

The condition of the millions of unemployed in the United States is more miserable and critical than ever before. Such resources as they may have had themselves or through friends, relatives, etc., are wholly exhausted. Dependence upon organs of charity and governmental assistance is greater than at any time hitherto. Yet at this moment, governmental relief of the cities and other agencies is being either sharply or entirely cut in numerous communities, such as New York. The “New Deal” of the Roosevelt administration has failed thus far to touch to any noticeable degree the misery involving the unemployed millions. All these factors tend today, as much or more than hitherto, to give a strong impetus to the growth of a militant and broad movement on behalf of the unemployed.
Of a positive and beneficial character is the growth of tendencies which aim for a merging of the various unemployed movements into a single, national organization on a united front basis. But as a consequence, in part, of this forward direction, resulting essentially from the objective conditions and demands of the unemployed, other questions have again come sharply to the front. These questions must be decisively revolved soon; they involve the growth or crack-up of the unemployment movement, and particularly its development in a class conscious direction.
The numerous conferences of the unemployed, especially the Conference held recently in Chicago which brought together various political tendencies, reveal that certain basic requirements still confront the movement on behalf of the unemployed. Some of the more important ones are:
 
Basic Requirements

Working out ways and means for cooperation and joint action of the employed and unemployed.
 
Drawing the trade and labor unions, particularly of the American Federation of Labor, into the movement of the Unemployed, for reciprocal results and benefits.
 
Developing a political consciousness among the mass of workers, in this instance, the movement of the unemployed.

Various movements of the unemployed arose in the past years in the hope that through mass pressure and organization, the miserable lot of the unemployed millions can be partially alleviated. These are necessary and immediate objectives that must be sincerely and militantly fought for by all forces taking part in the unemployed movement. For Communists, this is elemental, or ought to be. As in other fields of daily class struggle, so in the unemployed movement, we put forward immediate demands in themselves of greater or lesser importance. These have been more or less accurately worked out and need no repetition here. We present immediate demands because as living and not sterile revolutionaries, we fight for the interests of the workers today. At the same time we set forth our ultimate program for the abolition of capitalism and its replacement by the rule of the working class.
But, if we forget for one instant our basic class approach, namely, our need and task to revolutionize the workers; if we allow ourselves to get lost in a maze of immediate demands and become absorbed, howsoever militantly, solely in the struggle for these demands, little or nothing will be gained for the working class. What we reap will be illusions among the workers, the growth of opportunism and the chance for opportunists and fakers to deceive the workers. In short, it will be a case of “sowing dragons’ teeth and reaping flies.”
Today, very clearly and sharply, opportunistic and even reactionary views are being put forth in the movement of the unemployed, not alone by the known labor fakers of the A.F. of L. and the charlatans of the socialist party – from them that is to be expected – but also among so-called Communist elements. We cannot here deal with them all; we take only those concepts brought out by the representatives of the Lovestone, Eight wing Communist, group.
Movements of the unemployed have been organized in a large measure through the instrumentality of various political parties and tendencies in the labor movement: among these are the official Communist party (Stalinists), the Socialist Party, the CPLA (Musteites), Lovestone (Right Communist Opposition) and others.
These movements of the unemployed take, or should take on, the organizational expression of the united front of all organizations ready to take part in the movement of the unemployed. A correct objective must be the merging of the now existing various unemployed movements into a single and broad United Front on a national scale. For the immediate demands themselves of the unemployed movement can be fought for successfully only on a planned, national scale. Such a united front must work out a Common, minimum program of action (immediate demands) which binds all those adhering to the movement, to work for its achievement, irrespective of other political, economic, racial, etc., differences that exist in the movement. This should be accepted as elemental.
 
The False Views of the Lovestonites
But what does not appear to be accepted as elemental is who shall make up the constituent parts of the united front unemployed movement. Other issues exist, but unless this question is given a clear answer, the movement of the unemployed can easily disintegrate and founder. Under the best of conditions, an unemployed movement is the most difficult of all movements to hold together because of the natural looseness of organization, state of employment, etc., that conditions its existence.
The first question that must be answered is the political question: the matter of organic participation of the political parties and groups of the working class in the united front movement of the unemployed.
At the national conference of unemployed movement groups in Chicago and at local conferences in New York, representatives of the Lovestone group came out for non-participation organizationally of the political parties or groups in the unemployed movement. In essence, their position was that the interests of the unemployed can best be served if the united front is made up organizationally only of the various organizations of the unemployed: Unemployed Councils, Association of the Unemployed, Workers Leagues, etc. The political parties and groups must be kept out and also, even labor unions should be represented only fraternally in the united front.
But the mere posing of the issue by the Lovestone Right Wing is sufficient reason for taking up the matter of relations of political forces to the unemployed, or for that matter of any other movement of labor. It has to be said plainly that Lovestonite proposal, howsoever intended, is an outright reactionary one, completely in line with the proposals and objectives of the A.F. of L. and other fakers in the labor movement.
This is a politically functioning age, as never before. Every group, one could almost say each individual, whether stupidly or intelligently, solves its problem in terms of class and government – that is, class interest and class power. The political question enters, and rightly so, into every step and action of the workers. It has been and is the aim of all capitalist politicians, and their lieutenants in the ranks of labor – the Greens, Wolls, Lewises, etc. – to keep the working class out of politics, that is, working class politics and action. These frauds and deceivers have said to the workers: look only to your bread and butter, the economic side; and the not very far-seeing IWW and syndicalist echo the admonitions of the bourgeois liberal and working class opportunists to evade or keep away from the decisive, the political question.
 
The Communist Position
Every movement of the working class is bound to have impressed upon it a political ideology. That outlook is determined essentially by the general conditions and outlook prevailing within society; within the labor movement itself, it is largely determined by the political force that most intelligently and consciously makes its class outlook and program felt upon the workers.
Communists take it for granted that every movement of the workers must be penetrated and fractions organized therein: trade unions, cooperatives, fraternal organizations, etc. Why exempt the organizations of the unemployed?
What justification or reason can there be for the formal exclusion of the forces that really determine, for good or bad, the functioning and outcome, within limits of the objective situation, of the united front of the unemployed movement? Who is being fooled, what is being gained by the exclusion of the intelligence, the political force, the class expression of any movement? Nobody; least of all, the unemployed. Not maneuvers, but plain, direct, speech and direction to the unemployed, on the immediate and ultimate class solution of unemployment is the way to advance the cause of the workers. Direct participation of the Communist party, the Communist League of America (Opposition), the socialist party, etc., is a test for all the tendencies within the labor movement.
Moreover, this can and must be done while maintaining the discipline of action of the united front.
A united front movement is organized to achieve certain immediate objectives. In the case of Mooney and Billings to achieve the freedom of Mooney and Billings; in the case of the Scottsboro defendants, to free the Scottsboro boys; and likewise, with the objects of each united front movement that is built.
Shall the political parties, for instance, be excluded from direct participation in the Mooney United Front movement? The revolutionary would say, no. The capitalist politicians say, yes, for many reasons. And then these latter, at a proper moment, find ways and means for a Jimmy Walker to step in and represent himself as Mooney’s and labor’s savior.
 
Stalinist Errors
And certainly in the case of the unemployed, of far greater significance than the Mooney issue, the possibilities for educating and winning the workers to a class viewpoint are at hand. Nothing is to be gained in such instances by “hiding the face” of the movement. The official Communist party (Stalinists) has gone in for that also a great deal lately, and in each instance the Stalinists have been wrong. Their outstanding error and crime is their formal effacement from the leadership of the struggle against imperialist war and for the defense of the Soviet Union. What needs to be remembered is: the political party joins the unemployed United Front. The Unemployed Council or group does not join the party.
The Unemployed movements will assort themselves politically. Witness Seattle and other places. The point is, shall the opportunists and fakers take over the political and class direction of the unemployed? This must not be.
The next logical step of those who would exclude the political parties from direct organizational part in the unemployed united front is to exclude the trade and labor unions. And the Lovestone group proposes exactly this!
Yet the failure of the labor unions to rally behind a united front of the unemployed is a basic Cause of the movement’s weakness today. The unions and the unemployed must be linked organizationally for the objectives of the united front. Moreover, such a correct relation within the united front should be an excellent means for organizing the unorganized unemployed, which moans (he overwhelming bulk, into the unions. An unemployed worker is no less a worker because he is unemployed, and there is not less, but more need to organize him into a labor union in his interest as well as in the interest of the employed worker to preserve and better working conditions.
Lastly, from a fundamental view, why do the Communists bring all possible support on behalf of the unemployed? Because we must develop, in whatever way is permitted, their political, their class consciousness. Otherwise, the actions and aims of the unemployed will prove valueless in a lasting sense. The class question must be raised, even as in the trade unions, or the really worth-while and positive side of the unemployed movement will be dissipated and disappear, and hard work will have gone to naught.
We have to develop class conscious and revolutionary workers in the unemployed movement, while at the same time working militantly to achieve the immediate demands of the united front. All elements can try their hand at the task. But the Communist is the historical instrument for that task, functioning through his party or group. This is the standpoint of the Left Opposition.
 



The National Industrial Recovery Act has at last become the law of the land. After several weeks of wrangling and, at one time even threatening to completely run wild, Congress has at last been whipped into line, and finally passed the bill in substantially the same manner in which it was originally advanced by the president The precise manner in which Roosevelt intends to use the powers delegated to him remains yet to be seen, but a brief scanning of the three months of new deal program makes one suspect very much that the new national industrial recovery deal will be nothing more than a continuation and an extension to the entire country of the Roosevelt dollar-a-day plan.
The National Industrial Recovery Act was originally conceived of by the president as a means of stemming a rising movement for a series of measures that were being advocated by various labor groups. The first and most potent of the measures which had begun to loom large on the economic horizon wai that for a six-hour day five-day week. Unexpectedly passed by the Senate, with support being given the bill by the liberals, the A.F. of L. and the railway unions, it began to appear that the Black Bill might suddenly pass from the realms of bills before Congress, to a measure waiting for the President’s signature. There was even talk of incorporating into the bill a national minimum wage law. Of course the amendments advanced by the Communists against a reduction in pay, were not even considered. Despite this however, all the manufacturers associations and local and national chambers of commerce rushed into the fray to defeat the bill. They found a capable ally in Franklin D. Roosevelt, who, running counter even to the proposals of his own Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins, requested that the thirty-hour week bill be dropped, and advocated in its stead, the present work.
 
What the Act Consists of?
The bill as it was finally passed consists of two sections. The first, devoted to the increase of public works, is most probably but another one of the many promises to increase public works that the American people became so familiar with under the Hoover regime. Over three billion dollars are to be expended for public works. What this means one cannot as yet say. Does this huge item include within itself the sums to be expended at Boulder Dam for the next five years? Does it include the four year expenditure contemplated in the Tennessee Valley? Does it include the three year naval building program? And does it include the ordinary yearly public works expenditures? Too often now, we have been treated to grandiose figures by the Hoover regime only to find at the end of the year that the total public works expenditure had been less than the year previously. True, the fact that the exact same thing occurred in the New York State regime of our former governor Franklin D. Roosevelt (promises of public works increases coupled with actual decreases observed at the end of the year) should not prejudice one against the three billion dollar outlay; but if nothing more, we remain at least skeptical.
The second section of the bill and by far the more important one is the industrial control section. This section has been hailed as a boon not merely to the industrialists but also to labor. This is the bill to increase profits, decrease unemployment, introduce a shorter work week, produce higher wages and put our entire industry on an organized basis. In short, this measure, like Lydia E. Pinkham’s pills, is good for whatever ails you be it falling hair, fallen arches, dandruff and falling teeth. What are the actual provisions of this section, and what is its history and the history of those empowered to enforce it? Only in this manner can we obtain an inkling as to what this huge all inclusive measure will actually mean.
 
The Origin of the Bill
A brief history of the origin of the bill has already been given. It was the administration’s way of side-tracking the agitation for the thirty-hour week, for the minimum wage, for no-reduction in pay. As for the man to enforce the provisions of the bill? It is the same Roosevelt who originated the dollar-a-day scheme for the Reforestation Army; it is the same Roosevelt who gave the veterans sugary words and then – a dollar a day; it is the same Roosevelt who forced through a federal wage cut to the lowest brackets; it is the same Roosevelt who has as his intimate counsellors and companions the Woodins and Davises of J.P. Morgan fame.
Let us consider the measure itself. It consists of a series of items, all of which have in their opening sentences the word “may.” Nothing is stated in a positive manner; all is left to the discretion of the President, the same Franklin Delano Roosevelt whose three months’ record has already branded him as the sugar coated starvation President. The most important items of the bill may be condensed as follows:
 
Provisions

Any trade or industrial group may adopt a code of “fair competition,” which code the president may approve, reject, modify or change. Where no code is agreed to by industry the President may draw one up for the trade.
 
After a code is approved it is enforceable by law. The President may institute a licensing system to make the code effective; in that case nobody can engage in that business without a license.
 
Any action under the bill is exempt from the anti-trust laws.
 
In the industries affected by the bill, the workers are to have the right to collective bargaining; yellow dog contracts and the closed union shops are both outlawed, and the employers must apply the minimum wages, maximum hours and labor conditions, “approved or prescribed by the president.” These standards are to be worked out by collective agreement between labor and employers if possible. But where no agreement is approved by him, the president may prescribe a labor code of his own making.
 
The duration of the law is one year.

Such are the provisions of the bill. In brief, industry is told to organize under government supervision and warned that, should a branch of industry fail to come to any agreement suitable to the government, a “fair code” will be forced upon it, and any protesting will be refused the “license” necessary to continue to operate under the new law.
The past five years has seen this complete about-face on the part of the relationships of government and business. Under the Coolidge administration we had – non-governmental interference in industry, both in words and in action. Under Hoover this had changed to government proclamations of non-interference, together with the reality of increased government participation in private industry (Farm Board, Railroad Credit Corp., Reconstruction Finance Corp., aid to the banks and railroads, etc.). Today, we see the Roosevelt regime proposing to supervise and direct American economy, and in addition, admitting so openly. Such has been the change brought on by the past few years.
 
How Is the Working Class Affected
It is only in an indirect manner, however, that we are concerned with the inner organization of the capitalist system, – only in the reflections of this organization upon the working class. And the reflection of the above measure can be seen to portray the real image of which when translated into labor reorganization and consolidation, terms means: less workers, increased lay-offs and wage cuts; for, it is only in this manner that the bill is to be interpreted by the working class. The railroad workers are to he the first to receive the gentle medicine of coordination, and they have already begun to feel the full meaning of the government’s labor program, so that even the railroad unions have – true, in their mild manner – begun to raise a voice in protest against this American bearing Greek gifts.
As for those combinations of words seeming to indicate that Roosevelt will introduce the minimum wage, and maximum hours, one cannot but be reminded of the record of the man empowered to enforce the measures. Hidden beneath the sugar coating will be revealed the cruel harshness of the starvation program. The “right of collective bargaining” will be transformed into a company union program. The “minimum wages, maximum hours” will, when translated into reality, become, most likely nothing more than the extension of the “stagger system” to every large factory in the country. It is not the bourgeoisie that will voluntarily surrender part of its profits to better the condition of the working class. The workers will have to organize, to fight many a difficult battle to win these elementary labor demands, the thirty hour week with no reduction in pay.
 



The new deal government at Washington, so solicitous for the welfare of the poor speculators on the Chicago wheat market and the New Orleans cotton exchange, is about to come to their aid again. The present step, like most of the new deal kind, is completely surrounded with the usual trappings of “aid to the impoverished farmers.” But like most of the farm aid bills, seventy-five percent of the benefit will go to the financiers whose nearest approach to a farm is the wheat room of the Chicago Board of Trade.
This week’s newspapers carried the headline announcements of a fifty million dollar sale of wheat and cotton to the Chinese Nanking government. The money, to pay for the purchases by the Chinese government of the wheat in this country, is to be advanced by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation as a loan payable after several years. Although no mention of the subject appears in the dispatches relating to the subject, the cotton will most probably be used in the contemplated Nanking campaign against the peasant armies. The Chiang Kai-Shek government which has been spending millions in his unsuccessful campaign against the peasant armies of inner China, has now succeeded in securing the advance of this fifty million dollars from the American government.
For the American unemployed however, the Roosevelt administration, like that of Hoover, is providing merely line phrases. In the same day there appeared the announcement that despite the grain crop failures in many parts of the country, and despite the campaign of the government to cut down the wheat acreage, the total amount of wheat being stored in the granaries of this country at the present totals almost four hundred million bushels. This huge supply of wheat is being let to spoil in the huge warehouses of the country, and attempts made to secure any of it for the unemployed have been frustrated (with the exception of a few million bushels of Farm Board wheat turned over to the Red Cross last year.) A conservative estimate would show that if the four hundred million bushels stored in the country today were advanced to the unemployed, it would last for almost five years.
Instead of taking any measures to relieve the suffering, exactly contrary steps are being taken by the government and the various relief agencies. The New York City Home Relief Bureau has cut off all payments of rent. In addition, the Gibson Committee which through the Red Cross has been distributing food have announced their intentions of discontinuing this work after the summer.
This is the indictment of the present system; amidst plenty, there are many starving. Only a powerful working class movement will force from the capitalists a portion of the huge supplies of all types of food and clothing stored throughout the country.
 



(Continued from last issue)
If there is any instance where only the Communists can lead effectively and correctly, it is in the struggle against capitalist militarism and imperialist war. Yet, witness the spectacle at the Barbusse Congress at Amsterdam when the Communist International abandoned its rightful role of leadership to the intellectuals! Comment here is superfluous; the Militant has dealt fully with this Congress and at the Student Conference Against War at Chicago, initiated by the NSL and the Communists, the Amsterdam spectacle was repeated in an even more grotesque manner. The YCL abandoned its field and the results of the Chicago Conference were – confusion, disorganization, perversion and misrepresentation of the revolutionary ways and means to combat imperialist war except as clarified by delegates and supporters of the Communist Left Opposition. (See the articles on the Chicago Student Conference in the Militant by Aderhabe and A. Glotzer for an analysis of this Conference). It was inevitable there, as at Amsterdam or wherever the same stunt is tried, that when the intellectuals or students took over the leadership in the anti-militarist movement, the real basis of struggle against war was vitiated and the workers misled. The C. P. and YCL stood in the wings, behind the scenes, witnessing, approvingly, the spectacle and abandoned their leading role. Was the revolutionary student participating in such a conference doing his duty in attempting to lead this struggle against capitalist war? He thought so. But he was doomed to failure. Yet subordinate to, and a part of the YCL, the revolutionary students could take a part, howsoever small or large, in a united front movement against war on specific issues.
On other questions, the NSL has taken a position which on the one hand is correct and on the other, false. For instance, the “revolutionary” NSL endorsed the Communist party in the November elections: a correct action. But it motivated its support of the C.P., not on revolutionary class grounds, but on the fact that the C.P., of all political parties consulted, had alone taken a stand for the students on their specific problems of class fees, etc. How ridiculous for an organization presumably pivoting on a revolutionary axis! Why should any such confusion arise among revolutionary students? It shouldn’t; the confusion is unnecessary and springs largely from the concept of an independent student role and the belief that revolutionary students should put forth more “palatable” or “adaptable” reasons for their revolutionary conclusions. This is the manner in which liberals and opportunists justify their stupidities or betrayals.
Yet, and this is another decisive factor, the Young Communist League, measured by its theoretical and organisational basis, is or should be a sufficiently broad organization to include within it not only young workers, but also the revolutionary-inclined students. The Communist Youth organization does not demand that young workers or students who desire to join it, shall be full-fledged Communists when they make application. It requires, arid properly so, that those joining it shall be willing to learn to be Communists, in theory and through participation in the struggles of the workers. We speak here not of the caricature that the YCL in the United States, and elsewhere, has become, but of the foundation upon which the Young Communist International was erected and the manner the YCLs were expected actually to function. For such students who join the NSL today because of its revolutionary program, we have to say that their place is directly in the ranks of the Communist youth organization.
It is a totally false conception of bridge organizations and their functions to accept the formation of an independent students’ organization as a part of that schema. An ILD, which defends class war victims irrespective of their political or economic views, is one thing. An independent students’ body with a political program and functions is an altogether different matter. An ILD has an obviously legitimate function to perform. An independent students’ organization can, and already has done great harm to the immediate and historical interests of the workers. That which tends to and does usurp the role of a revolutionary political party or YCL becomes a perversion of Marxist theory on the role of a Communist party. When the Stalinists aid in the formation of such bodies as the National Student League, workers and peasants parties, Labor party, anti-imperialist Leagues, etc., etc., they only further undermine the theoretical foundations of Marxism, and particularly the role of the C.P. and YCL. The NSL, in our opinion, is but another version or application of Stalinist theory, and as in the other cases it results only in additional blows delivered against the revolutionary movement. The Barbusse Conference and the American replicas of it are the demonstrations of how these blows are dealt.
But while the Left Opposition, hence, must stand opposed to the formation of independent students’ organizations, and more so when they masquerade as “revolutionary” or “Communist”, this by no means excludes work among the students. In whatever students’ organizations exist, the Communist must build fractions, even as they do in trade unions and other mass organizations of the workers, and there seek to develop Communist influence and win the individual students to the revolutionary banner and organization. Even as anti-imperialist papers can be issued by the Communist without special anti-imperialist organizations, so can Communist student papers be issued to proclaim its cause for the workers and proletarian students.
 
Win Students on Communist Basis
Nor need there be any neglect of neutralizing or trying to win as allies to the proletarian cause the middle class or petty bourgeois students, in the same manner, relatively, as we seek to make allies of the poor and exploited farmers But while we recognize the need to win such groups to accept the leadership of the proletariat and the Communists in the struggles against the bourgeoisie, yet it is not for us to aid in the creation of organizations of the petty bourgeoisie of various descriptions. Bigger and more important tasks remain for the Communists. Wherever any organization exists, however, which contains workers and other elements upon whom we can exert influence, the Communists enter, build fractions and conduct their work accordingly. But certainly Communists can never think of relinquishing the role of leadership, politically or organizationally, to such elements; for they are historically unqualified to do so; they cannot serve, with their confused and false programs, the interests of the working class and the vast mass of exploited. Trotsky points out in connection with the building of the Red Army: “The petty bourgeois intelligentsia could give the army a considerable number of lower officers. as they had done under czarism, but they could not create a commanding corps in their own image, for they had no image of their own.” Likewise, by analogy, the Communists nowhere must concede leading historical roles to forces incapable of “creating a commanding corps.” Wherever Stalinism has permitted them – and, worse, justified it – there have resulted debacles: in China on a tremendous world stage; in Amsterdam (Barbusse Congress) on a lesser, but still important scale; and in Chicago (Youth War Conference) on an illusionary and comic scale.
In short, the Left Communists must come to the conclusion, in the writer’s opinion, for the liquidation of the National Student League and similar creations, and insist that the Communist party and YCL take over the duties and role that properly belongs to them.
 



The existence for some time now of the National Students League in the United States, organized through the instrumentality of the Communist party and YCL, requires from the Left Opposition a fundamental statement of its attitude toward the NSL. Can the Communists stand by quietly when there is formed an independent students’ organization, with its own programmatic policy? Moreover, can Communists assist in, and be responsible for, the formation of such independent student organizations?
The recent activities of the NSL and its assumption of various roles in the class struggle bring this question sharply to the forefront and demand a clear enunciation of policy on our part. The organization recently of the Students League of Canada only adds to the need for clarification on the question. The writer presents his views here in sketched form in order to initiate a discussion which will speed the adoption of a position by the Left Opposition. Communists in principle, must oppose, in our opinion, the formation of an independent or separate organization of either the students or the intellectuals. This position, which has been the principle position of the Communists and the Young Communist International in theses adopted at the second congress of the Y.C.L., requires no revision today.
 
Role of Students
The students have no independent role to play in society and require no separate organization. The division of the students may be roughly made into rich, middle class or petit-bourgeois and proletarian students. Even so, the particular social, economic and political positions of these groupings in society negate any idea that these groups can have an independent role in the class struggle as student groups. Our concern here is mainly with the proletarian students who have historically no interests separate and apart from the industrial proletariat, from the working class as such The proletarian students to be at all effective in the labor movement, must link themselves organizationally and politically with the vanguard of the revolutionary movement – the Communist party and the YCL, and conduct such activities as they are able to on a Communist program. The Communist student would necessarily, therefore, direct his energies primarily among the proletarian students.
The matter becomes even clearer when it is seen that the National Students League and the Students League of Canada are not formed on the basis of a “broad” student organization which supposedly might appeal to all classes of students for the preservation of student rights and needs on the campus, or conduct “general propaganda” and education for liberal, socialist or revolutionary ideas. Both Student Leagues, on the contrary, recognize the weakness of such a position and make their appeal on a “revolutionary” or even “Communistic” basis. In fact, they regard themselves as Communist student organizations. The Spark, official organ of the Students League of Canada, is most clear and explicit on the matter of the character of its appeal to the student body. In the issue of December 1932, the Spark editorially says:
“... The majority of students ... are not members of the proletariat, even though a good many come from working class homes. Because of this fact Marxism, however logical, can have no appeal to most university students for it is inimical to the interests of their class. Accordingly, the Students League has no illusions regarding the student body as a whole ... We only aim to attract the small number of students who see an identity between their interests and those of the working class and who are, therefore, willing to take an active part in the working class movement. After all, a few active members are far more valuable than is a passive recognition of the validity of our views from the majority of the student body – and again on this latter score we have no illusions.” (Our emphasis)
What the Spark says is correct. But if there is this identity of interests between the students minority, that is, the proletarian students and the workers, then why a separate organization? What are those special tasks of so-called revolutionary or Communist student organizations which cannot better and more correctly be performed in the revolutionary political organisation of the youth – the Young Communist League? In our opinion, none; and such an independent student organization can only lead to confusion and malpractices in the revolutionary movement, and bring about just the opposite results from those intended, as will be shown.
The Communist Left Opposition particularly has every reason to reject the organization of separate students organizations. The Left Opposition, in its condemnation of the Stalinists, has stated often, and correctly, its opposition in principle to the creation of so-called “anti-imperialist” Leagues, “peasants” parties, “workers and peasants parties”, labor or Farmer-Labor parties, etc., etc. We condemn the formation of these bodies on the ground that they usurp, or attempt to, the role legitimately and necessarily belonging to the Communist party, and, further, that every concession to the formation and activity of such organizations brings successive betrayals of the working class, emasculates and caricatures the revolutionary position, and weakens or destroy the Communist party or YCL. In short, the theoretical position of the Left Opposition, based on historical experiences, refuses to attribute an independent or revolutionary role to such hodge-podge bodies. Our attitude toward the NSL and the Students League of Canada must flow clearly from our fundamental position to analogous organizations in other fields. In the case of an independent students organization, the issue is even plainer.
The Left Opposition contends that the role of a “peasants” party, an “anti-imperialist League”, a “four class Kuo Min Tang”, a Labor party, etc., proves in every case to be false to, a betrayal of, and reactionary in relation to the working class as a whole, and also, thereby, to the Communists and their organizations, the C.P. and YCL. In such cases, where “independent” organizations like the NSL pretend to a “revolutionary”, even Communist position, they place themselves directly in the road of the genuine revolutionization of the proletarian students who, if they accept the revolutionary, the Communist position, should join the organization of their class, the YCL, and function actively therein in their allotted tasks. Wittingly or otherwise, the “revolutionary” position of the NSL, sponsored and organized by the YCL, actually forms a bulwark against – and not a bridge to – students joining the YCL. Yet what is demanded of them in the way of profession of belief and activity in the NSL that is not demanded of them in the YCL – minus the discipline required of a member of the YCL? Little or nothing, under ordinary circumstances.
It is demonstrated, not merely in theory but by numerous practices, that when the students or intellectuals undertake tasks, in lieu of no objection by others, which are not theirs historically and which they cannot properly execute – they bungle the job badly, confuse and mislead the workers, ignore the revolutionary position and, by default, usurp the role which only a C.P. or YCL can undertake. They are not to blame, since no one says them nay, and, worse yet, the Communists themselves urge them on in their false steps.
(To be continued)
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



Note must be taken, now that detailed figures are available, of the extremely low poll of the various parties of the working class in the national elections in November. Even in absolute terms, in round figures, higher votes have been polled in other elections. But when consideration is given to the millions of new voters, due to increase of population and extension of suffrage to women. It is found that the various labor parties – the Communist party, Socialist party, SLP – received proportionately the lowest vote in 32 years. Such a result is surprising in view of the years of economic crisis, which, one could expect or hope, would have a radicalizing, if not revolutionary, influence on the political attitude of the American worker. Yet, not only did the Communist party receive a distressingly low vote, but even the Socialist party with its emasculated program appealing to the vast mass of the petty bourgeoisie and what remains of the upper strata or aristocracy of labor, obtained a vote lower than the high vote of Debs.
 
Some Factors in the Low Vote
It will give some comfort, but not be telling the whole story, to acknowledge a number of factors and deficiencies of American political life which effect the tabulation of the voting strength of the American workers. First there is the disfranchisement of vast numbers of the foreign-born, though that need not be a permanent obstacle; there is, too, the intimidation and terror in the South which brings about the real, if not formal, disfranchisement of the mass of Negro workers and peasants. Corruption and vote-stealing are factors, perhaps even worse than conceived by revolutionists themselves, as revealed in the recent elections in New York City when even a Democrat, McKee, swerving from the Tammany machine, found later that some 150,000 votes for him had not been tallied. Allow, then, for wholesale stealing of Communist and socialist votes. The political writer Kent maintains that the political machine having the most money for campaign purposes always wins the major elections. Grant its importance to the capitalist parties, that phase can nevertheless have only a secondary significance for the working class parties which depend on basic social and economic factors for their ultimate victory. The social-patriot and many times “socialist” minister of Belgium’s monarchy, Emile Vandervelde, in his book, Socialism Versus the State made out something of a case for the tremendous ballyhoo methods of the American capitalist parties to affect the working class in casting their ballots. But that too can have but transitory significance and had its basis, in part, in a stable American capitalism. In addition, many millions of people continued the practise of staying away together from the polls.
The sad truth is that in 1932, almost four years after the most terrific economic crisis in American history, the workers as well as the bourgeoisie, middle classes and farmers, voted their belief in the efficacy of capitalism yet to solve the ills of unemployment, low wages, etc., etc. It is true that they rejected the reactionary administration of Hoover and accepted the demagogic politician Roosevelt, but that of course was a case of tweedle-dum and tweedle-dee. The shift basically was not a change from their capitalist outlook, but only a change of administrators of the system of private property.
Does this mean that relatively swift changes of the political physiognomy of the American people, and particularly the proletariat, are excluded? By no means. Despite the affirmation of faith of the vast mass of American people in the social system of capitalism, it is nevertheless observable that there is a search for new methods, even new systems. There is no longer the same certainty about the durability of capitalism or its parts. Too many dents have been made in its armor and the soldier doesn’t seem to be such an ardent fighter. It is a fact that with one hand the American workers gave their okay to American political system as such, and that with the other, they are girding themselves for struggles which will bring them into sharp conflict with capitalist property rights and ideas.
The masses often devise their own strategies in the class struggle, evidently preferring or finding it necessary to experience every possible solution for their requirements. The American workers, having had in the past the least need for independent political experience and actions, because of the circumstances and character of American economic life as against that of Europe, are proceeding to turn over in their minds the ways and means out of their impasse. In this, they are no different than the workers in other countries, albeit not yet so advanced politically and industrially.
 
A Lesson from England
People often shift their base of attack in the hope of effecting their aims. When the ravages of the Industrial Revolution in England, in the beginnings of capitalism, ate their way into the sinews and bones of the English workers, they turned toward trade unionism and initiated big struggles. Various factors contributed to their defeat on the economic field and they abandoned that field almost entirely and entered the struggle for the granting of suffrage and other political rights. The Chartist movement was the essence of this transference of struggle by the English proletariat from the economic to the political field. The Chartist movement had its vital importance in the evolution of the English labor movement, as did also a sharp turn at another time toward the co-operative movement led by Robert Owen as a panacea for the miserably exploited English workers.
Struggles of all description were to ensue for many decades before the English labor and political movement had made headway in the direction of joint action or agreement between the industrial and political arms of labor to achieve labor’s aims. The movement has proceeded by the process of evolution and division. Rapid changes in the condition of Great Britain’s imperialist domain bring the mass of English workers, who adhere to the political platform of socialism, to the point where they will have to abandon once and for all the tempo of “gradualism” in socialism and go over to the tempo and outlook of Communism.
There is need to allow and hope to believe in swifter reactions and development among the American workers from now on. Though in the last elections, their vote indicated from a class standpoint, almost total ignorance of the significance of the economic crisis in this social milieu, the fact remains that in their daily life they pay very close attention to it, and can be expected to generalize their experiences in a more thorough-going class manner. How does this show itself?
 
The Labor Party
Lot us take the matter, briefly of the Labor party. It is still by no means excluded that there will be formed a Labor party in the United States. But the relation of the Communists toward it, at least that of the Left Opposition, has been clarified; namely, that of sharp exposure and opposition, despite our readiness to consider what might be our working relation to it if such a movement develops.
Not so many years ago, when Labor party agitation and attempts at organization reached their heights, the bulk of the proponents of the Labor party, in accepting it, undoubtedly attached a definite class significance to it, in fact in many cases, a revolutionary importance. They viewed it, not as the Communists did – as a part of a process of American political evolution, – but rather as the class movement of the workers and a substitute for any other revolutionary movement. It is true, also, that this same bulk removed from the Labor party any idea of mass actions, extra-parliamentary activity and viewed it in the parliamentary or English Labor Party sense. And such a Labor party, if it develops, will have all that opportunist virus and confusion. But such as it was in those years of 1922-28, it was essentially a movement of labor and even regarded by opponent classes and groups as a narrow class movement which might have its dangers for capitalism.
But today, irrespective of the development of a Labor party, such a party is looked upon altogether differently. The experiences of the English Labor Party have made their way on an international scale, not excepting America. Among its proponents in America are middle-class leaders who find in the platform of a Labor Party the reflection of the middle classes’ own needs and ambitions. The wiser bourgeoisie, despite contrary noise, view such a possibility or other changes with might break up the two-party, Republican and Democratic, system, with equanimity. In fact, such a shrewd political observer as Samuel G. Blythe foresees such a break-up in one more, maybe two elections.
Communists, surely, have no illusions about a Labor party (or do some of them still have?). The Labor opponents of revolution, the middle class and the bourgeoisie – all view such a party as a bulwark against effective class struggle and social revolution. The working class in the United States, which will move on both the social reformist and revolutionary fronts simultaneously, will more swiftly hereafter grasp political lessons, whether or not one of those lessons takes the form of the Labor party. Hence, in respect to the Labor party, it must be said that the last few years have witnessed changes in outlook about it.
But if the American workers have not reacted on the political, or more strictly, the parliamentary, field more in accordance with the acuteness of the economic conditions, they are preparing for class struggle on other fronts. None other than William Green, president of the American Federation of Labor, speaks about economic struggles that will engage the workers on many and big fronts. It is not needed here to explain Green’s role or his sudden espousal of the cause of militant labor struggle and a “new deal” for labor. That has been done already in the columns of the Militant. But it is noteworthy that Green has felt it necessary to give lip-service so far to the pressure of the mass of the labor movement.
Even more important is the fact that the new program of the labor movement, with all the confusion and illusion still to be found, has begun to catch up with the new situation produced by American capitalism. In this n«w social program for official labor, which, besides industrial struggles, envisages also independent political action by the workers, is to be seen the positive side of the workers’ reaction to the economic crisis. The negative side, the vote of labor in the November elections, has already been recorded – and, more important, is and will be rapidly forgotten in the natural course of the struggles of the working class with the employers and the governmental apparatus.
There need be no doubt that unorganized labor will be found ready to add its forces to organized labor in common struggle, and, indeed, to go beyond the official program in all respects. But that is not under discussion here. What is decisive and important is that the dialectics of the struggle are about to reconcile the seeming contradictions of the actions of the American working class on a higher plane of struggle and vision. While the election results are, therefore, extremely “disappointing” and this field of struggle is yet to be militantly invaded by the American workers, still they are not the final and only barometer. Behind the peaceful gesture of American labor at the ballot box, there is to be seen already the clenched fist about to do battle with his class enemy. The Communist party and the Communist Left Opposition must be prepared to assist and lead in the historic battles that will tend to change rapidly the face of American social and political life.
 



Eduard Bernstein led the attack of reformism against the revolutionary doctrines of Marx and Engels. Laying emphasis on immediate gains and objectives, Bernstein completely subordinated or submerged the need of revolutionary strategy to guide the proletariat in its struggles. He lost sight of the ultimate goal of socialism – the goal which, on the one hand, conditions the character of the strategy and tactics of the revolutionary workers and, on the other hand is determined by them. For the means employed will also determine the end. [1] Without revolutionary tactics and strategy for the movement, the goal of socialism or communism is never reached. The crash of the Second International, of the German Social Democracy at the outbreak of the World War in 1914 proved in a catastrophic manner the views of Marx. Reformism brought destruction and death in the wake of the masses.
Today, sixteen years after the establishment of the proletarian dictatorship and the Soviet power the revolutionary movement is confronted once again, in another form, with the ravages and menace of the new revisionism espoused by the school of Stalin and which is properly labelled Stalinism. With the theory of socialism in one country as against the theory of permanent revolution, Stalinism, in the epoch of modern monopolistic imperialism, revises fundamentally the principles and revolutionary strategy and tactic of the working class and particularly the Communists. Stalinism professes the world revolution, but it begins by limiting its revolutionary goal to the establishment of a complete socialist society within the confines of the, as yet, economically backward Soviet Union, and relegates the spread of the proletarian revolution to other countries as a pious and hoped-for consummation after the fact of a completely established socialism. Leninism, on the other hand, as taught today by its expounders, the International Left Opposition and based on decades of struggles now concretized in Bolshevik theory, says: Base the strategy of the revolutionary movement on the interests of the working class on a world scale as the best and surest means for the preservation and building of socialism in the Soviet Union. The theory of socialism in one country, therefore, is not merely an incidental polemical cry of the Left Opposition against Stalinism. It must be regarded as the root of all evils wrought in the past decade by Stalinism. It is the modern revisionism. This theory makes working class victory on either a national and international scale ever impossible.
 
Since the First Comintern Congress
In 1919, the Communist International was formed. It declared in its manifesto to the international proletariat:
We live in an epoch of wars and social revolutions. The proletarian path is toward the speedy consummation of the latter.
Fourteen years have passed since then, yet the estimation of Lenin and Trotsky, of the first Congress of the Comintern remains valid today, despite the tragic defeats of the workers in many countries. Despite all, the crisis of world capitalism exists. The situation objectively is revolutionary. What is missing are the subjective factors, genuine Communist parties, such as were being built in those early years, and a revolutionary Communist International. But these can be built again.
Revolutions, said Marx, are the locomotives of history. Locomotives sometimes are sidetracked, as Stalinism has done, but they can be placed on the rails again. That is our task.
At this day, on the occasion of the anniversary of the Russian Revolution, one need only record the manner in which Stalinism has been responsible, criminally so, for the rolling backwards of the proletarian revolution in the Soviet Union and throughout the world.
Stalinism, with its basically false social theory and consequently radically false strategy and tactics, necessarily bowed before the blue flag of the Kuo Min Tang in China. Inevitably it capitulated before the swastika of German fascism. Deliberately, in the narrow interests of Soviet diplomacy, it restrained the rising revolutionary wave in Spain. The Stalinized “Communists” ran to cover before the verbal charge of Dollfuss in Austria. Stalinism surrendered to the trade union fakers in Great Britain. Everywhere it gives up the banner of Communism and drags it in the mud.
And in each case in the past decade, beginning with the formation of the Bolshevik-Leninist Opposition in the Soviet Union under Trotsky and Rakovsky, the International Left Opposition exposed Stalinism before the working class and fought for the revolutionary position.
 
Why Bolshevism Will Be Victorious
It is true that the Left Opposition formally has not been victorious. Stalinism had its way – organizationally. It has achieved many pyrrhic victories. For ten years now, the International Left Opposition with small forces, too few almost to mention, has stood by its principles, and like Lenin in earlier days has carried on against the stream. The International Left Opposition has demonstrated to ever increasing numbers that it has quality; its revolutionary viewpoint gave it that. Now the dialectics of the class struggle are about to transform quality into quantity. That growth and the problems arising therefrom, stand before us as the tasks of today and tomorrow. Time has verified once again our theories. These are now to be demonstrated to an ever increasing degree in the daily struggles of the working class. We are starting anew in the building of new Communist parties and a new Communist International; but we are building on an old and tested foundation and therein lies our strength ...We are building on the first four Congresses of the Comintern, and upon that which we have learned since in our struggles against Stalinist depradations and practices. We are passing from the stage of propaganda to the stage of agitation and organization in all fields of struggle of the working class. They lie and are wrong who say that Communism is dead. It is Stalinism that is passing. It is Communism that will rise once again. On this, the sixteenth anniversary of the Russian Bolshevik revolution, the Communist League of America and the International Left
Opposition rededicate themselves to those basic tasks which the Communist International originally set for itself. Our aim as before remains the international proletarian revolution. That is, for the struggle for workers State power – the transfer of power from one class to another. It is the order of the day in this epoch. In the Soviet Union the problems of economic and political administration on behalf of the toiling masses are as heavy and decisive as at no other time perhaps in its history. The Russian Bolshevik-Leninists, despite the extreme conditions of their existence, will assist the Soviet power in the correct direction. – As before, the dictatorship of the proletariat through the medium of Soviets on a world scale remains our goal. The theory of permanent revolution is the basic conception which guides the International Left Opposition toward that goal. We are small: we need more cadres, more leading forces. These must be gathered. Old revolutionaries are beginning once again to return to the revolutionary struggle. They are welcome. But above all we must win the new forces of workers never before active in the labor or revolutionary movement – those who are just beginning to take the first steps toward a revolutionary position.
The Third Congress of the Communist International raised as its major slogan: “To the masses”. This, and more, is our slogan today Into the unions! Organize the unorganized! Develop class consciousness. Widen the foundations for the new Communist Party of the United States and a new, Fourth Communist International. In this way we can best honor the Bolshevik revolution of the Russian October and extend it.

Note by ETOL
1. The first lines of this article in the printed edition were as follows:
The end is everything. The means are nothing. With this conception Edward Bernstein led the attack of reformism against the revolutionary doctrines of Marx and Engels. But Marxism demonstrated that this conception of tactics and strategy of the reformists was the source of the opportunism and betrayal of the interests of the working class by its alleged leaders. This theory is reactionary. polemized Marx. For, he said, the means determine the end.
However, the following week a correction was published (The Militant, Vol. VI No. 51, 11 November 1933, p. 4) subnstituting the text here.
 



There is every reason to hope that the Weekly Militant will continue. Thus far, our paper has depended almost exclusively upon the membership of the Communist League, out of their limited resources, to maintain the leading English expression of Bolshevism. Now, today, our readers and sympathizers must lend a hand to save the Weekly. The demands upon our numerically small membership have been heavy, especially so in this lengthy period of economic crisis.
We have no doubt that our readers will respond to the plain, frank appeal of the Left Opposition to maintain the Weekly Militant.
The requirements of the situation demand more and more the participation and direction of the Left Opposition in the daily class struggles. Through the Militant, still our best organizer, the ideas and practices of Leninism, of the Left Opposition, are made known to the Communist movement, to the Left Opposition, to the broad masses of workers coming steadily, if yet slowly, toward class consciousness and Communism.
The Militant can and must be maintained. Its existence as a Weekly through these scourging years of the economic crisis, have shown clearly the devotion and sacrifice of the supporters of the Left Opposition to their paper. What has been done before, can be done again – better and even more generously. Sympathizers, readers – help the Militant now! Save our and your Weekly!
 



American capitalism, twisting and squirming under the lash of economic law, is making strenuous efforts the present time to bring about a revival. Plan after plan is being thrown at the country, only to go down in defeat, leaving barely a ripple on the declining crisis curves. But a few short days after the creation of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation and the administration at Washington announced the new, bi-partisan, anti-depression measure, the now much heralded Glass-Steagall Bill.
The capitalist class of this country, failing to see any indication of a coming revival, even now, two and a half years after the stock market crash, are attempting to, through a series of well timed and big scale maneuvers to restore this “confidence” that has supplanted all their economic theory. It is only in an actual analysis of the proposed steps that their valuelessness as measures for revival can be exposed. Particularly is this true of the present Glass-Steagall bill.
“Big Free Gold Gain”, “Credit Expansion”, “Increased Currency”, we read in the newspaper headlines. What are the actual facts? Is there a stringency of credit at the present time? What might this “big free gold” lead to? These are the questions to be answered.
Any economist will admit that were there a demand for credit at the present time and the banks were unable to satisfy this demand, any steps taken to relieve the credit strain would be steps for revival. But is this condition prevalent today? By a mere glance at the low interest rates of the past year one would be forced to give only one answer. Industry desiring funds for investment have no difficulty finding lenders. There is no credit crisis – except on the side of the borrowers.
Now, to examine the actual measure. Under the existing laws, member banks of the Federal Reserve system are permitted to rediscount (borrow on) certain commercial short term loans from the Federal Reserve Bank. This so-called self liquidating paper consists of loans secured by actual commercial and industrial goods to be realized upon soon. Thus should industry demand more credit, the various member banks can apply to the Federal Reserve system with these eligible notes as security for loans in the form of increased currency, which money is then loaned to industry. The cry is now raised of the exhaustion of the total of eligible paper. Item number one of the new measure would make eligible for rediscount less secure paper than at present. This is hailed as the powerful tonic to aid “our” sickened industry. Will it do this?
Any analysis of the facts shows the futility of the measure in this regard.
The capitalists assume that the mere increasing of the total available currency outstanding or the credit available, will insure that industry will use or desire this, money. Through a false interpretation of concomitant variations of the past they are attempting to rouse the body of industry by wagging the tail of credit This would be possible only were there a shrinkage of available credit today. But today, the figures of the Federal Reserve itself show that there has been presented for rediscount of commercial paper only $400,000,000 by the banks of the country. They still have eligible for rediscount in their vaults a total of about 3 billion dollars of commercial paper, in addition to 5 billion dollars of United States Government Bonds. Furthermore, it has been pointed out that only 91 banks of the total 7,800 in the system have exhausted their eligible paper. Any expansion of credit that industry desired could have been taken care of by the present system. The problem they have to solve is that of creating the desire for credit, not the supply. But then, there is nothing like a bombastic gesture.
The second feature of the present bill, that connected with “free gold” can be hailed as a great step forward only by those who still believe that Hoover is to inaugurate the era of engineering prosperity. Under the present law all Federal Reserve Notes must have a backing of forty per cent in gold, the other sixty percent to be made up of gold or commercial paper backing, government bonds being definitely excluded. This provision of course was inserted to prevent the backing up of the paper currency by bonds; which are also paper. Thus a shortage of commercial paper requires the use of gold above the 40 percent limit, leaving less free gold to take care of large scale withdrawals by foreign countries. This shortage exists now as can be seen from the following figures.



Federal Reserve




Notes issued


2,925,000,000


 


100%




Eligible paper held


   989,000,000


  34%




Gold required


1,936,000,000


  66%



Under the present provisions only the “self liquidating” paper could be used as backing for the sixty percent feature (aside from gold and gold notes). The present measure would permit to be used in addition to the above also (1) the less secure paper of the present ineligible class (2) government bonds. This, of course, increases the amount of free gold of the country. But how can anyone hail as epoch-making, a bill that does nothing but make legal that which is actually taking place. With the sprinkling of the “Holy Water” they merely make legal that which they are unable to prevent.
On the other hand, the bill is saturated with a sort of concentrated nitroglycerine. An ever-mounting pyramid of U.S. government bonds, increasing paper currency, in addition to a growing budget deficit, all to be supported by the shrinking gold reserve. The new bill increases the free gold, but what does it put in its place? Nothing but paper values that may collapse at the first gust of wind. It is not for nothing that the more objective of the American economists do not assert with all positiveness that America will not go off the gold standard. The danger becomes more imminent daily.
Congress is busy with these ballyhoo measures hoping to bring to a stop the declining production indices. Their rallying center is the one of psychology. Failing in this, they are preparing the ground for a collapse worse than that of the past three years. The failure of the ballyhoo campaign will bring with it more misery for the working class. The Communists must prepare now to take advantage of this movement for the overthrow of the entire capitalist system. The opportunity presents itself in exposing the sham of this type of maneuvers of the government, and counterpose to them the concrete proposals of the Communist movement – and first of all the slogan of long term credits to the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union needs these credits; the capitalists of this country have the necessary funds. Such a move will aid the Soviet Republic as well as the unemployed workers of this country who will benefit by Soviet orders forthcoming to American industry on the basis of long term credits. Now the opportunity presents itself for the Communists to bring this slogan forward at every workers’ gathering, in the factories, in the unions, and among the unemployed.
 



The latest patch to our threadbare capitalist society is being applied. They are now announcing the birth of the “Reconstruction Finance Corporation” Not so many months ago the bankers themselves, at the pronounced initiative of the president, created the National Credit Corporation for the purpose of aiding the weak banks. Admittedly, it has been of little aid. Now, a bigger and broader plan is being put in effect, the R.F.C. The bill providing for the creation of this “patch” specifies a two billion dollar fund to be raised through the sale of bonds ($500,000,000 to be subscribed to by the government) which money will be used to loan money to banks, advance money to the railroads to cover maturing bonds, aid to over-mortgaged farmers, and similar transactions, the essential nature of which is the “thawing out”, for the present holder, of “frozen.” and perhaps even worthless paper. The success or failure of the entire scheme can be established only after a survey of the entire banking situation today.
About three years ago the first rumblings of the present crisis could have been detected by the trained ear – from the ever lessening pounding of the tap hammer, as fewer and fewer rivets were driven home to secure the girders in the many buildings that had been shooting up. Beginning with the construction industry, the wave of depression rolled ever onward, from industry to industry, until now even the mighty banking system of this country has begun to wobble and grow dizzy with the constantly mounting list of casualties.
There are in general three types of banks (aside from Investment Houses, Insurance Companies, Personal Loan Societies, etc. – that have many functions similar to those of banks). They are (1) Mutual Savings Banks – Bowery Savings (2) Commercial Bank – National City (3) Private Banks – J.P. Morgan.
The first two concern us primarily. They are the ones that hold the meager savings of the “well-to-do” worker and small business man. They are the banks that act as the support of the industrialist from the moment of the purchase of his raw materials until the time he secures the returns on the finished product. These banks are the ones, that failing will add a heavy blow to the attempts of the capitalists to rise from their present prostration. These are the banks that the Reconstruction Finance Corp. is to aid.
 
The Importance of Bank Stability
For savings banks the almost total, and for commercial banks the overwhelming bulk of the liabilities (money the bank owes to other people) are to the depositors. Thus the recent statement of the National City Bank shows out of a total liability of $1,800,000,000, the sum of $1,400,000,000 under the item of deposits. This grand sum came from industrial and commercial concerns who are constantly depositing and withdrawing money to transact their business. On the side of the assets we find a similar item: “short term loans” (for circulating capital) of $912,000,000 out of a total assets of $1,858,000,000 – the largest single item recorded. A failure of a commercial bank means the throwing of a monkey wrench into the wheels of all the business that was transacted by the concern having deposits there, increased unemployment and misery. The failure of a saving bank, although not having the direct effect upon business in general as that of a commercial bank, brings within its train the pauperizing of all the depositors, who particularly during times of crisis look upon the few dollars saved during the seven fat years to tide them over the present lean years. More so than the bankruptcies of ordinary industrial and commercial houses, bank failures – because of the wide spread tentacles of modern financial capital – although also an effect of industrial crisis, add new fuel of a most highly inflammable nature to the economic catastrophe.
The importance to Capitalism of a sound financial system cannot be underestimated. It is for that reason that they have been so quick to apply any remedies that they hope may relieve this growing infection. The R.F.C. is but one of many, the most grandiose one of all. There are the Mutual Aid Plan of the New York State Savings Banks; there is the National Credit Corp – but as even the bankers admit, they have not been of much help. Of the present scheme, all that can be said is, that although it may succeed in helping through the coming few months the smallest and weakest of the banks, no too great bank liability can he secured with it.
 
The Trends to Be Counter-Balanced
The present bank crisis hinges on many important trends. The Federal Reserve System though its rediscounting power of short term loans helps the banks to overcome the failure of the industrialist to make good on his loans. The R.F.C. was created for the purpose of counterbalancing those features of the bank crisis – those of a long time trend. (1) the collapse of the real estate market; (2) the sharp drop in railroad bonds; (3) the defaulting of the European and the South American countries (Aside from the increase in stock holdings, accompanied by their subsequent decline in value). The act has as its avowed intention the alleviation of any weaknesses displayed by the banks as a result of the first two of the tendencies enumerated above. Of course, this will at the same time lessen the effect of the defaulted foreign bonds.
The importance of these trends upon the bank situation can be easily observed by a glance at the asset sheets of the large banks of the country. Thus the Bowery Savings Bank, the largest savings bank in the country, lists out of the total assets of $535,000,000.



Mortgages


$204,000,000




Railroad bonds


94,000,000



The books of commercial banks would also list large bond holdings. The complete collapse of the real estate boom of the prosperity era brought with it a consequent depreciation of the value of a goodly percentage of all mortgages. The totality and depth of this shrinking away of values can be gathered, to a slight extent, from a recent survey of mortgage bonds throughout the country. Of a total of ten million dollars outstanding, three billion would have to stand a loss of approximately 42%; two and one half billion losses of 18%. The merchant and worker unable to pay the high rents of 1928 and 1929, the real estate owner unable to pay the interest on the mortgage and the same with the farmer; the bank unable to pay its depositors. This is the picture presented.
In the field of railroad bonds the situation is exactly as serious. More than 70% of all railroad bonds are held by banking and similar institutions. The severe decline in the net income of railroads, dropping from $1,284,000,000 in 1929 to the low of $534,000,000 for 1931, brought about a consequent decline in the railroad bonds. In 1931 alone, to say nothing of the sharp decline of the last few months of 1930, railroad bonds have experienced a decline of 25 to 50 percent. Of course, there are various remedies that are being experimented with now, to increase railroad income. Namely: the rate increase recently granted, will succeed in bringing in an additional profit of $100,000,000; the second, if put into reality, another $200,000,000; while the amount of bond interest not being earned now is estimated at $75,000,000. The holder of railroad bonds and securities might put much hope in these prospective increases, were it not for the realization that very little replacing of fixed capital, very little of necessary repairs to locomotives and cars has been done during the past year. Were the actual balance sheet to be drawn, it would be much worse than it now appears; for money that should have been used for replacement purposes, has been used for dividend purposes to the stock and bond holders. The proposed savings of $300,000,000 is already being balanced against replacement of worn equipment. Only a substantial increase in the total haulage of the railroad of the country can return to them a portion of the income of the prosperity days. This increase in haulage is dependent upon a general improvement on the business situation as a whole.
The third unstable factor is the defauIting on both the European and on Latin-American markets. The vastness of this item is impossible to determine, but when we consider the countries defaulting – countries in which the American banker has been investing his funds for the past decade, an inkling of the size of the canvas can be obtained. In a recent statement of the Chase National Bank, it was pointed out that approximately 3½% of the total resources of one bank consisted of German credits (with Germany on the verge of defaulting). Adding to the above the loans to the S.A., and European defaulting countries, brings the total to a far from negligible item on the asset sheet. A general all-around, world wide refusal to pay, as seems to be imminent, would seriously impair the condition of the American banking institutions.
The above are the conditions that the creation of the Reconstruction Finance Corp. is to remedy. Even the leading financiers of the country are very skeptical as to its value. “Sixty billion dollars in values lost during the past three years cannot be repaid by two billion.” The Annalist of January 15, 1932, uses the phrase “There is no real remedy for this depreciation in security value, except the restoration of earning power.” In referring to the recent measure they say, “the business depression cannot be cured by such measures.” Recognizing the truth of the above statements, one must search elsewhere for the explanation of the creation of this present Corporation.
 
A Dole for Bankers – Starvation for Workers
The bill has been described as a “two billion dollar bill to relieve bankers’ mistakes.” The explanation of the above is easily seen by a careful reading of the measure as passed. The initial capital is to consist of $500,000,000: the remaining 1½ billion is to be made up through the sale of bonds, but and this is the all inclusive but, “the said obligations are to be fully and unconditionally guaranteed as to interest and principle by the United States,” by the government. In other words, the U.S. government has agreed to buy two billion dollars worth of depreciated and worthless paper from the banks and railroads. The proper title for the measure should have been “The Bank Subsidy Bill of 1932”.
All this by itself is nothing new. Big business repeatedly attempts to secure the aid of the class as a whole for its own particular enterprises. The whole campaign to dump the reparations into the Atlantic revolves around the question of aid by the capitalist government to a particular group, the bankers. The present plan has exactly a similar character.
The latest patch has been applied to our industrial and financial system. Two billion dollars have been diverted from the taxes to aid the bankers and railroaders in their present “sore plight”. Although the measure may have a temporary effect, “there is obviously no real remedy for this depreciation in security values except the restoration of earning power.” The trend out of the present crisis must occur in the industrial field, in the field of manufacture. Without a pick-up for industry as a whole one can expect to begin hearing before long of a new scheme to restore confidence and return prosperity.
To the millions of unemployed workers, the government refuses the slightest aid. But to the financial oligarchy it is prepared to lend its entire machinery. As the court-jester of American capitalism, Will Rogers, intimates: The government is always ready to help those who do not need it – those who do, the working class, will have to wrench it from them in the course of the struggle against capitalism, for its eventual overthrow.
 



On February 2, 1932, the Disarmament Conference called by the League of Nations will convene at Geneva. This conference is to give consideration to the limitation of armaments by the various powers. It will devote much talk on the need to “outlaw” war as the means employed by nations to solve their economic and political differences and rivalries.
So uncertain and cynical are the capitalist powers on the matter of disarmament or even limitation of armaments, that for a long time there has been doubt that the Conference would even be held. But it will be, and each capitalist nation has or is selecting delegates who are to lie or to sow illusions on the prospects of peace for a war-weary world.
Characteristically enough, President Hoover has appointed Charles G. Dawes, Ambassador to Great Britain, to be chairman of the delegation from the United States Government. Dawes is one of the outstanding jingos in this country – a noisy war-monger who carries the appellation of “Hell N’ Maria” Dawes, a bitter foe of labor and the Soviet Union. The American delegation will, however, be perfumed with pacifist flowers, among them being Mary Emma Wooley, president of Mount Holyoke College. It is the same with the delegations from other capitalist powers. The bearers of pacifist illusions in a world armed to the teeth will mingle with the gentlemen who “keep their powder dry”, and the latter will prevail. Arthur Henderson of the British Labor Party will give the proper touch at Geneva through his selection as Chairman of the Conference. Thus the militarists, pacifists and the labor betrayers will make up a trinity of forces who will talk loudly against war and militarism, come to the conclusion that nothing really can be done now about the matter – and the capitalist nations will continue to strengthen their war departments.
 
The Cost of Militarism
Armaments and wars are very expensive affairs and no doubt the imperialist powers would like to decrease expenditures, particularly so, if by lopping off some small sums here and there, they can satisfy to some extent the demands of the workers and the petit-bourgeois middle classes for a reduction in armaments and their longing for peace. But in all these years of disarmament confabs, war “outlawry” and pacifist talk, the powers, particularly the United States, Great Britian, France and Japan have been increasing their armament expenditures. The following figures, compiled by the World Peace Foundation from the League of Nations Armaments Year Book, give the expenditures for the fiscal year of 1930:



Government Budget Expenditures




United States


$707,425,000




France


  466,960,000




Great Britain


  465,255,000




Italy


  248,946,500




Japan


  236,861,500




Germany


  171,923,040



War to maintain peace between the capitalist powers, and periods of peace to prepare for war again, are indeed costly matters – and, as always, it is the working class that carry the burdens, shoulder the guns, foot the costs – and then are honored with an “Unknown Soldier’s” grave.
 
A Fake Disarmament Conference
And now we are to have another fake “disarmament” conference to lull the mass of people throughout the world to sleep, into a false security on the possibility of the maintenance of peace under capitalism. The Secretariat of the League of Nations has organized live commissions for this conference to deal with the land, sea, air, budgetary and political phases of the negotiations. This is the same League of Nations that has listened to the guns roaring, the cannon booming and the airplanes tossing bombs on the fields of Manchuria – and did nothing because it could not. The League is not the instrument that can solve or even diminish the capitalist rivalries. That lies in the hands of the international proletariat when it awakens to the problem and becomes conscious of its own unused power.
Since the World War there has been a growth of pacifist illusions, peace societies, declarations of “conscientious objectors” that they will not bear arms in times of war, etc., etc. All the while there has not been a day without war in some part of the globe: semi-colonial and colonial wars for national independence, capitalist, warfare (Sino-Jap war in Manchuria today), wars of intervention (imperialist interventions in Soviet Russia, Nicaragua, etc.) and, lastly, the insurrection by an oppressed people against its rulers. Its highest and best expression was reached in the insurrection in Russia which brought the Bolsheviks into power and the dictatorship of the proletariat into being and by means of which the historical basis for the final elimination of exploitation and war was first laid. For with the assumption of political power by the working class which alone has no exploiting, imperialist or ulterior aims to serve, there will in time be needed neither an oppressive or suppressive governmental apparatus with its military concomitants, etc.
 
The Proposal of the Soviet Union
These are times to restate fundamentals of class struggle on whatever front it manifests itself. An exposure of the fake disarmament aims of the capitalist powers and proofs that disarmament or peace are impossible and utopian under capitalism, is an absolute necessity if the proletariat is to be able to fight effectively against capitalist imperialism, understand the causes underlying another impending world war, and give the revolutionary answer to the imperialists.
The Soviet Union long ago showed up the hypocrisy of the capitalist nations on the issue of war or peace when it made a proposal for complete disarmament of all countries and laid its program for disarmament and peace on the table. The capitalist nations ran from this proposal as if from the plague. With a single stroke the Soviet Union demonstrated that the capitalist nations were not seriously interested in the abolition of war, but only in such measures as would maintain the capitalist system and serve to fool the working people on this scourge of humanity – capitalist war.
 
Imperialist Rivalries
This is an epoch when the imperialist rivalries are not lessened, but, on the contrary, approach the breaking point and can find solution only in capitalist war or proletarian revolution. It is the fear of the latter possibility in an awakening proletariat that holds off for the time being the “solution” of the first, capitalist war. Does anyone with half a mind seriously doubt that, despite all the clap-trap about the “unity and close relations of the English-speaking people”, the contradictions and imperialist rivalry between Great Britain and the United States are sharpened? Or that, notwithstanding the visit of the “pacifist” Ramsay MacDonald to the United States, the economic basis for warfare between nations, with the United States and Great Britain as the outstanding rivals, has increased manifold in the past years? Only fools would deny the facts. It is one of the great capitalist contradictions that is heading the world into another convulsion.
 
A United States of Europe or
A Soviet United States of Europe
Pacifists and other well-meaning muddle-heads have raised the slogan of a United States of Europe as a solution to the war danger and other problems in Europe. Little or no consideration is given by them to the economic differences of the capitalist groupings in each of these nations that have caused these conflicts and that have no solution on the basis of a capitalist program. There are treaties and agreements between “little ententes”, among the Balkan States, France and Poland, Germany and Austria, etc., but no sooner are these understandings arrived at, then others break out – each steps on another’s toes.
It is hoped, therefore, that a federated or United States of Europe, a political agreement on a continental scale, could reconcile the grievances and differences. But all these agreements and proposals are based upon the continuation of the system of exploitation, of capitalist relations in the individual countries. This is an insoluble capitalist contradiction. No sooner would such a United States of Europe be formed, then it would already begin to disintegrate, to establish rival groupings and – there would be an end to the United States of Europe.
There can be a United States of Europe, but it must take the form, as L.D. Trotsky has so brilliantly demonstrated, of a SOVIET UNITED STATES OF EUROPE. In other words, there must first be the elimination of capitalist exploitation, of capitalism itself, before there can be a solution to its effects – militarism and war. The abolition of customs tariffs and similar barriers between nations can have a meaning only under such conditions. German-Austrian Anschluss, for example, therefore can have, under capitalist conditions, only a transitory significance.
Of the imperialist rivalries and contradictions in the Near and Far East, we need not comment. They are only all too evident. There is need only to cite the present war in Manchuria. The League of Nations has proved powerless there. The Disarmament Conference can once again in February “outlaw” war by passing another resolution – but the Japanese guns will boom and possibly others as well.
 
The Fundamental Struggle: For Capitalism or Communism
And lastly, there is the outstanding contradiction, the historical contradiction between the imperialist powers of the world and the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics. For this the “Disarmament Conference” has no solution except war. And it is this war against the Workers’ Republic, based upon the fundamental contradiction of capitalism and Communism, that the capitalist powers are preparing. There is no answer to the existence side by side of a capitalist world and a country aiming for the abolition of all forms of capitalist exploitation and ideology, except a struggle between them for supremacy. That can only be by the destruction of one and the victory of the other on a world scale. This economic, social and political contradiction in the world today – a capitalist world and a Soviet Russia – can find no solution, nor even a beginning of one, in a League of Nations, the Kellogg Pact or Disarmament Conferences. The answer can only be: the domination of international capitalism or international Communism.
The Soviet Union, under the aegis of Stalin, Litvinoff, et al., has most unfortunately assisted in the sowing of illusions, of pacifist nonsense, of fraudulent peace talk, by being a signator to the Kellogg Pact, a capitalist instrument aimed, in the last analysis, at clipping the wings of the Soviet Republic, disarming and destroying it. The propagation by the Soviet Union of the theory of peaceful co-habitation side by side, indefinitely, of the Soviet Republic and the capitalist world only plays into the bands of the bourgeoisie and the muddled pacifists and confuses the working class which must see the problem of war and peace as a class problem.
 
Pacifism – A Middle Class Movement
Pacifism, which finds its greatest expression and hope in “disarmament conferences”, Leagues of Nations, etc., has been swelling its forces numerically. In all countries pacifist movements have grown. Yet the pacifist movement is impotent to solve the problem of militarism and war. Pacifism represents the outlook of the middle class, the petty-bourgeoisie: it represents the flower of its idealism. We find here a diffused economic class, declassed elements too, caught between the main classes of society, the capitalist class and the industrial proletariat, crushed from all directions, also victims of capitalism, militarism and war.
Pacifism is the only way in which this group finds it possible, with its limited consciousness of today, to express its resentment and opposition to capitalist warfare. Students, overwhelmingly from the middle class, make up the “militant” section of the pacifist movement. But, when all is said and done, when the war drums begin to throb, they will answer the call of “Tommy Atkins” and the “doughboy”. Until these elements, the petit-bourgeois, grasp the class outlook, the proletarian concept of the causes of war, their movement is doomed to sterility.
“Conscientious objection, anti-war strike, and so on,” says Lenin, “are just stupidities, pitiful and poor-spirited dreams of unarmed struggle against the armed bourgeoisie, of the ending of capitalism without a desperate civil war or a series of wars ... Away with the parsonical, sentimental, absurd dreaming about ‘peace at any price’.”
That is why, too, all the post-war literature of pacifism, the horrors of war, have no lasting impression or genuine value for a solution to the war problem.
 
Militarism and War: A Class Problem
War and militarism must be approached by the working class from a class standpoint. They are class problems. War is a manifestation of capitalist society: it occurs when there is no other way out of the impasse of capitalist rivalries or rivalry today between contending social systems: capitalist society and the Soviet Republic. War remains as long as capitalism remains. Armaments, navies, armies, airships – all are unavoidable while these class divisions and rivalries exist. Capitalist Disarmament Conferences can do nothing about this – except to play the game of the capitalists. It is a matter of class struggle. Capitalist militarism has found in the imperialist epoch its class rival – the Red Army of the Soviet Union, the protector of the class interests of the proletariat in the Soviet Union and the entire world.
The future lies, not with pacifism, but in a recognition by the working class of the world that it must prepare the organization of all its forces for the impending final struggles between the workers and the capitalists. Not pacifism – but class war. Not “national security and defense”; not social-patriotism and nationalism – but international solidarity and organization of the proletariat.
The Geneva Conference will settle nothing; it has not the power to settle anything. Geneva will only serve further to expose the futility of pacifism, the impotence of the League of Nations, the rapacity of the imperialist powers, their unwillingness to give up any part of their spoils. The only thing peaceful at Geneva will be its peaceful waters. Otherwise, it will only reveal the imperialist contradictions once again and be a warning to the proletariat to be on guard.
 



A comrade from Bethlehem writes to the Militant that Communists, sympathizers and Left wingers still inquire on the attitude of the Communists toward the question of the State. They further ask what is the position of the Left Communists. The comrade inquires: “Is the aim of the Communists, after a successful proletarian revolution, the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat, to continue to build a State?”
In reply to the comrade, it can be stated that the views of the Communists relative to the State, or government, are definite and specific. The early and modern leaders of scientific socialism or communism have answered clearly all that is involved therein. The first to do so were Marx and Engels in their historic Communist Manifesto and in Engels’ Socialism – Utopian and Scientific, which comprises a section of his larger work, Landmarks of Scientific Socialism (Anti-Duehring).
 
Class Society and the State
The Communists see in the State an organ of domination of one class in society over another. Till the advent of power by the proletariat in the Soviet Union, the State had always been an instrument of power of a ruling and exploiting class over the mass of exploited people. This has been the situation, in all preceding class societies: slavery, feudalism and today capitalism. Modern capitalism in its stages of growth, and largely even yet, expresses itself through the parliamentary – allegedly through the methods of “universal” suffrage – form of government. But already, in its imperialist epoch and its decadence or decline on an international scale – it is resorting to another form of domination or dictatorship, that is, the Fascist dictatorship, which, among other things, shows more plainly the bankruptcy of the economy of capitalism today and compels it to resort to special repressive forms to maintain, somehow, capitalist domination.
The Communists understand that the State is but the outgrowth of the existing social and class relations which arise out of the conditions of production and distribution of the means of existence. This is so under the Soviets in the period of the proletarian dictatorship, even as in capitalist society itself. No Communist desires a State or repressive organ for its own sake. But unlike the Anarchists and Syndicalists, they know that the mere denial or negation of the State and its role, does not do away with it.
 
The Proletarian State
The proletarian State, the Soviet Union, too, is an apparatus of one class against another. The proletariat has succeeded the bourgeoisie as the ruling class, and, in alliance with the peasantry there, protects the interests of the useful producers and endeavors to eliminate all forms of exploitation and exploiters. Soviet rule is the highest form of democratic procedure yet developed. It is not a parliamentary form, after the manner of capitalism but, in the main an industrial form or the political expression of the masses.
The dictatorship of the proletariat, in Russia in the form of a Soviet Government – Workers’ Councils – represents the transition form between capitalist society and the final establishment of classless – hence governmentless – society, that is: Communism. The Soviet, state strives for the complete elimination of all forms of capitalism and capitalists petty or large. At the same time, as one of its outstanding achievements, the Soviet government assists in the establishment of the social and economic functions of the working masses. So long as classes in one form or another exist, a governmental apparatus or State will exist. Its final elimination or dissolution can only be the result of a long process in which the useful producers – workers of brain and muscle – finally establish all the necessary bases of social production and distribution, without any kind of exploiting factors or remnants, and thereby develop a condition wherein no form of governmental apparatus is required. In other words, to paraphrase Marx and Engels, the administration of men (government) is to be replaced by the administration of things, that is, the administration of the processes of production and distribution or the establishment of a social and industrial commonwealth in which political government, as we understand it now. becomes wholly unnecessary. Society will function through social and industrial forms. On this question Daniel De Leon, the American revolutionist, has made great contributions which have been attested to by Lenin.
Respecting the gradual elimination of the State, Engels has described the process as a withering away or vanishing of the State. Our readers can find voluminous material on this and kindred questions in Lenin’s brilliant work, the State and Revolution, Trotsky’s Terrorism and Communism, Marx’s Criticism of the Gotha Program and other works. The point of view of the Left Opposition is amply expressed therein.
 
The Soviet Government Today
There remains nevertheless the situation in the Soviet Union today. That Stalin and Stalinism have to a large degree converted the Soviet apparatus into a bureaucracy which less and less represents the basic historical interests of the proletariat, does not do away with the fundamental fact of the necessity for the proletariat to create a State, a Soviet government, for its own ends. Stalinism has abused the proletarian State, has made a mockery of proletarian democracy in the Communist party, in the Soviet government, in the unions, etc., but despite the terrible abuses, despite the usurpation of powers by the bureaucracy, – the Soviet government remains a WORKERS’ STATE. Despite all that happened, the Left Opposition has full faith in the regeneration of the Communist party of the Soviet Union and the Communist International. The vigilance and understanding of the worker-Communists and proletariat, led by the Left Opposition, we have reason to believe will yet remedy the situation with in the Communist movement in Russia and internationally.
 
The Viewpoint of the Opposition
In Problems of the Development of the U.S.S.R. – a draft of a thesis of the International Left Opposition on the Russian Question – comrade L.D. Trotsky has dealt concretely on the causes and cure of the situation existing in Russia and in the Comintern. We can think of nothing better to recommend to our Bethlehem comrade and to all other interested workers than a close study of this thesis.
It is there pointed out that the party, like all political institutions, is also a product of the productive relations of society. The bureaucracy that has developed in the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, in the Soviets, etc., is not an independent historical factor; it can only serve a class. The zig-zag course of Stalinism has nevertheless, because of pressure from the Left Opposition and the proletariat, developed on the basis of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
The fundamental danger of the bureaucracy, in addition to all the crimes against the Russian and international proletariat committed by Stalin and his faction, is that, “even if it can not itself become the foundation of state power, it can, with its policy, make it extremely easier for the power to be transferred from the hands of the class into the hands of another,” namely, the passing of Soviet power into the hands of the bourgeoisie. “The present-day Soviet apparatus is a bureaucratic, plebiscitarily distorted form of the dictatorship of the proletariat. At the same time, however, it is a potential instrument of Bonapartism.” But, the Left Opposition, points out, the proletariat and the worker-Communists will resist such a development to the limit, and “between the present function of the apparatus and its possible function, the blood of civil war would still have to flow”. The proletariat will indeed not lightly give up its power because of the crimes of Stalin and the bureaucracy.
In brief, comrade Trotsky proves, “The strength of the Soviet bureaucracy has unfolded on the basis of the abrupt decline in the political activity of the Soviet proletariat after a number of years of the highest exertion of forces, upon a series of defeats of the international revolution, upon the stabilization of capitalism and the strengthening of the international social democracy” Nevertheless, “the bourgeoisie could come to power in the U.S.S.R. in no other way than with the aid of a counter-revolutionary upheaval. The proletarian vanguard retains the possibility of putting the bureaucracy in its place, of subordinating it to its control, of insuring the correct policy and by means of decisive and bold reforms, of regenerating the party, the trade unions and the Soviets.”
 



In attempting to give a brief economic analysis of the past few months, and a prognosis for the immediate future one should observe the following trends. First, the actual figures on production and general business activity (steel, cotton cloth production, shoes car loadings, electric power production building, etc.), of course, adjusted to seasonal variation. Secondly a study should be made of commodity prices. No break in the declining curve of general business activity can be expected unless a brake can be applied to the precipitant fall of commodity prices. Capitalists will begin to replace worn machinery, and invest the easily obtained credit in new industry only when they feel that they will not be confronted with their competitors purchasing in March at a reduced rate the raw materials that they purchased in January.
In connection with the actual commodity prices, one should attempt to estimate the actual stocks on hand, of raw materials and of manufactured goods, (quantity, not value is the factor to be looked for – most estimates are of present depreciated value, not of quantity). In connection with this item one should also examine the figures for construction contracts awarded and building permits granted. Also important are new capital issues. These of course indicate purchases to take place in the immediate future. Thirdly, the condition of the working class, in the form of wage cuts, numbers employed, total wage, etc., etc., should be considered. Fourthly, there should be taken into consideration any special items that may have arisen, such as the recent government measures, or any special large scale measures planned or advocated by any specific industry. Under this last heading should be included any measures that have some bearing on the subject, but do not properly fall under any of the above headings. The above procedure, although not advocated as a rigid plan, should succeed in giving one a brief yet general sketch of the economic condition and immediate prospects of the country.
To sum up the economic developments of the past two months, one can but say, that as yet there have appeared no signs of any immediate revival. The months of January and February continued the kaleidoscopic decline in production begun over two years ago. The steel industry, which ordinarily shows an improvement during the first quarter, continued to perform at about 26 to 27 per cent of capacity. The hoped-for rise in steel production to be brought on by an increase in automobile production failed to .materialize because of the lack of improvement in the production of new cars. The index of automobile production declined from a high of 52 for the first week of January to one of 36.5 for the last week of February. Despite the streaming headlines to the contrary, Ford has not yet begun any substantial production. Freight car loadings and electric power output showed similar declines, the latter dropping during the two months’ period from an index of 222 to one of 216, registering a rate of decline much greater than that of the past two years as a whole. The latest reports of building activity, one of the most important industries of the country, showed no bettering of its present paralyzed condition, the figures even showing an aggravation of the condition of the industry. The New York Times combined weekly index registered a new low for the depression in the last week of February. The index is now at 60.8 as against 69 for the beginning of the year.
The only figures reporting increased activity of a substantial nature have been those of shoe and cotton cloth production. In the production of cotton cloth, the rise from an index of 91 in the first week of January to one of 96 for the last week of February, had merely an aggravating effect upon the market, the sales in no way being able to consume the increased production. The stocks on hand increased, and despite the temporary rise in price brought on by the Shanghai events, the price trend continued downward for the period. (An interesting feature to be investigated in this so-called consumers’ industry, is the recent statement made by the New York Cotton Exchange Service that 40 per cent in yardage and 60 per cent in weight of all the cotton goods produced go into industrial uses.)
Commodity prices temporarily steadied in the third week of February, the only break in the two months’ period, failed to keep their gains, and again registered a decline for the final week of the month. The Annalist index dropped from 95 to the low of 91.4. In the factors connected with commodity prices no signs leading to the belief that a bottom has been reached can be seen. Although comprehensive figures are difficult to obtain, one is led to believe that stocks on hand of manufactured goods still remain very high. The accumulation of raw materials is growing so rapidly as to become threatening for some, industries. Crop estimates for the coming year indicate even greater yields than the present year. On the field of building activity the hoped for increase remained in the wishing stage. The figures of this year are running about 30 per cent below those of last year. For both contracts awarded and building permits granted, one is forced to use the words of the National City Bank Bulletin, “lowest by far” for any similar period. New industrial capital issues (a portion of which sums will be used for the purchase of goods in the next few months) have been conspicuous during the month of February by their almost complete absence.
The first two months of the year marked a continuation and extention of the general wage slashing campaign this time attacking the organized industries, namely railroads and building trades. A horizontal 10 per cent wage cut to some 1,500,000 workers employed by the railroads, will reduce the total wage for this group, for the coming year, approximately by $200,000,000. The proposed 25 per cent cut in the building trades has this peculiar feature attached to it, namely, that the great majority of the workers in the industry are already receiving much below the scale. The proposed official wage cuts can but mean, not the adjustment of wages to 25 per cent below the present scale (which in many cases would mean an actual wage increase), but rather a further reduction of the already reduced prevailing rate of pay.
According to the latest available reports of the Department of Labor, the number of people employed continues to decline; the total wage paid decreasing even more rapidly. Thus the drop from December to January for factory employment was from 67.9 to 66.3 whereas payrolls declined from 55.8 to 52.4. This ever widening spread between the two curves merely indicates the results of the wage cutting campaign. The worker fortunate to be kept on the payroll is finding less and less in the pay envelope each week.
As special emergency measures, the past two months saw the birth of the two much heralded banking measures, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation and the Glass-Steagall Bill. (In connection with our article on the Glass-Steagall bill, a misleading sentence crept in, due to last minute revision. The sentence reading, “But how can anyone hail as epoch making, a bill that does nothing but make legal that which is actually taking place”, should have been concluded, “namely, the continued withdrawal of gold by foreign countries.”) The entire attempt to increase commodity prices by increasing the available money in circulation is based upon the false assumption that it is possible to inject into the process of circulation, additional money despite the fact that business does not desire the additional sums. The bankers have yet to explain how the possible increase in currency will result in an actual increase. Were the government actually able to inject new money into circulation, then this would be a factor in tending to bring about a temporary rise in prices. But the present measures are valueless in this respect. Actual justness conditions are the determining factor, and not the effect of money in circulation. Summed up in the words of Marx, “prices are not high or low, because there is more or less money in circulation, but on the contrary, there is more or less money in circulation, because prices are high or low.” The complete futility of the present currency measures is summed up in the above sentence.
The danger of America going off the gold standard (inflation in the strict sense of the term) becomes greater daily. Gold continues to be drained from the country. In the first month of the year the total decrease of gold stocks was 37 million, while for February this sum had mounted to 67 million. In addition to the above there exists the ever mounting deficit of the national government, which will probably reach well into the three billions for the present fiscal year, unless new tax measures are rushed through. “The need to balance governmental budgets of all kinds beginning with the Federal Government.” Thus reads the National City Bank report, expressing in their words the fear of the stability of the U.S. government bonds. The financial crisis, rather than being alleviated, is facing much greater stumbling blocks. Private German bonds are now being talked of, in addition to the public debt, in the discussions of defaulting. There is even talk here of a complete shut down of the stock market. The framework of the banking system is rapidly becoming weaker.
All in all, the conclusions to be drawn are, that the prospects for immediate revival are not great. Unemployment and the misery of the working class will most probably become more accentuated. The questions of immediate relief and of unemployment insurance must remain at the forefront of our unemployment campaign. Concentrating on these slogans, and in addition bringing forward that of the six hour day, as well as that of credits to the Soviet Union, the Communist movement should attempt to rally around it the great masses of workers who more and more should become disillusioned with the prospects held out for them by the capitalist system.
 



Philadelphia. – During the last couple of weeks a wave of strikes has been sweeping Philadelphia. We had the Taxicab strike, the strike at B.G. Budd Wheel Company and a number of minor labor affair. Comrade Goodman mentioned the above strikes in the issue of the Militant of December 30. But he failed to mention the strike which hit the food industry. During the last four weeks the recently organized Transit clerks union, which is in the A.F. of L., has been putting up a militant fight to organize this industry. Up until now it has not been touched by organized labor.
The Fruit Clerks Union has been putting up a magnificent battle against odds. The Penn Fruit Company which this union has been fighting for union recognition has the backing of the Retail Fruit dealers association in its fight to smash the union. They are spending thousands of dollars, telling the workers the union is a racket, etc. Also they have tried to frame the leaden of the strike, in particular the organizer, Eddie Greene, who is the real backbone of the strike.
Four weeks ago before they went on strike the Fruit Clerks union came to the meeting of the Philadelphia Meat Cutters association, also a newly organized union, Independent of the A.F. of L., and asked their support of the strike. The organizer made a speech to the effect that since the meat cutters, who also worked for this concern, would in the future also have to fight the Penn Fruit Company for recognition, where the fruit clerks walked out the meat men should also walk out. After the fruit men left the hall the fakers at the head of the meat union said: “Why do we have to go and back them up? We are the strongest union, all they want is to use us for a front.”
Federation of Unions After the strike had gone four weeks they finally came to some agreement. Last week the fruit clerks, the grocery and delicatessen clerks, and also the truckers all came out for a federated union. This was last Wednesday. The Teamsters Union’s business agent said that they had their agreement before Mr. Sam Cooke the head of Penn Fruit for the last month and he promised the fruit men that the next day, Thursday, his men would not deliver to the stores which the union was battling and that when they signed they would sign for three.
The meat cutters who worked for Penn Fruit now took a vote as to whether they should go out on strike. Unanimous to strike. Thursday, out of 30 men in the union, four walked out from the store at 52 Market St. The other men refused to come out. Pickets were posted at all the six Penn Fruit stores.
Saturday the head of the meat union, a shyster lawyer by the name of John Auspitz, made a deal with Sam Cooke from the Penn Fruit Co. to call the strike off without consulting the other unions for their opinion. Probably he was bought off. Auspitz called the fruit men the trouble makers and claimed that he was a good fellow. The fruit union was asked to go back to work by the Regional Labor Board pending arbitration. They refused to call the strike off until their union is given recognition by the Penn Fruit Company, which they refused to do. Although many of their men have gone back to work they still refuse to call off their pickets as the meat cutters union did.
 



Developments in the Sino-Japanese War in Manchuria have been rapid in the past week. The Japanese armies proceeded so swiftly to remove Chinese forces from any control of Manchurian soil that the foreign powers, who had not even sharply reprimanded Japan’s military aggressions before, called upon Japan to halt her advances. Great Britain and the United States particularly intervened when it appeared as if the Japanese would also seize the city of Chinchow, the last hold of China on Manchuria. U.S. Secretary of State Stimson’s alleged statement that “Japan was running amuck in Manchuria” tended to bring diplomatic parleys, carried on for the most part secretly, to a head. For the moment, at least, the Japanese march upon Chinchow has been halted.
But what is outstanding in the Manchurian situation is that the Japanese imperialists have achieved virtually all their objectives in Manchuria and are now in a position to make “concessions” to the “demands” of the United States and the imperialist powers associated, in the League of Nations. Japan has cleared Manchuria of nearly all Chinese forces and influence for the time being, The so-called International Commission of Inquiry into affairs in Manchuria and China will, when it begins its tasks of legalizing the exploitation and dismemberment of Manchuria and China, have to do so while Japanese troops occupy Manchurian soil at all strategic points. Japan has virtually forced the other imperialist powers (bourgeois China herself had little choice in the matter) to recognize the validity of her so-called treaty “rights” in Manchuria, rights obtained from a powerless China at the point of a gun.
 
The Chinese Bourgeoisie Capitulate Before the Imperialists
The Chinese bourgeois government of Chiang Kai-Shek has all but totally surrendered to the demands of the Japanese Imperialists, as well as to the pressure of the capitalist powers led by the United States and Great Britain. After much bluster that the Chinese government would consider no negotiations between Japan and itself on disputed questions, until Japanese military forces had evacuated Manchuria, the Nanking government is now ready to concede that vital point and to place her reliance on the International Commission of Inquiry. A sad reed indeed to lean upon and which foreshadows greater miseries for the Chinese people.
Rarely has a government in all history been so suppine and groveling before its foreign imperialist masters, – from Japan to Italy, Great Britain and the United States, as has been the capitalist government of Chiang Kai-Shek. The latter has not moved in reality one iota to resist the Japanese invasion, despite the strong and growing protest and demands of all elements in China, particularly the workers and poorer peasants. Chiang’s boast that he would lead the military forces against Japan on the Manchurian front has proved to be an idle boast. He remains in Nanking.
 
The Oppression Against the Chinese Masses
But if Chiang Kai-Shek and the rest of the bourgeoisie behind him have been wholly weak and lax in opposing the Japanese imperialists, they have been working overtime once again to smash the rising movement of the workers, peasants and students, whose wrath and demand for struggle against all forms of imperialism, foreign and native, has grown rapidly again in the past weeks. But Chiang denounces the demonstrators, not only against his bloody regime, but against Japan. The economic boycott against Japanese goods and its possibilities is frowned upon by the government, and efforts are made to make the boycott innocuous, colorless and merely gestures of defiance against Japan. Despite this, and the present bourgeois character, in the main, of the boycott it has been a thorn in the side of the Japanese. The Kuo Min Tang government of Chiang Kai-Shek further proceeds against the working class. It has forbidden strikes and brands the suspension of work “as illegal in times of crisis”. Suppression of workers’ organizations and execution of labor militants and Communists continue as the policy of the Kuo Min Tang. Our readers in other columns of The Militant can read the Fenprekor despatches which give graphic first hand pictures and explanations of the situation and actions in China and the Far East generally.
 
Relations With the Soviet Union
Despite these actions and policies of the Chinese Nationalists, there is considerable effort being exerted for the resumption of relations with the Soviet Union. It is sad to have to say that the Chinese Revolution of 1927 was destroyed by Chiang Kai-Shek and the Kuo Min Tang which was then fully supported and endorsed by Joseph Stalin and the Comintern over the protests of the Left Opposition. It is perhaps fitting that the hands of Chiang Kai-Shek should again seek to grasp those of Stalin whose policy leads everywhere to the destruction of international socialism and solidarity of the working masses.
The Canton Government, of which Eugene Chen is foreign minister, charges Nanking with failure to resist Japan’s invasion, and decries reliance upon the League of Nations. This bourgeois government which has fundamentally the same aims as Nanking, realizes that if the Chinese bourgeois is to develop as a power and be able also to resist the Chinese toilers, it will have to show at least some semblance of resistance to the invaders.
Arising out of the Manchurian situation, Pravda, Moscow, raises the question of recognition of the Soviet Union by the United States as one means whereby confusion and understanding between the various countries may be alleviated or removed, citing the Sino-Russ Eastern Railway dispute as a point.
Winter will slow down military operations in Manchuria. Meanwhile Japan remains intrenched in Manchuria and, on the whole, regards with equanimity, the forthcoming commission of inquiry, to be extended to five members to include a small power. Only the Chinese bourgeoisie have cause to tremble in their boots. Japan’s capital investments of $750,000,000 (figures of 1930, from World Almanac of 1931) appear indeed to be secure. Nor has it great qualms just now over its investments in China itself which, among others, include outright ownership of 43 cotton mills, with 1,397,272 spindles and 13,981 looms.
 
The Importance of Chinchow
Japan’s hope to seize Chinchow, against which the other powers set up a screeching howl, is easy to understand. It was the last hold of China in Manchuria. Chinchow, says a report of the National Geographic Society, is the chief city of Southwest Manchuria; it is the center for Chinese trade. It is one of the most strategically located cities in the Far East and has the only railroad which links China and Manchuria. It is China’s open “front door” to Manchuria which China must hold to have any say in Manchuria.
Now there are discussions for the establishment of a “neutral zone” about Chinchow, and, further, December 15th is suggested for the withdrawal of troops from Manchuria. Negotiations are slow and, it is expected, will be long drawn out, during which time, nevertheless, fighting of one sort or another will continue, and working class victims of capitalist militarism will be killed. The Nanking government will accept whatever is handed to them by the imperialists. The League of Nations is seeking for a “formula”, not a solution, to the Manchurian problems.
 
Revive the Workers’ Movement In China
The Communists and militants in Japan and China are increasing their activities. That is the best hope for a correct ultimate solution. In Japan there have been manifestations by the workers against the Japanese attack uopn Manchuria. In China, as has been pointed out, the working class is endeavoring to rebuild its economic and political organizations, and is arousing itself for struggle against the Chinese bourgeoisie and the Kuo Min Tang betrayers, against the militarists and landlords of north and south and the institutions of militarism and capitalism in China. The Chinese toilers are once again building for the future, for the only lasting solution, for a Soviet China. It is for the American workers to assist the Chinese masses by organizing their forces against the strongest of the imperialist powers, the United States, whose claws are sharpened for a grip on China.
 



Japan has succeeded in her immediate objectives in Manchuria. She remains firmly lodged there, as predicted in The Militant. Her steady display and use of military force, her intransigence in achieving her aims in Manchuria, have brought about the capitulation, at present, of China, the League of Nations and the United States.
The League of Nations formulated (12-10-31) an innocuous resolution on the Sino-Japanese conflict in Manchuria which Japan readily accepted, and China accepted because there was no other choice. The resolution does not even mention the decisive question of the control of the Manchurian railways. So far as the moment is concerned, they are Japan’s to have and to hold. The much-talked of commission of inquiry into affairs in Manchuria and China has no actual power, will make inquiries over a period of time, and then incorporate them into an official record for time’s dusty files. Meanwhile, the Japanese military forces are to evacuate Manchuria “as speedily as possible”, a speed which will make a snail’s pace look like that of a harrier. China and Japan are to continue direct negotiations for settlement of the disputes.
 
Nothing Settled
Fundamentally nothing is settled in Manchuria. The last word is yet to be said: and that will be said neither by the Japanese imperialists, the League of Nations, the United States, nor yet by the Chinese bourgeoisie – but by the Chinese and Manchurian masses, the Japanese and all other exploited people. On that day there will real evacuation: of all exploiters.
In one important respect in the day to day events, neither the Japanese nor the other imperialist powers have been successful. They could not provoke the Soviet Republic into the war and thus make easier the aims of the bourgeoisie to unite forces in an onslaught for the overthrow of the first Workers’ Republic. That is an evidence of the basic desire of the workers for peace. But it does not mean that continued provocations and attempts against the Soviet Union will always go unchallenged by the outraged working masses of the Soviet Union and the entire world.
Nor is Japan’s immediate position at home a rosy one. Despite efforts, among them the steady export of gold to bolster the yen and to maintain the gold standard, Japan on December 13 joined England and other nations and went off the gold standard. Speculation with the yen has been continuous. Trade has been stagnant; the boycott of Japanese goods by China has had sharp effects and there has been a loss of trade in other directions, plus the fact that Japan has also been involved, deeply in the world economic crisis.
Japan’s victory in Manchuria will yet prove a pyrrhic one. It presents itself before capitalist judgment with Manchuria virtually entirely in its possession – and, by capitalist standards, possession is nine-tenths of the law. But the dispossessed will learn how to deal with bourgeois standards.
 
The Movement in China
In China itself, the rising wrath of the workers and students has been asserting itself in demonstrations against the Nanking govenmeut of Chiang Kai-Shek in paricular. The students have demonstrated en masse, in a strike of 50,000 participants on one occasion, for a more determined struggle by China against the Japanese invaders of Manchuria. Strikes of workers are suppressed or outlawed by decree. The Chinese government continues the policy of White Terror against the labor movement and especially against the Communists. Recent despatches from China show efforts ot the workers to revive and vitalize their labor organisations, so brutally and cruelly destroyed by Chiang Kai-Shek and Co.
 
The Kuo Min Tang Betrayers
In the face of the attitude of the workers, peasants and students, the Kuo Min Tang has been trying to unite its force. The two main factions, that of Nanking, headed by Chiang Kai-Shek, and Canton, headed by the opportunist Eugene Chen, Sun Fo, Wang Chin Wei, have held unification meets, but thus far without success. Both feel the necessity of bourgeois unity to beat down the working masses and to continue with the system of exploitation, but they have not been able to agree on the division of the spoils. As we go to press, there is reported the resignation of President Chiang Kai-Shek as head of Chinese Nationalist government. This does not change anything essentially.
There is of course no principle difference between these two bourgeois factions: both of them capitulate before the imperialists – Japan, United States, Great Britain, etc. Both are alike in their hatred, oppression and exploitation of China’s toiling masses; both destroy labor’s organizations and forces – their unions, political parties, etc.; both murder labor militants and communists. Both countenance betrayal and traitorous conduct to the foreign enemy, rather than risk the loss of their privileges to the plundered workers. Witness the renegacy of the Chinese general Ma, who, first fighting the Japanese in Manchuria, has now become Japan’s puppet there. The Chinese bourgeoisie have said nothing about this, except to deprecate and condone this act: no doubt having similar actions on their part in mind for the future. Ma does openly what the Chiang Kai-Sheks would rather do covertly.
 
The Communist Party
Events and affairs will continue in Manchuria. But more now than ever, the basic problem stands out: the struggle of the exploited masses against the foreign and native exploiters. The city proletariat, headed by a Communist Party, must lead this struggle and movement. There can be no subordination of the Communist Party to the bourgeois Kuo Min Tang, as was the policy of Stalin and the Comintern in the Chinese Revolution of 1927–1929, which resulted in the beheading of the Chinese Revolution. Nor can the peasant, the agrarian masses, be permitted to assume, or even to attempt, the role of leadership of the struggle against the bourgeoisie, the landlords and warlords. That role is the historical one of the working class and its vanguard, the Communist Party; it is for the exploited peasantry of China to march under the leadership of the proletariat and Communist Party. This over-emphasis and over-evaluation of the peasantry by Stalin and Bucharin, guided by the Menshevik Martynov, added further ruin to, and loss of thousands of lives of the Chinese masses. It must not be repeated: or the Chiang Kai-Sheks will have double duty as executioners of the proletariat.
The working class movement of China is again slowly rebuilding its forces and organizations. All possible assistance must be given to hasten the revival and growing struggles against the Chinese bourgeoisie in the struggle, among other things, for democratic rights. The generation and growth of a genuine Communist Party of China, linked in common effort with a de-Stalinized and regenerated Communist International, are the best and only real hopes in the struggle against the Japanese invaders, the native Chinese exploiters and the foreign imperialists. That resolves itself into the conscious and militant struggle of the working masses everywhere against the capitalist system.
 



The scene of Far Eastern affairs has shifted to China proper with the resignation of Chiang Kai-Shek as president of the Chinese Nationalist Government and the rise to power of the southern Cantonese faction of the Kuo Min Tang, headed by Wang Chin Wei, Eugene Chen and Sun Fo. The vacillation and impotence of Chiang Kai-Shek and the Nanking faction in the face of the invasion of Manchuria by the Japanese, and the pressure from the rising wrath of the workers, peasants and students hastened the downfall of Chiang and Nanking. The immediate basis of the differences between the Canton and Nanking factions, apart from opinions as to how best to continue the exploitation of the Chinese masses, was the dissatisfaction of the Cantonese clique of militarists and politicians with the complete domination of the government by general Chiang Kai-Shek and Finance Minister T.V. Soong, who between them controlled all the guns and all the money – and therefore all the power.
 
The Canton Bourgeois Clique
The Cantonese already last May set up their style of “Nationalist Government of China”, but onrushing events, especially the Manchurian war, forced the Nanking and Canton cliques to discuss “Unification” of the Kuo Min Tang. Since October “terms” have been discussed, and now, according to declarations, these have been satisfactorily arranged. The Cantonese group of the Kuo Min Tang becomes the open face of the capitulator before the foreign imperialists and the oppressor of the masses of China. Chiang Kai-Shek and others of his faction are to be adequately cared for, however, in the redistribution of the spoils, offices and honors.
With this change of rule in China to another faction of the bourgeois Kuo Min Tang, nothing essential, as we pointed out before in the Militant, has been changed. Wang Chin Wei, Eugene Chen & Co. will talk about a more “determined” stand against the Japanese, but actually it will consist only of phrases. Their real color was again stamped when, within a day after the Cantonese were in control, troops in Nanking were shooting and killing demonstrating workers and students. Chiang Kai-Shek, of course, was particularly reluctant to proceed against the Japanese bourgeoisie, with whom he had maintained friendly relations. Most of his wealth is deposited in banks of Tokyo, Japan. Chiang loves his money most of all. It is fitting that the Cantonese propose Chiang Kai-Shek as Chairman of the Military Council. He is the most accomplished artist, thanks to Stalin, of murder of the Chinese proletariat.
In brief, the Cantonese will continue the policies of Chiang Kai-Shek, endeavoring to change the forms to meet a changing situation. There will be more talk of “democratic rights”, etc., but these will only be achieved if the working masses of China develop a struggle to win them and succeed in drawing the poor peasants and students into such a struggle under their leadership. A Chinese Communist Party that recognizes the necessity for the struggle for democratic rights in this period and prepares to fight for them, must lead and direct the whole movement.
 
The “Achievements” of Stalin and the Browders
It is necessary to point out that the Chiang Kai-Sheks, the Wang Chin Weis and Eugene Chens, the Right, Center and Left of the Kuo Min Taug in the period of 1925-1927, all united in the destruction and massacre of the Chinese workers and peasants. It is equally necessary to point out “that the cruel massacre of the Chinese proletariat and the Chinese Revolution at its three most important turning points ... the party owes principally and above all to comrade Stalin” and to the lesser Stalinites, the Earl Browders, et al.
Stalin and Stalinism sowed the roots of illusion and belief of the Chinese masses in the Kuo Min Tang by demanding the subordination, politically, ideologically and organizationally of the Communist Party and the proletariat to the bourgeois Kuo Min Tang. The bloodbath of the Chinese proletariat was the price paid. Behind the sword of Chiang Kai-Shek, Wang Chin Wei and Company was the approving head of Stalin and his Menshevik supporter and advisor, Martynov.
In another section of the Militant there begins the publication of Facts and Documents on Stalin’s Role in the Chinese Revolution, which comrade Trotsky has assembled. These further serve to demonstrate the terrible degradition and horror to which Stalin subjected the Chinese Communist Party and the proletariat. It is proper that an Earl Browder, who assisted in the betrayals of the Chinese workers as an agent of Stalin should condemn (Daily Worker, 12-19-31) Chen Du-Shu, who, becoming conscious of the crimes of Stalinism and the correctness of the criticism and program of the Left Opposition, honestly declared himself in support of the Opposition.
 
The Struggle For Democratic Rights
Illusions concerning the Cantonese Kuo Min Tang must be destroyed completely in the minds of the Chinese masses. In this period of capitalist domination of China, but with a ferment constantly deepening among the Chinese masses, the struggle for democratic rights – for free speech, free press, free Assemblage, for the right to organize in labor unions and political parties, for the right of legal existence of the Communist Party of China and the Left Opposition, for the convening of a Constituent Assembly, democratically elected, with the extension of the right to participate in the elections of all workers and exploited peasants and a safeguarding of their voting rights – such a struggle will help swiftly to disillusion the workers and peasants of China in the new Nationalist Government.
The student demonstrations must be deepened socially and politically against the regime of capitalism itself rather than only its worst manifestations. The proletariat and the Communist Party must be responsible for this task.
There must be demanded an unconditional cessation of the White Terror which has continued unabated. There are other phases of the struggle, but these must be placed in the forefront. This movement must be directed by the Chinese Communist Party, and the Communist International must give it full support. The lessons of 1925–1927 must be learned, not only by the Chinese Communists but by the Communists in every country. In one form or another these questions will arise sharply, as they did in England, in Germany, in Spain, etc. In each instance the Stalinized Comintern failed to permit the development of an independent Communist Party policy that could lead the struggles of the masses.
 
The Soviet Union and the Imperialists
While the change of regime in China overshadows for the moment the events in Manchuria, nevertheless they must not be overlooked for one instance. The covetous eyes of American Imperialism note with dismay Japan’s swift moves to control Manchuria, and are also apprehensive concerning the situation in China proper. It will work with might and maintain to maintain its influence over the Kuo Min Tang led by the Canton faction, even as it did over Nanking.
The provocations against the Soviet Union by the Japanese and other capitalist powers have not abated, and the Soviet Union is being pressed sorely. As we have said before, the Soviet Union does not want war, but will not indefinitely, assuming a revolutionary proletarian policy on its part, permit itself to be provoked and to be placed in a defensive position. The proletariat does not fear the clash with imperialism. The Soviet Union, as the first fortress of the world revolution, may yet be compelled to take an offensive step in the maintenance of its proletarian power and in furtherance of the international proletarian revolution. It is unfortunate that the Stalinist leadership leads to defeat after defeat of the proletariat, but the Bolshevik core everywhere is gradually asserting its demands for a correct line.
That the imperialists of the world have in mind a concentrated drive against the Soviet Union cannot be doubted. They bide their time and prepare their forces. The Manchurian war is a phase, both of the contradictions between the imperialist powers and a move against the Soviet Union. The visits of Premier Laval of France and Foreign Minister Grandi of Italy are likewise, as is the developing force of Fascism in Germany, before which the Communist Party of Germany with its adopted policy of national socialism is impotent. The Daily Worker, reviewing the Manchurian and Chinese events, the war danger, etc., and raising slogans thereon, adds confusion upon confusion with its 36 slogans on the war danger, covering literally every issue before the working class. It makes it more difficult to bring before the workers the essence of the problems both in China and the American workers’ duty in the situation.
 
For Communist Unity
The workers and Communists in the United States have to understand the imperialist aims of American capitalism in China and against the Soviet Union; to demand that American ships and troops get out of China; to realize that the powder of world war is being mixed by the imperialist powers, and an explosion can easily occur. But before all there must be, if our work is to be effective, a repudiation of the Stalinist policies, a clarification of program, strategy and tactics, the reinstatement of the Left Opposition into the ranks of the Comintern, and a unification of all genuine Communist forces. This is the pre-condition of a successful revolutionary struggle.
 



Eastern Railway presidents and the leaders of the four Brotherhood unions held a four day conference in New York during the last week of November. A deadlock on all important questions was the immediate outcome, neither group of fering at the time to accept the other’s proposals. The Railroad Executives received a report of the conferences on November 24, but decided to defer further action until after Dec. 8, when 1,500 Railway Labor Union heads are to meet in Chicago to receive official reports on the New York conferences, and to take
up the entire railroad situation. The employers had demanded that the railroad workers voluntarily accept a 10% wage cut, and thus avoid the necessity for them to resort to action under the Railway Labor Act which would delay a decision for at least a year. The heads of the Brotherhoods, on the other hand, proposed their plans for the stabilization and increase of employment. Presumably nothing was settled at these drawn-out conferences, but in reality the railroad owners emerged victorious. Despite the failure to receive a ready consent from the Brotherhood leaders, the Railway employers are confident of enforcing at least a 10% wage cut, and feel that they will shortly have the support and agreement of the Brotherhood heads for this immediate objective.
 
The Wage Cuts Begin
The train service employees of the Georgia & Florida Railroad have already accepted a 10% cut beginning December 1. The publication, Business Week (12-2-31), remarks that “it is significant that this agreement was approved by the grand officers of the Big Four brotherhoods.” The railway bosses cannot but regard this as a precedent and forerunner of national railroad labor policy and are proceeding accordingly.
The Chicago and North Western Railway, one of the largest roads, on Dec. 1 proposed that its union employees accept a voluntary 15% cut; other western railroads are expected to make similar demands in the next few days. Union officials were scheduled to meet in Chicago on Dec. 8 to take up the entire railroad situation. No comment as yet has been made by the union leaders on the C.&N.W. Railway proposals. On this road there prevails the B.&O. plan, that is, between the railroads and the union employees, which in every instance, where it has been introduced, has devitalized or destroyed the character and militancy of genuine labor unionism.
On all fundamental issues involving the very existence and standards of the railroad workers, both the employed and unemployed, the Eastern Railroad owners, expressing themselves publicly through Daniel Willard, President of the Baltimore & Ohio, took a stone-like stand. Theirs was an attitude that contemplated a wreck and destruction of what remains of the railroad unions and their hard-earned rights and gains, unless the railroad workers will be able to wage an effective struggle for their maintenance.
 
Bosses Sharply Reject Six Hour Day
To the proposal of union labor for a six hour day as a partial remedy for unemployment in the railroad industry, the Railway Executives categorically replied:
“We have found ourselves unable to accept your conclusion that the six hour day is necessary and that it must be instituted in order to absorb the existing number of experienced employees without reduced compensation.”
Consequently, continues President Willard’s letter, “we would be unwilling to recommend the appointment of a commission to determine the ways and meant of applying this principle to the different classes of employees.”
This declaration is plain, hard and challenging: labor shall receive no concessions; the matter can not any longer even be discussed (not even another of those long, drawn-out investigation commissions which always produce nothing for the workers). This stand of the employers in the six hour day is a direct challenge to the very existence of what remains of union railroad labor. The struggle for the six hour day and five day week, without reduction in pay is the essence and kernel of the existence and development of militant unionism in the railroad industry. All other issues – amalgamation of the unions, organization of the unorganized, preservation of seniority rights, alleviation of unemployment caused by extreme exploitation, the speed-up system and technological improvements – now group themselves around the central issue and struggle for the six hour day.
 
Six Hour Day Is Rallying
It is in the militant fight of railroad labor for the six hour day that it will be possible to arouse all the railroad workers, organized and unorganized, employed and unemployed, skilled and unskilled for a united struggle against the railway bosses. Only the rank and file of the railroad workers led by the militants and Left wingers will be ready to initiate the necessary steps in preparation for railroad struggles that will begin on single roads but which will rapidly extend their scope. Upon the supine present day union leaders, they cannot rely at all to defend their interests. These misleaders of labor will “negotiate” and sell out the rank and file.
 
Brotherhood Heads Are the Allies of the Bosses
The railroad owners feel, and rightly so, that they have allies in the ranks of labor, that is, “the labor lieutenants of the capitalist class,” in this case particularly, the heads of the Brotherhoods. They expect the latter, however they plead or pretend otherwise now, employees accept the owners’ demands for immediate wage cuts. The railroad owners know their union leaders. In addition, they are preparing swiftly for any eventualities, and that includes, as their foremost objective, the destruction of the what remains of unionized labor on the railroads. The railroad workers must have no doubts of that.
How supremely confident the railroad bosses are concerning the union heads, and how lightly they regard them, is put simply and bluntly by Business Week (12-2-31):
“There are 2 reasons why the labor executives could not accept the proposal for a voluntary cut in wages. One was that after sending men to Canada to stiffen the necks of the rail employees there in their fight against wage reduction, they could not let them down before the Dominion arbitration board issued its findings. The other is that, because of the temper of the men, the labor executives – regardless of what they themselves may think about a wage cut – want to compel the managements to carry the wage reduction proposal to the Board of Meditation where they will show their hand.”
 
Preparing Sell-Out Through Board of Mediation
What could be clearer? Already a despatch from Ottawa, Canada reports that the application of the railways (for a wage cut) has been granted”. The “Board of Conciliation” has acted; now the union heads will try to “conciliate” and convince the men that the wage cut must be accepted because of the “special conditions”. And before the “Board of Mediation” in the United States, “they will show their hand,” – the hand of agreement with the bosses’ demands.
All the other negotiations and discussions that took place at the New York conference between the Eastern Railroad Executives and the labor representatives, loom up as secondary beside the hard-boiled stand of the railroad owners for an immediate wage-cut of at least 10%. Railway Age (11-28-31) enters into details on the various phases of this conference. Above everything else, the reports demonstrate the persistent demands of the railroad bosses and the readiness to yield of the Brotherhood heads, whose spokesman was D.B. Robertson, president of the Locomotive Firemen and Enginemen.
 
Conditions of Railroad
What, briefly, are the conditions prevailing among railroad workers today? More than one-third of the employees in the industry are unemployed. Only part-time employment exists for thousands of the men. The statement of railroad labor’s situation and requirements, as set forth in the labor manifesto presented by the railroad unions to the Conference, says, in part:
“Thousands of train and engine service employees work only from four to eight months a year. Thousands of maintenance men (in the shops and on the right of way) are idle for a substantial part of the year. In the months of employment their wages equal only $1,000 per year.”
At the same time, comparing 1910 and 1930, “the employees of today handles over 50% more traffic and produces twice as much revenue over labor cost.” With this result of the speed-up system, the improvement of technique and the increased exploitation, the railroad owners still demand a wage cut from the employees. From the meek shall be taken. The railroad workers are being made right along to bear greater burdens so that the railroad barons may also receive dividends in times of capitalist crisis, not to mention their swollen profits of the past. Railroad increases in traffic rates which will “produce $125,000,000 more revenue from the same amount of labor” have been granted by the Interstate Commerce Commission, but the gluttons demand more off the backs of the workers.
Seniority rights to older railroad men in the service are gradually being pushed aside. The manifesto points out that “technological changes, reducing total volume of employment, have limited seniority protection to fewer and fewer employees.” Increased traffic cannot meet the situation. The employers would not even consider the mild proposal of the Brotherhoods for the adoption of federal legislation for retirement insurance and for elective workmen’s compensation. Indeed, the employers will give nothing that they are not compelled to. Instead of the mild Brotherhood proposals, there must be a demand, linked with the struggle for the six hour day and 5 day week with no reduction in pay, for genuine unemployment insurance, paid for entirely by the railroad and other industries and by the government, and to be administered through labor’s agencies.
To the plea of the Brotherhoods that the rights of the workers be preserved in the consolidation of the railroads that is going on apace, the Railway Employers’ Executive gave a brusque reply. President Willard stated that “the carrier presidents were not in complete accord on this question”, and hence nothing could be done about the matter.
 
Labor Heads and Bosses Congratulate Each Other
It is a striking commentary that the union head, Robertson, could say, concerning the conferences, that there had been “no encouragement that any action would be recommended or taken by railway managements to provide any substantial measure of relief of the present intolerance conditions.” (Railway Age, 11-28-31) But the railroad president, Mr. Willard could say that “the conferences had been carried on in a fine spirit of friendship and that the discussions had been wholly devoid of any unpleasantness.” To which labor leader Robertson replied in kind in his letter to Mr. Willard: “You have listened courteously to our propositions and have discussed them to some extent ...” Thus our railroad Damon and Pythias. The exploiter of labor and the betrayer of labor have every reason to be cordial to one another. It is not they who will receive 10 and 15% wage cuts.
 
Railroaders! Prepare For Struggle
Railroad men! Another betrayal is being prepared for you by your leaders. The further and final destruction of your unions, built by decades of militant struggles, is being prepared for you by the bosses, joined by the false leaders of labor. Your militant resistance is the only answer.
The rank and file must build their movement around the central slogan of the six hour day and five day week, without reduction in pay. It is the main slogan for the preservation of the union and union conditions and for meeting the burning needs of all railroad workers. The Minneapolis Railroad Council, built around this central slogan, leads the way. Learn from them; work with them; unite with them to build a movement for militant railroad unionism – one that will make it possible to drive the betrayers of labor put of your ranks. Unite the ranks of railroad labor. Prepare for struggle against the bosses!
 



On December 8, President Hoover delivered his annual message to Congress. Every worker should be acquainted with its contents. It ought to prove to every intelligent and thinking worker that in Hoover and the ruling capitalist system, of which he is the official spokesman, there is nothing but contempt for the working class and an insistence to continue the exploitation of the mass of people, no matter by what extreme means. The capitalist class has laid down its law: maintain profits; for the workers there will be the crumbs from the laden tables of the rich. Hoover, as the leading executive and governmental expression of the capitalist class, makes public the law of his class.
 
A Bankrupt Capitalism
While Hoover’s message is a salvo to capitalism and a hope for its preservation, nevertheless, the speech demonstrates the bankruptcy of capitalist society and its eventual break-up. American capitalism, pride and leader of the world’s imperialist nations, is no longer, as is already even more clear in the case of the other capitalist nations, an historically progressive force. It cannot any further guarantee to the mass of wage workers, from whom it must extract its profits, a minimum of subsistence and existence.
The economic crisis, with its outstanding effect, permanent mass unemployment, has deepened capitalism’s contradictions. It has reduced the standard of living of the employed workers, and it has taken away any standard at all for the unemployed, whom it is pushing toward slum proletarianism, dependent upon local relief, charity, etc. Bourbon American capitalism, of course, is not yet ready to accept the “dole” or unemployment insurance even as an aid to its own continued existence. But working class pressure will achieve that as a demand and gain of a militant working class. Albeit, when a ruling class cannot ensure the existence of those whom it needs for exploitation, that class is historically outlived. A change is due and is being prepared, in this instance, by the only force that has nothing to lose but its chains and everything to gain – namely, the modern industrial proletariat.
What does Hoover’s message tell us about the world economic crisis? That the crisis exists – which every worker knows and feels. Unemployment is heavy and burdensome – he endorses charity methods to alleviate the situation. And wages – must go down! We take up here some of the more outstanding points in the message.
 
The World We Live In
We are living in an epoch of wars and revolutions. Economic crises only hasten the development of imperialist war or its development on a higher scale, that is, the proletarian revolution, Hoover cites as a fear, and we as a sign of hope, the fact that “within two years there have been revolutions or acute social disorders in nineteen countries, embracing more than half the population of the world.”
Though “the economic depression” says Hoover, “has continued and deepened in every part of the world”: “ten countries have been unable to meet their external obligations; and “in fourteen countries, embracing a quarter of the world’s population, the former monetary standards have been temporarily abandoned.” Hoover explains it all away by saying that “business depressions have been recurrent in the life of our country and are but transitory.”
 
Marx and Engels Corroborated
But Hoover does not explain why these cycles of depression, of economic crises, occur and recur at greater frequency, at greater depth, with sharper dislocation of the productive forces and at such tremendously greater sacrifices and misery upon the part of the working masses. The reasons do not concern him and his kind, so long as the profit system itself, continues.
Marx and Engels, however, decades ago pointed out the inevitability of these very developments of today, and proved that the contradictions inherent in mass production and individual distribution, of production not for use, but for profit, would finally bring about a collapse of capitalist economy; and that only the proletariat, through the organization of its economic and political forces, could reconcile this capitalist contradiction by the establishment of an economic system af social ownership and management of the means of production and distribution.
 
Hoover’s Internationalism
Hoover’s concern, nevertheless, is with a possible destruction of capitalist society. For this reason, the great nationalist and American, Herbert Hoover, becomes international-minded long enough to point out that unless America intervened in Central Europe, particularly in Germany, “it was apparent that without assistance these nations must collapse”.
But of Soviet Russia, first fortress of the international proletarian revolution, there is not even a mention. There is, therefore, the continuation of the policy of bitter hostility toward, and encouragement of a unity of the forces of reaction against, the Soviet Republic.
And what about so-called domestic policy? What of unemployment, of wages, of working conditions of the mass of people, of the exploited and persecuted Negroes, of the Mexicans?
 
The Facts and Results of Mass Unemployment
We are told that “the emergencies of unemployment have been met by action in many directions; that “public and private agencies were successfully mobilized last winter to provide employment and other measures against distress. Similar organizations give assurance against suffering during the coming Winter.”
But the claims are even greater. “The Public Health Service,” maintains Hoover, “shows an actual decrease of sickness and infant general mortality below normal years. No greater proof could be adduced that our people have been protected from hunger and cold ...”
These statements are appalling. What are the facts? Has anyone disproved the existence of ten or more millions of unemployed in the United States? How does Hoover explain away the fact that, particularly in the industrial centers, hunger and want are apparent everywhere, that men, women and children dig in garbage cans to find something to eat? It is a fact that millions, under the best of capitalist circumstances, remain permanently in the army of unemployed, due to elimination from industry by the machine and technical development. Starvation and poverty while granaries overflow; overproduction of other commodities is overwhelming. That is the social economy of capitalism. How are these to be cared for?
The concern of Hoover over the children is enough to cause one to shed tears. But evidently president Hoover does not bother himself with the facts. The United States Health Service has recently declared that more than six millions of the school children are suffering from malnutrition, making them easy victims of many serious diseases. Hospital report an alarming rise in types of physical trouble due to undernourishment, and all schools are reporting a marked decline of mental alertness among the pupils and a marked appearance of physical lassitude. Is this what Hoover means by “proof of protection from hunger and cold?”.
But of course, this representative of Wall Street declares himself “opposed, to any direct or indirect government dole” or unemployment insurance. Insurance and protection are only for the bosses.
 
Hoover Is for Wage Reductions
On the questions of wages, Hoover now openly espouses the wage-cutting campaign and forgets his verbiage of same time ago for the maintenance of the existing wage standard. He says, in apologia for the employers, that “a large majority of them have maintained wages at as high a level as the safe conduct of their business would permit.” There is now full sanction to proceed with wage cuts in all directions, and the railroad barons are acting rapidly to effect such wage cuts.
Capitalist spokesmen and apologists try to excuse their acts against the working class, against those yet employed and those jobless, by maintaining that the cost of living, of commodity prices has gone down and that therefore wage cuts are in order. But even this argument is false to the roots.
 
Significant Figures
Ethelbert Stewart, Commissioner of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, says that from December 1925 to June 1931 the workers cost of living had been reduced 15.5% while the employers had reduced the total wages paid workers in the manufacturing industries during that same period almost 40%. Thus, even according to U.S. Government figures, wages have been reduced already 25% below the fall in the cost of living. Stewart’s own statement is that a similar situation prevails in other industries.
Mary Anderson, Director of the Women’s Department of the U.S. Department of Labor, confirms Stewart’s declarations, stating that “since 1929, while the cost of living has declined 12%, the income of factory workers has gone down 37%.”
The above figures, we think, expose Hoover’s claims regarding unemployment, wages, and the conditions of existence of the mass of workers in the United States. But if president Hoover deals blows against the working class, he is gentle as a lamb and soft as silk with his colleagues and bosses, the employing class.
To take but a single example, it is necessary, president Hoover says, that the railroads “should have more effective opportunity to reduce operating costs by proper consolidation.” With wage cuts on the order of the day for the railway workers, Hoover proposes to help along by throwing more men out of work. Operating costs are reduced; profits are assured. All’s well with the railroads. Other questions in Hoover’s Congressional message are dealt with that concern every working man: the advocacy of “certificates of residence” for aliens, a revival of the campaign for the registration of the foreign-born, aimed mainly at the radical workers; the endorsement of a huge army and navy policy; there was a failure to mention the problem of the Negro masses, and many other matters. We shall have occasion to return to Hoover’s program for capitalist salvation and against the working class.
 
Functions of Government and Taxation
One further point of some interest remains. This refers to the Hoover-Mellon policy of increased taxation for maintenance of the government’s functions. The day of “cheap government” is gone forever under capitalism. Modern imperialist development requires an ever-increasing force of oppression and suppression of the working class: a huge military equipment, army and navy, police, courts, and other agencies of a wide description. The increasing sharpness of the class struggle, strikes, mass unemployment, movements in the colonial and semi-colonial countries, etc., call forth these forces of suppression of the masses to a greater degree right along.
The employing class recognises that it must pay to maintain its governmental apparatus of oppression, capitalist propaganda, etc. Within the ruling class there is an effort to pass the burden of governmental costs from one group onto another, and also to shift even these burdens to the extent possible onto the exploited working class. This is done through taxation, direct and indirect, the largest bulk of which comes from the finance-bourgeoisie. To an extent the bourgeoisie does succeed in foisting taxes upon the workers, to make them carry a burden in addition to their exploitation directly by the employer. But while such taxation is a sort of factor, the working class need to recognize that their basic and daily problem lies in the extraction of unpaid labor, of surplus value, from them by the employers. The official Communist Party exaggerates the taxation of the workers and develops a petit-bourgeois outlook. But the economic crisis has naturally effected the revenues of the government, always increasing in cost, and now the bourgeoisie must pay more to their government to help maintain “law and order”, that is, suppress and oppress the working class.
 
Building A Movement Against Capitalism
Hoover’s message of reaction and challenge against the working class must be taken up by the workers. In the immediate sense, there is need to mobilize and organize the working masses in a common struggle for the six hour day and five day week with no reduction in pay; for immediate relief; for unemployment insurance; for the extension of long-term credits to the Soviet Union as a measure of relief for unemployment; for the recognition of the Soviet Union and against the anti-Soviet phobia of Hoover and the U.S. government.
Fundamentally the problem remains the same: the education and organization of the working class for the militant struggle for the overthrow of capitalism and the establishment of the rule of the workers, a Soviet Republic. To this end the Left, Opposition directs its tasks.
 



“... There is every reason to count that under the conditions of the present commercial and industrial crisis, particularly in case of its further aggravation, the Soviet government by a correct policy can gain an incomparably larger access to the resources of the world market. Unemployment is a factor of huge importance which can make its impression upon the whole politics of the near future ... One of the most important slogans of the transition period can and must become the demand for economic collaboration with the Soviet Union.” (L. Trotsky in World Unemployment and the Five-Year Plan)
The recent announcement by the Amtorg Trading Corporation, the Soviet commercial agency in the United States, that orders placed in this country had fallen off 52% during the first ten months of 1931, as compared with a similar period in 1930, raises the problem posed by comrade Trotsky once again in a very sharp and concrete form. On the question of economic relations between the Soviet Union and capitalist countries – between the Soviet Union and the United States – Trotsky’s thesis today retains its complete validity.
 
The Campaign Against the Soviets
The reactionary business and political forces in the United States, led by the Matthew Wolls, Hamilton Fishes and Herbert Hoovers conduct a systematic, unceasing, bitter and relentless propaganda against the Soviet Union on the economic front as well as on the political. The stupid and ostrich-like policy of the American section of the Stalinist Comintern has played directly into the hands of these bitter opponents of the Soviet Republic and all revolutionary workers’ movements.
 
Amtorg Asks For Better Credits
The Amtorg Trading Corporation, in its official statement pointing out the decline of purchases in the United States for the ten month period mentioned, from $102,800,000 to $49,400,000, says:
“Soviet commercial organizations are prepared to carry on and expand trade with the United States only on condition that long-term credits are extended comparable with those received by other countries in Europe, and on the further condition that the exceptional obstacles put in the way of the importation of Soviet products into this country are removed.”
The credit terms now extended in the United States, continues the Amtorg declaration, are not acceptable, and are the sole reason for the decline of trade relations with the United States.
Its purchases, it points out, have increased in England by 33% and have doubled in Germany, due to the more favorable credits established. In the United States, however, cash payments have been made in many instances. At the same time, all payments of bills have been made when they fell due.
The Department of Commerce of the United States, though acknowledging that the Soviet Union has made good on all its obligations, now advises officially business men to be “cautious” in their trade relations with Soviet Russia. The reactionary elements are speeding up their propaganda of hostility to the Soviets. Naturally there are protests from the friends of the Soviet Union, from itself and its trade agencies against the attitude of the American government on business relations with Russia. But what is being done, what policies are put forward to thwart these acts that hinder the development, to the greatest extent possible, of socialist construction in the Soviet Union. Has the Soviet Union a political line on the immediate issue of credits to the Soviet Union and what is the line of the Communist International, the “policy” of Stalin?
 
The False Doctrine of Stalin
Most unfortunately, the Stalinist line has been the enunciation and propagation of the false doctrine that the Soviet Union can function as an isolated and self-sufficing economic and political entity – as a Workers’ State within the capitalist world – and in time even build, barring military intervention, a complete socialist society. The Left Opposition condemned this theory of national socialism as inimical to the interests and needs of the workers of the Soviet Union and the international proletariat. The Stalinist policy has already broken a leg on the hard rock of world economic facts, particularly aggravated in the world economic crisis of which the Soviet Union is a part, though a lesser on because of the methods of planned socialist economy.
To develop its natural resources to the utmost, to push construction ahead in this period of the immature development of Soviet economy, in the period of the beginning of the socialist revolution (in which Soviets Russia is the first of the fortresses established by the proletariat) and the international proletariat revolution, the Soviet Union must utilize the resources of the capitalist world.
Concretely this means that economic relations on a wide-scale must be established between the Soviet Union and the capitalist countries. Since, as affairs stand now, the ready resources of the Soviet Union are insufficient to meet the demands of the capitalists in order to make the necessary purchases from them, it is plain that the extension of large and long-term credits to the Soviet Union is essential and imperative. Otherwise, the Soviet Union cannot obtain now the necessary industrial and machine equipment required for its purposes; the development of socialist economy is necessarily enormously hindered. It is an unavoidable contradiction between an economically undeveloped Soviet economy existing side by side with capitalist nations. Nor can credit extensions remove the contradiction; they can only temporarily soften it a bit, and at the same time permit the working class in other countries to develop its own revolutionary movement and struggle for political power.
The Stalinists have been blind to the obvious. The theory of socialism in one country is, after all, for magicians who pull rabbits out of a hat. The Comintern has been wholly wrong, politically and economically, in its neglect and failure, and the more so during this period of economic and social crisis, to raise the slogan of economic collaboration, of trade relations and the extension of long-term credits to the Soviet Union, and to call upon its sections to carry on a campaign for their realization. In the United States more than elsewhere, perhaps, could these slogans have taken hold among the masses of workers and been brought to some fruition.
 
Immediate Demands
It has been pointed out time and again in the columns of The Militant that these slogans, connected concretely with the issue of the millions of unemployed in the United States, could have and will yet make their way to the minds of the American workers, if properly carried out under the leadership of the Communists ; and that pressure can be brought to bear upon the American bourgeoisie to extend to a far greater extent than now its economic relations with the Soviet Republic. For almost two years, the American Communist Party, led by the Browders, has ignored or derided this burning question, doing great harm both to communism in the United States and to the requirements of the Soviet Union. But facts have a way of making themselves seen and heard. In recent months, the American Party has smuggled the slogan of the extension of long-term credits into its program, but has not yet grasped its full significance and carried on a wide campaign for its realization. The recent elections are an example of this failure.
Immediate demands can never be permitted to cloud or retard the main strategical line or principles of Communism in the struggle for political power by the workers. Immediate demands, as formulated and carried through by the liberals and socialists, are aimed to draw the workers into the field of reform as against that of the proletarian revolution. The Communists aim to serve the immediate and revolutionary needs of the working class, and to develop their demands in accordance with that line.
 
For Working Class Unity
It is necessary to point out to the workers that the slogans for broad economic collaboration with, and the extension of long-term credits to the Soviet Union can serve two immediate objectives: 1. To aid in the alleviation of unemployment in the United States through the employment of worker needed to make the products to be pur chased by Soviet Russia; 2. To assist thereby in the development of the Five Year Plan in Soviet Russia and the development of socialist construction. Confidence and fraternal relations between the workers of the two countries are thereby increased. Support for the Soviet Union by the workers in all countries must be built upon the understanding and needs of the workers in the Soviet Russia; and, likewise the confidence of the workers in Russia in their task is increased by the knowledge that they can count upon the support of the workers in other lands. The spread of the ideas of internationalism is the best defense of the Soviet fatherland.
America remains for the Soviet Union the best market for its major needs tractors, automobiles, electrical equipment, machinery, etc. The Communists must direct a propaganda to demand that the U.S. government make possible economic and political relations (recognition of the Soviet Union) with Soviet Russia. Already the engineer Dr. Walter N. Polakov has brought forward the suggestion for a billion dollar pool for the extension of credits to the Soviet Union. Business selfishness and greed or profits can make it easier for the masses to carry through the demands upon the capitalist government. The slogans of the Left Opposition retain their full validity and strength for the immediate interests of the American workers and for the development of their class conscious and revolutionary spirit for assistance to the Soviet Union in its industrial and agricultural construction; for the development of international solidarity, understanding and the unity of the working class on immediate burning issues and ultimately for the international proletarian revolution.
What will the official Communist Party in the United States and the Stalinist Comintern do? Will they correct and change their line, or continue the policy of isolated, national socialism in Soviet Russia and the repudiation in fact, if not in name, of the development of the international forces for Communism?
 



On November 3rd, the vast majority of the voting population in the States of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and other sections of the country marched to the polls and cast once again a ballot of confidence in, and retention of, the capitalist system. Reaction and conservatism remain in the saddle, though here a democratic, there a republican rider, sits in the saddle.
Prior to the elections, The Militant (10-24-31) said:
“The elections will serve as a barometer of the maturity of the American working class, to what point it has been heightened under the Impact of the disillusioning post – ‘prosperity’ crisis ... The elections will not create the rising temper of the proletariat; they will register it within the narrow confines of the ballot box ... provided ... the workers mobilize their voting strength behind the candidates of the only revolutionary party in the field – the Communist Party.”
 
The Capitalists Win Again
The votes cast in the elections did indicate some things, but not the desired ones. The votes did demonstrate, by and large, the swing of the voters back to the Democratic Party. With this shift, the electors aimed to demonstrate their resentment, and that of the mass of non-voters, against the outright reactionary, naked bourbon capitalism of the Hoover administration, which offered nothing but a prayer to the mass of people during the two years of economic crisis. But fundamentally, the bourgeoisie, the petit-bourgeois middle class and the voting proletariat, cast another vote for capitalism, but proposed that another court-plaster be pasted on the open cuts.
The American masses voted for the capitalist candidates, because of lack of clarity of a program by any other contending group in the parliamentary field, and, most important, because they are not yet ready for socialism. The objective factors, – mass unemployment, the rule of King Hunger, low wages, etc. – were favorable for an increase in radical and revolutionary expression. Even though the original Hoover boast, and then only a hope, of “a chicken in every pot” found its realization in the soggy handout on the bread-line though unemployment and militarism, the opposite poles of capitalist disorganization and organization, stalked the land, the people voted capitalist.
 
The Bosses Look Now to the Democrats
The next House of Representatives will apparently have a slight Democratic majority and will thereby be both a plague to Hoover and an excuse for further failures and inadequacies of the Republican administration. The Democrats will demand of the “sovereign” people, in order to put over their “pro-grain”, complete control of the powers of Government. Present indications are for Democratic success in the 1932 elections which will enable them them to divide the spoils of victory and to function in their particular manner as the executive committee of the capitalist class.
The discontentment that exists among the masses continued the course of previous elections and canalized itself in support of the Democratic Party. But as before, apart from individual, sectional and secondary questions, the two main capitalist parties are as like as tweedledum and tweedledee in their support of the powerful financial and industrial interests of Wall Street; both parties reject with equal equanimity any genuine immediate relief on behalf of the jobless, oppose unemployment insurance at the expense of the employers and government; and both parties give unqualified ind enthusiastic support to Hoover’s concern for the bankers’ welfare, a military program, and an attack on the living standards of the working class. Thus the workers who now voted for the Democratic ticket voted to be duped again.
The American Federation of Labor continued its former policy against independent working class political action, and in the main threw its “non-partisan” support to the Democrats.
 
The Elections in New York
The elections in New York City where unemployment reaches over a million, and where all sections of the labor movement seek political expression, are perhaps good examples to gauge the significance of the elections, particularly in relation to the Communists and the Communist Party.
It is the viewpoint of the Left Opposition that the working class, in taking its first steps politically, will follow simultaneously the roads of the social-democrats and the Communists. The extent to which the workers will be attracted to the program of communism as against the socialists will, apart from the objective factors of economic and social conditions, depend upon the ability of the Communists to present their program in a clear, intelligent and unambiguous manner. There is no reason at all ordinarily, so far as programs are concerned, why a worker should not be able, if he is looking for a revolutionary way out of the capitalist impasse, to make clear his preference for the Communists as against the socialists. But in the New York elections, the mish-mash program of vulgar reformism and revolutionary communism put forward by the Communist Party, made for confusion instead of clarity, and amplified the tasks of the socialists.
 
The Petit-Bourgeois Appeal of the Socialists
The Socialist Party of Norman Thomas and Morris Hillquit made its programmatic appeal, in the main, to the disaffected petit-bourgeois, the small business man and shopkeeper, the professional man, the liberals, white-collar slaves, etc. While, no doubt, it received the votes of deluded industrial workers, it had no fundamental class approach to the workers. As is known, the acceptance of the theory of the class struggle no longer appears in its preamble. There are those elements in the Socialist Party who, looking farther ahead than their brother reformists, would prefer to have the Socialist Party appeal to and base its support on the labor bureaucracy of the A.F. of L. and the assistance it can give to develop a labor bade.
But the Norman Thomas wing, steeped in the ideology and practices of liberalism, though paying lip-service now and then to the working class, does not concern itself with the capitalist system per se and the need for its abolition. Rather it devotes itself to a denunciation of and demand for a reform of the rottener manifestations of capitalism, with its sores and festers. The S.P. concerns itself with such resultant issues as Tammany corruption, graft, vice, etc. The vote for Norman Thomas, the Socialist candidate for Borough President of Manhattan bitterly disappointing to him, was 48,438 (which was greater than his 1929 poll), represented, not votes for socialism, but for petit-bourgeois reformism. His own comment on the outcome of the elections was typical and true to his own and the socialist party propaganda in the campaign itself. Thomas stated that the election results were a “blow against good government ... a triumph of organized greed ... rampant gangsterism ... there is no hope for clean government”. Nothing is there but the words of disappointed liberalism, of a program that would put silk covering on a moth-eaten, ragged capitalism.
 
The Communist Party Vote
An interesting feature in this connection is that appeal to the secondary or cancer growths of capitalism, – corruption, gangsterism, etc. had no effect on the voters who overwhelmingly returned Tammany politicians or their blood-brother Republicans to office. Fundamental education on principle questions of socialism, the class struggle, etc. was naturally missing, with the exception here and there of a socialist candidate who spoke for “socialism” in the socialist manner.
And what was the case with the Communist Party and its election campaign. To cite one example, I. Amter, Communist candidate for Borough President of Manhattan, received the miserably, incredibly low vote of 1,789. Add what votes were stolen or uncounted, as the Party claims, and it is still far beyond legitimate expectations. The living issues were there: the economic crisis and unemployment, around which the Communists have centered their agitation for two years. Why the pitiful showing in the elections?
 
The Communist Objective in Elections
We do not over-emphasize the counting of noses at election time, but its value as a partial barometer of working class development has been indicated. For Communists, election time offers a special opportunity to intensify the continuous, all-the-year-round campaign to reach the workers with the message of communism, to explain the class struggle and the solution. Even actual election to office, unlike with the socialists, is for Communists essentially but a chance to use the parliamentary tribunal for Communist education, to point out why the capitalist machinery of government cannot be used to achieve fundamental gains for the working class, and why a complete class change of government and social system is the only bona-fide solution.
Did the official New York Communists carry out the tasks of Communists during election time? The answer is NO. If it is true that the Communist Party and movement has an influence greater than its organizational expression, it failed indeed to consolidate its strength and influence at the ballot box. Actually, however, misleadership and false policies of the Party in the trade unions and in strikes reflected themselves also at the polls, in the failure of unionists and strikers to vote Communist.
 
The N.Y. Party Program
The Militant has dealt before with the crying weaknesses of the party program in the New York elections, which found similar manifestations in Philadelphia and other points. There was first and foremost a program of Immediate demands with no less than 75 demands, good and correct ones mixed, like chopped herring or chop-suey, with demands of the most reformistic and petit-bourgeois kind, a mish-mash that left everyone bewildered as to what it all meant. These demands concerned themselves with cheaper milk, ex-service-men’s demands, a limit of $3,000 salary for police captains (! Yes, it is sad, but true), the return of money to mulcted bank depositors, for unemployed relief, against the war danger, defense of the Soviet Union, and, lastly, the 75th demand, for a Workers’ and Farmers’ Government. We are given to declare that no Socialist Party local in American history ever put together such an enormous list of demands without real examination as to meaning or purpose in regard to class content or reality to the situation.
The masses, it is true, again voted overwhelmingly for the capitalist system. But there were some thousands who, thinking a little more clearly, voted for the first time for what they regarded as a “vote for socialism”. They voted either for the Socialist Party or the Socialist Labor Party. Why not for the Communist Party, the official representative of the future society communism?
Because the Communist Party campaign was scarcely distinguishable from a stupid, near-sighted campaign such as one expects from reformists and socialists. Under the conditions of a volume of reformist demands, why should any worker choose particularly the Communist as against the milder-toned Socialist, is just one way a worker could reflect in making his decision.
 
What Kind of Demands Should be Raised
We are for immediate demands. But they cannot be 75, or 50, or 25 or even 15. They must be a few clearly and definitely selected and centralized demands which fit a given situation. Immediate demands are not permanent; nor are the same ones always emphasized. These selected demands must appeal to and meet the vital needs of the workers at the moment; but, moreover, they must be linked with and be capable of causing agitation against, difficulties for, and exposure of the capitalist class and capitalist government who will and can not carry out or concede to fundamental demands of the working class. Our object in a class sense, in presenting immediate demands in connection with our ultimate program, is WORKING CLASS EDUCATION AND ORGANIZATION for the principles of Communism.
Under the conditions, where king hunger held dominion in New York City with an approximate million unemployed, the issue of IMMEDIATE RELIEF, came first. As natural corollaries to achieve real immediate relief, there followed the demand for unemployment insurance, at the expense of the bosses and government, agitation for a six hour day and five day week, and, from a broader but correct political class angle, the agitation for the widest possible economic collaboration between the capitalist United States and the Soviet Republic through the medium of the extension of large and long-term credits to the Soviet Union. These immediate demands, in election campaigns and NOW, remain the immediate demands and issues for the Communists to present. These demands, alive and comprehensible, if intelligently presented, more than adequately cover the sum total of the actual working class demands set forth in the 75 demands by the Party. But it is even far more important to present clearly in the election campaign that there is no lasting way out for the working class but the Social Revolution.
 
Win Workers to Communist Principles
The object of the Communists in election times and at all times, is to teach, to develop and to organize Communists. This is simple, but primary. If the Communist Party had really had this object in mind during the campaign, the results, votes or no votes, would have been better from a Communist viewpoint.
Far better to go to the extreme of alleged revolutionists as the Socialists Labor Party, and put forward only the demand for the realization of the Social Revolution, than like the Communist Party to put forward 75 demands which smother the main task of Communist education. The Communists cannot compete with the reformists or capitalists on the matter of amelioration of conditions of the workers; to do so means only to sink into the quagmire in which socialist weeds flourish, or into the quicksands in which the revolutionary outlook is buried.
 
The Central Committee on the Elections
On the day before the elections, the Central Committee of the Communist Party (Daily Worker, 11-2-31) said, in its appeal to the workers to vote the Communist ticket: “Our party ... is the party of class war ... It organizes the proletariat on the basis of class against class, working class against capitalist class, for the struggle for power.”
What a pity it is that the Communist election campaign was not conducted on the lines of this basic appeal. At least then some workers would have understood the basic distinctions between the Communists and the Socialists, not to mention the capitalist parties. But it is this same Stalinized Central Committee that formulated the election program of 75 immediate demands. The result is that the election campaign witnessed another brand of “socialist competition”. That is, the Communists “competed” with the socialists on the platform and arena of the socialists and the socialists naturally won this “competition” hands down.
The Communist Party forgot the main issues in this campaign. In trying to understand the workers, it fell to the level of outlook of the, in the class sense, undeducated worker. The Party dealt too much with the manifestations of capitalism, and too little indeed with the causes and cures for capitalism.
In brief, capitalism in America held its ground, though getting ready to switch the personnel of its political committee, the government; it made no concessions and holds the fort. The Socialist Party, weak too, nevertheless developed its main ideology of reform and poultices for capitalism, and laid the ground a little better for the period when capitalism will need to seek them out and use them as their cover and protectors.
 
The Party Pays the Price of Wrong Theory
The working class as a class is still capitalist-minded. It must yet take its first steps as an independent political force. The Communist Party had great opportunities to make forward strides for Communism, but failed almost totally. In a principle manner, there is only one answer to the failure of the official Communist Party. The Communist Party must once again set both feet on solid theoretical ground, it must examine its past and present. If it will look straight, it will find that, wittingly or unwittingly, it has been under the insidious and corrupting effects of Stalinist theory and practices, sinking, even as other Communist Parties, into national reformism and even local provincialism, coupled as yet with a general outlook and comprehension of communism. The elections are but an outstanding example. The Communist Party is paying the heavy toll of being wrong in theory and principles. Party ignorance receives payment in kind from the workers.
If the Communist Party will then examine a little further, they will see the Left Opposition standing by and offering the original Communist program of Lenin. Will the elections help the Party to learn, and to redress and reform itself before it is too late?
 



At this writing the state of war between Japan and China on the fields of Manchuria continues and the death toll increases. All forms of “legal” and diplomatic measures, threats of economic boycott and severance of diplomatic relations, the demands of the League of Nations, the invoking of the Kellogg Pact, have failed to deter the Japanese government from sharp military aggression and actions against the Chinese. Japanese imperialism pillages and kills At Tienstin, U.S. infantry troops have been called out, prepared to add their bit of slaughtering.
From the start it has been clear that the Chinese National Government, directed by the policies of the Kuo Min Tang and Chiang Kai-Shek, is helpless in a military sense before the Japanese (even as are the Northern war-lords), and is compelled to call for a cessation of hostilities through the medium of the League of Nations and for open or secret support from the United States. Chiang Kai-Shek, the militarist, the murderer of tens of thousands of the Chinese masses, is suddenly become an advocate of the policy of non-resistance. Such resistance as has been directed against the Japanese aggression, has been the result of pressure of protest from the masses, as well as from sections of the Chinese nationalist bourgeoisie who see in Japan’s invasion a blow at their economic and political supremacy in Manchuria.
 
Behind the Smokescreen of Japanese Imperialism
Japan, to justify her invasion of Manchuria, puts forward economic and political considerations, legal excuses (violation of treaty agreements by China, that is, the infamous 21 points enforce upon them at the point of a pistol), historical analogies with other nations, including the United States. And, of course, and not least, are not the Japanese keeping the “Red Menace” out of Manchuria! The Nipponese maintain they are in Manchuria merely to repair and protect their railroads in which they have enormous investments, and to protect their treaty rights. At the same time Japan is already directing her military operations to the south, as well as in Manchuria. Manchuria must be developed economically, says Japan; it is Japan’s “manifest destiny”, its economic and social necessity to do so. Their acts are neither acts of war nor intended as such. After all, the Japanese state, they are merely following the “peaceful” procedure of the United States in the latter’s frequent interventions into Nicaragua, Santa Domingo, Cuba, Mexico and other South and Central American countries. The Japs therefore plainly say: What’s sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander.
The United States is still proceeding discreetly, and in the main is giving its support to the Chiang Kai-Shek government from whom it is receiving and will receive much more support for Wall Street in the future, if the Kuo Min Tangists last. While the economic and physical partition of China and of Manchuria is uppermost in the minds of the imperialist powers, there must be method in the slicing. All of them are jockeying for political, diplomatic, economic and military positions for that time when the economic difficulties, ambitions and contradictions of each imperialist nation compel an attempt at a solution on the arena of capitalist war on a world scale. In the present Manchurian fighting, therefore, there are all the ingredients for immediate war on a world-wide scale, although present indications are that these developments and war skirmishes are only same of the preludes to the impending world war crash.
 
Imperialist Provocations and Soviets’ Policy of Peace
The Japanese are now also in the Soviet sphere of influence. All imperialist powers, and the Chinese government included, are endeavoring to place the Soviet Union into a bad and false position, to put the onus of difficulties upon the Workers’ Republic, and are increasing their propaganda and preparations for an imperialistic war combination against the Soviet Republic. The Soviets are using all efforts to maintain a condition of peace, to demand the cessation of hostilities between the Japanese and Chinese governments. Everybody knows that the policy of the Soviet Union is for peace; that the workers’ road is the road of peace and collaboration between the workers of all nations. The imperialists will not succeed in their campaign to provoke the Soviets into war.
Nevertheless, the Soviet Union and the workers in every country are supporters and friends of the Chinese masses, and will do everything possible to enforce the resistance of the Chinese masses against the economic and military aggression of the Japanese imperialists, as well as to support the Chinese people against the blood-brothers of the Nipponese invaders, the Chinese Chiang Kai-Shek government. Manchuria and China are the property neither of the Japanese warlords nor the Chinese militarists and bourgeoisie. The American bourgeoisie, too, are sticking their hands into the bloody affair, and their paws drip with gold, coined from blood. Sales of military supplies are being made to Japan and no doubt to China too. Every factory becomes a potential arsenal. The resources of China and Manchuria belong to its mass occupants, the workers and peasants, whose main job it is to wring the necks of both the foreign and native exploiters and establish their own Soviet government.
 
The Dual Task of the Moment
On previous occasions The Militant has examined the causes and objectives of the Manchurian invasion by Japan; the article in The Militant (11-7-31) by comrade Niel-Sih of Shanghai has graphically portrayed the political situation in China, particularly the impotence of the Communist Party of China and. the Comintern in the present situation. The official Communist movement is today paying the price of Stalinist policies, Stalinist “victories” and “Soviets” in China, by an inability to organize the Chinese workers and peasants in the dual task of resistance against the Japan invasion into Manchuria, and for the overthrow of the Chiang Kai-Shek government and all other bourgeoisie and war-lords in China. It is imperative, moreover, that efforts in all countries be organized to the maximum against the imperialist bourgeoisie in every nation, in order for each Communist movement best to carry out its respective tasks in defense of the Chinese revolution, against the Japanese aggression, for support and defense of the Soviet Union against any and all forms of attack, and against the war danger.
Upon the Chinese Communists, particularly its most militant, resolute and determined section, the Left Communists, devolves the task of mobilization of the Chinese people against Japanese imperialism, for resistance against the invaders. The surest way to effect this is a struggle to defeat the bourgeoisie Of China, to achieve the destruction of the Kuo Min Tang movement, whether that of the bloody militarists led by Chiang Kai-Shek, or the “Left” Kuo Min Tang headed by Wang Chin Wei. The intensification of the CIVIL WAR IN CHINA is the best weapon of defense against Japan. It is fundamentally that correct tactic proposed by the revolutionists in 1870 during the invasion of France by Prussia, when, as the best defense of Paris against the Prussian invaders, it was necessary and correct to work for the overthrow of the bourgeois government of Thiers and its replacement by a people’s government. The Japanese Communists need to increase their struggle against the Japanese imperialists. In the last analysis, the native Chinese bourgeoisie will divide the spoils with foreign exploiters, rather than to give up everything to the masses.
 
Defeat the Aims of the War Lords!
In the United States all forces must be mobilized to demand that the imperialistic paws of the United States be kept off China; to demand that the Japanese get out of Manchuria. War exists. It can easily spread till it engulfs the entire world. The propagation of the ideals of the Soviet Union and of the principles of Communism must be increased manifold as measures of preparation and defense of the proletariat against the objectives of the bourgeoisie.
Among the tasks and duties that fall to the lot of entire working class, and especially the American workers and revolutionists, are the exposure of the hypocritical game of the American imperialists who are getting ready, when the opportunity arises, for military action in the Manchurian situation, with the aim to advance their own interests in the guise of “protection” of China, thereby accelerating a world war. We must demand that the imperialist powers end their pillage of China.
Full support, must be given to the Chinese workers and peasants in their struggle against the foreign Japanese invaders and their enemies at home – the Chinese bourgeoisie, militarists and landlords, their Kuo Min Tang agents and the Northern militarists. The Chinese Communist Party must adopt the policy by the unity of all Communist forces, particularly with the Left Opposition, and gird itself for a bitter fight against foreign and internal aggression and exploitation. The attempts to provoke the Soviet Union into war must be combated, and workers everywhere must be on guard at all times for the defense of the Workers’ fatherland, the Soviet Republic. All forces must be mobilized against the world war which, all the imperialist forces are preparing.
 






We reprint the following statement and appeal of the Youth Fraction of the Communist League of America (Opposition) from the first issue of Young Spartacus. We feel sure that it will prove of interest to all readers of The Militant, and call upon them to give all possible support to Young Spartacus through donations, subscriptions, putting young workers and comrades in touch with the Youth Committee, etc. Readers who wish to obtain a copy of the first isue may do so by addressing Young Spartacus, 84 East 10th Street, New York, N.Y. – Ed.



* * * *
With this issue we introduce Young Spartacus to the Communist youth and young workers in the United States. There is a sore need for what the organ of the Communist youth of the Communist League of America (Opposition) sets out to accomplish.
What The Militant has been achieving in its tasks of regeneration of the official Communist Party, now under the domination of the American political underlings of Stalin, the youth of the Communist Left hope to carry through on an ever wider front among the members of the Young Communist League and youth in this country. Young Spartacus will be a spokesman and guide in this necessary work. The confusion and misleadership of the Y.C.I. and Y.C.L. have brought the official Y.C.L. to a sorry state of theory and practice. Young Spartacus, we hope, can cleanse this Augean stable with the fresh air of Marxism and Leninism. It is imperative again to begin the work of clarification and education of the American working youth along Marxian lines.
 
The Low Level of the Y.C.L. To-day
We but merely assert here, what Young Spartacus will have occasion again and again to prove; namely, that the Y.C.L. like the official Communist Party, having acquiesced in the expulsion, oppression and exile of the Left Opposition in the Soviet Union, led by Leon Trotsky, and of countless hundreds of Bolsheviks in the other Parties, and Youth Leagues, has fallen also into a theoretical swamp and adopted the pernicious practices of the Stalinist bureaucracy. The result has been that the Communist Parties and Y.C.L.s everywhere are but caricatures of what genuine Communist Parties and Young Communist Leagues should be.
By the printing and distribution of the writings and platform of the International Left Opposition and its sections, we shall in time demonstrate that the salvation of the international Communist movement, of the Comintern and Youth Comintern lies, – first; in the abandonment of the false, anti-Marxian doctrine of “socialism in one country” the theory from which Stalin proceeds and from which flow the other incorrect doctrines and practices that prevail in the official movement of Communism; and, second, in the acceptance of the platform of the Left Opposition, led by Leon Trotsky, and which, in a few words, is but the acceptance again of the original theories of Marx and Lenin and which enabled the Comintern during the first four congresses of its existence, to flourish.
 
The “leadership” of Mineriches and Greens
We state plainly and unequivocally in here addressing ourselves to the membership of the Y.C.L.: Nothing can be hoped for from a leadership of acquiescent Mineriches and the tiny bureaucrats like the Greens. They epitomize the groveling type of “leadership”. As they demand it from those below them, so they, like fawning lap-dogs whining for a bone, submit unquestioningly to the lash of those above them, to the party whip. Stalin and Stalinism are the source of the cancerous growth of political boot-blacking in the Party and Y.C.L. Will a thinking, red-blooded Communist youth in the Y.C.L. long accept such a situation. We think not, if the truth is laid before his eyes to read and judge.
 
The Dismal Y.C.L. Paper – Young Worker
The official organ of the Y.C.L. is the Young Worker. In its columns we can find the quintessence of the “ideas” and practices of the Greens and Mineriches. A paper should be one of the best, if not actually the best, means for the development of an educated, theoretically clear and militant Communist youth. In this fundamental task of education, of clarity to achieve correct actions, the Young Worker has signally and woefully failed. We believe that we are only stating what every honest member of the Y.C.L. thinks, when we say that the Young Worker is a crude and vulgar mish-mash of ideas and events. In it is to be learned – exactly nothing. It is a perfect reflection of the youth leadership that runs it and the Y.C.L.
The members of the Y.C.L. are expected to accept policies from above without question. Free discussion and democracy, as within the Party itself, is on the Catholic index, it does not exist. Genuine examination of the validity of theories and policies is not allowed; the practices and results are to be noted in the low ideological and numerical status and influence of the Y.C.L. Other columns of Young Spartacus tell the unpleasant story. What discussion takes place in the Y.C.L. membership is either in secret or in the secret chambers of their minds.
Young Spartacus aims to assist in the reformation of the Y.C.L. The youth of the Left Opposition accept this policy and will work to revitalize the Y.C.L. in all respects. A Y.C.L. must have the spirit of youth, militancy and independent thinking, it must aim to be broad organizationally, to make it possible for young workers and youth who WANT TO LEARN COMMUNISM to be able to become members and to feel that they have full rights in the organization. In a Communist youth organization the first task is to learn, to become equipped with the theoretical weapons of Marx and Lenin which will best enable them to put them into practice in the shops in the factories, in the unions, in the fields, among the student youth, wherever the youth is to be found. The field is broad and immense. A Communist youth organization must take this into consideration in outlining its tasks. A youth movement is a young movement, and there must be no fear about the youth who wants to learn. Let there be fearlessness in expression. The youth will learn through education, mistakes practices. It is necessary to follow a route instead of the rut that is the Y.C.L. today. This is the road toward Communist CLARITY AND ACTION.
 
Trotsky on the Youth
Trotsky, in his famous letter, on The New Course to his Party nucleus, has this to say concerning the youth:
“The bureaucratism of the apparatus has its heaviest consequences in the intellectual-political growth of the young generation of the party. This explains the fact that the youth – the most reliable barometer of the party – react the most sharply of all against party bureaucratism ...
“... It is wholly inadequate that the youth should repeat our formulas. It is necessary that the youth should take the revolutionary formulas fighting, transform them into flesh and blood, work out for themselves their own opinion, their own personality, and be able to fight for their own opinion with that courage which comes from sincere conviction and independence of character. Passive obedience, mechanical drill, characterlessness, obsequiousness, careerism – away with these things from the party! A Bolshevik is not only a disciplined man; no, a Bolshevik is a man who boring deep, has worked out for himself in each given instance a firm opinion and courageously and independently defends it, not only in war with his enemies, but also within his own organization. To-day he may be in the minority in the organization. He submits because it is his party. But that obviously does not always mean that he was wrong …”
 
For Clarity and Action
The slogans of Young Spartacus, as in the early and best days of the revolutionary youth movement in the United States, the Young Workers League, are CLARITY AND ACTION.
Young Spartacus espouses the cause of the Left Opposition. It will, however, endeavor to be a youth paper, reflecting the attitudes and needs of the youth in the fields of education, sport, economic, trade union and political activity.
The youth of the Left Opposition regard themselves as the Left fraction of the Y.C.L., whether officially members or otherwise, and therefore endeavors to redress the organization of the Y.C.L. At the same time, recognizing the broad field of work before them, and the failure of the official Y.C.L. to reach even a fragment of the youth and young workers that properly belong in a Communist youth organization, the Communist Youth Opposition will try to draw every possible young worker into conscious, active, revolutionary work in the Communist .movement. Through Young Spartacus, we hope to be able to achieve a measure of success.
Young Spartacus will no doubt not be all that we want it to be. Mistakes will be made – errors of initiative and lack of knowledge and experience. But that is not to be feared. The Communist Youth Opposition WANTS TO LEARN that it may be ABLE TO TEACH, organize and win the American youth to Communism.
 
The Course of the Communist Youth Opposition
In Young Spartacus will be reflected the policies and activities of the Communist Youth Opposition on all phases of youth work. This need not therefore be discussed here. In line with the program of the Communist League of America (Opposition), the Communist Youth Opposition and Young Spartacus will steer its independent course on all youth and political issues before the Communist movement. Although a fraction of the Communist movement, the Communist Youth Opposition will endeavor, to the extent possible, under the conditions, to develop its own independent activity wherever the official Y.C.L. fails, is negligent or persists in a false line.
Lastly, we have adopted the name Young Spartacus in honor of Spartacus, the great leader of the revolt of the oppressed slaves and gladiators in Rome; further, we take this name in an effort to follow in the traditions of the Spartacus League of Germany, organized by Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg in their revolt against the German Social-Democracy that trampled revolutionary theory and practices into the dust.
In the glorious name of Spartacus, Liebknecht, Luxemberg and Lenin, we pick up the banner of Communism now being besmirched by the Stalinist Comintern; under the leadership of Leon Trotsky, we will march forward to again win the Comintern and Y.C.L. to Leninism.
Upon this program we call upon the Y.C.L. members and class-conscious youth everywhere to support Young Spartacus.
 



There is no cessation of military activities between Japan and China on the Manchurian fields. On the contrary, Japan has increased her military forces and magnified her aggressions in Manchuria. Hundreds fall dead and wounded in what the capitalist class merely calls “skirmishes” between Japan and General Ma’s Chinese forces in Manchuria. Japan now more brazenly aims for domination of Manchuria and raises the prospective penetration of Eastern Mongolia. Tsitihar may be taken and sacked any day by the Japanese, who thus deliberately aim at incitement of the Soviet Republic within whose sphere of influence and agreements with China Tsitihar is located.
The League of Nations is now meeting in Paris to attempt to “settle” the Manchurian invasion. The Japanese flatly declined the League of Nations “demand” to evacuate Manchuria of all armed forces by November 16. The League of Nations proves impotent, and the equally powerless Chinese government still looks to the League for salvation. Nor has the United States been successful in her diplomatic approaches and negotiations. On the war front against Japanese imperialism, apart from incidental resistance, China comes beseeching and groveling for peace. Japan, aggressive and certain of its powerful position, sneers at the requests of the capitalist nations, and demands unconditional recognition of her “five points” first. Only the prospect that the Soviet Union may yet be compelled to defend herself against the systematic incitements by Japan gives the latter pause.
 
The Japanese Demands
Japan’s five demands upon China and the capitalist powers are summarized as follows:

repudiation of aggressive conduct by China and Japan (Hear! Hear!);
respect of China’s territorial integrity (if Japan finds it not possible to slice a big chunk immediately);
suppression of all organized movements interfering with trade and stirring up of international hatreds (this refers to the economic boycott of Japanese goods by China, a thorn in the side of Japanese merchants and capitalists);
effective protection of Japanese subjects in Manchuria in their trade, etc.;
acceptance of the treaty rights of Japan in Manchuria (that is, the continued acceptance of the infamous 21 points forced upon China by Japan.)

According to reports in the capitalist press, it is said that the “compromise” plan of the League of Nations is as follows: To have direct negotiations between Japan and China on the first four points, but that the completion of evacuation shall not depend on these direct negotiations. Regarding the fifth point involving the 21 points, negotiations thereon shall begin after evacuation has been completed.
 
Situation Remains Critical
As The Militant goes to press, affairs remain at a standstill in respect to the cessation of war hostilities, as well as negotiations for peace. The situation remains critical and the danger of a conflict that would involve all nations in war has not been removed even for the immediate period. Japan has continuously and directly incited and provoked the Soviet Union; the other capitalist powers, led by the United States, have continued also to lie about and slander the Soviet Union, which has a determined peace policy. All the imperialist powers have the ultimate object to unify their forces in a common front of the imperialist bandits against the Workers’ Republic.
As a matter of fact Japan’s invasion of Manchuria has been given encouragement by some of the imperialist powers, such as Great Britain, and, to an extent by the United States also. Each of them has a close eye to a prospective share in the plundering of Manchuria, Mongolia and China in the forthcoming period. It is not to be forgotten that the United States already has investments of great sums in Manchuria; and though hesitating at open warfare now, fears the constant encroachments of Japan. It prefers at the present time a settlement short of war.
The United States has tremendous hopes, both in Manchuria and China, for wide commercial relations and capital investments. A unified National Government, sufficiently unqualified however to find it necessary to make concessions of an economic and political character to the United States, is the more desirable to her, as against a completely disintegrated China, subject to plunder by all the imperialist powers.
 
Japan Determined To Dominate Manchuria
Japan, no matter what the outcome of the present embroglia, is determined to intrench herself in Manchuria, having, in fact, eventual annexation in mind, as well as the further economic penetration of China proper.
Japan feels quite cocky about it all and says she can do a better job of exploitation of the Manchurian masses than others. In Manchuria, for instance, Chinese warlords have forced upon the population some seven billions of paper money, against which there is a reserve only of 60 million in silver yens ($30,000,000). Of 200 million yens collected in taxes, 120,000,000 reached the viceroy’s office and of the latter amount 80 million went into armaments expenditures. So as far as exploitation of the Chinese masses in Manchuria is concerned Japanese control would represent only a change of masters, and the Japanese feel they are more efficient at exploitation than the Chinese militarists. It is to be noted that of the 30 million population in Manchuria, over 29 and a half million of these are Chinese, and the remaining half million composed of Japanese, Koreans, etc.
 
The Capitalist Powers Want Their Booty
The Foreign powers are apprehensive of Japan’s Manchurian invasion, feeling that Japan is taking undue advantage of the situation to create monopolies, and that, they complain, would be “violation of the open door”, that is, the infamous policy for common capitalist exploitation of the resources and population of Manchuria and China. The complaint of the capitalists is not at all at the exploitation engaged in by Japan, but at the fact that the Japanese “have their feet in every trough” and the others can’t get in. The Japs, in short, result what may of the momentary struggle, are getting and expect to maintain a trade grip in Manchuria, despite the temporary stagnation of trade caused by the battles and the economic boycott of Japanese goods by the Chinese.
In Japan itself everything is being done to foster the jingo spirit. While clanging the firearms and beating the war drums, the Japanese bourgeoisie appeal to the narrow “national” interests of the Japanese people. They point out that Japan has already for decades been speeding up her industrial development, finding it necessary more and more to push into Chinese territory for essential raw materials, markets, and capital investment. To maintain her present social, economic and industrial life, they continue, it is necessary by all means to hold and to extend their influence and domination in Manchuria and China.
 
The Aims of the Chinese Bourgeoisie
On the other hand, the comparatively young Chinese bourgeoisie, hoping to inflict a final or long-enduring defeat upon the Chinese workers and peasants, want and expect to develop China greatly on bourgeois economic and industrial lines. Hence they wish to exploit the Chinese masses for themselves. Here presents itself an immediate and outstanding contradiction of capitalist development in the Far East; and, further, we must remember, both England and the United States, especially, are making every effort to increase their footholds in China. These facts alone increase the prospects of war on a world scale to the bursting point.
The government at Tokyo constantly emphasizes its economic problem. The Japanese envoy to France and to the League of Natrons Council, Kenkichi Yoshizawa points out that “beginning with the South Manchurian Railway we have made investments of a purely economic character ... For the protection of this railway zone we have the right ... to station 15,000 troops therein ... Our institutions, railway rights, mining exploitation, timber felling and the like are based upon treaties.”
Hence, Japan concludes, it is only exercising “self-defense” in Manchuria, even as does the United States in Nicaragua, Haiti, Cuba, Santa Domingo, etc.! In brief, Japan operates in Manchuria after the manner of the Western powers that have for decades pilfered and slaughtered in all parts of the world to make secure their pillage, particularly in the exploitation of the colonial and semi-colonial countries.
Japan is determined to rule in Manchuria. In addition to seizing Mukden and occupying additional territory, the Japanese are setting up a puppet Manchurian government, a so-called “independent, autonomous government”, which simply means a government of Japanese tools easy to control. The “independence.” movement in Manchuria is therefore but another screen to mask Japan’s depredations. Only when the Chinese masses in Manchuria establish a Soviet Manchuria, will there be a genuine independent and autonomous Manchuria.
Japan lays her base for any eventuality – peace or continued war. Japan is disturbed that her gold standard also may go into the discard. Her financial and banking authorities profess to be alarmed thereat, because of the Manchurian situation and the speculation that has already taken place with the yen. It is desirous of checking the steady outflow of gold but at the same time must intrench the position of the yen in other countries, particularly in the United States with whom economic relations are increasing. By the end of November it is expected that 105 millions of dollars in gold metal will have reached the United States from Japan, by which it is hoped to strengthen Japan’s position in the United States, as well as to stop speculation over the yen at home.
 
American Imperialism at Its “Job”
The position of the Chinese National Government of Chiang Kai-Shek is grotesque throughout. The Kuo Min Tang, which does not hesitate to slay tens upon thousands of the flower of the Chinese proletariat, is powerless before the Japanese invasion. It continues to call piteously upon the League of Nations and American imperialism for assistance. The latter is determining the best way both to check Japan and to plunder China. So far there has been no interference with the shipment of 6,000 tons of nitroglycerin which the Japanese government is reputed to have ordered from American manufacturers. The blood-profit is there, without as yet any difficulties for the United States and is therefore allowed.
The United States Government, through Secretary of State Stimson, is winding its way through secret negotiations, which, no matter what the immediate outcome, can bode no good for the workers of China, Japan, or America. When the imperialists are compelled to hide their schemes, they are more than ever fraught with ill for the workers. War alliances for the future are no doubt being consummated in secret between the imperialist powers. The outstanding aim is a combination against the Soviet Workers’ Republic. All workers must be on guard, and demand that the secret treaties be made public, so that the war-mongers can be unmasked. The behind-the-doors negotiations must be made known to all. The imperialists are preparing war; all workers must be made to realize the danger and to work for its prevention.
 
Tactics for the Communists
Previously we have pointed out the necessary tactical lines for the Communist movement to follow in the Japanese-Chinese war and in the prospective war danger. These remain the same. The defense of China and Manchuria can best and only be achieved by a struggle of the Japanese workers against the Japanese imperial government; by the development of the struggles in China of the workers and peasants against the Chinese bourgeoisie, militarists and landlords, for the overthrow of the Chiang Kai-Shek government and the Kuo Min Tang, the hangmen of the Chinese proletariat and peasantry. There is the most imperative need for the unity of the Chinese Communists in this terrific struggle. The Comintern must be compelled to adopt this unity policy, despite Stalin, the splitter of the Communist movement. In every country the workers must be aroused to the dangers of world war.
It is for the Comintern to adopt a genuine international policy on all questions if there is to be a successful mobilization of the world’s proletariat against the efforts of the bourgeoisie to accomplish a unity of the capitalist powers to destroy the Soviet Republic. Less talk by the Stalinists of more or less fictitious Soviet Republics in China. More concentration on the revival of the morale and organizations of the Chinese working class; more efforts to rebuild a solidly founded Chinese Communist Party. No more talk about possible “alliances” with the Chinese Kuo Min Tang, either of the “Right” or “Left” variety. Rebuild the Comintern on its original Leninist foundations, so that once again it will be firmly impressed that a real defense of the Soviet Union and against a growing world war danger, rests upon the ability of the Communists in each country to organize the working class into labor unions, to draw them toward the Communist movement, and to bring them into militant struggles against their native exploiters.
 



Japanese imperialism continues to intrench herself more strongly in Manchuria, and pushes her military operations persistently and sharply. From the Chinese there is little or no resistance to the aggressions by the invaders. The slaughter of the victims of capitalist war increases. Tsitihar, center for the Chinese Eastern Railway, jointly operated by China and Soviet Russia, has been seized by the Japanese. The latter are now massing troops for an attack on Chinchow, center of the South Manchurian Railroad, owned by the Japanese. With the prospective occupation of Chinchow by Nipponese troops, Japan will have direct control of every city of consequence in Manchuria, except Harbin.
Japan’s position now in Manchuria is powerful and is reflected in her adamant attitude toward proposals for a cessation of hostilities and arrangement of terms between Japan and China. Japan has set out to dominate Manchuria, and to date is succeeding very well. The United States, though not a member of the League, and the powers dominant in the League of Nations – Great Britain and France – are having a trying time to save the face of the League, so obviously impotent in the present Far Eastern war. There is talk of invoking economic measures against Japan, America’s attitude on this appears to be negative.
 
The International Commission of Inquiry
At the moment, the League of Nations Council is in session and is getting ready to submit another proposal to Japan and China; both turned down the earlier suggestions for a cessation of warfare. The draft resolution calls for an International Commission of Inquiry into the Sino-Japan war; it concerns itself also with the evacuation, to be started at once, of Japanese troops from China and immediate stoppage of military activities.
This Commission also has in mind an inquiry into the internal affairs of China, thus laying an additional base for the spoliation and dismemberment of China by the various imperialist powers. Thus far there is no indication whether any or all of the proposals in the League of Nation’s draft resolution will be acceptable either to Japan or China. The latter, as matters stand today, really has little choice in the matter, though stressing the evacuation of Manchuria as a sine qua non for the settlement of disputed issues. The Militant has gone into these issues before in detail.
The relations between Japan and the Soviet Union remain the same, despite the provocation by Japan with its occupation of Tsitihar. As a matter of fact, the other imperialist powers – the United States, Great Britain and France – actually encourage acts and gestures of hostility toward the Soviet Union, and continue to plan ways and means for a united front of the capitalist nations against the Workers’ Republic. They hope in due time to be able to wage war upon the Soviet Union in an effort for the latter’s destruction. The Soviet Union thus far has refused to allow itself to be provoked by the imperialist powers. She pursues a policy of peace.
 
Japan Achieving Objectives
In the main, Japan has achieved her objectives in Manchuria. Anti-Japanese elements have been removed from high post in Manchuria. Her economic interests, possessions and capital investments are on a more solid footing than ever before; Japan feels that any settlement of the disputes will be largely in her favor and that any existing or Chinese government of the bourgeoisie to-be will be tolerant of Japan’s “rights” and interests and treaties.
The Chinese National Government continues to do nothing to stem the Japanese aggressions. There is much talk, but it signifies nothing, for there is only wind behind it all.
Dr. Alfred Sze, Chinese delegate to the League of Nations Council at Paris, knowing the flabbiness of his government, tries to pass the buck and wails at the bourgeois League because the “League has not lifted a finger in defense of covenants they have pledged to defend.” The Nanking Government, knees bent in suppliance, complains before the League Council that the Japanese have expropriated Chinese lands, levied illegal taxes, disrupted Chinese communications, interfered with local municipal administration in Manchuria, etc. While China protests that she will not pay a political price for Japan’s evacuation of Manchuria or again sign another treaty embodying the notorious 21 points of 1915, Japan and the imperialist nations only give a mocking answer.
 
Kuo Min Tang Uniting Bourgeoisie
From Chiang Kai-Shek, Chinese hangman of the proletariat, comes high talk about going to the war front to lead the struggle against Japan. He exhorts the Kuo Min Tang Congress for unity of all shades of the Kuo Min Tang and achieves reinstatement of expelled elements, among them Gen. Fng Yu-Hsiang and Yen Hsi-Shan, now re-elected to the Central Executive Committee of the Kuo Min Tang. The Fourth Congress of the Kuo Min Tang – the association of Chinese bourgeoisie, landlords and militarists – meets in a tense atmosphere, feeling and knowing the rising wave of indignation and protest of the Chinese proletariat and peasantry against them.
In China itself the situation has become more favorable for the Left wing labor and Communist movement. The Chinese masses are indignant and resentful at the almost total failure of the Chiang Kai-Shek government to resist the Manchurian invasion by Japan. They are beginning to feel more surely, and correctly so, that the bourgeoisie of China will capitulate before and compromise the historical interests of the Manchurian and Chinese masses to the Japanese. At the same time, they steadily receive the blows of the Chinese bourgeoisie.
 
Chinese Toilers Organizing Resistance
The Chinese masses sharply resent the efforts of Japan to make what amounts to a colony of Manchuria. The proletariat is compelled to carry the brunt of the battles, not only its own, but that of its enemies and exploiters. As pointed out in The Militant hitherto, demonstrations and the economic boycott were involved at the outset of the present struggle. These are now on the increase, and the historical weapon of the Chinese, the economic boycott, in this instance of Japanese goods, is being linked up more and more with political manifestations against the Chinese bourgeoisie.
Class forces are once again more clearly aligning and realigning themselves, both internationally and in China. The bourgeoisie of other countries are compelled to condone the Japanese aggression because of their own imperialist objectives. They have not been able to find a way out of the world economic crisis; the Manchurian events are but an extension of this economic crisis on the political and military arena. The basic combination is that of the capitalist powers against the Soviet Union and the international working class which is gradually organizing its forces for the defense of the Soviet Union and against international capitalism.
In Japan there has been an increase of protest by workers and workers’ organizations against the Japanese government and its depredations upon Manchuria.
In China the Chinese bourgeoisie are already calling upon “Left” fronts to mask their schemes and exploitation, in addition to attempting, as pointed out, to unify the Kuo Min Tang. The Kuo Min Tang of Canton, South China, is pressing Wang Chin Wei to the forefront as the “Left” representative. These maneuvers are some of the internal dangers that the Chinese proletariat faces and must meet.
Basic tasks remain as before: Unification of all the forces of Communism in China and internationally; revival and reorganization of the Chinese labor movement, oppressed mercilessly by Chinese capitalism; integration of the Communist forces in the United States in order to be able to develop a common and wide front of the American working class in struggle against the American bourgeoisie, and to achieve a mobilization of all possible forces in support and defense of the Soviet Union from aggressions from any quarter and against the growing menace of world war.
 



The 14th anniversary of the Bolshevik Russian Revolution is at hand; and the proletariat of the entire world cheers the first working class to achieve power over the capitalist class. The heritage of the October Revolution, precious to the toiling millions everywhere, must be preserved.
In 1848 Marx and Engels, in the immortal Communist Manifesto, exultantly cried: “A spectre is haunting Europe – the spectre of Communism”. With the Russian Revolution of November 1917, this spectre became a reality of the modern world, the first death-thrust of the unsheathed proletarian sword in the body of imperialism.
 
The Proletarian Dictatorship Is Established
The major act of the Russian proletariat, in the program of revolution, was the seizure of political power as a class; it established State power; it set up the dictatorship of the proletariat which, as Marx proved in the Criticism of the Gotha Program, was the necessary transition measure employed by the working class in the long, hard road toward the establishment of a genuine Communist society – a society without the exploitation of man by man and thereby without classes. The Kautskys and the Mensheviks, et al., abandoning Marx’s ideas, lost their base, and since then have stood upon the ground of revisionism and reformism.
When the Russian masses, under the leadership of the Communist Party, of Lenin and Trotsky, assumed power, there began the first acts in carrying through the economic program of scientific socialism. The Russian Revolution proceeded with the social measures put forward by the early leaders of scientific socialism, Marx and Engels. The means of production and distribution were socialized and nationalized. For the first time in the modern imperialist epoch, by the act of the proletarian revolution, “Socialist production upon a predetermined plan became henceforth possible” (Engels). Not through the hazy dreams of the Utopian socialists, but scientifically, following the basic plans of Marx and Engels, socialist construction began.
 
The Epoch of Wars and Revolutions
There began that experiment in humanity-building when ultimately, “The government of persons (the State) is replaced by the administration of things; and by the conduct of the processes of production.” (Engels).
The Leninist estimation of the present imperialist epoch is that it is the “epoch of wars and revolutions.” With the advent of the Bolshevik Revolution, the establishment of proletarian Soviet power, the two phases of the Leninist view were realized. The World War, that enormous but inevitable disaster of civilization, which forever damned capitalism in the eyes and minds of the thinking and revolutionary workers and peoples of all lands, was first given a deadly blow by the uprising of the misery-ridden workers and peasants and soldiers of Czarist Russia. The epoch of capitalist war had met its complement and master – the Proletarian Revolution. The Kerensky socialists and mensheviks – the protectors of the interests of the Russian bourgeoisie – who tried to hold back the realization of the demands of the workers and peasants met defeat. The Bolsheviks, penetrating the Soviets with the slogans of Bread, Peace and Land, won the masses to their slogans and received the mandate of the Russian people to carry through the Bolshevik program.
 
Carrying Out the Program of Communism
It became possible then to initiate the work of carrying out successfully the principles of Communism – a task which, as Lenin pointed out in his brochure, The Soviets At Work, would comprise the physical and intellectual efforts of the masses for decades. Its consummation would witness the complete transformation of the means of production and distribution and the outlook of man upon the world – a transvaluation of values that would raise mankind to a historical level never before conceived by man. Though begun in Soviet Russia, this objective could only be achieved on an international scale through the instruments of Communist Parties and a Communist International as guides and leaders of the working class. To this end the Communist International, with the leading spirits then of Lenin, Trotsky, Rakovsky, Zinoviev and Platten was formed in 1919.
During the fourteen years of the Russian Revolution there have been also six congresses of the Communist International. During these 14 years of proletarian power in Soviet Russia, there have been mighty achievements despite the many and persistent efforts of the Russian bourgeoisie, White Guardists and the world imperialists led by America, England and France, to smash the Soviet Power. Military intervention, civil war, sabotage, famine, etc. failed. The power of the Red Army, the fundamental acts of the socialization and nationalization of the means of production (to the fullest extent possible under the given conditions) the power above all, of the ideas and ideal of Communism, that penetrated the consciousness of the masses ever more and more, held the Soviet Power and the Communist Party firmly together through all struggles and vicissitudes.
 
Lenin Dies; Stalinism Rises
The death of Lenin, which came after four Congresses of the Communist International had guided the destinies of the Soviet Union and the international proletarian movement, gave rise, under the aegis of Stalin and Bucharin, to new formulations, new ideas, false interpretations and revisionist theories of Marxism. The tremendous damage which the epigones of Lenin – the Stalinist-Bucharin school of thought – have committed to the immediate and historical interests of the Russian and also the world proletarian revolution, is here briefly outlined.
Property – land and the means of production – remain socialized in the Soviet Union. The monopoly of foreign trade, a mighty pillar for the maintenance of the proletarian dictatorship, exists. The years in which Lenin and Trotsky led the destinies of Soviet Russia, the best period of Communist leadership, have instilled millions of workers with the understanding and need of Communism. Despite the Stalinist perversions of Marxist-Leninist theories and practice and the disfiguration of Revolution, there remains tremendous ideological strength in large sections of the Communist party and the proletariat, largely unexpressed because of the suppressive methods of the Stalinist regime against the worker-Communists and Left Opposition.
 
Stalin and Menshevik Hopes
The revision of the doctrines of Marx and Lenin by the Stalinists has given aid and comfort to the theories of Menshevism. Menshevism insists that the zig-zags and revisions of Leninism by Stalin and Bucharin are historically inevitable, and that the present leadership of the Comintern is adapting itself accordingly. Menshevism denies that the assumption of power by the proletariat in a so-called backward country economically, as in Russia, can become the means whereby the proletariat can proceed to the introduction of socialist principles of production and distribution, and it maintains that if a working class attains political power under such conditions, the drift must be back to capitalism, in order not to “skip any stages” in the historical economic scale. But the years of the Russian Revolution under Lenin and Trotsky are a living refutation of the Mensheviks and made easier the defeat of the latter both in Soviet Russia and on a world scale. However, the official paraders of Communism, the Stalinist regime, have made simpler the tasks of the Menshevik slanderers. We cite here some factual material.
The Left Opposition has consistently discussed the issues dividing it from the Centrists and Right wing. In the 14th year of the Russian revolution, the Left Opposition finds that time has confirmed its criticism of the Stalinist Comintern and ratified the platform and perspectives of the Left Opposition both in regard to the situation in the Soviet Union and internationally.
In the year 1931 there took place the trials of the engineer specialists and Mensheviks on charges of sabotage and counter-revolutionary activity against the Soviet Government. The Opposition warned the Party against the Stalinist methods which made it so easy for Mensheviks and intellectuals of the old order to step into positions of significance, without any check, in the fields of economy and politics. The party and the Soviet Union paid the price of this “reconciliation” with window-jumping Bessedovsky, the Agebekovs, the Ramzins, the Mensheviks-Bolsheviks, and countless others.
 
The Opposition Platform Serves the Workers’ Interests
Advances in socialist construction in the domain of industry and agriculture have been made – notable ones. The Left Opposition led the struggle, resisted for years by Stalin and Bucharin, for a vast increase in Soviet and collective farms and for a swifter industrialization policy. Under Opposition pressure the Stalinist “Left” swing began. We will not deal hear with the caricature the Stalinists have made of a sound collectivization and industrialization program, but concern ourselves with the main outlines. The Five Year Plan, the first of many to come, was first advanced by the Left Opposition under Trotsky’s leadership. In a fundamental, principle and programmatic sense, these and many other ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION BELONG TO THE LEFT OPPOSITION.
In respect to Soviet economy, the Left Opposition proposed the abandonment of the Stalinist policy of economic isolation, the theory of an isolated, self-sufficing Soviet economy able to build a “complete socialist society” (Stalin) with the existing economic perquisites of Russia. The Opposition insisted that the false theory of socialism in one country, the foundation of Stalin’s “theories”, be discarded. The Opposition proposed a foreign trade policy that would link the needs of the Russian Revolution with the requirements of the world’s workers affected by the world economic crisis. The monopoly of foreign trade by the Soviet Union would be the lever for a controlled economic collaboration with the capitalist world. Concretely, further, Trotsky proposed to this end that the Comintern initiate a worldwide campaign for the extension of large and long-term credits to the Soviet Union by the capitalist countries. Stalin and his stupid lackeys branded this living slogan as counter-revolutionary. It conflicted with the theory of “socialism in one country”.
 
The Conditions in the Factories
It is axiomatic from a revolutionary standpoint and the aspect of the development of workers’ control, that for every increase in the productivity of labor in the Soviet Union, there must result an approximately corresponding increase in the standard of living of the workers – their wages, working conditions, etc. The industrial proletariat particularly, the carriers of the future hopes of humanity, must participate in every gain made by industry and agriculture.
But under Stalin, there has been by and large a policy of production for the sake of production, a false concept of socialist construction; productivity has increased at the expense of the working class; that is a damning indictment of Stalinist practices. The regime within the shops has deteriorated. More, not less, control, must be vested in the workers in their shops, their committees, their unions. Instead, managers, trade union officials and State and party bureaucrats increase their domination over the workers. Dissatisfaction naturally arises with this non-proletarian policy; workers shift from job to job. hoping for betterment; shop control and discipline become weakened, which the Stalinist bureaucracy thinks can be overcome by decree. A principle of Communist management and workers’ control is involved in these prevailing Stalinist methods in the Soviet Union.
In the field of foreign policy, there has been a wide departure from the early days of Lenin, Trotsky and Chicherin. It is indeed a long journey from that period to the “diplomacy” of Stalin and Litvinoff who finds it possible on behalf of the Soviet Union, to sign the Kellogg Pact of the imperialists and to justify this non-revolutionary action on the ground that the Kellogg Pact enforces “moral” (sic!) obligations on the capitalist powers who also signed it.
 
The Changes in the Communist Party
In the Communist Party of the Soviet Union there have been tremendous changes, which took on the speed of a locomotive with the expulsion of Leon Trotsky and the Left Opposition from the Party. The Party, in a fundamental sense, is non-existent: it is melted into the masses by the method of mass infiltration into the party by whole factories, etc. The actual role of the Party as the leader of the masses is vitiated by the bureaucratic control of the Stalinist apparatus which tolerates no criticism or program other than its own. Thus, the proletarian dictatorship still exists, but Stalinism is eating at its roots and its heart, the Party.
The Stalinist policy is the policy of isolation for the Soviet Union, an underestimation of the role of a Communist Party and the Communist International. With the acceptance and espousal of the anti-Marxian theory of socialism in one country, it was inevitable that not only in the Soviet Union, but throughout the C.I., social-democratic theories would in time take their hold.
 
The Development of National Socialism
Theory has no boundary lines. Even as the Left Opposition warned, national socialism developed among the Communist Parties in other countries (witness the German Party and the recent referendum). The theory of “socialism in one country” became “internationalized”. With it, to mention but this major cause, there followed the decline of the Communist parties. The War Danger and Defense of the Soviet Union became, without relation and analysis to the current situation and burning issues of the day, the central slogans of the Communist Parties. Lip service was given to the fact that the best defense of the Soviet Union and for the temporary staving off of another world war, was best carried through by a consistent struggle against one’s own capitalism on living issues. The Communist Parties have in the main become reduced to auxiliaries for the Soviet Union.
During the period of Lenin’s life four Congresses of the Communist International took place, as follows: First Congress – 1919; Second Congress – 1920; Third Congress – 1921: Fourth Congress – 1922. Lenin’s death followed iu January 1924 and the Fifth Congress was in 1924; four years elapsed between the Fifth and Sixth Congress of the C.I. in 1928; three years have since passed and there is not yet a word about a Seventh Congress. Thus loudly, but without words, shouts Stalin his contempt for the Comintern.
Here we will only mention that Stalinism, carried over into many other countries, as in Great Britain, hoped to jump over the inevitable step of the development of a British Communist Party, and thus helped to carry out the mangling of the British proletariat and Party through the “actions” of the now dead, but unlamented Anglo-Russian Committee. And the manner in which Stalinism aided by Mensheviks like Martynow, helped to strangle for years to come the Chinese Revolution. Need we mention how the Communist International ignored, and Pravda lamented, that the Spanish Revolution, still in mighty motion, might hurt the preservation of the peace of Europe; forgot the cause of revolution and clung instead to that pitiful reed of peace by agreement with capitalism, “of collaboration peacefully of the Soviet and capitalist world.” (Litvinoff).
 
Soviet Russia – the Fortress of World Revolution
Despite all, Soviet Russia remains the fortress of the world revolution, its prelude. The Russian Revolution still is powerful in its own right – despite Stalinism. The fundamentals remain – which the second party and fourth international advocates fail to see – : The prevailing property relations are the socialized and nationalized means of production and distribution; the monopoly of foreign trade by the State remains as a bulwark. The Proletarian Dictatorship stands; Soviet Russia is a WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT. The education of the masses, the militancy and achievements of the workers and Bolsheviks during all the years of the Russian Revoultion, have planted deep the roots of revolutionary practice and the doctrines of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Trotsky. On an international scale, in varying degrees, this is true also. Therefore, the International still lives and the Opposition calls for the policy of the regeneration and reform of the Communist Parties and the Communist International. The Opposition and its ideas live and will conquer. The HERITAGE OF THE RUSSJAN OCTOBER STILL REMAINS. It is for us to be dedicated to the task of preserving that heritage and increasing its wealth. Stalinism destroys, but Leninism rebuilds again and again on a higher plane.
 
The Platform of the Opposition – And the Future
With comrade Trotsky and the Russian Opposition, we say, even as it was said to the Stalinist Central Committee on October 23, 1927:
“We stand at the helm of Bolshevism. You will not tear us away from it. We are going to hold it true. You will not cut us off from the party. You will not cut us off from the working class. We are familiar with repressions. We are accustomed to blows. We will not surrender the October Revolution to the politics of Stalin – the entire essence of which is contained in these few words: Repression of the proletarian nucleus, fraternization with the compromisers of all countries, capitulation before the world bourgeoisie ...
“The platform of the Opposition is on the table of the Party. The proletariat thinks slowly, but it thinks strong ... The decision lies in the last account with the political course, and not with the bureaucrat’s fist ...
“Your persecutions, expulsions, arrests, will make our platform the most popular and the closest and dearest document of the international workers’.movement. Expel us. You will not stop the victory of the Opposition – the victory of the revolutionary unity of our party and the Communist International.”
 



In 79 B.C. the slave and gladiator Spartacus commenced a magnificent struggle of revolt against the oppression and rule of the Roman Empire. In the course of battles in which thousands of revolting slaves gathered around the banner raised by the Greek Spartacus, ten Roman armies were defeated and laid to waste before the patricians and military power of Rome could gather sufficient strength to beat down the glorious revolt of the enslaved masses. Spartacus and his followers went to their death, but for the slaves, plebeians, serfs and toilers, there remain forever the glory and inspiration of the revolt of Spartacus and his fellow-slaves and gladiators.
The Communist League of America (Opposition) aims to develop further the Spartacus tradition of struggle, revolt and organization against the slavery of today – wage-slavery, which enfolds countless millions of toiler, young and old, throughout the world. The National Youth Committee of the Communist League jointly with the National Committee of the Communist League, have decided to call the forthcoming Youth paper of the Left Opposition, announced in the previous issue of the Militant – Young Spartacus. The youth of the Left Opposition, in claiming the tradition of Spartacus for the revolutionary youth and proletarian movement of today thereby also lift high the symbol and banner by which Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg gathered the first cohorts of Communism in Germany into the Spartacus League – Communist Party of Germany.
The issuance of Young Spartacus in the very near future represents another advance of the Communist League of America and the International Left Opposition in the endeavor to bring clarity again into the confusion wrought by the theories and practises of Centrism, led and nurtured by Stalin. It is but the first, we hope, of youth publications by the Left Opposition.
For the young workers in the United States, in the official Young Communist League, for Communist sympathizers among the toiling and student youth of America, the issuance of Young Spartacus, it is hoped and expected, will be one of the means whereby the revolutionary youth can once again step into the front ranks of Communism in the demand for clarity of purpose, sound theory and program, for militancy and action. The Young Worker, official organ of the Young Communist League, is but a caricature of what a youth paper should be. It grovels before the bureaucrats of the party, and makes sycophants of the youth, acceptors without question of any and all orders handed down from above. The official apparatus of the Y.C.I. and the party is passively accepted, at best with whispered criticism. Neither thought nor educational material of any real consequence is any longer to be found in its columns. The revolutionary youth in the United States needs a revolutionary youth paper and this role Young Spartacus aims to fulfill. In his letter to his party nucleus, entitled The New Course, Trotsky has this to say concerning the youth:
“It is wholly inadequate that the youth should repeat our formulas [i.e. of the older comrades – so-called Old Guard – M.A.] It is necessary that the youth should take the revolutionary formulas fighting, transform them into flesh and blood, work out for themselves their own opinion with that courage that comes from sincere conviction and independence of character. Passive obedience, mechanical drill, characterlessness, obsequiousness, careerism – away with these things from the party! A Bolshevik is not only a disciplined man; no, a Bolshevik is a man who, boring deep, has worked out for himself in each given instance a firm opinion, and courageously and independently defends it, not only in war with his enemies, but also within his own organization. Today he may be in the minority in the organization. He submits because it is his party. But that obviously does not always mean that he was wrong. ...”
The members of the Young Communist League and the Young Worker today only too plainly do not have that independence and courage and clarity which characterize the kind of revolutionary youth needed in the Communist movement. Trotsky’s words are the words for any vital, thinking revolutionary youth. The Youth fraction of the Communist League, through Young Spartacus, as well as through the coming formation of youth clubs, will endeavor to instill the fundamentals of Communist theory and practise among the youth it can reach. In the Young Communist League of America there is also worthy tradition, particularly of its early years as the Y.W.L. when Clarity and Action were its slogans. Young Spartacus will endeavor to fulfill these slogans. Every adult worker and member of the Communist League and sympathizer of the Left Opposition should help in the issuance and maintenance of the forthcoming Young Spartacus which will start as a monthly four page paper, tabloid size. H. Stone has been selected as Business Manager of Young Spartacus and funds for it may now be sent to H. Stone, care of Young Spartacus, 84 East 10th Street, New York, N.Y
 



With a triumphant fanfare, the Daily Worker (10-2-31) makes much ado of the application of Sam Scarlett, an old-time I.W.W. militant for membership in the Communist Party of Canada. The Daily Worker in commenting upon Scarlett’s adherence to the Communists, declares:
“Again the victory of socialist construction in the Soviet Union has shown a capacity for winning over to Communism the really revolutionary elements among the anarcho-syndicalist workers of past years.”
It is a correct step for Scarlett to join the Communist Party. The Left Opposition has pointed out time and again the failure of the Communist movement in the United States and Canada and throughout the world, to attract the revolutionary syndicalist to the banner of Communism, and has explained why the Communist parties have failed. Foremost, there stood out the basic theoretical weakness of the syndicalist, the I.W.W., to grasp the cardinal necessity of a political party of the working class, and the dictatorship of the proletariat, as the instruments of the workers and all exploited peoples to achieve and to maintain the power of the masses against the class enemies.
But there was also the pedantic, smart-aleck and bureaucratic attitude of two-by-four functionaries of the Communist party toward the militant I.W.W. workers, participants and leaders of magnificent battles in the class struggle. Coupled with the mechanical measures utilized to win adherents of the I.W.W., these conditions served further to disgust or dismay I.W.W. militants still unclear on theoretical, principle and tactical issues avowed by the Communists. So the fundamental appeal of the Russian revolution and Communism brought only handfuls of the I.W.W. to the party where hundreds and thousands might have come.
 
Catching up with the Revolution
In the 14th year of the Russian revolution, Scarlett only now finds it possible to join the Communist party, to endorse the Communist International. This act is understandable for ordinary workers just coming to comprehend the class struggle and looking for methods to throw off the shackles of wage slavery. The path of a worker, blinded by capitalist prejudices and education toward class consciousness and the revolutionary movement is, at the outset, slow for the lone worker and, for the mass of workers, is speeded up only under the impetus and blows of stupendous class struggles and political developments, economic upheavals (Russian revolution, Spanish revolution, economic crisis, general strike, etc.) But this cannot explain Scarlett’s late entry, far Scarlett is a militant of many years standing. Why should he but at this day join the Communists?
Scarlett has finally caught up with the Russian revolution. He says, in his statement printed in the Daily Worker (10-2-31) that “we (the I.W.W.) underestimated the role of the proletarian dictatorship, and maintained our anarcho-syndicalist opposition to all forms of government, capitalist or proletarian.” The ex-syndicalist or I.W.W. Scarlett now arrives at and sees the role of a vanguard organization of the proletariat, of a political party of the working class; he now “recognizes” the ‘’State”; he draws the distinction between the aim and function of government in the hands of the capitalist class as an oppressor of the workers, and a Soviet Government, through the medium of the proletarian dictatorship, as the defender and guide of the workers and all the exploited peoples.
We may thus assume that Scarlett will struggle hereafter against the “epigones of syndicalism” who dominate the degenerated I.W.W. of today with false and outworn doctrines of the emancipation of the working class solely through the method of “industrial action” and the industrial union. By such “ideas”, the I.W.W. remains factually and historically in the swamp of reaction.
Scarlett is correct when he says that ‘’lack of self-criticism and inability to alter the opinions of yesterday on the basis of the facts of today led to fossilization and degeneracy” (of the I.W.W.). But will Scarlett, in thus stepping ahead, now apply this critique and approach to the problems that today face the Communist party and the Comintern? Let us see.
 
Scarlett on the Field of National Socialism
Scarlett unlike the liberal and treacherous “Friends” of the Soviet Union, takes his stand on the field of Communism itself. The Left Opposition has charged that the Communist parties and the Comintern itself are neglecting or ignoring the basic problems and issues of the struggle for political power within the respective capitalist countries and on an international scale. Under the orders and guidance of the Stalinist Comintern the respective Communist parties tend to become transformed largely into auxiliary agencies for the preservation of the Soviet Union, and to push the basic issue of the international proletarian revolution into the attic of history and pure speculation. The Stalinist Comintern draws its theoretical outlook into the closed shell of “socialism in one country” and, with its narrow horizon, fails even to see that the preservation of the Soviet Union itself is predicated upon the support of a proletarian revolution in Western countries.
Scarlett himself accepts this narrow Stalinist theory. Like the Daily Worker in its opening sentence, Scarlett says, “The political line of the Communist Party is correct. It is necessary to build socialism in a territory which is industrially and politically backward.” He is impressed with the “amazing progress of industrialization”; he watches the revolution change from the “haystack” to the “smoke-stack stage”.
With these lines we see how Scarlett comes to the Communist Party. From the theoretical swamp of the I.W.W. he progresses to the need of a political party of the working class, etc., only to fall into the anti-Marxian, Stalinist and reactionary swamp of the theory of socialism in one country. Neither the effusion of the Daily Worker nor of Scarlett carry the burning spirit of international revolution and socialism, for a genuine Comintern. Both begin and end with the glorification of Soviet industrial successes, even as liberals hail these successes. The Left Opposition forecast, planned and worked for these successes, despite Bucharin’s and Stalin’s hopelessness and pessimism.
From what considerations does Scarlett come to accept the theory that a complete Soviet industry and economy can be built independently in the Soviet Union without the assistance of the workers in other countries and through international proletarian revolution?
 
The Struggle Against Bureaucracy
Further, has Scarlett failed to note, in his 14 years of lonely progress to Communism, the specific problems and contradictions developing in the Soviet Union, arising both from objective factors and the Stalinist destroyers of revolutionary theory and revolutions themselves (China, Germany, etc.)? Is Scarlett blind to the changes in Soviet industry in respect to continuous loss of workers’ control in the shops, lack of Communist direction, etc.?
In the old I.W.W. emphasis was laid, and no doubt endorsed by Scarlett too, on the unskilled workers, the most exploited, the lowliest workers, whom the I.W.W. reached in the wheat fields, the lumber camps, the oil territories, the waterfront, etc. Potentially, these were the most revolutionary workers with nothing to lose and all to win. The old I.W.W. fought militantly for free speech, in and outside of the organization, for democratic methods, against fakers and bureaucrats. These were strong points on the I.W.W. side.
Will Scarlett react to these good qualities of a revolutionary syndicalist and a Communist, and will he now fight for workers’ democracy within the Communist party and Comintern? Will he oppose the bureaucracy in the Communist Party of Canada, the United States and the Comintern?
In Problems of the Development of the U.S.S.R., Trotsky has accurately forecast the present and impending difficulties in the Soviet Union, arising out of the successes of industrialization and agricultural collectivization, and the contradictions of the temporary existence side by side of a Soviet State and a remaining capitalist world. Despite Stalin and Litvinoff, the U.S.S.R. and capitalism cannot indefinitely coexist side by side peacefully. Will Scarlett and the thousands of new Communists continue to ignore the program of the Left Opposition on these growing problems?
The Comintern bureaucracy, with its false policies, continues to corrode and poison the vitals of the Comintern and its sections, the Soviet Government and the working class. In the Soviet Union, Stalinist methods create ever wider differentiations economically among the masses, particularly the city proletariat. Workers, poorly paid, shift from job to job in hope of economic betterment. Stalinism and its lackeys everywhere make no effort to close these gaps, but only to justify them in the name of “industrialization”. Stalinism makes a caricature of a correct policy of Soviet building, as set forth by the Left Opposition.
The Left Opposition has exposed the inadequacies of the theoretical position of Stalinism and its terrible results for the proletariat everywhere. For struggling for a change of the Comintern line, for the reformation of the Comintern, Oppositionists by the thousands have been imprisoned, exiled and even shot. What has Scarlett to say to all this?
Will he fight for the reinstatement of the thousands of Left Oppositionists to their righful places in the Communist movement?
Having taken one step forward to the Communist party, will he remain, as now, on the ground of Stalinist national-socialism or will he take another step forward to the Leninist position of international socialism?
 



40,000 applications have been filed for the nationwide examination for stenographer and typist, and in itself demonstrates the enormous unemployment and state of insecurity that prevails among the office workers and “white-collar” workers generally.
The official statement of the U.S. Civil Service Commission, says:
“Approximately 40,000 formal applications were filed with the United States Civil Service Commission at Washington for the stenographer and typist examinations ...
“This establishes a record for all time. In the same examinations held in 1030 for the departmental service, 8,546 applications were filed with the Commission, a record number at that time ...”
The Commission acknowledges that, “the greatly increased number of applicants is, without doubt, due to the general industrial depression”, and also admits that this huge increase of applicants for Civil Service jobs is to be met with [line missing] in other classes of positions.
The vast numbers of unemployed or poorly paid office workers vaguely believe and hope that a Civil Service job, “working for the government”, will bring a large degree of economic security, permanent employment, and that their worries will then be over. It is a pitiful hope and illusion; for capitalist government, no less than its bosses, the private proprietors of industries, lands and banks, must face by and large the problems posed by an economic crisis, political instability, etc. Budgets must be balanced, taxes arranged – according to the requirements of the employers, the rulers of the land. Employees, whether of a local, state or national government, or employees of a private capitalist, remain economically – wage slaves. When “times are hard”, the government employee, like any other worker, is also hit by layoffs, increase of working hours, wage-cuts, etc.
But so strong is the illusion of government, jobs, Civil Service appointments, etc., that between the year 1930 and 1931, an increase of approximately 450% in the number of applicants for stenographer and typist jobs, is recorded. And 1930, with its 8,546 was already a record year for applications. To cap it all, the U.S. Civil Service Commission does not mention the number of jobs actually open for the 40,000 applications. By the tens of thousands, the applicants are to fall by the wayside, and left to ponder their future fate, lack of jobs and security under capitalism.
 
Low Wages of Civil Service Workers
It might be thought, further, that these stenographic and typist jobs, for which 40,000 humans swarm in desperation, paid handsome wages. Yet the wage for the highest paid stenographic position is $31.00 per week and the low is $24.00. And in this mad plunge of applicants for $24.00 and $31.00 a week jobs, the race is not merely to the swiftest. With an unconscious sense of humor or irony, the Civil Service Commission announces with dignity that “Recently ... it has improved its test for stenographers and typists for the Government Service.” For in addition to the ability to take dictation and to transcribe notes, “such an employee should have good judgment ... more knowledge of the English language, etc.” All for $24.00 and $31.00 a week, and the right to “work for the government”.
It is known to all and sundry that the U.S. Government, and its official spokesman, President Hoover, have professed great concern about the unemployed, and have even called upon the captains of industry not to lay off workers or to cut wages. It has however been amply proved that neither Hoover,
the government nor the bosses were serious about such statements; and the employers have, from the day of Hoover’s statement, continuously cut wages, increased hours of labor, and laid off workers, so that some 10,000,000 are today unemployed in the United States. U.S. Government Increases Hours Now the government adds its bit, and we quote, for the benefit of the stenographic and typist applicants, postal workers and any others who may read, a statement of the Post Office Department.
“Because of the greatly increased deposits, all employees in the postal savings division are required to work eight and one-half hours a day, an increase of one-half hour over the regular Federal workday. This extra work will not involve any salary increase. The Department found it necessary to hire more men, or to require overtime work of present employees, and decides upon the latter course.”
Capitalist government and employers set their course by the dollar sign or requirements of capitalist economy, and not by those of the worker.
The office worker or “white-collar” employee, unquestionably in the past and largely yet in the present, is affected by the ideas of the capitalist class, particularly of the middle class. Actually feeble in an economic sense, he has endeavored to ape the class he aspired to. The viewpoint of the office-worker has been slow to change. But low wages, unemployment on a tremendous scale among office workers, inability to pretend even to “keep up with the Joneses”, are driving the office worker, very slowly as yet, toward a common economic and ideologic position with the rest of labor.
 
Need to Organize “White-Collar” Workers
There are no special and final reasons that prevent the organization of the “white-collar” workers into militant labor unions. European countries have witnessed them. The United States need not be exempt from progress in this field. It is folly to surrender all the millions of extremely low-paid office workers to the existing capitalist movements or to potential Fascist movements, or to liberal and social-democratic ideologists. While there are obvious limitations in approaching and winning such elements, the policy of virtually ignoring them is patently wrong. The American Federation of Labor has only played about with the question of organizing the office workers, and its federal labor unions have been made up to a large extent of civil service employees. These should be reached by all means also. But hitherto the other millions of office workers have been passed by. The Left wing has made sporadic efforts of organization and has gotten mostly office help employed by unions.
The task of organization of this wide field of workers is basically the same as with the industrial workers, with all due advantages as are already known in the organization of the latter. The appeal must be broad and on elemental economic and class issues. Sectarian appeal will not work. Yet the only efforts able to succeed will have to be exerted by the militant and Left wing workers and organizations.
 




“Immediately upon the liberation of any area by the armed forces of the United Nations, the population thereof shall receive aid and relief from their sufferings, food, clothing and shelter ... to the end that peoples once freed may be preserved ... for the tasks and opportunities of building anew.” (Preamble of the United Relief and Rehabilitation Administration)
But there is no Santa Claus. Actually, food and other relief is dispensed as a political weapon by the United Nations; more precisely, by those of the United Nations which must provide the supplies.
Such relief as is now being issued in “freed Sicily” (which represents less than 1.5 per cent of the population under Axis control) is meager and a demonstrated failure.
On the island of Ischia, for instance (population 32,000), the people are “eating far less and a smaller variety of food than they had before the armistice”. (Chicago Daily News)
Throughout Allied-occupied Italy, emergency feeding continues to limp to this moment. Inflation and the black market aggravate the miserable situation of the hungry masses. At the outset AMG announced that TAXES in Sicily would be CONTINUED and tax revenues used to help pay for relief. Thus the expectation of the starving people that relief would be unconditional was soon shattered. They began to see that American intervention butters no parsnips. For food is a weapon of the counter-revolution in Europe, of which the United States is the spearhead.
 
Relief a Political Weapon
As a matter of fact, no one should have any illusions about American objectives in relieving Europe, from “freedom from want.” Ex-Governor Lehman’s first declaration, upon assuming direction of the Office of Foreign Relief and Rehabilitation was to the effect that relief was a matter of feeding people to prevent revolution.
AMG indicated its role with equal clarity: To prevent “anarchy,” to restore “order,” to “establish” local authorities, to suppress any possible clashing of rival political groups aiming for power (that is, to suppress any revolutionary uprisings), AND THEN to feed the population. And that IS the way AMG and other agencies have actually functioned in Africa and in Sicily to date. Moreover, AMG, Washington’s instrument, further exposes its role, with subsequent discreditment among the masses, because of its reliance on and association with the upper Italian bourgeoisie and fascist elements.
Moreover, meager as actual relief is, even potential relief is in an important measure almost certain to be wiped out because numerous government agencies conflict with one another. For instance, AMG expected much of the work would be carried by OFRRO. However, the military quickly stepped in, presumably for ninety days, after which the civilian OFRRO was to take over. However, military control soon extended itself to six months, the prevailing situation. And AMG’s policy is to retard, where it cannot suppress, the workers’ independent actions and movement.
Further, OFRRO itself purchases food only as allocated by the War Food Administration. When AMG took over, WFA cancelled OFRRO allotments. Besides, other government agencies enter into the picture to help emasculate European relief. There are the representatives of Lend-Lease, the Navy, the Office of Economic Warfare, the Treasury and the Office of Foreign Economic Coordination.
 
Food ... But —
For instance, the policy of Foreign Economic Coordination is especially crude. It objects to food being extended through any political group which does not enjoy the approval of the State Department. Thus it virtually declares that food IS being used, and is to be used, as an instrument of international imperialist policy by the United States government. That is, to force starving millions into accepting U.S. policy and objectives in Europe – or go hungry!
But even aside from this, Hallett Abend writes: “When it comes to food, the bald prospects are that in most of the newly liberated lands there will be a full diet only for nursing and expectant mothers and for essential labor. The young, the old and the non-essential elements will have to forge for themselves.” Further, the government hopes to cover future food relief failure in Europe, in an important degree, by talk of a “food shortage” in the United States. Thus, a report of federal agencies states that food supplies will remain low for at least two to three years after the war, and even says that the United States can “easily sink to the level of downright hunger.”
The American workers must strongly register their objection to the policy of the American government, which is ready to permit starvation of great numbers of European workers who are determined to strive independently for their own democratic, social and working class objectives.
To what degree unconditional relief is possible has yet to be fully shown. But certainly, in the circumstances, the American workers must call upon and demand that the United States government provide the fullest relief to the starving European masses without attaching political or other conditions to this relief. In order to prevent abuse, discrimination and reactionary use of government relief, the American labor movement must demand that the labor unions be assigned responsibility and control of the distribution of relief, in conjunction with any existing and arising bona fide labor organizations in the respective European countries.
The American labor movement mast, be concerned to try to establish its complete independence of action in this field. It is a fact that the capitalist government will always attach or try to attach conditions to the actions and propositions of the labor movement. The aim is, of course, to curtail or nullify the independent aims of the working class. It is also a fact that war conditions make it more plausible for the government to say that it must control all shipping, all relief, etc. However, there is involved on this issue of relief the right and principle of the independent organization and action of the working class on behalf of its class brothers in other countries.
Moreover, the American labor movement must be concerned with stimulating the independence of the European masses in their struggles and to demonstrate working class solidarity between the working peoples of all countries. Therefore, even if necessarily limited in resources, the American labor unions and other workers’ organizations ought to aim to establish an independent workers relief organization, preferably a single, united labor relief body, to raise money, food, clothing, etc., to aid the starving European workers (and also starving peoples in other countries). Such workers’ relief organizations should demand the right themselves to administer relief to the European masses to insure that there will be no discrimination against European labor. As a minimum, such a workers’ relief organization should insist on its representatives being on hand in any country receiving relief in order to aid in and guarantee the fairest, most impartial distribution of relief to the workers and peasants.
 



Opportunity for building a revolutionary youth movement in the United States is at hand as never before. Nor are the difficulties for the development of a mass communist youth organization especially unusual. The Spartacus Youth Clubs already in existence in a number of cities in the United States are the groundwork on which to go forward with the task of mobilizing growing numbers of class conscious working and student youth in the daily class struggle and for Communism.
In this task the Stalinist youth organization, the Young Communist League, has grossly failed. The International-Communists, if there is to be realized the much-needed mass organization of youth, will have to fill the need.
From one source or another come confusing and false notions as to what a young communist organization should be. Yet, if one accepts the foundations on which the Young Communist International was founded and to which comrades Lenin and Trotsky gave so much assistance, it is not hard to outline what a young communist league needs to be and to do.
Like a communist party, the communist youth movement is a politically functioning organization. It accepts the political leadership of the adult organization, but remains organizationally independent within the spheres of youth functions. Its relations with the adult organization are developed on the basis of mutual exchange of representatives between the units of both organizations and through the greatest possible degree of collaboration in all fields of work.
The communist youth movement – Young Communist League or Spartacus Youth – is a broad organization of all the youth, young workers or students, who accept the principles and aims of the organization and are ready to participate in its work. But the communist youth organization does not make a demand upon the youth who wishes to join, that he be already a communist before he is accepted. What is required is a readiness to learn the principles, theory and practices of a communist organization and to carry out the tasks assigned. Membership is, hence, for the youth who want to learn to become communists. In this sense, together with the broader scope of activities than is the case with the adult organization or Party, the young communist organization is a broad movement, sufficiently so for any youth who accepts the class struggle and the necessity to participate in it, and who is ready to learn the problems and needs of the revolutionary movement. But while broad in these respects, it is not a loose, amorphous body open to consciously hostile political elements of the youth. Still, a genuine communist youth movement – not, it must be emphasized, the caricature of the ones the American YCL and YCI have been for so many year – is sufficiently broad – non-sectarian – to admit of all youth forces open to conviction. From this we have to observe that the political, industrial, educational, social, athletic and cultural activities of the communist youth movement have to be of a kind able to attract the completely raw, inexperienced but ready-to-learn youth of America.
The activities of the communist youth organization are varied. Insofar as possible, it participates in all phases of the class struggle: industrial, trade union work, united front, etc.., independently and in conjunction with the adult organization.
 
Youth and Militarism
A major task is anti-militarist activity and, self-evident, today as never before. So far as the industrial proletarian youth particularly is concerned (that is, the youth in industry or in proletarian families) they are extremely unlikely to be infected with the pacifist virus or attitude on the issues of war and capitalist militarism. Born into the era of world-wide military conflicts, observing daily the race for huge armaments by the capitalist powers in preparation for war, as well as noting the necessary building of the Soviet Red Army, the proletarian youth is not prone to kid himself with pacifist syrup about disarmament by capitalist banditry. What the working class youth, with greater or less consciousness of the problem of war and militarism, wants to know is what he can do about these most menacing of all dangers – involving his very life ... Here lies the task of the communist youth organization to present and act upon all phases of the communist position and program of war and militarism. This relates itself to propaganda, attitude toward and activity within the militarist and semi-militarist organizations of capitalism – the army, navy, national guards, C.M.T.C., etc., etc. These matters are not gone into here; they belong in an elaborated exposition of the communist point of view. What is declared here is that a communist youth organization which does no put the problem of anti-militarist propaganda and activity at all times as a foremost task, is no communist youth organization at all. This is a touch stone for the youth movement.
Of all other tasks, some of the outstanding ones are outlined. The widest degree of activity of the youth in the class struggles of the day is imperative, it goes without saying. Nevertheless, it would be a decidedly short-sighted and opportunistic approach if the communist youth movement allowed itself to be involved, under pressure or pretexts of all sorts, ina all kinds of routine activity, and to be made into a wagging or running tail of other bodies, political, trade union, etc. in order to achieve a name for ”activities”. There are some, perhaps, who believe that this very routine work, doing some of the distasteful work for the adult comrades, is the task of the youth. But it is in the communist youth organization that the youth (young worker or student) must make their major opportunity to learn thoroughly the fundamental principles and theory of the communist movement, its history, etc. in order really to be prepared for intelligent participation and leadership, at a later period, in the adult organization, the Party. It has to be said plainly that in the adult organization, the opportunities are often too limited for serious and necessary study by the ranks. Lack of time and the need to carry through numberless concrete tasks after working hours are the main reasons therefore. The adult members have to place a great reliance, perhaps too much, on experience and the theoretical back-ground can or should to a large degree be obtained by the youth in the years they are apart of the communist youth organization. This knowledge, coupled with their activities otherwise, will serve as a strong safeguard against opportunism and adventurism.
In the above sense, the slogan of Clarity and Action sums up the attitude of the communist youth. While stressing education and class struggle activity, a youth movement, communist or otherwise, cannot live by these alone, especially so if the communist youth organization is to attract the wider strata of the youth to its own banner or around its bona-fide sympathetic auxiliary bodies. Social, sport, and cultural activities need to be systematically developed. The youth movement needs to build its dramatic and musical groups and like mediums which attract the youth. It can be done; who says otherwise needlessly narrows the possibilities for rallying youth elements to the communist cause through diverse methods. Particularly must the communist youth foster a broad workers’ sport movement of which it must be a guiding participant. The insidious and malevolent influence of the bourgeois sport movements, both professional and amateur is immense, and systematic efforts are required to counter-act this influence on the mass of American youth. A general social and cultural life, in addition to the basic tasks outlined before, will tend to attract young workers and students around us. If the new forces are approached sympathetically, made to realize our genuineness, they will either join the communist youth organization, or at least remain sympathetic, even if not ready to accept the entire outlook of communism. Numerous other tasks for the youth can be posed, but space forbids.
A final, but basic point, and this in reply to the false concepts cultivated and practiced by the Stalinists and others. There is no need of another so-called broader or peripheral youth political organization, whatever this organization may be called, besides the communist youth organization itself. If the communist youth organization – Spartacus Youth – is properly directed and functions along the path given here, it is the organizational expression sufficient to attract to its banner the widest possible strata of youth forces ready to participate organizationally in the class struggle. These were the concepts of the communist youth organization in the days of the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky; these were the views that in the best years of the Young Workers League of America gave it vigor, intelligence, activity and growth. There is no need to revise these concepts for a genuine communist youth organization in the United States and in the new international communist youth movement that must again be built. What is needed is for the Spartacus Youth to build on these bases.

Special Note by Trotskyist Youth Archive
This document, written by Martin Abern in the 1930s, was part of a discussion that took place within the Spartacus Youth Clubs, the youth group of the Communist League of America (the organization of the Trotskyists expelled from the American Communist Party in 1928, and a predecessor of Socialist Action).
It is reprinted here in its totality, with only minor editing for spelling and the confusing capitalization of the word “communist” which makes it difficult to distinguish the actual Communist Party and its affiliates, from the generic use of the word.
Also, for better understanding of their uses in the above article, below is a small glossary of terms and abbreviations:
Young Communist League (YCL): youth group of the American Communist Party (at one point known as and referred to in the above article as the Young Workers League).
Young Communist International (YCI): youth counterpart of the Communist International (also known as the Third International), which like its adult counterpart, degenerated into a Stalinist instrument in the late 1920s.
Spartacus Youth Clubs (SYC): youth group of the Communist League of America, not to be confused with the current organization of that name affiliated to the Spartacist League/US.
Internationalist-Communists: another term for Trotskyists emphasizing our internationalist perspective as opposed to the Stalinist concept of “socialism in one country”.
 



The crisis in the Party, manifest to all but the self-contented bureaucracy, demands the most serious attention of all Communist workers. It is to aid them to break through the rigid barriers erected by the ruling regime in the Party for the worthless “pre-convention discussion” that the Left Opposition addresses this appeal to the Party membership.
There is a widening gap between the possibilities for the strengthening of the movement in the United States and the accomplishments that the leadership has to record. The increase in Party membership and influence over the workers corresponds less and less to the activity of the Party. There is not a single mass organization of the workers where the Party has succeeded in consolidating or advancing its position in the past year or two, be it in the Left wing unions, in the conservative A.F. of L. and independent unions, in the cooperatives, in the numerous language fraternal orders, etc. etc. In the ranks of the Party itself there is a deadening passivity, an indifference and a growing dissatisfaction with the prevailing Party course, which are prevented from completely paralyzing all activity only by feverish administrative lashings and the ever harder measures of the control commission.
In the upper strata of the Party, new “leaders’” appear every day and old “leaders” disappear or are demoted without the Party or working class knowing anything about it until they are informed by the official press. The suppression of all initiative and the complete dependence of all activity upon decrees from above make the Party immobile, and the leadership endeavors to make up for the Party’s failure to meet situations in time by plunging it unprepared into adventures and consequent debacles.
The Party’s immobility and the leadership’s adventurism is the more dangerous because of the broad perspectives for the growth of Communism in this country.
Apart from the historical causes, the immediate reasons for the bourgeois, class-collaborationist ideology and political backwardness of the American workers have been the relative prosperity it enjoyed in the past few years and the privileged position it occupied in comparison with the European and Asiatic working class. The American workers have developed for the better part of a decade under the illusion of a “permanent prosperity”.
 
The Economic Crisis
The collapse of the stock market, the deep-going decline and crisis in industry, and the creation of a huge army of the unemployed are having the effect of wiping out this illusion in the minds of broad sections of the working class. The sharp contrast between the previous “prosperity” and the misery of unemployment which has cut into more than 6 million workers and hangs like a Damoclean sword over the rest of them, is jolting the working class out of its bourgeois stupor. A deep-going process of radicalization is beginning to take place. The process will be accelerated by the exhaustion of the “prosperity reserves” of the workers. The attempts of American capitalism to issue out of its crisis by a re-adjustment of its industry for more effective competition on the world market, attempts which spell rationalization, wage-slashing, and in general an offensive upon the workers’ standards of living, can only hasten the process. U.S. imperialism can re-create a bourgeois working class in this country, such as England had at the opening of the century, only by enslaving the rest of the world, the mere endeavor of which involves the most violent military and revolutionary eruptions.
Under the pressure of these developments, the American workers are moving away from bourgeois influence and ideology, and their former passivity. There is a growing mood for struggle and militancy. The huge demonstration on March 6 and even the smaller ones of May Day (we do not speak here of the bluff and exaggerations of the Party leadership, or of their incompetent direction which resulted in the frittering away of these gains) and the alarm of the American bourgeoisie at, the “specter” of Communism, are signs of the changing situation. In addition, sections of the workers are moving from acquiescence in the leadership of Green, Woll and Co. to participation in the various “progressive” movements, the Conference for Progressive Labor Action, and to a certain extent the new “Left wing” of the socialist party. For the workers this is a movement towards the Left. Muste, Thomas and Co. form the ideological and organizational curb on this movement, a “safety valve” against Communism, a rut for the harmless canalization of the forward movement of the ranks. American Reformism There is no foundation for the idea that the half-way house of reformism, or its “Left” variety, must be occupied by the American workers for a long time. There is no fatalistic analogy between the development of the German or British working class and that of the American proletariat. The unevenness of social struggles and development, and the abrupt changes inherent in the imperialist epoch, speak against this analogy. That decades elapsed between the bourgeois and proletarian revolutions, in let us say, Germany, was not at all an absolute precedent for the interval between them in Russia. The British and German workers went through their long period of reformist domination during the upward swing of world imperialism.
The American working class is developing to maturity after the world war, in the period of the collapse of world imperialism of violent wars, of proletarian and colonial revolution, of the existence of an international Communist movement which concentrates within it enormous experiences. These facts, and America’s involvement and dependence upon a declining and anarchical economy, make probable a situation in which the reformist experiences of the working class here can be traversed with unprecedented rapidity.
This process and its speed are not automatic. Their acceleration depends largely upon the Communists. It is the task of the Communist Party to reduce to the smallest minimum the “reformist period” of the American workers, to paralyze the power of the Left and Right wing reformists, to fight for every worker whom they still influence. But it is precisely here that the present course of the Party and the leadership foisted upon it demonstrate their impotence. The great opportunities are allowed to pass by entirely, or else they are misused and ruined to the detriment of our movement and the advantage of its enemies.
 
Fruits of the “Third Period”
The weaknesses and the defeats of the Party, and conversely, the growth of reformism are traceable to the policies pursued by official Communism for the past six years, and more recently, to the theory and practise of the “third period”. The theory of the “third period” with its thoroughly opportunist motivation, officially inaugurated the present ultra-Leftist zig-zag of the Comintern.
The arbitrary proclamation of a “third period” was intended to serve as the theoretical foundation for explaining away the past crimes and blunders of the Right-Centrist bloc in the International (Stalin-Bucharin). The fatal subordination of the Chinese Communist Party to the bourgeois Kuo Min Tang, which enabled the Chiang Kai-Sheks to mount to power over the corpses of the Chinese proletariat and peasantry, was and is justified by its occurrence in the “second period”. The bureaucratic protection which the Anglo-Russian Committee gave to Purcell, Hicks, Swales and Co. after they had stabbed the British workers in the back, was and is explained away by the “second period”. The course based upon the Kulak in the Soviet Union, the reactionary struggle against the industrialization proposals and the rest of the program of the Leninist Opposition, is similarly excused. There is, however, no change in the practical consequences of the “third period”, which, like the practise of the “second”, results in reality in the strengthening of reformism in the working class.
 
The United Front Policy
From united fronts exclusively at the top, with bureaucrats like Purcell, Fimmen and their ilk, or with reactionary militarists and national bourgeois like Chiang Kai-Shek or Calles, the official policy has been changed today to no united front at all, that is, no united front with non-Communist workers who are still under the influence of the reformists. The ruling apparatus and its spokesmen in all the Parties have changed from their conception of the “progressive” leaders as fighters against imperialism to a conception of the progressive workers as “social fascists”. Both conceptions have a common base: the surrender of the non-Communist workers to the control of the reformist leaders.
However, the labelling of reformists as “social fascists” does not result in the decline of their strength and influence. Social reformism is growing in the U.S. – not a little of which is attributable to the policies of official Communism. The petty bourgeoisie, heavily hit by the industrial and stock market crises, is seeking political expression manifest in the tendencies towards a “third party”, and in the increase of the socialist party vote and organization, to which the desperate middle class so largely contributed (Thomas vote in New York).
The socialist party is gaining not only among the middle class, but also among the workers: in the new miners’ unions of Howat-Fishwick-Brophy-Germer-Ameringer, and in partial reestablishment of socialist strength in the needle trades unions. In the South, the sectarianism and blunders of the Communist Party have made it easier for both the A.F. of L. bureaucracy to play its ordained role of labor agent for capitalism and the Musteites to play the rote of shock absorber for Green and Co. against the militancy of the workers.
The sectarian, ultra-Leftist line of the Party, its failure to apply the tactic of the united front, its refusal to penetrate and work within movements not under the direct control of the Party has enabled Green to have a free field in the South (and in the A.F. of L. as a whole), has enabled the Musteites to play their treacherous game in Marion and Klizabethton without the Left wing having any chance to intervene, has enabled the Muste-Fishwick combination to establish their control in the Illinois mine field without effective challenge from the Left wing.
The Party must change its course and adopt instead the tactic of the united front. Applied in a revolutionary sense, and not in its pro-Purcell, pro-Chiang Kai-Shek interpretation, it is a most effective instrument for separating the workers from their reformist leaders, and helping to speed the movement of the American proletariat along the revolutionary path. The present line of the Party is a brake on this movement.
* * *
International Roots of Party Crisis
The crisis in the American Party is not an isolated phenomenon; it is a part of the crisis in the U.S.S.R. and the Communist International. That crisis developed under the reactionary banner of the struggle against an alleged “Trotskyism”, that is, in reality against line fundamental principles and strategy of Marxism and Leninism. The “Left course” has not alleviated this crisis. It has only brought it to full bloom. The Parties of the International are everywhere incapable of measuring up to their tasks, and are paying with defeats for the past years of Stalinist corrosion.
In India, with a revolutionary situation, there is no Communist Party in existence, and the mass movement is threatened with complete strangulation by Gandhi, Nehru and other representatives of the national bourgeoisie. In Great Britain, the hostility of the workers towards the monstrous treachery of MacDonald and the Labor Party is being transformed into support) for the “Left”-wing of the Independent Labor Party; the official Communist Party in virtually out of the picture In Austria, Italy and Spain, where there are powerful or potential mass movements against fascism, the Communist Parties are reduced to unimportant sects with no substantial influence. There is hardly a Party in the International that is not torn by a crisis or rendered impotent by stagnation and passivity. That is the balance sheet of Stalinism in the Comintern.
This condition is part and parcel of the crisis in the Soviet Union aud the Russian Party. The attempt to bridge the gulf between an isolated proletarian state and the retarded world revolution with the utopian, reactionary theory of “socialism in a single country” has failed in two different ways. Proceeding from this theory the Stalin-Bucharin regime proclaimed that socialism would be built “at a snail’s pace” by the “kulak growing into socialism”.
This perspective of decades-long capitalist stabilization was accompanied by resting upon and mobilizing all the anti-proletarian elements in the Soviet Union in the campaign against the Left Opposition. The course towards the Kulak culminated not only with the organizational crushing of the Leninist group in the Russian Party, but also with the “bloodless Kulak uprising” of 1928. The pressure of the Opposition’s ideas and the proletarian core of the country compelled the rupture of the Right-Center bloc and the commencement of the zig-zag to the “Left” of the Stalinist faction. But just as the Stalinist faction abandoned – with one foot – the positions of the Right) for those of adventurism, so surely is it now preparing to return to its former position and to heal its temporary breach with the Thermidorian elements of the Right wing. This movement backward, foretold by the Opposition, is now in the process of realization. The serious situation engendered by the adventurist course of Stalinist Centrism in Soviet economy, which brought about a virtual rupture of the bonds between the proletariat and peasantry, which tightened the bureaucratic stranglehold that stifles the Party and reduces it to an automaton, demands the active intervention of every Communist worker.
The predictions and the program of the Left Opposition have been confirmed a thousand times over. For that “crime” it has been subjected to the foulest slanders, to imprisonment, exile, deportation and even assassination. In exile, in the factories, in prison and in the Party, the Left Opposition (Bolshevik-Leninists) stand on guard for the revolution and its conquests. It is the revolution’s reserve of gold. The American Opposition proudly re-affirms its solidarity with the Russian comrades. Their reinstatement into the Party, like our own, is the principal guarantee for the advancement of the movement and the solution of its crisis.
* * *
The Right Wing and Stalin Factions
The pre-convention “discussion” up to now, the fact that the “theses” were officially and finally adopted long before the discussion commenced, and all Stalinist precedents, are sufficient, indication that the convention will be another meeting of the functionaries of the Stalinist faction, with a purely formal and decorative attendance of workers-delegates. The convention will prove incapable of solving the urgent problems of the Partly. Our appeal is therefore directed primarily and essentially to the worker-Communists in the Party.
Our warning against, and designation of the character of the Lovestone group, made while it was still the American representatives of the ruling regime in the Russian Party and the International, have been more than confirmed by subsequent events. We characterized the Lovestone faction as a Right wing group, which was leaving the positions of Communist principle, at the moment when half of the present leadership of the Party was an integral part of the Lovestone group (Minor, Bedacht, Stachel, Weinstone) and the other half was in a bloc with that group to expel us from the Party (Foster, Browder, Hathaway). All the noise – and “predictions” of the “uniting” of the Right and Left Oppositions – is designed to conceal the damning fact of the unity between the Lovestones and Fosters in the fight against us.
The Right wing has turned its back upon internationalism, and applied the Stalin-Bucharin theory of “socialism in one country” to the United States. It has crystallized its opportunist conceptions of Communist work among the masses, which, white it led the Party under Stalinist dispensation, was always so thoroughly imbued with timid conservatism, dragging along behind the masses, bureaucratic “maneuvers” and “united fronts” at the top with all varieties of reformist leaders, exaggerations of the omnipotence of American imperialism, faith in the capture of the official trade union apparatus as a substitute for the struggle to win over the workers ia the ranks. Its whole line of thought and action fitted it eminently to lead the reactionary campaign against “Trotskyism”, which the present manufactured leadership is seeking so vainly to continue.
We stamped the nature and course of this group correctly and in time. We fought against its liquidationist tendencies instead of uniting with it to expel the Left Opposition. The official leaders of the Party have now undertaken a belated struggle against the Right wing but they are incompetent to conduct it. In reality, they have helped to strengthen it, and that in three ways: by uniting with it against us; by carrying out such an adventurist, sectarian, ultra-Leftist policy that they play into the hands of the Right wing and drive many Communist workers in its direction; by methods of hooliganism and “strong arguments” which discredit the Party and only create an artificial sympathy for the Right wing. The Centrists, bound to the Right wing by a hundred theoretical threads, are incapable of conducting a serious Marxist struggle against it. The smashing of Centrist impotence and theoretical confusion will be the heaviest blow against its former and future ally, the Right wing.
As in our struggle against the Right wing, the course of events has more than sufficiently justified our opposition to the present Centrist regime in the Party. The latter has only deepened the crisis engendered by the previous rule of the Lovestone faction. It has weakened the Party, paralyzed its activity, cut down its influence and prestige among the militant workers, it has driven away hundreds and even thousands of workers from the Party; it has been unable to hold the thousands of workers who have recently come to the Party; it will continue to be incapable of holding the many others who move towards Communism under the impulsions of the struggle.
 
Solution of the Party Crisis
The prerequisite for the solution of the crisis is clarity and understanding of its nature and its source. To attain this clarity and understanding, the Party requires a genuine, a free discussion, which we have not had up to now because it is officially prohibited. For such a discussion, the Party requires the re-establishment of workers’ democracy. For workers’ democracy, the Party requires an intransigent struggle against the Party bureaucracy appointed from above and against the regime which it represents and by which it lives.
The Party must, be returned to the Party membership!
The Left Opposition, since its existence as a separate group formally outside the Party as a result of bureaucratic expulsion, has continued to fight for its principled viewpoint and to defend the foundations of Communism, even under the extremest provocations of the apparatus. It is pledged to continue this struggle. The Centrist regime’s deformation and discrediting of fundamental principles upon which our Party and our International were built, only necessitates a firmer and more relentless struggle in our Party since the whole future of our movement is involved. The great problems with which the whole movement, particularly the American, are confronted demand the re-incorporation of the Opposition into the Party. Our fight for Communism must of necessity be conducted in fraternal solidarity, shoulder to shoulder with the Communist workers in the ranks of the Party. It is they, and not the miserable, blind bureaucrats, who will decide in the end. It is to this end that we are working. It is for the clarity needed to attain this end that we address ourselves – now, in the past, and in the future – to the Communist workers.



 


National Committee of the
Communist League of America (Opposition)
Martin Abern, James P. Cannon, Albert
M. Glotzer, Max Shachtman, Carl Skoglund,
Maurice Spector, Arne Swabeck



 



There is need now to begin preparations to convene an International Conference of the forces of the Left Opposition. Many factors make such a conference both necessary and possible. It is not even a “forced, march”; the world situation, the status and policy of the Communist International, urge such a gathering of the Left Opposition throughout the world. Economic and political struggles, arising out of the depressed and receding strength of international capitalism, are taking place on an increasing scale. In these the Opposition plays its part, but it must consider in what manner its role can be more decisive, both directly and through pressure by correct policy and tactics upon the Communist International and its sections in each country.
A steady and growing number of defeats have been inflicted on the proletariat and the Communist Parties in every country (alleviated only by incidental victories of a not very marked character here and there), in the-past six years under the influence and direction of the Stalin-Bucharin regime. These range from the catastrophe in the Chinese Revolution (1925–1927); Anglo-Russian Committee debacle; the pro-Kulak policy, until recently in the Soviet Union; up to the May 1st, 1929, adventures in Germany and the washed-out August 1st international demonstrations against war – to mention a few of the outstanding events. For these defeats, Stalin and Stalinism, leaning strongly in these years upon the Right wing, bear the main responsibility. Trade union policy and activity, as embodied in the resolutions and theses and decisions of the Second and Third Congresses of the Communist International and the Red International of Labor Unions, when under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky, have become a caricature coupled with either the abandonment or grotesque modification of tested united front tactics, have brought isolation of the militants from the mass unions, and sectarianism into practice on a world scale. There is need for a conference of the Leninist-Bolsheviks, of the Left wing, under the leadership of L.D. Trotsky, to examine thoroughly the situation before the world’s working class and in the Comintern, and to elaborate a program of action that will more quickly defeat Stalinism and turn the Communist movement again on a correct path. That the bureaucrats are subject to proletarian pressure, even though yielding more comfortably and easily to the opportunists and revisionists of the Right wing, is a fact of experience. But the Left wing must turn the screws still tighter.
 
Opposition Problems Need Elaboration
A conference is needed to elaborate the position of the Left Opposition toward the Comintern, the U.S.S.R. and Stalinism. That there is wanted more clarity is evidenced by the differences that arose in some sections of the Opposition (German Leninbund, Belgium) on the Sino-Russian conflict; the attitude toward the recent capitulators to Stalinism (Radek et al.); Thermidorism; etc.
At the same time the Left Opposition has reached the point and possibility where it is necessary and able to establish an international political platform as a guide for the Oppositions in the various countries. Some of the Oppositions, among them the Leninbund (Germany), Bordiga group in Italy, Communist League (United States and Canada), China have drawn up platforms and given their estimate of the international situation and the tasks of the Communists. The basic conceptions of the Left Opposition on the theory of socialism in one country; the Chinese Revolution; role of the Party; party democracy, etc. are incorporated soundly in the Opposition forces. What is needed is to clarify as much as possible such differences as may and do exist; to draft the general platform for all the Opposition; to assist one another in the specific tasks of each country; to lay the basis for the unification and centralization of the organization and activities of the Left Opposition on an international scale.
In little more than a year of the past, the Platform of the Opposition in the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the activities of the Left Opposition in other countries have made a definite and good impression on the rank and file workers in the Communist Parties. This too, on an increasing scale among the proletarian forces in the C.P.S.U., among the Russian proletariat generally, and particularly among the party members and workers in the large factories in Leningrad, Moscow and other large cities. Opposition determination, the needs of the workers there, are more and more breaking through the Stalinist suppression and terror. The voice of the Leninist-Bolshevik is being heard and his message read. A major task of the International Opposition is to assist the Russian Leninist-Bolsheviks in their tasks with propaganda, material aid, etc.
 
Opposition Growing
The correctness of the views of the Left Opposition are accepted by larger numbers in the Communist Parties and the proletariat each day, by open declaration or silent acquiescence, or a waiting policy. The zig-zag Stalinist line fools less and less. Even now, the sudden dizzy “Left” zig-zag of the Stalinists in the Soviet Union and internationally, a course undertaken without conviction or understanding by the chinovniks, apparatus-men, shows signs of weakening and again gradually yielding (later a collapse?) to the Right wing opportunists (the removal of the so-called ultra-left, Fried, in Czecho-Slovakia, the speech of Manuilsky against the Left are the first straws). Only the active intervention of the genuine Left Opposition everywhere can serve to try to push the apparatus of the Stalinist Centrists and the Right wing onto a proletarian course. To do this more effectively, coordinated international activity and policy of the Opposition is required.
The Stalinist apparatus-men and the Right wing alike proclaim our “death” and have many times chanted our swan song. They may bow to ikons if they want to. The Opposition has its life in historic need and revolutionary activity. The more that Stalin and Bucharin maintain their revisionism of Marx and Lenin by the theory of socialism in one country as against an international revolutionary movement, the broader grows the international ring of the Left Opposition, encircling and isolating this social-democratic theory and Stalin in the narrow confines of national reformism. Stalin, through terror and suppression, makes his way yet in the Soviet Union. But the growing International Left, the increase of its press in the past year, the formation of new Left Opposition movements throughout the world indicate its growing strength and influence.
There is need to cite only the organization and development of the Left Opposition in the United States and Canada, Argentine, Mexico, China and other countries, not to mention the older European Oppositions. The capitulators find little comfort in the increasing proletarian cohorts of the Opposition. These found their way to the Opposition through understanding, and the pressure of the Stalinist chinovniks will not avail against them. It is this very growth of the Oppositions, with their own special problems, the need to define the particular roles of each Opposition (the United States and Belgium as contrasted, for instance, with Germany and France); the problem of the illegality of the Opposition (C.P.S.U.); the acute difficulties of work of the Opposition in China (illegality under Chiang Kai-Shek together with Stalinist suppression) that make advisable an international conference, to work out our problems. The extreme conditions under which the Opposition operate make sectarian practice and an incorrect attitude toward the Comintern and the Communist Parties an easy swamp into which to fall. A conference which will discuss how we can increase our influence and activity among the masses and energize our movement in the Communist Parties will help greatly.
The open discussion of such issues as have arisen in the Left Opposition in some countries have helped to clarify our tasks. There is no need to wail about that. However sharp these discussions have been, they will aid the development of unity on a commonly accepted platform. An International Conference should make it possible for ALL groups and tendencies in the Left Opposition to be present and fully heard as an aid toward unity. Secondary issues, which tend to obscure main lines, can then be brushed aside.
 
An International Opposition Organ
An exchange of views in the press of the Opposition is required.. At the same time, we must discuss ways and means to transform into reality an International Opposition organ, published in three languages at least, if at all possible, and to develop plans for a wide circulation. Such an organ will go a long way toward the theoretical education of the Left Opposition and the Communists generally.
At this conference should be elected an Executive Committee of the International Opposition to centralize the work of the Opposition. If possible representatives of a few of the European countries and also one from America and China should remain in the city of the headquarters of the Executive of the Left Opposition. The International Opposition Conference has to lay out a campaign for an even more thorough exposé among the Communist Parties and the mass of workers of Stalin and Stalinism, their methods of suppression and terror against the Leninist-Bolsheviks in the Soviet Union; the blow, against the Russian Revolution in the deportation of the outstanding living leader of Bolshevism, Leon Trotsky; and to broaden the activities for the reinstatement of the Left Opposition throughout the world into the ranks of the Communist International and the return of Trotsky and the Opposition to their rightful position and role in the U.S.S.R.
The European comrades, particularly in France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, Holland and Austria, should take the initiative to form a Committee of Action to lay the basis for such an International Conference. When agreement has been reached as to time, place and character of the Conference, the needed steps to bring the delegations from the various countries together can then be taken.
 



In a star-chamber proceedings in New York five Communists, including Wm. Foster, were found guilty on April 11 of unlawful assemblage and face a maximum sentence of three years in jail. They had been among the leaders of the unemployed demonstration on March 6th at Union Square.
Typical capitalist justice was dispensed from the time of their arrests till the frame-up was consummated and convictions were secured. So-called civil liberties were again mocked at by the agents of the bosses. A jury trial was denied the defendants. Three judges in special sessions court ruled on all points. No evidence was permitted to be given that stated the case and views of the defendants and the workers. Moving pictures showing that Police Commissioner Whalen had deliberately precipitated a riot were not allowed, nor could witnesses testify to the deliberate and provocative acts of Whalen’s Cossacks against the participants at the Union Square demonstration. The riot was precipitated by the police on the pretext that the demonstrators could not march to City Hall to present the facts and grievances of the unemployed regarding the unemployment situation before Mayor Walker. The bosses and their governmental agents were bent on railroading the workers to prison. Sentence has not yet been pronounced. The case will be appealed to the State Supreme Court.
Thus do the capitalists show their concern for the misery of the unemployed and those who try to defend their interests.
* * *
It is necessary for all workers, workers’ organizations and other groups to rally on behalf of the convicted comrades. A broad defense movement is needed. Among the issues are the right of free speech and assemblage; against the star-chamber proceedings; the right for the workers to express their grievances through demonstrations, parades, etc. without interference by the bosses’ agents. Labor must show its solidarity. May Day can become one of the outstanding rallying days on this and other important issues confronting the working class in the United States and throughout the world. Repressions of the capitalists against the workers are taking place throughout the country. In New York they have taken a most virulent form. The New York capitalists have taken the initiative and given the lead for the capitalists elsewhere.
* * *
Regarding May Day we have pointed to the necessity for a genuine united front of all working class forces against capitalism on a number of specific and burning issues before the workers; and that it is up to the Communists, especially the official Communist Party to initiate such a May Day movement. Otherwise, the May Day demonstrations will be limited, the workers’ protests divided and made less effective; and to the degree of its influence, the official Communist Party will be responsible for a division of the workers, particularly among those elements who are Communists or sympathetic to the cause of Communism.
All the conditions point to the need of a broad May Day movement. But the policy of the official Communist Party prevents this, and makes a mockery of the slogan it pretends to be for and issues; namely, a United Front of all labor on May Day. In New York the official Communist Party at the May Day Conference called to mobilize the workers for May Day, held a long talk-fest, limited to its previously appointed speakers and gave no expression to delegates from the ranks and other bodies. The conference was like others for which the Party has become a laughing stock among honest and sincere elements who want to cooperate and participate in the movements of the day, such as the movement on behalf of the unemployed, etc. The Youth Conference for May Day, called by the Young Communist League of New York refused to seat the delegates of the Youth Section of the Communist League of America (Opposition) on the ground that they were “renegades” ... The idiocy of the Party leadership evidently knows no bounds. It leads to further isolation of the Communists from the labor movement, and lowers steadily the prestige of the Communists in the eyes of the workers. Among other things, by rejecting the delegates of the Left Opposition from official participation in the May Day demonstrations, the Party objectively plays the game of the bosses, who are indeed pleased to see the Communists forces divided.
* * *
It is imperative to unite all possible forces for May Day. The slogan of the United Front remains valid as the means to rally the workers and their organizations with their various economic and political views for a united and solid demonstration. The issues around which to unite, the workers are many:

The solidarity of labor against capitalism.
A struggle on behalf of the unemployed, taking the form of demands for: work or compensation, the seven hour day and five day week, social insurance, abolition of the speed-up system, the unity of the employed and unemployed workers, the establishment of wide-scale credits to the Soviet Union by the U.S. government as a practical means to aid the unemployed at once, and recognition of the Soviet government by the United States.
A militant campaign for full civil liberties – unrestricted free speech, free press and assemblage for the workers – now being ruthlessly taken in various ways from the Communists and other workers’ groups by the capitalist class.
A broad campaign to mobilize the working claims against the repressions of the workers and their organizations by the employing class and the government.
Mobilization of the progressive and Left wing movement for the organization of the unorganized masses into labor unions.
To rouse the masses for the Defense of the Soviet Union.

These are a few of the immediate issues around which to rally the workers on May Day. A prerequisite is the unity of all Communist elements to conduct a campaign along these lines.
* * *
The slogan of the official Communist Party for a mass political strike on May Day is without validity under the prevailing conditions. As promulgated now by the Communist Party, its only results will be to mislead the workers, particularly the Communist workers and sympathizers, about the true situation today. Its inevitable failure will only bring discredit to the slogan and to the Party. Phrase-mongering is the most dangerous game for revolutionaries.
* * *
.In New York, reactionary organizations of World War Veterans and similar groups have secured Union Square for May Day and propose, with the full support of the Police Department, to prevent the workers from their accustomed use of Union Square for working class demonstrations on that day. Here is another direct offensive of the capitalists and the government to smash and limit the workers’ and Communist movement.
May Day is Workers’ Day; Union Square on May 1st, by usage and tradition, fought for and gained by years of determined organization and struggle, belongs to the organizations of the working class. The Communists and the Left wing must appeal to the masses of the workers against the insolent provocation of the reactionary forces, the militarists, the White Guardists – against the whole gang of anti-labor elements with the New York City government in the forefront. The Party cannot fight this battle alone. It must appeal to the masses. Upon the volume of support which the masses give to this appeal, clearly manifested beforehand, depends the question whether the Communists should accept the challenge to fight for the Square on May Day, or make a temporary retreat before stronger forces of the enemy. All efforts in the next days must be concentrated in going to the masses with this issue.
* * *
The Hoover government and the capitalist class continue to do everything in their power to hide the facts about mass unemployment; to lie about and distort the situation of prevailing misery; to cover up the failure of capitalism to solve the unemployment crisis as well as other ills of capitalism.
Reports are given in other columns of the Militant of the huge profits during the past year made by the numerous corporations throughout the country. Of course, the workers got, instead of profits, low wages, long hours, speed-up and then – joblessness. The census reports now being compiled by the United States government itself indicate that in round figures there are 7,000,000 unemployed workers in the United States. The panaceas of the bourgeois apologists and agents for unemployment have proved just nothing. Frances Perkins, the State Industrial Commissioner of New York, now hopes for a solution in the “next quarter century”! Other apologias for capitalism are equally valueless for the needs of the workers now without a job and the means of livelihood.
* * *
Vaster trade relations with the Soviet Union, extensive credits to the Soviet Union by the U.S. government, should be vigorously put forward by the workers, by the Communists, as practical measures to alleviate the unemployment situation in the United States and thereby also to aid the development of the Five Year Plan of the Soviet Union. Of course, no measures under capitalism can solve the unemployment problem which develops out of the system of capitalism. The basis for the complete elimination of unemployment can only be laid under a Workers’ Government, a Soviet system. But it must be impressed upon the workers that broad economic relations with the Soviet government are one of the ways to aid the present situation, and that demands must be made upon the U.S. government accordingly. It is particularly unfortunate that the official Communist Party does not utilize this concrete proposal as a major slogan in the unemployment campaign.
* * *
In New York a small demonstration against the murder of the anti-fascist, Carlo Mazzola, took place in Union Square on April 12 under the auspices of the Socialists, at which anarchist representatives also spoke. Mazzola was killed by one of Whalen’s policemen at an anti-fascist meeting in Cooper Union. The Communists were not permitted to participate officially in the memorial services and anti-fascist demonstration. For this the socialists deserve the severest condemnation for dividing the workers and refusing to unite all working classes forces against the fascisti and their murderous acts. A United Front movement against Mussolini, against Fascism is capable of organization and development. Those serve Fascism who refuse to permit the unity of workers’ forces and organizations in demonstrations, meetings and movements against Fascism. That is the manner in which the Socialists acted at the Union Square meeting. Honest anti-fascist workers who think the Socialist Party is the enemy of fascism should ask the question why the most militant fighters against it were excluded from the demonstration.
 



Reports from throughout the country give the lie to the propaganda of the bosses and the government that unemployment is on the decrease. The employment service of the U.S. Department of Labor itself is forced to acknowledge, in its report for the month of February, that “industry made no substantial gains” during the month, while “in some industries a slight recession was noted.” Yet but a few days prior President Hoover had declared that the “recovery” from industrial depression had been the most rapid in American history!
Before the Senate Committee, Senator Wagner of New York declared that the unemployment situation is the worst that has ever existed in the United States. Investigations and statistical reports from all sections of the country confirm the fact of mass unemployment. For the millions of working men and women it has brought the most dire need and acute misery. There is nothing to indicate any substantial improvement in the economic situation in the near future. Every city and hamlet in the country counts its toll of unemployed and misery. To mention any is to describe all. Distress from unemployment in Chicago, states Professor B.M. Squires of the University of Chicago and who is also director of the Illinois State employment agency, “has been the most acute in ten years.”
 
Iron and Steel Production Slow
The steel industry, the barometer of industry in general, remains low, according to iron and steel publications which report that no definite upturn is yet apparent, and that this situation prevails also in the foreign markets. The Iron Trade Review comments that “Continental and British iron and steel markets generally are dull, some British plants having gone on short time as a result. World trade in iron and steel is slow, and restricted Inquiry forecasts continuation of this condition.” In virtually all trades, manufactures, industry and agriculture fields there is described a condition of wide-spread unemployment. Hoover and the employing class continue to hand out hokum for consumption by the jobless, but they themselves know the reality and find no capitalist remedy for the situation. Any other kind of solution is of course to them unthinkable.
As never before, public and charitable institutions have been utilized as a sop, but the breadlines grow longer and increase in number. The U.S. government has declined to do anything directly to provide work or compensation for the unemployed, but instead continues to talk of industrial revival, while jobs become scarcer each day. All sorts of proposals have been forthcoming from capitalist politicians for public works, etc., but all remain on paper.
 
Bosses Cutting Wages
The bosses have naturally ignored Hoover’s “request” at the conference consisting of Hoover, the employers and the A.F. of L. bureaucrats, not to reduce wages. Henry Ford, the “high wage” boss and “philanthropist” has been outstanding in speeding men out of work and then cutting wages still further on one pretext or another. On the other hand, Wm. Green, the labor faker and agent of the bosses in the ranks of labor, continues to advise the workers not to resist the attacks of the bosses through strikes, etc. – all in the name of the “national welfare”, that is, for the bosses. Not all workers who still have jobs take this “advice”. By a vote of four to one, to the surprise of the reactionary officials of the United Textile Workers Union, the company-union workers employed in the notorious Amoskeag Manufacturing firm of Manchester, N.H. in the manufacture of printcloth refused to accept a 10 per cent reduction in wages. Here and there (Pittsburg Cabmen’s strike, Aberle Mill strike in Philadelphia, etc.) are to be noted the defensive but militant struggles by the rank and file of the workers against the bosses.
In view of the acuteness of the industrial situation generally and mass unemployment particularly and the rising distress and discontent among the masses, bourgeois politicians, and now also the socialists and the A.F. of L. fakers, in New York, have been forced to take note of the situation and to propose “remedies”. Theirs is the role of lightning rods to divert the discontent of the masses into harmless (to the bosses and to the reformist and labor fakers) channels. These socialists and fakers have access to and contact with the bosses and governmental agencies, which permit them to gain publicity for their proposals. Without direct pressure from the Left wing and the Communists, they feel free to betray the interests of the workers. The Emergency Conference on Unemployment, representing the Socialists and the A.F. of L. unions in New York has proposed, as one of its “solutions” to unemployment, that the Police Department (!) shall conduct a census as to the number of persons out of work. This is indeed touching, if it were not tragic and disgusting.
 
Socialists Propose Unemployment Census by Police
The reformists and labor fakers are willing to turn over the unemployed into the gentle hands of the soft-spoken Whalen. This same Police Department, under Whalen’s direction and O.K.’d by Mayor James Walker, beats the unemployed, provokes riots at unemployed demonstrations, acknowledges the use of spies among labor organizations and use of the blacklist to deprive workers of their livelihood, is to be the census-taker of the unemployed! In brief, by the approval of the socialists and labor fakers, the Police Department is to be permitted to bully and spy and lie about the unemployed situation and then to report to the bosses what they are told to say.
To divert attention from the situation of mass unemployment, the repressive measures against the Left wing and Communists are continued and intensified. In New York parents of children who attended the March 6th unemployment demonstration were sentenced to a day in jail for permitting their children to solidarize with the unemployed. A Young Pioneer has been given the vicious sentence of five years in the reformatory. Communist leaders of the unemployed in New York appear for trial on April 11th on charges of felonious assault and provoking an unlawful assembly on March 6th. A jury trial, which the defendants requested, was not granted. The United States Department of Labor has approved the method of spying, blacklisting and brutality against the workers.
 
Repressive Acts Against Workers Don’t Solve Unemployment Crisis
But these repressive measures cannot do away with the fact that American capitalism is unable to solve the unemployment problem, and that more and more numbers of workers are beginning to question the “benefits” of capitalist society. The only possible solution of unemployment and capitalism’s other ills lies in the struggle for the abolition of capitalism and its replacement by a government of the workers. This is the important lesson that is being taught by the Communists in the unemployed situation. At the same time, the Communists propose as the only workable immediate measures to relieve the acute condition of unemployment: Work or Compensation to be provided for by the bosses and the government; a decrease in working hours to allow for more men to be employed; elimination of the speed-up system that breeds unemployment, etc.
The official Communist Party, unfortunately, still continues a policy that isolates it more and more from genuine mass contact. It has failed to date to make proposals for a united front of all labor organizations on the issue of unemployment, and thereby plays into the hands of the socialists and labor fakers who are now stepping into the situation with their false and betraying proposals.
The Communist party has substituted a policy of mass meetings and demonstrations, coupled with gross exaggeration and self-praise of its achievements, very much like in the days of Lovestone, for a policy of systematic education and organization of the unemployed, linked with the employed and the organized and unorganized. It is this policy which makes of the March 29th National Unemployment conference in New York only a caricature of what it should and could be. Preparations are indeed “rushed” as the Daily Worker reports; but preparations which could have made the gathering a really representative one of delegates from various labor organizations and all sections of labor have not been made. Thereby the March 29th conference dooms itself to a talkfest.
It is still necessary that the Communist Party shall change its course if there is to be a mobilization of the widest possible number of workers and organizations for the relief of the unemployed We have stated this before and shall continue to do so until the sectarianism of the present party leadership is rooted out and done away with. The opportunity is yet here for a broad united front movement for the unemployed.
The Communist Party is letting golden opportunities slip by to reach and hold large numbers of workers with the Communist message on unemployment and for the cause of Communism, the only true salvation for the working masses. We urge again: for the interests of the unemployed; for the adequate defense of the arrested workers; for the struggle against capitalism; for Communism – the Party must change its course and unite, first of all, all Communist forces as a preliminary basis for a broad struggle against unemployment and capitalism.
 



Lenin died. No sooner had the leader of the Bolshevik Revolution and of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union closed his eyes in eternal sleep, then began the open and systematic revision of the basic theoretical principles and conceptions of Marx and Lenin. Coupled with this revisionism, the Stalinist regime also undertook the falsification of the history of the Russian Revolution.
For a period of years now, since and before the death of Lenin, Stalin and his scribblers, the Yaroslavskys, Thaelmanns, Fosters, Minors, Cachins and numerous others have lied about Lenin and his teachings. They lie about Trotsky. They have falsified and distorted the history of the greatest event of all time for the toiling masses – the proletarian revolution of Russia. They have disfigured the Revolution in a grotesque and shameful manner.
With a procedure completely out of line with the practice of Lenin and the Bolsheviks, the Stalinist Centrists jointly with the Right wing, suppressed the views and platform of the Russian Opposition, led by L.D. Trotsky, the platform that represents the continuation of the Bolshevik line of Lenin. They have persecuted the revolutionary Leninist-Bolsheviks; they have expelled the outstanding Communists, with services of many years to the revolutionary movement from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Stalin and his followers have made a mockery of ideas and theory and independent Bolshevik thought. The Five Year Plan
The regime of the bureaucrats has exiled to far-off and desolate points the Bolsheviks who fought against the Stalin-Bucharin policy that gave encouragement and support to the Kulaks and Nepmen and that were sapping and undermining the strength of the proletariat and poor peasants and hired men.
Trotsky, after a long struggle against the revisionism of Stalin-Bucharin, presented the Platform of the Opposition to the XVth Congress of the C.P.S.U. in 1927 which, among other things contained the FIVE YEAR PLAN for socialist construction in the Soviet Union. But Trotsky finds himself deported by Stalin and Bucharin from the Soviet Union to Kemal Pasha’s land at Constantinople, Turkey, there to be in continual danger of assassination by the thousands of Russian White Guards that swarm about Constantinople. Because Leon Trotsky remained and remains a Bolshevik; because in the suppressed (in the Soviet Union) Platform of the Opposition, he insisted upon the revival of genuine workers’ and Party democracy and upon a campaign against the growing bureaucracy in the Party, the trade unions and in the Soviets; because he and the Opposition demanded the adoption of an INDUSTRIALIZATION PROGRAM that would develop industry along modern lines as the technical and economic foundation for genuine socialist construction; because he stressed and fought for a systematic and widespread development of COLLECTIVE AND SOVIET FARMS; and because he demanded an end to the policy of Stalin-Bucharin that encouraged the Kulak, gave him economic strength, the Right-Center bloc (Stalin-Bucharin) deported Trotsky and increased their persecutions ot Bolshevik-Leninists.
 
The Bureaucracy and the Working Class
But the neglect of the basic interests of the city proletariat and the hired hands and poor peasants by the Stalinist regime caused wide-spread dissatisfaction in the C.P.S.U. and among the working masses. Under the pressure of the working masses and the Bolshevik Opposition, the Stalinist Center was compelled, after many years of joint policy and work, to break the Right-Center bloc and to undertake another zig-zag, a “New Turn” to the Left The Opposition Platform is now being adopted in piece-meal fashion by the Patty bureaucracy. The turn is in the proper direction, but unless the “Leftward” swing is carried through with genuine belief and conviction; unless the turn is accompanied by an analysis of the present relationship of class forces in the Soviet Union, so that the strength and possibilities of struggle of each class grouping are understood and measures applied in accordance by the Party; unless the industrialization and collective and Soviet farms program is linked with a campaign to advance the cultural and political consciousness of the working masses and poor peasants (retarded in recent years by the policies of the Stalin-Bucharin regime) – the Five Year Plan can easily defeat its own purpose.
There ia no doubt that the ranks of the Communist Party and the mass of workers in the Soviet Union welcome the new course of the Party. Therefore, the Opposition correctly warns against eclectic, piecemeal adaption, arbitrary selections from the Platform of the Opposition by the bankrupt Stalinists. A genuine Left course can only mean the adoption of the Opposition Platform as a whole, and the reinstatement of the Opposition to help carry out the Left turn.
 
Stalin Splits the Communist Movement
Stalin and Bucharin not only in Russia, but on an international scale, split and decimated the ranks of the Communist Parties and converted them into factions. Behind the factions of Stalin and Bucharin in the C.P.S.U. particularly, stood the conscious and unconscious forces of the class enemy – the Kulak and the Nepmen. The Opposition warned and pointed this out, despite all oppression, and demanded that Stalin and Company change their course. It is sad to say, but it is the truth nevertheless: The Stalin apparatus-men, without definite principles or platform, swaying between the classes, the proletariat and the poor peasants on the one side and the Kulak and Nepmen on the other, for these past years carried out a Right program which objectively aided the return of the bourgeois forces to power. They could not see what was taking place in the class relations in the Soviet Union and many yet do not want to see.
It is only by recognizing that these epigones, Stalin and Company, have changed, for a time, their ways, but not their minds, that one can understand how the Centrist bureaucrats have proceeded from one backward step to another and have arrived at length at an extreme act – the murder of Blumkin at Stalin’s behest. The person of Stalin cannot be removed from his policies and the policies cannot be removed from the personality of Stalin.
 
Lenin Rejects Stalin
Lenin years ago recognized what would come of the brutality and disloyalty of Stalin. A brutality and disloyalty that would affect not only the revolutionists themselves in a personal way, but would in time adversely affect the proletarian revolution itself. Lenin saw clearly the true Stalin – the splitter and wrecker of the international revolution, of the Communist International and the C.P.S.U. Lenin therefore in his final Testament to the Party, still suppressed in the Soviet Union, DEMANDED the REMOVAL of STALIN AS SECRETARY OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY. Lenin, in fact, finally found it necessary to cut off all comradely and hence political relations with Stalin. At the July Plenum of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. Zinoviev said:
“And the third warning consists of this: That at the beginning of the year 1923, Vladmir Ilyich, broke off all comradely relations with him (Stalin).”
This speech refers to Lenin’s letter of March 5th, 1928, written after Lenin’s testament. But the Party membership has yet to hear of this.
Now, Trotsky is deported, and as the next step of the lost bureaucracy, the Bolshevik, Blumkin, a supporter of the Opposition has been shot upon Stalin’s orders. This act is a personal act of Stalin, but it is also, and more important, an evidence of instability and lack of confidence of the Centrists in their latest zig-zag to the Left. Why has Blumkin been shot? Why was this crime against the Revolution committed? With us it to not a matter alone of the person of Blumkin, but rather where do such acts, and the approval of them lead.
 
The Daily Worker “Answers”
The Daily Worker, under the barrage of questions of the Militant and the indignation of large numbers of workers, has twice been compelled to “answer”, but it yet has given no fitting reply. The Hearst-like scribblers of Stalin on the Daily Worker and the Communist Party first answered (Daily Worker, 2-15-30) by professing ignorance: “The name of Blumkin is little known.” This was no answer at all. The Militant has fully told how Blumkin travelled the road to Bolshevism; how he became a trusted, active, loyal and leading member in the service of the Bolshevik Revolution. His work was of sufficient importance that not even his open adherence to the Opposition and to Trotsky brought his removal from his post. The murder of a Bolshevik, Blumkin, is accomplished for the first time by professing Bolsheviks, the Stalinists. How to explain such acts of terrorism against the Opposition Bolsheviks that one could expect only from White Guardists? What is behind it all?
With utter irresponsibility they lie about Blumkin and speak of Blumkin’s “flight” after July 1918 to avoid being shot for his activities while he was yet a Left Social Revolutionary. They neglect to speak of his years of prominent work as a member of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, as an upstanding Bolshevik, holding an important post and carrying out his duties till the day of his murder by Stalin. Still the Daily Worker and the American Party perform one doubtful service. They endorse the shooting of Bolsheviks and take full responsibility thereof. All in the name of the “Five Year Plan” and “building socialism”!
The arguments of these Stalinists sycophants! What alone matters is the Five Year Plan and the building of socialism. How? By shooting Bolsheviks? By removing and deporting them? By removing those most capable to lead the proletariat and the Revolution? By suppressing the ideas and ignoring the thousands of comrades, men and women, who first brought forward a Five Year Plan, a program of industrialization and soviet and collective farms? That is the way to hinder, not to advance, the Proletarian revolution.
 
Rakovsky on the Centrists
Ch. Rakovsky, now exiled under bitter conditions at Barnaoul raised this very question of the “New Turn” to the Left and makes an analysis of the class content of the turn now being executed by the Stalinist Centrists. He says:
“You (the Centrists) made a principally new and important step in the question of industrialization. But this step will not achieve your purpose if you will not make radical reforms in regard to the Party, the trade unions, and the Soviets. If you sincerely and seriously want to get on this road you must first of all reestablish the Opposition in the Party.”
At the same time, Stalin now acknowledges (N.Y. Times, 2-23-30) that he is appropriating the program of L.D. Trotsky and the Opposition, and gives in extenuatiou the bare excuse that Trotsky was “too early”. So! We will not at this point argue the merits of “too early” or “late”. But we put the question : Since when does being “too early” merit expulsion, persecution, imprisonment and death of Bolsheviks? It is rather, that Stalin and the Centrist apparatus are making a late turn, and then only under the pressure of the Opposition and the proletarian masses.
 
What Is to be Done?
There is imperative need for still another turn. Blumkin is dead – at the hand of Stalin. He cannot be brought back to life. But his death can yet serve the revolutionary cause. But the answer, further, lies with the proletariat and the worker-Communists whose only interests are service to the Revolution. They in increasing numbers will demand, as a tribute to Blumkin: RETURN L.D. TROTSKY AT ONCE TO THE SOVIET UNION; REESTABLISH HIM IN HIS RIGHTFUL POSITION AS A LEADER OF THE BOLSHEVIK REVOLUTION. And likewise, return all the Left Opposition once again to the Communist Parties. Reinstatement and the use of the services of the Opposition is the only guarantee for an honest and militant campaign to carry out the Five-Year Plan, to smash the Kulaks, to build anew and on its original revolutionary foundations, the Communist International and Communist Parties. The reinstatement of the Opposition lays the basis for a correct Bolshevik policy and program in the Soviet Union. This is our view of the Blumkin shooting.
 



The activity of the Communists and Left wing in presenting the facts about the unemployment crisis in the United States and in making demands upon the bosses and the government for work or compensation for the unemployed workers, have drawn the fire and wrath of the capitalist class and various governmental agencies upon the Communists. Hoover and Wall Street, Tammany Hall and Whalen, Mathew Woll and Secretary of Labor Davis, et al., are endeavoring to screen the acute misery of millions of unemployed workers by raising the cry of “RED” around the burning issue of unemployment.
Close upon the heels of the unemployment demonstrations on March 6th, a vicious campaign against the radical groups, particularly focusing upon the Communists has begun. For the moment it takes its most violent and vicious form in New York City under the leadership of Commissioner of Police Whalen and his official thugs, promptly endorsed by Mayor James Walker and the business men of the city. This campaign against the Communists is taking numerous forms. Among these are:
 
The Proposed Frameups and Police Brutality

The arrest of Communist leaders and an endeavor to railroad them to prison for their activity among the unemployed. Every known obstacle was utilized to prevent the release on bail of the New York arrested. Only after repeated efforts and after exorbitant bail ($12,500 each) had been placed, were they released, to stand trial on charges of felonious assault and provoking an unlawful assembly at the March 6th Union Square demonstration in New York City. The outcome of the New York trials will to an extent determine the scale of repression and terror against the Communist movement and labor in general in other sections of the country. But already in many parts of the country efforts are made to railroad the Communists.
 
A wave of terror, brutality and provocation against the radicals and Communists and any rising militancy by the workers. Every form of weapon – club and blackjack, gun and horses, machine guns and tear gas – is either brought into play or held ready for use against the unemployed and those leading the struggle on their behalf. Almost every capitalist paper in the country reports the extremes to which the loud-mouthed Whalen and others like him went in their brutality against men, women and children gathered at the unemployment meetings and demonstrations.
 

The Labor Spy and Blacklist of Militants

The method of OPEN LABOR SPYING and BLACKLISTING on behalf of the employers by police and other governmental agents, thus plainly showing that government and law are instruments of the capitalist class. Police Commissioner Whalen of New York has declared that he has turned over the names of alleged Communists to employers that they may be dismissed and deprived of a livelihood because of the opinions they hold; and that he favors and will pursue such a blacklisting policy in the future. Whalen admits that he maintains stool-pigeons in radical organizations, particularly among the Communists, to frame evidence against the radicals; and that, further, he instructs his stoolpigeons to provoke violence and riots. He thereby admits responsibility for the trouble and brutality at the Union Square demonstration. What Whalen boasts about (until such time as the business men and higher-ups told him to be more discreet) is also done more quietly by police, Federal men, etc. throughout the country. The use of the Labor Spy by the employers is well known; now it is openly acknowledged and permitted that this be done “legally”.
 

The Drive Against the Foreign Born

The revival by the reactionaries of the campaign to compel the registration of aliens and for the deportations of aliens who are not satisfactory to the Bourbons of Wall St. Bills have been again introduced into the United States Congress for the registration of aliens. In effect it will establish a vast espionage system over the millions of foreign born workers; be means of persecuting them, driving them out of their jobs if need be, jailing and deporting them. The bills are aimed at the alien radicals, and typically enough, are supported by that arch labor faker, now an open tool of Wall St., namely, Secretary of Labor Davis. The foreign-born workers, who are in the basic industries are the ones most sharply affected by the mass unemployment. These alien registration bills have in mind to stifle their protest against capitalist exploitation and oppression, and to take whatever measures are needed to do so, including deportation.
 

Workers And Civil Liberties

A drive to deprive aliens and American radicals of so-called civil and constitutional rights. The campaign is going on all the time, but now the 100 per centers, the Pay-Triots of every description are coming out of their holes and beginning to bark for greater suppression of radical labor and for withdrawal of so-called liberties and rights from them. Where successful, it will be labeled “Americanization work” (that is, good results in breaking up union organizations, lowering wages, increasing hours of labor, speed-up, etc.); where unsuccessful in “Americanization”, then there will be the policy of revocation of citizenship of alien radicals, refusal to grant citizenship, to permit radical gatherings, indoor and outdoor meetings, attempts to persecute Red students and school-children, etc. In New York a college youth has been suspended from City College by the Dean for so-called “violation of a city ordinance”. He had the audacity to distribute handbills for the New York demonstration of the unemployed! Others in public schools are to be dealt with by the educational authorities who will work hand in hand with the employers and the police.
 

Revival of Criminal Syndicalism Laws

The attempted revival of Criminal Syndicalism laws in an effort to drive the Communists and other labor organizations into illegality. The reaction of 1919-20, the period of of the vicious Attorney-General Palmer, is raising its head. Nothing serious of course is done with the gunmen, racketeers and murderers who infest society, products of the capitalist system. Indeed, these gangsters and racketeers are regularly brought into service by the officially recognized thugs – the police – against workers on strike, against unions, against the radical workers, etc. The Mathew Wolls and William Greens, the labor agents of Wall Street, chime in to endorse any movements aiming to check the progress of the workers and to smash the “Reds”.
 

The Bosses Organize

The organization of the capitalist groups themselves to give organized direction and policy to all campaigns against labor, organized and unorganized. The New York Chamber of Commerce has formed a special committee to launch a “militant fight” against the Communist movement. They hope thus to hide or obscure the burning problem of unemployment. New York wealth and plutocracy have given the lead and expect the other Chambers of Commerce and business groups to take the cue. It has a Committee on Deportation; Committee on Communism in Business and Industry; Committee on Publicity, etc. Every agency, governmental, business, religious, etc. is to be enlisted to raise the “Red Scare” so that the misery of the workers under capitalism, and particularly severe because of mass unemployment, shall be passed by.
 

Mass Unemployment Remains
What needs to be done to stem the rising tide of reaction and to bring again to the forefront the problems that affect sharply the daily lives of the working men and women of this country? It is largely up to the Communists and Left wing, and in particular the official Communist party, to answer this question and to make possible effective work, agitation and organization among the masses. The tactics to pursue have been proposed before by The Militant. The basic problem and issues remain as before.

Mass unemployment, estimated at over 6,000,000 at the present time, remains the outstanding phenomenon and cancer of American capitalism. There has been much bally-hoo otherwise, but mass unemployment remains and mounts higher. Cleverness, advertising and now a “Red Scare” have not gone over; Hoover and capitalism are seeking other means to cover up the acute situation. The figures of the Hoover administration, of the U.S. Labor Dept. on unemployment and an alleged rise in industry and business have been challenged from various sources, and have been shown up as valueless, unreliable and untrustworthy.

In New York State, where figures by the State Dept. of Labor have been issued monthly, F. Perkins, State Industrial Commissioner, reports a further increase in unemployment and at the same time challenges the accuracy of the Hoover figures. Reports from other regions are similar, varying in totality of numbers, but revealing essentially the same situation throughout the United States. The need to defend the interests of the unemployed, to unite the organized and unorganized, to get the unions to enter the fight on behalf of the unemployed, to bring together the employed and unemployed, white and colored workers, in common action for demands upon the employers and the government for work or compensation, less hours of labor and speed-up is yet paramount. The Communists remain the main instruments that can give such a movement vitality, purpose and direction, and develop the consciousness of the worker regarding his social position in capitalist society. The basic tasks of the Communists and class-conscious workers remain to explain the causes of unemployment; the failure and inability of capitalism to solve the problem and the Communist solution thereof.
 

Create United Front Defense Movement

Organize a broad UNITED FRONT DEFENSE MOVEMENT to defend the leaders and workers arrested in the unemployment demonstrations and meetings, and in order to make an effective campaign to smash the anti-Communist and anti-labor offensive of the Bosses, the A.F. of L. labor fakers, Woll, Green & Co., and the Government. A sectarian defense movement, limited largely to the Communist party and the I.L.D. with its present narrow line, will defeat its own purpose. Large sections of the labor and liberal movement can be mobilized in such a campaign, if only the official Communist party will permit and not cut such a movement to pieces, as it did, for instance, in the Gastonia textile case. Already liberal elements – professors, scientists, etc. – have protested the Black List and red-baiting campaign of Whalen, et al. The Socialist party has been compelled to declare against the forms of the drive against the Communist movement. The Socialists find it necessary to present a liberal front against reaction, while they at the same time wish to stave off oppressive measures against themselves. Wide circles of labor can be brought into acition for a broad UNITED FRONT DEFENCE MOVEMENT, can be made to see that a blow against the Communists by the capitalist reactionaries is a blow against the whole labor movement and the working class. We demand that the Communist party shall discontinue its sectarian policy and make possible the creation of such a movement.
 

United Front for the Unemployed

The unemployed movement under the direction of the Communists must likewise be given room to breathe, must be developed into a United Front movement. In such a movement, the Communists can easily hold their own and make gains among the workers at the expense of the reformists and labor elements that come into it, provided the Communists use intelligent tactics.
 

In New York, the Socialists and A.F. of L. unions have organized an Emergency Conference for the Unemployed. We have recommended that the Communists propose a United Front movement to them. It is conceivable that the social-reformist movement will attract the unemployed, albeit they have only reluctantly and under pressure begun such a movement. The Communists will have to find ways and means to penetrate the masses wherever they are. The United Front remains yet in this period the best tactic to achieve contact with the masses and to influence their though and direction. For the Communist party to continue its ostrich policy, to reject the tactic of the United Front, will result in a number of defeats for itself and the Communist movement in the future; moreover, it will directly affect the adequate defense of the arrested Communists, the attempted frame-ups and the progress of the unemployment movement
In any case, if the unemployment movement is not to be diverted into channels of reformist illusions, or even directly into capitalist grooves; if there is to be a genuine defense movement; if there is to be an energetic campaign against the efforts of the employers and government to smash the Communist movement, to drive it into illegality, the rank and file of the Communist party must make possible the unity of the Communists in these common needs, and demand at the same time a broad united front movement on the issue of unemployment.
 



A sharp decline in building totals for the first quarter of 1929 in the metropolitan area of New York and the 37 states east of the Rocky Mountains is reported by Thomas S. Holden, vice-president of the F.W. Dodge Corporation. This is a report of the building condition committee of the New York Building Congress and constitutes a survey of building construction for the periods of the first three months of 1928 and 1929. The comparative figures are $254,933,000 for the 1929 quarter and $378,280,800 for the 1928 quarter.
While the fakers of the building trades unions say everything is yet “jake” in the building industry, building is on the increase, unemployment is nominal, etc., the cold figures of this report show something else. Building totals declined for the period given a total of 33% for the New York Metropolitan area and a decline of 15% is noted for the 37 states. This in fact means a decline of such proportions for the entire United States, since 91% of building in the United States is carried on in these Eastern states.
 
Reasons for Decline
To an extent this decline for the first quarter is explained by the increase in money rates in this period thru the orgy of gambling or speculation in recent weeks in the stock market when call money reached astounding proportions. The building trades industry requires large outlays of ready money for wages, materials, etc., and swift and large credit facilities. But the tightening of cash and credit facilities for this period does not explain away such a sharp slump in the first quarter of 1929 over the same period a year ago. The report of the committee attributes the slump to “slackened demand and unsettled credit conditions.” In this time, industrial and commercial building gained, while public works and utilities contracts decreased over the whole country, except in New York where educational buildings increased. The report notes the trend of decreasing residential building throughout the country.
The decline reflects itself in the increase of unemployment or part time work among the building trades workers generally with isolated exceptions in some localities. The officials of the building trades unions hide their heads in the sands and content themselves with the prospects of huge projects of public utilities and governmental building on national, state and local scales. They accept “Hooverian prosperity” and promises, but take no steps to strengthen the fighting qualities of the unions for the time now approaching when the building contractors will push systematically and in a concerted manner for lower wage scales, longer hours and speeded production. The reactionary union officialdom is contenting itself with day-to-day adjustments. Still, they know that the building corporations and contractors will not stop at efforts to “adjust credit facilities”, but will intensify even more the rationalization process in the building industry. Machine methods are being introduced with precision and speed into all trades of the industry, bringing with them the concomitant of unemployment first, and next, demands by the employers for wage reductions, longer hours, etc.
Building trades workers are especially affected with the illusions of public works and utilities construction by the government when times are hard. There is need for these to be broken down among them and all workers, and instead preparations made for forthcoming struggles: strikes, lockouts, etc.
 
The Public Works Illusion
“Prosperity reserve” is the name given to the illusion of public works construction in times of depression. On occasion capitalism utilizes such and similar projects as “stop-gaps”. They offer no permanent solution to the unemployment problem which grows constantly and maintains its permanent character.
Capitalism cannot ever stop unemployment, but only increase and aggravate the situation. The federal or state governments may provide for such works through taxation. But the practical result usually is that capital is merely shifted from other capital investments, industries and manufacture, and other groups feel the sharp whip of unemployment. Under such conditions, capital often holds off from going industries or does not develop new enterprises.
The building trades workers yet retain these illusions and many more, and pride themselves as aristocrats of labor. But if they will not learn from other workers in America and other countries, they will nevertheless have to concern themselves with growing problems arising out of their industry. The building trade employers are certain to attempt to hammer down the wages of the workers, to increase their hours, despite the fact that the profits are the largest ever. The conscious rank and file in the building trades must endeavor more systematically and patiently than ever to draw the mass of the building trades workers to fight for a program to include, among other points, the following: A six hour day and a five day week, with no reduction in wages. Amalgamation of the building trades into one industrial union to effect a stronger fighting front against the bosses; establishment of unemployment insurance to be paid by the employers and the government and administered by local trade union committees elected by the membership; And, then, the membership must begin to think in terms of struggle as a working class against the capitalist class in a struggle for political power.
 



President Herbert Hoover is preparing a big swindle for the American working class with his “construction program” to stall off the growing depression. The blustering confidence of American capitalist interests, received a rude shock In the wild crash recently on the stock market. While American capitalists by no means feel that the fall will prove fatal; and while at the same time, they try to minimize its effects, nevertheless, it is clear that the shock to wide strata of people of all classes and groupings, including the as yet largely bourgeois-minded workers, has been severe. The same confidence as before in the status quo is no longer there.
 
Hoover “Stabilizes Capitalism”
Schemes, or prayers, for “permanent” capitalist economic stability” are forthcoming from all corners. “Prosperity President” Hoover is the champion of most of these hoped-for capitalist stabilizers. Hoover, the pride of the House of Mammon, stepped to the helm to guide the ship of profit.
But lo, in but a handful of months came the Wall Street crash, upsetting faith, bank accounts, business and jobs. All eyes turned to Hoover to speak his and also the wisdom of the House of Morgan. As business begins to tremble; as factories and mills in many large centers begin to shut down; as unemployment, in the beginnings of a cold winter, jumps sharply from its already high figure, Hoover steps forward and trumpets:
“Business as usual! There is nothing fundamentally wrong with us (capitalist system)! Let us build!”
The Chairman of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States, Julius Barnes, however, is satisfied with production and says:
“The anxiety ... and problem of to-day is over the maintenance of buying power.”
But how? President Hoover with true Quaker calmness once said:
What About the Unemployed?
“The primary safety to continued prosperity will be continued willingness Of our people to save their enlarged earnings (what, the unemployed?), to resist extravagance and waste (also the unemployed or the Southern textile workers, (?) to give full individual exertion.”
Now, the practicality of the situation compels greater concreteness. So Hoover replies to the rumblings of uncertainty, distrust, restlessness by advising a policy, in the main, of public works, road-building, construction, etc. Hoover further proposes that business hereafter plan its activities more carefully, attempt consciously to regulate the business of capitalism in accordance with a laid-out scheme; in fact, to set up-to-date National Business Council, which by its character and purpose hope’s to serve as a permanent regulator of capitalism, and upon occasion to spread salve on the sore body of the workers.
It intends further to ignore, as much as possible, its own created instrument, Congress, as now too slow and inefficient for this world of business engineering. Through this organized National business Council, that great individualism and needed competitive spirit of the “true Americanism”, so staunchly lauded by Hoover, takes a back seat. In fact, Hoover, outlines a policy, in socio-political terms, of state socialism, or more correctly, state capitalism, with some added special governmental features – borrowed from Mussolini. But organized production, or its development, is only possible where capitalism is replaced by working class rule, as in Soviet Russia.
The figures adduced by leading capitalist men of almost every known industry and trade, by bank presidents, electric power heads, railroad magnates, automobile barons, and others, to show what business has in mind to maintain “Business as usual”, stagger the imagination, certainly those of a layman, and are meant to be impressive and conclusive. The figures run into billions of dollars that are to go for construction, new activities and increased production and maintenance and repairs in almost any sphere of production that one could name. The daily and other papers and magazines are filled each day with these astronomical figures and stupendous proposals that are to be. But their weakness is that the proof of security they are supposed to show are “too conclusive” In some respects. Even casual inspection of these gigantic figures [show,] or are supposed to, the immediate needs of a given industry or trade if there is not to be a collapse. Increased figures are meant for realization, but only in rare instances is there shown specifically how the particular job is to be accomplished: how many workers, at what wages, working hours, etc. The figures sound grand – but are hollow, so far certainly for that which they are supposed to portray.
The New York Times is hopeful of Hoover’s schemes, but by no means certain. It says (12-1-29):
“It will be some time (how much?) before the projected outlays by great corporations can be made concrete in actual employment. In every case preliminary studies will have to be made, blue-prints submitted and each detail worked out,” (Is this “business as usual”?) Moreover; this mobility of labor is not in actual practice so facile as it is in economic theory, so that time must elapse before workers who may be displaced at one point can find jobs at another. Apparently Mr. Hoover himself contemplates some such slow (!) development of his plans.”
Public construction, however wide the program, does not eliminate the features of the capitalist system that make for recurring crashes. True, governors, senators, businessmen, bankers, and also the A.F. of L. fakers may “co-operate”. But that will not carry on production unless profit is produced; will not hire labor unless there is profit therein. The construction of public buildings, subways, houses, etc., are one way of applying Hoover’s proposals. Yet, these forms of building construction have been on the decrease in in 1929 and the total values less than in 1928. Hopes for 1930 may be high and good wishes of men expressed in conference but no substantial economist has yet stepped forward with figures to prove a better case for 1930. In the last analysis capitalists seek for the key to unlock the door to profit.
 
The Public Works Panacea
Governments, national, states, local, may tax for public works. But it will not then be long before the hitherto “public-enlightened citizens” or capitalists will begin to squeal and will try to do business where their profits will not be affected so much by governmental and political exigencies.
Mr. Julius Klein, assistant Secretary of Commerce and the closest economic collaborator of Hoover may buoy up the spirits of the property and wealth-owning classes with his references to the general and dominating role of American capitalism in capitalist world economy.
He may further point out, that this expansion of American capitalism’s influence on an international scale will be on the increase for a time yet and that this factor will also be of aid domestically. But it is also necessary to point out that this increased aggressiveness of the United States increases the rivalries and difficulties with other nations; that ultimately and quickly these international economic and political rivalries produce national domestic discord – unemployment, rationalization methods, lower wages, increased and sharper class conflicts between the employers and the working class.
All the measure sponsored by Hoover, are only stop-gaps at the workers expense. Others of the enlightened capitalists and their political agents, such as Lieutenant Governor Lehmann and United States Senator Wagner of New York, sense even bigger crashes to come and add their bit in the hope also of “permanent capitalist stabilization”.
The emergency brake may work, but each time it is tried again, it works less simply and easily. The working masses are slowly now, and more swiftly in the future, learning that though the roads, are here and there lined with trees and hot-dog stands, the road of capitalism leads over a cliff. They will clamber out, as many already have, and look for another route of socialism or communism. Hoover’s “prosperity reserve” is being depleted.
 
Organize To Fight!
The workers in the United States still have the task in the main to see the capitalist as their class enemy, to organize as a class to defeat the employers. Hoover’s waning “prosperity reserve” can only be effectively answered by a new social system which substitutes social production and use for capitalist anarchy and misery. It can only be met now with a militant resistance to his enormous “construction program” swindle, a meaningless palliative for the growing unemployment among the workers, the prospect of heavy wage cuts, of speeding up the already intensively exploited American working class, and the general attack on their standard of living. The Communists must lead in this task of education, organization and struggle.
 



In the unscrupulous falsification of the history of the Russian Revolution by the Stalin clique, the distortions and total misrepresentation of the views of comrade Trotsky and the Russian Opposition on the peasant question stand out in bold relief. On this question, the position of Trotsky coincided with that of Lenin.
Lenin, replying to rumors of differences between him and Trotsky, wrote:
“The rumors of disagreements between him and and me are a monstrous lie, propagated by the landlords and capitalists or their conscious or unconscious servitors. I, upon my part, fully confirm this statement of comrade Trotsky. There arc no disagreements between him. and me, and in regard to the middle peasants there are no disagreements not only between Trotsky and me, but in general in the Communist Party of which we are both members.
“... I subscribe with both hands to everything Trotsky wrote.” (Lenin, Pravda, No. 35, February, 1919)
The falsification of the views of Trotsky is attempted both for the period when Trotsky was Lenin’s closest co-worker, and also for the general historical position of Trotsky. Trotsky “underestimates the peasantry”; “he does not accord them the proper attention”; he “pays no attention to the peasant at all” – every conceivable idea is attributed to Trotsky on the peasant question. All the distorters of Trotsky’s ideas have one thing in common. They never quote or state his actual views which differ in nowise from Lenin and the Bolshevik position. The procedure of Trotsky is completely Marxist, as even casual investigation would show.
From a revolutionary standpoint, in any relations with other social groups, the Marxist puts forward the unquestioned domination of the proletariat. To see the peasant in any other light fundamentally than as an ally of the proletariat under the leadership of the latter is to undermine the foundations of proletarian revolutionary rule; for example, such “defenders of the U.S.S.R.” as Arthur Rhys Williams who extolls the peasant above all other groups. The peasant cannot be the leader, and driving force comes from the city. Hence, the theory of the hegemony of the proletariat in the revolution is accepted naturally by the Communist from historical, political and social reasons.
Trotsky wrote,
“Once in power, the proletariat will appear before the peasantry as its liberator.” From Our Revolution, Henry Holt & Co., p. 98 (written in 1906).
While the proletariat maintains hegemony once it achieves political supremacy, nevertheless, “The proletariat will be able to hold this position under one condition; if it broadens the base of the revolution.” (Ibid., p. 96, our emphasis)
But in what manner shall this base be broadened and for what groups and classes? Are the class differentiations, for instance, among the peasantry to be ignored? Is only volume of commodity production in agriculture to be the main guide in the attitude of the proletarian dictatorship and the U.S.S.R. toward the various peasant groupings: the hired worker, poor and middle peasants and the rich Kulak? The Right Wing, as an instance, lead by Rykov, as Trotsky pointed out long ago and which the Stalin regime today repeats without understanding, bases its policies primarily upon increased productivity by the Kulak with his use of hired labor, perhaps some horses and other means of production which the poor peasants do not have. But the encouragement of Kulak production as against development of Soviet and collective farms hinders the socialist development of agriculture, as well as the productivity of the rest of the peasantry.
“The Kulaks and their ideological defenders, hide all their ambitions under a pretense of worrying about the development of their productive forces, about increasing the volume of commodity production ‘in general’, etc. As a matter of fact, Kulak development of the productive forces, a kulak increase of commodity production, represses and checks the development of the productive forces of the entire remaining mass of the peasant industry.” (From the Platform of the Opposition)
This means, further, the development along capitalist roads, as the Russian Opposition declared, along the direction of Thermidor, for saying which the Opposition are imprisoned, persecuted and exiled. But now, at a time when the Right Wing, nurturing for so long the Kulak, Nepmen and bourgeois ideologies, has grown rapidly and strong the shocked and distressed Stalin regime, shouts the words of Trotsky but finds itself actually only puttering around with a program it does not understand and feel sure about,
But in words, Molotov, Stalin henchman, can say, among other things, at the March 1929 Moscow Party Conference:
“The Right deviation, in the question of the mode of development of agriculture, takes a different, openly anti-Party position, ... the essence of the Right deviation culminates in the following: Less expenditure of money on collective economics and state economics, caution in the development of advance payment for harvests, in the organization of tractor colonies, in the development of an agricultural economy based on agricultural machinery and tractors. Hence, the Right deviation means, in the first place, a loosening of the fetters binding the Kulak economy, which would lead in the last analysis to a victory of the bourgeois elements and to the restoration of capitalism.”
To develop agriculture along the line of soviet and collectivist farms, there must be an industrial development along socialist lines. Without a policy and plan which works toward electrification and the development of big scale production in industry, and a use of the resources of the country with this aim in view, agriculture will remain on the low basis of independent production by tens of millions of small peasants, producing virtually in a barbaric manner. Industry must produce the machinery which can transform agriculture into socialist agriculture production. “The sole material basis for socialism is a vast machine industry, capable of reorganising agriculture,” said Lenin. Today, this strikes root more strongly than ever. Only a high development of the means of production and electrification is able to overcome the technical backwardness of millions of small industries. However, this process of industrialisation, must be along socialist roads if the working masses in the city and country are to be the gainers thereby.
It would be incorrect to say that the Stalin regime has no policy on industrialisation. It is in particular contrast with the policy of the Bukharin-Rykov group. The latter has no faith in the possibility of a swift industrialisation development in the U.S.S.R., and hence bases its major policy on agricultural production, especially in the development of the productive forces of the Kulak. This situation, in their view, will continue for years, while the U.S.S.R. slowly, at a “snail’s pace” develops industry. This policy dooms socialist construction in the U.S.S.R. and inevitably draws upon capitalist elements for sustenance. Bukharin’s writings, Notes of An Economist contain the arguments for this line.
The Stalin regime now has, on the contrary, an industrialization policy. Unfortunately, it leads also to capitalist domination by another road. The Stalin regime says: Industrialize! and it calls upon foreign capitalists to enter and build industries along modern lines. True, the U.S.S.R. will become industrialized thereby, indeed, along Ford methods, if you please. But it will be capitalist industrialization and not socialist industrialisation. The Stalin plan of industrialisation, may yet lead to a Dawes plan of development and “cure” for the U.S.S.R. These are the signs to be noted in the agreement with the International General Electrical Company of the United States, the plans of Colonel Cooper for electrification, etc., and the “freer” foreign relations that are being indicated in the present foreign policy of the U.S.S.R. (Kellogg pact, etc.) Both Stalin’s and Bukharin’s way lead away from the Revolution and the proletarian dictatorship.
The program of the Opposition is the way of industrial and agrarian socialization with an absolute assurance of the retention of the foundation of proletarian rule: the dictatorship of the proletariat. That policy has as it basis the absolute maintenance of the foreign trade monopoly, a redistribution of the national income by means of a correct use of the budget, credit and prices, and a correct use of the bonds with the world economy, There are sufficient resources for a socialist policy for agriculture and industry in the U.S.S.R., as against the Stalin “capitalist industrialisation” policy on the one hand and the “Kulak” hope of Bukharin on the other. What is needed is the correct policy.
The Stalin-Bukharin regime jointly for these past years is responsible for the loosening of the control of the village by the Party and the proletariat. When Kulaks are told, as Bukharin told them, to “enrich themselves” and Stalin says, “Create non-party peasant active centers by revivifying
the Soviets” without mentioning the matter of which “class” is to dominate in the Soviets thus set up, the Kulaks enrich themselves not only in an economic sense but also take the opportunity to establish political rights, i.e., privilege of voting, etc.
“If the dominant party should be guilty of one mistake after another, in politics as well as in economics, if it should retard the growth of industry, ... if it should relinquish its grasp of the control over the political and economic processes in the village, of course, the cause of socialism would be lost in the country.” (Leon Trotsky, Whither Russia, International Publishers, pp. 13–14.)
The persistent crisis and confusion of policy these past years in the C.P.S.U. under the Stalin-Bukharin regime attests eloquently to the warnings of Trotsky uttered already in 1925.
The Stalin-Bukharin regime, contrary protestations now notwithstanding, saw the “Peasant problem” true enough, but they did not see it correctly, as Trotsky saw it, namely, that:
“In the class struggle now going on in the country, the party must stand, not in words but in deeds, at the head of the farm-hands, the poor peasants, and the basic mass of the middle peasants, and organize them against the exploitative aspirations of the Kulak.” (From the Platform of the Opposition. Our emphasis)
For those who wish to know the detailed program of the Russian Opposition on this and other questions, there should be read the Platform of the Opposition published in The Real Situation in Russia, the article on the July Plenum and the Right Danger by L.D. Trotsky printed in The Militant, etc.
Meanwhile, the grain crisis in the C.P.S.U. is not solved, and the Stalinites, now “cleansing” the Party of the Bukharin wing, still zig-zags in all directions. The fight against the Right Wing is three-fourths a sham battle. The Russian Opposition is cut off in the Stalinist way, the way of ruin, division and disintegration of the Communist forces. But still the Opposition remains and points out the correct line of action for the C.P.S.U., the U.S.S.R. and the International Communist movement. Stalin falsifies history today. But history will correct Stalin. And that will yet bring the victory of the Opposition under the leadership of Leon D. Trotsky.
 



The correctness of the policies of Trotsky and the Russian Opposition are now becoming clearer in the light of recent developments in the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Trotsky cautroned the Party to beware of the encroachments of the Kulaks and Nepmen who would take heart from the Party policy which tended toward a self-sufficient, an isolated Soviet economy. He stressed a more rapid industrialization and collective and Soviet farming policy. Some of those who expelled and exiled him are today compelled to give lip service to his proposals.
“If a certain tendency becomes apparent, it is useless to raise a hue and cry when it is already too late; the alarm must be given when the tendency begins to appear and when there is still time to guard against its consequences,” says comrade Kuibyshev in reporting on the Economic Situation in the Soviet Union before the Leningrad Party functionaries on September 19, 1928. (See Kuibyshev report in Inprecor, No. 71, 73, 75, October 12, 19, and 26, 1928).
Trotsky and the Russian Opposition long be fore and at the right time “raised the hue and cry” and gave the alarm on the very questions raised in this report of Kuibyshev.
Trotsky’s industrial and agrarian program was labeled “super-industrialism”, and in practice the “turtle’s pace” (Bukharin) toward socialism was adopted. The Opposition pointed out the tendencies to tamper with the foreign-trade monopoly. The elaborate program submitted by Trotsky and the Russian Opposition over a year ago to the XVth Congress of the C.P.S.U. and which today retains its validity was not given to the Party Congress and was in fact suppressed.
The warnings uttered by the Russian Opposition in its platform should be read in the light of the recent declaration of Stalin, General Secretary of the C.P.S.U. In his speech before the Plenum of the Moscow Committee and Moscow Control Commission of the C.P.S.U., on October 19th, 1928, He says:
“If certain circles among the Communists desire to keep the Party back from realising the resolutions of the XVth Party Congress by denying the necessity of an assauit on the Kulak elements in the rural districts, or else demand an arrest of our industrial development because they consider the present rate of advance fatal to the country, or if again they consider the Government’s subsidies for Soviet farms and collective farms to be impracticable and are of the opinion that the money in question is being wasted in this way ... or if they demand the loosening of our foreign-trade monopoly and so on, this means that in the ranks of our Party there are such as are anxious to adapt the cause of our Socialist construction to the tastes and requirements of the Soviet bourgeoisie. A victory of the Right deviations within our Party would entail an enormous consolidation of the capitalists in our country. And what would such a consolidation mean? It would mean a strengthening of the chances of a restoration of capitalism. Consequently a victory of the Right deviations in our Party would lead to the development of conditions which are requisite for the restoration of capitalism in this country.” (Inprecor, No. 77, Nov. 9th, 1928, p. 1439. Our emphasis.)
Thus they paraphrase the statements made by Trotsky and which they denounced as “Social Democratic” and even “Counter-revolutionary.”
In the Program submitted to the XVth Party Congress, Trotsky stated that only a powerful socialised industry can help the peasants transform agriculture along collectivist lines. He called for a cessation of basing hopes upon the so-called “strong” peasant, the Kulak. The Stalin-Bukharin group was ignoring or openly denying the petty bourgeoisie character of peasant property and peasant industry. Trotsky said:
“Only a suitable attention to the hired hand, only a course based on the pour peasant and his union with the middle peasant, only a decisive struggle against the Kulak, only a course towards industrialization, only a course towards class cooperatives and a class-credit system in the country, will make it possible to draw the middle peasant into the work toward socialist reconstruction of agriculture,” (The Platform of the Opposition, The Real Situation in Russia, p. 67, Harcourt, Brace and Co.)
He proposed:
“A sharply progressive tax system; state legislative measures for the defense of hired labor and the regulation of wages of agricultural workers; a correct class policy in the matter of land-division and land-utilization; the same thing in the matter of supplying the country with tractors and other implements of production.” (Ibid., p. 69).
A complete program for State industry and industrial construction and electrification for the Soviet Union is presented in the chapter that follows, but in this article emphasis is laid on the agrarian and peasant policy because of the slanders and misrepresentation particularly on this point. It is only necessary to compare these quotations from the Russian Opposition program presented to the Party over a year ago with the quotations from Stalin, Kuibyshev and others to note how extreme has been the falsification of the Opposition program.
To those who, like Bukharin, labeled Trotsky’s industrial program “super-industrialization”, Trotsky said:
“It is not true that the slow pace of industrialization is immediately due to the absence of resources. The means are scanty, but they exist. What is wanted is the right policy.“ (Ibid., pp. 91 92 Our emphasis.)
Today Kuibyshev in his report, says in reply to the Right Wing which hollers “over-industrialisation”.
“The requirements of our economy in the immediate: future will call for great investments, if our native construction of turbines is to be raised to the desired level. This task must be realized not only from the standpoint of industrialization and of socialist development. It must be realized in view of the demands of our economy in the future ... History ... will not permit us to proceed more slowly, otherwise the very next year may lead to a series of even more serious anomalies than are apparent today.“ (Report of Kuibyshev to Leningrad Party Functionaries, September 19th, 1928. Inprecor, No. 73, p.1339, October 19th, 1928, Our emphasis)
The ring of capitalist wolves still surrounds the Soviet Union. They are ready as always to devour the hope and inspiration of the toilers of the world, the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics. Our duty always is in defense of the first Workers and Peasants Republic. The perspective of every worker toward the Soviet Union must be international, even as the strength of the Soviet Union must lie not in a perspective of an independent isolated development, but in a firm faith and reliance in the international proletarian revolution.
The adoption of the platform of the Russian Opposition and the reinstatement of its leaders will hasten the economic development of the Soviet Republic, will strengthen its resistance to the economic, political and military pressure of the imperialist countries, and at the same time will encourage and aid the development of the revolutionary movement on an international scale. It is the highest duty of Communists in all parties of the Comintern to fight for this.
 




On the basis of the recently concluded March on Washington conference held in Chicago, it is necessary to review briefly its history of the past year in order to understand the proceedings and actions of the present. It is now clear that any decision with respect to an actual march on Washington will remain entirely on paper unless the rank and file of the March on Washington Movement and its supporters generally can exert enough pressure to compel militant actions and a march over the head of the straddling and opportunist director of the MOW, A. Philip Randolph.
The fact is that the program of action and proposals adopted by the national conference at Chicago mark a noticeable retrogression, in view of the events of the past year – Detroit riots, Beaumont lynching, Army discrimination, etc. – from the MOW policy conference held in Detroit last September 26–27.
 
A Real Perspective and Program – In the Past
In his keynote address to the Detroit conference, Philip Randolph, adapting himself verbally to the moods and needs of the Negro masses in order the better to be able to head off an actual march, declared:
“We must develop a series of marches of Negroes at a given time in a hundred or more cities throughout the country, or stage a big march of a hundred thousand Negroes on Washington to put our cause into the main stream of public opinion and focus the attention of world interests.
“The mobilization and proclamation of a nation-wide series of mass marches on the City Halls and City Councils to awaken the Negro masses and, center public attention upon the grievances and goals of the Negro people, and serve as training and discipline of the Negro masses for the more strenuous struggle of a March on Washington, if, as and when an affirmative decision is made thereon by the Negro masses of the country through our national conference.”
“A March on Washington as an evidence to white America that black America is on the march for its rights and means business.
“The picketing of the White House following the March on Washington, and maintain said picket line until the country and the world recognize that the Negro has become of age and will sacrifice his all to be counted as men, free men.”
Those assuredly were strong and brave-sounding words. They are even truer today. Indeed, a word from Randolph to the Negro masses that the MOW will really march would rally countless Negro numbers and wide labor support for the march. But Randolph will not give the word. Only the masses can still make the march a reality.
The truth is that the National Conference of the MOW did not act in a manner to assure a determined struggle under MOW leadership against Jim Crow. Why is this so?
 
Randolph Leads MOW – Downhill
To begin with, between the nine-month period of the Detroit conference and the Chicago national conference, Randolph and the MOW leadership have brought the MOW movement steadily downhill with their 1943 version and practice of Uncle Tom hat-in-hand. That is, with their almost complete reliance and faith in petitions and appeals to the Roosevelt Administration for the redress of grievances of the Negro masses.
Steadily the mass following which the MOW had developed at the inception of the movement, culminating in great demonstrations at Madison Square Garden, New York, the Coliseum in Chicago, St. Louis, etc., has disappeared. As the MOW leadership failed to direct the Negro masses into militant action for their economic and democratic rights (with local exceptions, carried on independently of the national leadership, as in St. Louis), the masses became despairing and disillusioned with the MOW.
Hence the real masses of Negro people, much less the Negro workers, were not truly represented at the Chicago national conference. The MOW has increasingly moved away from such a base as it did have in the organized labor movement and among the Negro proletariat generally; and toward a middle class base, viewpoint and practice. This development accounts for the pacifist, “non-violence” phobia that saturated the proceedings of the conference for several days.
 
Middle Class Leadership Runs MOW
Middle class elements – intellectuals, teachers, preachers, etc. – dominated and made up the great bulk of the MOW delegates at Chicago. However, these Negro middle class “leaders” (presumably, too, the most advanced of the middle class Negroes) cannot possibly (no more than can middle class elements generally) successfully build and lead a movement on behalf of the masses.
In a conference presumably representing the interests of 15,000,000 Negroes in America, of which ninety per cent or more are working men and farmers of various description, hardly any reference of significance, except for an occasional hosannah by some speaker, was made to the working class and the organized labor movement as the real or potential source and force for carrying through the struggle for Negro economic, social and political rights. Yet it is precisely membership, participation in and leadership of the MOW by Negro workers and unionists which alone can yet possibly transfer the MOW into an active, militant mass movement for Negro rights.
How limited has become the vision of the MOW leadership (which Randolph’s hand-tailored conference of delegates endorsed) is indicated in the decision of the conference to carry through its educational and “public pressure” campaign of “non-violent good will action” in the cities of Richmond, Washington, New York City, Los Angeles and Chicago.
But Detroit – where anti-Negro violence and murder raised their bloody head; Detroit, the seat of KKKism in the North; this great industrial city with tens of thousands of Negroes, is not even regarded by the MOW conference as among the first cities to receive its attention and “educational” efforts. Protests from some of the delegates did not change this part of the program of “action.” “Good will” had indeed nenetrated the spirit of the delegates.
Nevertheless, the pacifistic doctrine enunciated at the conference did not really represent even the attitude of the middle class gathering, much less the sprinkling of worker delegates. Murmurs of protest outside the conference proceedings and in the conference itself demonstrated this fact, as did also the motion in the last hour to set a date for the march.
 
St. Louis Mass Action – Real Way Against Jim Crow
For example, T.D. McNeal, president of the St. Louis MOW, proclaimed:
“In one ‘defense’ plant employing 15,000 workers, there were no Negroes employed. To the company, a MOW delegation declared:
“If you don’t give us jobs, we will take the issue to the streets, and keep it there until we get what we want. We will build a mass picket line clear around your plant and keep it there.”
This militant threat of mass action resulted in five thousand jobs for Negroes at this plant.
Delegate McNeal then further stated: “Mass pressure, a picket line, now will be thrown around the Bell Telephone Co. to force employment of Negroes.”
Basically, the delegates recognized that only a mass March on Washington would bring the issue of Jim Crow graphically and dramatically to the attention of the entire people of America, and for that matter of the world; and serve as a means to help eliminate, so far as is possible under capitalist society, aspects of Jim Crow.
 
“Seat of Jim Crow Is Washington”
A delegate from Buffalo, representing a body of union steel workers (CIO), expressed the real feelings and desires of the Negro masses when he declared, in voicing drastic and outright opposition to the resolution on Non-Violent Good Will Direct Action:
“The seat of Jim Crow is the seat of government at Washington. It is there we must go!”
In reply to the chief spokesman of the non-violent technique, he further pointed out that the Negro unionists in Buffalo were instrumental in helping to build a strong Steel Workers Union, “not by running away from the blows of the scabs and the company, but by unbroken mass solidarity to the fullest extent needed.”
 
Negroes Want to March
It is significant to note that no motion or resolution came before the convention calling upon and specifying the Negroes of the labor union movement to become the organized base and leadership of the MOW, locally and nationally, along with the adoption of the militant methods of struggle carried out by the labor movement.
In an even more fundamental sense the MOW conference demonstrated its inability to comprehend the objective conditions which, if understood and taken advantage of, make for a deep, wide and effective struggle against Jim Crow in its worst forms.
This truth is instinctively recognized by the Negro masses, who realize that if they don’t break down Jim Crow during the war, Jim Crow conditions will exist in even more aggravated form after the imperialist war. That is the reason why the Negro masses at the outset rallied in vast numbers to the MOW, as it gave initial evidence of leading the Negroes in mass actions, in a mass march, if need be, on Jim Crow’s chief seat, the government at Washington.
The solution of Jim Crow evils, even partially (as well as of the problems of labor) lies in who has or controls state power, the government. This was implicitly recognized initially by the MOW when it talked big words of a mass March on Washington.
If the march has failed to materialize, it is because the middle class, reformist and, apparently, pacifist outlook of Randolph and the MOW leadership today fear for their ability to direct or control the Negro masses should they once proceed to independent demands and actions upon the government powers.
 
A New Leadership Must Arise
The present weak organizational state and outlook of the MOW came about inevitably, as Randolph’s leadership of the MOW is examined and understood.
Specifically and precisely this meant and means today that the MOW ranks must develop their own working class leadership of the organization. Through independent local militant actions, they can still carry through the tasks and purpose for which the MOW was organized – an organization of mass action against all evils and representatives of Jim Crow. The methods of the St. Louis MOW must become the spirit and practice of all the MOW, thereby putting the needed pressure on the present MOW leadership to move toward national militant actions.
The national conference of the MOW graphically demonstrates that the only hope of the MOW for the future is for Negro workers in the basic industries, especially those in the unions, to enter into and dominate the policies and practices of the MOW. Unless the entry of such Negro workers – the best educated, conscious and militant forces of the Negro people, the ones best able to lead the Negro struggle also in their communities – takes place very rapidly; unless they soon assume local leadership of the MOW units (until they can achieve national leadership and replacement of the middle class MOW leadership), the MOW will go the road of all movements led by confused and straddling middle class elements – to an untimely end or a barrier to progress of the Negro masses.
In view of the hopes placed in the MOW by great numbers of Negroes, and in view of the original potentialities for a powerful mass movement for Negro rights, the MOW conference proceedings and decisions must be recorded fundamentally as a failure, even partially a tragedy. The responsibility for this failure rests primarily on the Randolph leadership. If the basic policies and leadership cannot be transformed, the MOW is going to get nowhere.
 
Which Road for MOW?
The rabble-rouser of the MOW, Dr. Charles Ervin, director of the Eastern Region of the MOW, in his: opening speech entitled, Why Negroes Assemble at Chicago, spoke many truths. Only they will prove to be bitter gall to MOW followers and the Negroes generallly as they come to observe the impotence of the MOW with its “new” policy of “non-violent technique” and “good will action,” plus the straddling policy adopted on the mass March to Washington – which in fact means no march at all.
The Negroes, Ervin declared, may properly proclaim for themselves the doctrine espoused by Karl Marx for the working class. “Negroes of America, unite!” he paraphrased Marx. “You have nothing to lose but your chains!”
True, but not quite enough. Negro workers, come closer to Marx, to Lenin, to Trotsky. Workers, Negro and white, “Unite! You have nothing to lose but your chains!” Therein lies the true historic destiny of the laboring masses of America and of the world.
The present MOW policy for the Negroes spells failure in the struggle against Jim Crow and its causes. With or without the MOW, the Negro masses must aim quickly to get on the road of militant mass action; insist on a MASS MARCH ON WASHINGTON; and, in time, take the road with other workers toward political power. Thus the conditions will be laid for the complete abolition of Jim Crow.
 




More jobs have been opened to Negroes because of the need for labor. Nevertheless, job bias – racial discrimination, – on jobs open to Negroes persists strongly.
Even where job discrimination is itself weakened, segregation continues in the communities and frequently in the factories – in fact, it is sometimes aggravated. There are, for example, plants opened on a Jim Crow basis, such as Sun Shipbuilding in Philadelphia. On the labor front, the formation of Jim Crow unions (such as the boiler makers in Portland, Ore.) likewise fosters the spirit of Jim Crow.
However, a better perspective on the struggles ahead can be obtained from figures on Negro and white occupations up to March 1940. The vast extent of Jim Crow stands out glaringly.
 
Hardest Work for Negroes
Farmers, farm laborers and other laborers made up 62.2 per cent of all employed Negro men, according to the Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce. White workers, however, in these occupations were only 28.5 per cent of all white employed workers. These figures reveal that the Negroes performed the hardest and heaviest unskilled work, far out of proportion to their numbers as compared; with; whites.
However, the opposite proportions are shown in the figures for professional, managerial and white collar jobs. For example, Negroes in these fields constituted a mere 5 per cent of all Negroes employed, as against 20 per cent of all employed whites.
Moreover, discrimination carried over into the skilled trades, where the “aristocracy of labor” in the AFL building trades, etc., aped the white bosses, and excluded Negroes from the craft. unions. Hence, while 15.6 per cent of all employed white workers held the skilled and higher paid jobs in these trades, only 4.4 per cent of all employed Negroes held such jobs.
Differences of even greater degree showed themselves between the occupations of Negro and white women. For example, 70 per cent of all employed Negro women were engaged in the service occupations, whereas the percentage for white women was only 22.4 per cent.
Further, of all the employed white women, 33 per cent held clerical and sales jobs, but only 1 per cent of employed Negro women held such jobs! Similar extreme divergences are shown in the figures of white and Negro women workers on the farms, in the factories, and so forth.
 
Bitter Struggle to Achieve Rights
Thus, clearly, the Negro people have always been restricted either in obtaining jobs at all, or in getting jobs commensurate with their skills, knowledge and ability.
There have been important changes since the war. However, the major task for Negroes remains: to achieve equal opportunities and equal rights in all fields of endeavor. Toward this end, only the labor movement is capable of rendering the necessary effective assistance and pressure to break down the Jim Crow practices of the bosses.
The interests of the ruling bourgeoisie have always been in dividing white and Negro workers on color lines. Wherever the opportunity is open, they do so, to the detriment of both white and Negro workers. They will only make concessions when forced to. The same situation and problem hold true essentially with regard to the Jews, Puerto Ricans, Mexicans and other racial minorities.
 
Widespread Discrimination Continues
Negroes correctly point to widespread discrimination in various parts of the country. They see the need of being on guard and girding themselves for future struggles. A few varied examples suffice to show the generally prevailing situation. Thus:

Milwaukee: failure to give jobs to young Negro women in war industry, although they have completed NYA training courses.
 
Philadelphia: refusal of the city to employ Negro nurses with full qualifications.
 
Chicago, Washington, Los Angeles and numerous other cities: refusal of the companies to employ Negroes as conductors and motormen and in the better jobs in the public utilities, etc.
 
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Bureau assigns the heavy, arduous jobs to Negro women; the lighter tasks to white women. And, of course, the sweeping job is exclusively the task of Negro women.
 
Railroads: General discrimination (previously reported in Labor Action).
 

In the Sunny South
In the South, extreme discrimination continues. Where Negroes are given jobs, they receive the very poorest; or else do the same jobs as white workers at considerably less pay.
In Tennessee, for instance, the powder plant at Millington, near Memphis, the shell loading plant at Milan, the Fisher Body Aircraft plant and the Army Depot employ thousands of Negroes now. The wage differential between Negro and white workers, however; for both skilled and unskilled labor, is great. Doing the same work or more than the white workers, they receive less money.
Moreover, the fact that these are war industries having government contracts has not for one moment stopped this discrimination against Negroes. The Administration knows how to keep peace with the Southern Bourbons while at the same time making verbal or, minor concessions to the Negroes.
In Alabama, Negroes, are flagrantly discriminated against in industry – in the shipyards, army airports, etc. In the shipyards, the Negroes are not even promised up-grading. Again, either the Negroes are not given the skilled jobs; or where they are, they must work at less pay. Thus, the Black Despatch (Oklahoma City) cites many such instances in regard to boiler makers, electricians, caulkers and riveters, painters, welders, sheet metal workers, burners, lay-out crews, etc. Innumerable additional citations could be given for other trades.
Therefore, what the Negroes see in all this is the same old Jim Crow. The attitude that prevails toward the Negro in the South is summed up in the statement of the director of vocational training in Georgia, explaining why Negroes are not even given a training program: “The need for these men as workers has not been established. It would be a waste of public money to train them.”
 
Can Smash Jim Crow
Thus, the pattern of Jim Crow remains. It is the mold that must be destroyed, and a new pattern created. Again, the answer lies in the drawing together of white and black workers in mutual understanding and effort against the Jim Crow ruling class and exploiters. In the recognition of the special status and problem of the Negroes as a race, as well as in seeing the working class problem common to both white and black workers, is to be found the key to effective struggle against Jim Crow.
 




A million and a half railroad-workers are getting the run-around in their demand for substantial wage increases. At the same time railroad profits, have soared sky high – to such an extent that it “Outrages any decent regard for equality of sacrifice in war-time,” according to the OPA.
The National (Railway) Mediation Board – the government agency responsible for considering the demands of the workers – is not even functioning today. It lacks the required number of members to make the board legally operative. Despite the unions’ request, President Roosevelt has failed to name a new member to the board.
Meanwhile, while the cost of living has risen sharply, the railroad workers are being stalled in their demands, for wage increases. Labor Action has previously reported on the low wage standards among railroad workers (in both the brotherhoods and the non-operative unions) which make immediate wage increases ranging from 15 to 30 per cent imperative. A statement issued through Thomas Cashen, president of the Switchmen’s Union, on behalf of the nineteen standard railroad unions, outlines the bad working conditions as well as poor wage status of the rail workers and strongly protests the obstructive, delaying tactics of the Railway Mediation Board and the government.
For instance, a large group of railroad workers have not received wage increases since 1937, despite recommendations by two presidential emergency boards to grant immediate increases. Further, railroad workers work forty-eight hours, and many of them fifty-six and sixty-three hours, at straight time. Time and a half and double time for excessive working hours is practically unknown. In addition, Cashen’s statement declares that the average hourly earnings of all railroad workers is only seventy-four cents. Thus the myth of high wages is blasted for the Brotherhood Unions as well, not to mention the notoriously low-paid maintenance men, laborers and other workers of the non-operative unions. Yet, obviously, out of the huge railroad profits, the wage increases can easily be met. The railroad owners are standing pat, unwilling to disgorge a cent. They believe that the workers are in a blind alley, anyhow.
 
Rail Labor Act Serves Bosses
Now, what is the situation of the unions in respect to their demands?
Above all, the hands of the railroad workers are tied by the machinery of the Railroad Labor Act itself, which calls for slow-moving, long-drawn-out mediation and arbitration methods. The non-functioning altogether, at present, of the Railway Mediation Board is only an added aggravation.
Because of the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, strike action can be delayed for years if need be. Thus, the essence of the effectiveness of the strike weapon – swift, militant action – is in fact nullified. The strike – the instrument which, if it were utilized today, would bring quick, positive results, is on the shelf.
Hence, while the railroad workers are sore about poor pay and working conditions, the railroad operators can gloat. For, through the class collaborationist machinery they were instrumental in setting up, together with the government, they have succeeded in their main purpose: namely, to prevent or slow up militant action by the workers.
 
Militant Union Is Need
Thus, once again it is demonstrated that the chief reason for the establishment of such instruments as the WLB, mediation boards, government agencies of every description, is to hamstring the needs and interests of the workers. They are the servants of the bosses, set up to defeat the workers obliquely where it cannot be done directly.
Probably, after still greater delay, the railroad workers will receive some meager handout. It will be small – that much is sure. Therefore, the chief lesson the railroad workers must learn from their serious predicament is the necessity for militant unionism. The railroad workers must aim to transform their unions into conscious organs of class struggle.
 




“Discrimination against every race must go!” This was the keynote of Paul V. McNutt’s speech before the Negro Labor Victory Committee mass meeting at the Golden Gate Casino, Harlem, on June 28, 1942.
On January 12, 1943, the same Paul V. McNutt scuttled the projected FEPC public hearings on discrimination against the Negroes on the railroads.
In this brief six-month period is represented the very sharp retreat of the Roosevelt Administration before the Jim Crow bloc of reactionary Southern congressmen and discriminatory employers in the great cities, both North and South.
 
Color Caste System Remains
One need only note the abandonment of the anti-lynching bill, the anti-poll-tax law and the continuance of peonage and the chain gang in the South, to understand why the Negro people conclude that those in authority do not seriously intend – if they ever did – to end the color caste system – expressed in discrimination and segregation. So far as the Negro is concerned, these facts and conditions, in themselves, make a mockery of capitalist “democracy.”
Therefore, reliance upon the government to effectively or earnestly break down Jim Crow in various fields has sharply cooled among the Negro masses. “Their general attitude is one of mingled cynicism, resignation and indifference,” says the Pittsburgh Courier.
Does this mean that the Negro masses have given up the struggle and the hope for the achievement of their economic, social and political rights? Quite the contrary. Only, they are seeking other paths.
 
Look to Independent Action
First, they are searching for their own independent course, actions and organizations to serve their ends. They are not satisfied with promises for the future – no matter who makes the promises.
This explains the strong, militant support at first given by great numbers of Negroes to the March on Washington Movement for full rights to the Negroes now. However, when the weak, vacillating leadership of the MOW sidetracked this authentic mass movement into a “go easy” policy and dependence upon Administration favors, the Negro masses again felt betrayed, and they largely abandoned their support of MOW. The Negro masses today want a militant movement for their rights.
Second, the increasing trend among Negroes is to seek either support or a base in the organized labor movement. However, in making their appeal to union labor, the Negro press and leadership do so with varying reasons, and motivations. For instance, the Black Despatch (Oklahoma City, Okla.), influential Negro paper in the Southwest, editorially says:
“Union labor needs help just now, while more than ten millions have been withdrawn from the ranks of gainful employment. If the Negro remains on the outside of union labor during this period, what will be the Negro’s status later on, when ten million unemployed soldiers return from foreign battlefields to again seek their places in peacetime avocations?”
“It ought to be plain to every Negro on the outside of an insane asylum that unless Negroes now show intelligent and sympathetic interest in the problems of white labor, white labor when it returns from the war will be justified in lacking interest in black problems.”
Here it is necessary to note that the Negro leadership and press generally evade or ignore the class origins and development of Jim Crow. Thus, unavoidably, they run into a blind alley in attempting to interpret and resolve the special and double evils imposed on Negroes.
Hence, relating directly to the labor movement, it must be realized that the Negro press is controlled and directed almost exclusively by the Negro middle and upper classes who follow a policy suited to their particular class interests and situation. Specifically, for instance, note the business man’s outlook which largely pervades the Negro publications everywhere. However, the Negro professional elements, because their skills and abilities are even more patently unused or unremunerated than white professionals, are more inclined to admit the need for, or a combination with unions – qualified by their own class bias or interests.
In the case of the Black Despatch editorial, the attitude reflected toward unionism is not that of Negro and white workingman joining in common cause and organization from a class standpoint. Rather, it is a recognition of the necessity for an approach to organized labor to assure, if possible, some economic protection for Negroes, as Negroes, when war jobs are done, and mass unemployment and economic crisis again convulse the country.
 
The Labor-Conscious Negro
More significantly, however, there are growing numbers of Negroes who are calling for the complete integration of Negroes, as workers, into the labor movement on a fully equal basis. It is these Negroes particularly who demand an end to any remaining Jim Crow in the labor unions in the interests (1) of Negroes as Negroes, and (2) in order that the labor movement can most effectively combat the employing and ruling class practices of discrimination and segregation against Negroes and other minorities, and the bosses’ common exploitation , of white and colored workers.
It is in both these lights, therefore, that labor-conscious Negroes hail the establishment of the CIO’s anti-discrimination committee; Philip Murray’s appointment of the Negro, Boyd Wilson, to help cement the bonds of Negro and white workers in the Steel Workers Union; and the efforts of the Auto Workers and National Maritime Unions and other units, to get rid altogether of any remaining Jim Crow remnants, as symbolized, for instance, in mixed crews in the American Merchant Marine.
Conversely, the standing of the AFL is low among labor-thinking Negroes because of the AFL’s essentially do-nothing policy in eliminating widespread Jim Crow in many of its important unions. The rebuff to Philip Randolph at the AFL convention is a case in point.
 
Want No Jim Crow in Unions
War requirements, of course, are making it easier for Negroes to get jobs. However, the bosses otherwise are either against the hiring of Negroes or are for hiring them provided they can continue their established policy of dividing workers on color or racial lines, and thus more easily exploiting both white and black workers. Therefore, the recent establishment of a Jim Crow local (Boilermakers, Iron Shipbuilders & Welders) in the Portland, Ore., region only serves to convince Negro workers that AFL policy follows along the same pattern as the government and Jim Crow employers.
Obviously, those Negroes who are seeking a labor base for their protection will not for long tolerate, in this period, a labor organization which persists in Jim Crowing them. Nor will they be satisfied merely by the appointment of a Negro (Milton P. Webster, vice-president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters) as a member of an AFL post-war planning committee. They will insist on an end to Jim Crow NOW in the AFL, or turn more and more to the CIO.
What is more important to observe today is (1) the steady turning away of the Negro masses from a reliance on favors from above, from the government; and (2) the growing ability of Negro masses to distinguish the basic and important from the secondary and episodic (that is, they are laying their hopes and foundation in labor unionism and a working class orientation as against Administration sops, easily taken away – FEPC, etc.).
Administration policy more and more shows itself as reflecting the outlook and practices of the real rulers of this country – the big business interests. The Administration’s appeasement of, and reconciliation with, the blatant reactionary bloc of Southern Democratic politicians is only an important and potent symptom thereof.
Hence, even as labor must hereafter more swiftly relinquish its faith and belief in governmental agencies to achieve their demands (for example, the demand for representation on fundamentally anti-labor bodies such as the WLB, WPB, etc.), so likewise the Negro masses will and are experiencing the same disillusionment with an appeasement policy. Both Negro and white labor are driven toward a united policy and action by their common class interests against the exploiters and oppressors – the employing class.
 




CHICAGO – Representing 200,000 CIO workers, officials of 242 CIO locals in the Chicago district held an overflow conference on April 21 and gave emphatic approval to a broad program of action to combat wage cutting, sub-standard wages, job freezing, mounting prices on food and other necessities of life, and high taxes on workers’ incomes.
This significant gathering of CIO labor, reflecting deep-seated anger against inroads on the economic and civil rights of the masses, highlighted the meeting by calling for a national emergency conference of the CIO at Washington to unite labor nationally in struggle for its program.
The conference further specifically called upon the AFL unions to join with the CIO in carrying out its program, suggesting as an initial step the “immediate formation of community-action organizations of CIO, AFL and other neighborhood groups.”
Recognizing the need for mobilizing the widest possible mass support a/id understanding of its program of action, the CIO conference further proposed local community actions by individual organizations and groups, to be followed by a series of mass meetings, preceding the proposed national conference.
 
Hit McNutt Orders
Among the more important proposals presented by the Chicago CIO’s high cost of living and legislative committee, and strongly endorsed by the conference, are:
1. A demand that the WMC-Mc-Nutt order freezing workers to their jobs be rescinded. Speakers emphasized that the basis for labor turnover in Chicago is not a labor shortage, for there are still thousands of unemployed skilled and unskilled workers, but in pay inequalities. “Freezing workers to inequitable jobs is unworkable ... Remove the pay inequalities that cause such job changes.” It is time to protect labor, not just the bosses’ interests on the job, said a CIO spokesman.
2. Demanding that the OPA revert all prices back to the September 15, 1942, level, reduce prices that are patently high, and forbid any additional price increases, the program calls for the deputization of union members and other citizens by OPA to check on all stores to see that rationing laws and price ceilings are enforced.
There is, however, no need to wait for OPA to deputize the workers. The unions themselves can proceed, together with committees of housewives, organized in every local and on every block, to establish committees to check the food gougers and profiteers, while simultaneously demanding genuine enforcement by the OPA of such regulations as presumably aid the workers and consumers.
On this score, taking note of the operations of the black market as well as the huge profiteering through “legitimate” channels, the conference demanded that “dollars-and-cents price ceilings be set for all necessities of life. Rationing should be extended to cover all the necessities of life so that everyone will be guaranteed his fair share.”
 
$30 Minimum Wage
Exposing the myth of general high wage scales, the program calls for a $30 weekly minimum wage, based on a 75 cents an hour, 40-hour week basis. Anything less, the program states, is “sub-standard.” The fact is that there are tens of thousands of Chicago workers who fall into the “sub-standard” wage level.
The Little Steel formula for wages is denounced as inadequate, particularly in view of the enormous increases in prices of foodstuffs, etc. The report adopted by the conference on this score therefore demands increased wages for increased production, as well as a “fair share in any decrease in the cost of production.”
The report of the committee still evidences illusions in the War Labor Board for the adjustment of wage inequalities. The program proposes reconsideration by the WLB, with public hearings, of all cases pending prior to April 8 to determine what are “sub-standard” wages. At the same time the report states that the CIO will oppose any imposition by the government of a national wage incentive system.
4. The preamble to the program states its belief in Roosevelt as “labor’s friend.” Ignoring the anti-labor record of the Roosevelt Administration in recent years particularly, it places sole responsibility for labor’s woes and predicament on the “reactionary big business bloc in Congress” Hence there is no reference, either in the program or in the speeches by CIO representatives -at the conference, to the need for the labor movement, particularly the CIO, to initiate a movement for independent political action; for the formation of a Labor Party to espouse labor’s cause and program in all the legislative chambers in the cities, states and nationally.
 
Tax Proposals
5. Denouncing profiteering, which, the report states, “is unequalled in the history of our country,” the conference called for the repeal of the Victory Tax “because it imposes a flat five per cent burden on all wages down to the worker earning only $12 a week, with no regard to living costs, family obligations and dependents.”
The tax program further proposes tax exemption for single persons earning $800 or less and married couples earning $1,500 or less, with an additional allowance of $400 for each dependent.
With respect to the incomes of the rich and profiteers, it favors a $25,000 limitation, after tax payments; a tax increase on corporate profits to 55 per cent; five per cent profit limitation for corporations with initial capital investment of $10,000,000 and four per cent on all amounts above that, together with a 100 per cent excess profits tax on profits above these levels.
The CIO proposals, therefore, still accept responsibility for sharing war costs with the bosses, instead of an outright demand that the bosses pay the costs of their war through a demand, along with other tax proposals, for a capital levy by the government on the corporations to cover the financial costs of the, imperialist war – the workers already paying many times over with their bodies and lives in the workshops and on the battlefields.
Whatever limitations and inadequacies there are in the program of action of the Chicago CIO conference, the proposals as a whole point in a highly progressive and militant direction. The conference reflects the pressure of the ranks on the officialdom for protective measures. It is imperative that the laboring masses everywhere adopt similar programs of action and take measures to carry them out.
Locally, the CIO ought to proceed to the early convocation of the proposed series of mass meetings. Without a doubt, a call for a gigantic open air demonstration in support of the program of action, convened jointly by the CIO, AFL and other organizations, or even by the CIO alone, would be supported by tens of thousands of Chicago’s exploited workers.
Particularly deserving of support is the proposal for a convocation of a national emergency conference of the CIO to develop the necessary pressure, organization and program for a national struggle against the attacks of the bosses and government upon labor’s rights and living standards.
 




A hornet’s nest has been stirred up among the Negro people by the action of Paul V. McNutt, War Manpower Commissioner. Acting with Administration approval, McNutt on January 11 intervened to suppress the sharp exposure by the FEPC (Fair Employment Practices Committee) of widespread discrimination against Negroes in the railway industry.
The suppression takes the form of an indefinite “postponement” of public hearings, belatedly scheduled for January 25–27 by the FEPC, on Jim Crow practices by railroad owners and rail unions. A death sentence for the FEPC is the only adequate characterization for McNutt’s action.
Thus our prediction (see Labor Action, December 12) regarding the fate of the FEPC receives early confirmation in a most dramatic and significant manner – no less than the direct, unveiled, obstructive and sabotaging action of the chairman of the War Manpower Commission, Paul McNutt, who is ostensibly pledged to eradicate Jim Crow in industry.
Pressure from the strong bloc of Southern Democrats in Congress has been a persistent factor in blocking hearings and investigations on Jim Crow by the FEPC and other bodies. Further, the State Department itself has also put the squeeze on the FEPC to prevent projected hearings in the Southwest on charges of discrimination against Mexicans. Also, the Navy, in the person of labor-baiting Ralph Bard, Assistant Secretary of the Navy, has interfered in order to force abandonment of FEPC hearings scheduled for Detroit, where Jim Crow is rampant in nearly all major war industries. Now, finally, because of its proposed action on the decisive railroad issue, the FEPC is right up against the knife in its “last ditch fight for existence.” The ‘’liberalism’’ and “good will” of FEPC members, their desire to eliminate at least the worst aspects of Jim Crow have been demonstrated to count for nothing in the face of the determination of employers and government bureaucrats.
Without the backing of mass action by the workers, black and white, to reinforce their exposures, the FEPC was doomed to fail from the moment of its inception. Where this mass pressure existed, independently, as in the case of strong union action against Jim Crow, the FEPC was superfluous. The masses could win their ends through their own instruments, and not by government charity.
It is only necessary to point out a little more of what has happened to realize that the Negro workers can only depend on themselves as workers and on aid from awakened white workers, to break down Jim. Crow.
 
Railroad Owners Win
The FEPC hearings on Railroad discrimination had already been long delayed and postponed. Finally, as a renewed lease on its bare existence, it had been granted funds by the WMC and had decided to carry out such hearings on January 25. The proposed hearings have been universally regarded as the decisive test fot the FEPC’s power and standing. The answer has been given, Even its investigating possibilities are being ruthlessly scuttled, thanks to McNutt.
The railroad owners have won the fight at this stage hands down, assisted by railroad union leadership carrying out a “lily white” policy. The sweet words of the “Hoosier Hitler,” enunciated in numerous speeches and statements to the Negroes upon his appointment to the WMC have been sensationally exposed in their true meaninglessness.
Flagrant discrimination against Negroes is widespread throughout the railroad industry nationally. Particular resentment is directed against the agreement between the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen’s and Enginemen’s Union and twenty-five Southern railroads to eliminate the few Negroes now working as firemen on these roads. A. Phillip Randolph, president of the Pullman Car Porters Union and head of the MOW, declares that the FEPC railroad investigation “is a showdown for Executive Order No. 8802 and for the committee itself.”
However, it is Randolph’s own straddling between a policy of dependence on Administration “good will” and calling for independent mass action to enforce demands for Negro economic and democratic rights, which has helped to hamstring the Negroes in their struggle.
Randolph continues to speak big words for Negro rights. However, his subordination, in practice, of Negro rights ans needs to the Administration’s policy, prevents him from appealing seriously to the Negro masses to act in the only way that can bring them results: militant mass action and marches on the factories and seats of government, particularly Washington.
Only a brief obituary is now required for the FEPC. From the very first it carried on with insufficient funds and personnel. A staff of fifty for the entire country was hardly worthy of mention. It is definitely indicative of the real attitude of the ruling class toward the FEPC. The transfer of the FEPC to the jurisdiction of the War Manpower Commission was really meant to put the FEPC on the shelf.
 




Perilous and hazardous as is the situation for the mass of workers under the government decree “freezing labor” (that is, under the dictatorial powers given to Paul McNutt, through Roosevelt’s order, to transfer and place workers wherever he sees fit), the situation and prospects facing the mass of Negroes are triply menacing.
Of the workers still unemployed, despite the increase in employment in war industries, an overwhelming number are Negroes. The fact that such unemployment still exists is in itself evidence that the need for freezing labor does not flow from a labor shortage.
 
“Frozen” at Lowest Jobs
Nearly three million Negroes are today employed at work and skills tar below their qualifications, declares a statement recently issued by the United States Employment Service.
The “freezing” order can be used as an additional excuse for keeping the Negro workers in their lowly and low-paid jobs. It can therefore have the effect of “freezing” inequality and low living standards for the duration.
Now, concretely, how do these effects of “freezing,” actual or potential, exhibit themselves in the day-to-day life of the Negroes?
1. On the urban transportation lines (street car, elevated, etc.) in Chicago, Los Angeles, Washington and other cities, Negro workers have vainly endeavored “to obtain skilled jobs as conductors, motormen, etc.
FEPC remedial rulings – for example, in Washington, D.C. – have been rejected by the companies. (FEPC is today under McNutt’s jurisdiction.) The companies, standing pat on their Jim Crow policies, may now claim that the “frozen labor” ruling allows no “tampering” with the present job status of the Negroes. Are their unskilled jobs “frozen” for the duration?
2. Skilled Negro riveters, chippers and caulkers (war industry work) have been advised by Birmingham, Ala., officials of the USES to take jobs as cooks on sugar cane plantations.
The USES not only proposes freezing these skilled workers into another (lower paid) trade, but tells them to move from their city homes to plantations. Thus the USES (also under McNutt’s jurisdiction), in proposing that these skilled workers be transferred – “frozen” – into another, lower paid trade, reflects the Jim Crow pressure of the Southern ruling class on the government agency.
3. Pullman porters, well educated and equipped, today remain classed as porters and are not given the opportunity to advance to the rating, pay or class of conductors. Moreover, Negro workers are held to the lowest jobs and pay throughout the railroad industry, certainly a war industry today.
While Negro organizations for a long time have been making demands on the railroads (today, also through FEPC) for improvement in the status of Negro rail workers, the question still stands: Are porters and Negro railroad workers in general now to be frozen for the period of the war?
 
Trained – But Refused Jobs
4. Negro men and women trained for jobs in Detroit plants – such as Ford Motor Co., General Motors, Chrysler, Hudson, Briggs Mfg., Fisher Body and others – have been refused work. Those refused include men and women who had received their training in the very plants that denied them work! A survey reveals that no less than 170 major Detroit war factories decline to employ Negroes.
Note that Detroit is the first major city where McNutt proposes workers shall stay put at their present jobs. This makes “strike three!” against Negro men and women who are refused work in a city where, according to the government and employ – ers, there is a shortage of labor! Further, it is particularly worth noting that of 57,500 women at present working in Detroit war plants, less than 100 are Negro women!
In view of the direct statements of officials of Locals 400 and 600, United Automobile Workers, CIO, that: the “UAW Welcomes Negro workers into its ranks and today has 60,000 Negro members, many of whom hold official positions in their unions,” the responsibility for refusing to employ additional thousands of Negro men and women in Detroit clearly lies with the Jim Crow employers and the government.
 
Training Also Barred
5. With millions of Negroes ready to be trained for jobs or for better jobs, what has actually happened? They are even being deprived, in important instances, of the opportunity for training.
The War Shipping Administration, under the’direction of Admiral Emory S. (”Shoot Organizers”) Land, has been barring Negroes from the Gallups Island Radio School, which trains officers for the Merchant Marine in Boston harbor.
In Washington, D.C. the War Manpower Commission (of which McNutt has been chairman from its inception) through its Service Center refuses on racial grounds to accept Negro women into its training classes for work in an aircraft manufacturing company.
In the South, discrimination is direct, as is indicated by the closing down of many government training centers in Sputhern citiey on the ground that Negroes are barred from skilled jobs in Southern industries anyhow. In the North, discrimination on racial grounds is often more
subtle in withholding skilled jobs: sometimes the training is even given; but no: jobs are provided. In either case the results for the Negroes are the same: ZERO!
 
1A for Asking Better Job
6. The fear and threat of draft re-classification is very real to Negro workers who want to be “upgraded” to better jobs. Note, as an example, the case of Leonard D. Smith, Oklahoma City, Okla., classified as a laborer and employed at the Oklahoma City Air Depot.
He applied for a job as an electrical helper. Instead of receiving promotion, he was fired. Three days later he was reclassified by his draft board from 3A to 1A!
At the office of his job, the air depot, he had previously been advised that he could continue as a laborer for the duration, but should remember: “air base authorities worked in close cooperation with the draft board.”
For every blow struck at white workers by the bosses, the Negro worker receives at least two, and often more. Hence, even as the threat of draft reclassification is held in general against workers who demand their rights, so too it is used against the Negro worker, only with less compunction or reservation.
Thus the masses of Negro workers find themselves in danger from every conceivable direction: no jobs at all; poor jobs out of which they cannot be “upgraded,” but must remain rooted or “frozen”; training for which they cannot receive commensurate jobs, if at all; danger of draft reclassification if they try to “upgrade” their jobs; loss of jobs through employer and government Jim Crow, etc.
Let no one be deceived by “token hirings” and “upgradings” in various plants to cover up gross discrimination against Negroes. The truth is that, apart from jobs created for Negroes through sheer necessity for more thorough prosecution of the war, the Negro masses have achieved no fundamental improvement in their status during the war. Such breaks as they have received, they will have to struggle to keep. What they nave not obtained they must continue to struggle for.
In fighting against “stabilization” of jobs or wages – or “freezing” of the status quo of any kind at the point where they work or seek work, Negroes are fighting for the very right to continue their struggles against degradation, oppression and exploitation.
The freezing of jobs is a measure that hits all workers, but most blatantly and particularly affects and concerns the Negro masses. Therefore both working class solidarity and necessity imperatively demand greater and more militant intervention by the unions to compel employers to hire and utilize Negroes on an equal basis.
 




The persistent “thumbs down.” attitude of the capitalist class toward the Negro masses, even while it makes demands on the Negroes for aid in the war, is making a deep impression on the Negro people.
Very little of the views and situation of the Negro is made known to the American people. The capitalist press largely suppresses what is happening among the Negroes. The labor press does considerably better – though far from enough – in exposing the conditions and espousing the interests of the oppressed and exploited Negro masses.
Below we indicate the situation among Negroes and their views on various questions as obtained chiefly from Negro sources.
 
Protest Censorship
“Apparently the Administration is adopting a deliberate policy of isolating the Negro from all of the other peoples of the world who are interested in a fight for democracy,” protests the well known Negro writer, Horace B. Cayton. Cayton declares that the authorities are afraid to let the facts about lynchings, poll-tax, shootings of Negro soldiers by white MPs, etc., be known to the Chinese, the Africans, the Indians, the English people et al. As a result, the Pittsburgh Courier in South America, England or Africa would find itself almost cut to shreds by the censor.”
“The effect of the censor of Negro news,” he concludes, “is to shot off from the main current of world news what to happening to the Negro in the United States, and similarly to keep htm uninformed as to what is happening to the small people in other parts of the world.”
Thus the Negro witnesses the operation of “freedom of opinion” (free press).
 
You Don’t Mean Us!
“Words, words, words,” is the description given by the Negroes to the promises of equality and freedom, following the war, madeby the authoritative spokesmen of the ruling class. The Pittsburg Courier recently conducted a poll on the question:
“Have you been convinced that the statements, which our national leaders have made about freedom and equality for all peoples include the American Negro?”
The answers:
81.2 per cent said “No.”
17.1 per cent said “Yes.”
1.7 per cent were uncertain.
 
Freedom from Want?
The per capita income in 1940 in the seventeen states listed below was (according to a report of the Department of Commerce Survey of Current Business, August 1941):



Alabama


  


$264




Arkansas


   253




Delaware


   836




Florida


   465




Georgia


   321




Kentucky


   330




Louisiana


   350




Maryland


   703




Mississippi


   195




Missouri


   483




North Carolina


   335




Oklahoma


   354




South Carolina


   281




Tennessee


   325




Texas


   422




Virginia


   455




West Virginia


   401



In the New York Age, these figures are cited among the reasons for opposing the “freezing” or drafting of labor. Labor drafting or “freezing” means, it is stated, “forcing upon Negroes, as well as upon the whites, a standard of living from which there would be little hope of escape.”
 
Bosses Pass the Buck
A survey of the American Management Assn. on the employment of Negroes passes the buck on discrimination in jobs to the white workers:
“Generally, it was found, there is no feeling of discrimination on the part of management, but there is often the fear that employment of colored workers might not be well received by the white personnel.” (New York Times)
This is as phony as phony can be.
Labor has some house-cleaning to do. However, the fact is that through the decades and to this very day the outstanding industries, including war production plants, carry out a Jim Crow policy against employing any Negroes at all, or in the kind of jobs given them. This policy has been broken down only in so far as the labor movement has forced an equal jobs – equal pay – equal rights policy upon the bosses.
 
Court Rules for Jim Crow
Take note that in every important city Negroes are pressing for the right to jobs on a non-discriminatory bisis. In Cleveland, members of the Future Outlook League, militant Negro organization, forced a court trial against the Warner-Swazsey Co., the country’s largest manufacturer of turret lathes, the Thompson Products Co. and the Thompson Aircraft Co. – all war production plants operating under government contracts. Directly concerned are 2,000 trained Negro women.
The judge, Frank J. Merrick, ruled that companies can refuse to hire Negroes regardless of qualification and despite President Roosevelt’s Executtive Order No. 8802 and FEPC rulings forbidding racial discrimination in hiring.
The Negro workers are learning more and more that obtaining jobs on an equal basis requires more than FEPC rulings. They are learning the need of militant mass action – picketing, demonstrations before government bodies, etc., or direct labor intervention. The judge’s ruling, which applies to the entire state of Ohio, puts the issue directly before the union movement to demand full rights for their colored fellow workers.
 
Labor and Jim Crow
While Negroes generally agree that the CIO is combatting Jim Crow, they voice sharp criticism of the AFL. Currently, they cite the Kaiser Shipyard (Portland, Ore.) situation and the “concession” (!) made by AFL Boiler Markers Union local secretary, Tom Ray, to organize the Negroes on a Jim Crow basis. The rejection of Philip Randolph’s appeal to the AFL convention at Toronto to abandon the Jim Crow policy prevailing in many of its largest unions has also been noted by the Negro masses.
A recent survey, conducted among Negro men and women by the Pittsburgh Courier, reveals a critical attitude toward labor union discrimination. Six out of every ten Negro women declared that organized labor generally was not fighting for their rights. The poll further shows that 61.8 per cent of the unions in the South, particularly the union leaders, are guilty, along with the bosses, of a discriminatory policy toward Negro labor.
The Courier describes the poll as “sympathetic scoldings by the American Negro” and also as a warning to American labor to stand up 100 per cent for the Negro in his demands.
From the views expressed generally in the Negro press; it appears that the great bulk of the Negroes are sympathetic with labor’s aim of better working and living conditions. At the same time, they definitely resent discriminatory attitudes and practices which humiliate and deny them equal economic and union rights.
Thus the Negroes define their attitude toward the labor movement. One: they want, seek and demand, as workers and as an oppressed race minority, their full rights, along with all others, in all fields. Two: more and more of them see the necessity for increased cooperation and common action with the white workers in order to protect their own special as well as common interests in conflicts with Jim Crow employers. Three: the Negroes hold out the hand of unity toward White laboir and insist that labor get rid of any remaining Jim Crow.
Therefore, the trend of labor toward a united stand with Negro labor must be speeded up. Five hundred thousand Negroes in the CIO unions are concrete evidence that the labor movement is making healthy, vital progress for cementing white and black labor in common cause against the exploiting employing and ruling class.
 




The American ruling class is seriously concerned with the sharp growth, of dissatisfaction among the Negro masses. Meager sops and remedies now, and big promises for the future, placate some Negroes. However, the acute and distinct abuses and discrimination that the Negroes continue to suffer as a race cause the vast majority to be skeptical and cynical about their status, present and future – especially as long; as they are dependent upon favors from above for improvement in their situation.
Not even the increase of jobs for Negro men and women, induced by war needs and somewhat alleviating their economic conditions, can lead them to ignore fundamental realities.
 
No Freedom
For example, the influential Negro columnist of the Pittsburgh Courier, George S. Schuyler, comments on the disillusionment of those intellectuals who only now learn that the war “has ceased to be a fight for freedom” (Pearl Buck). “It never was such a fight,” states Schuyler, “except in the minds of the easily deluded, wishful thinkers ...”
Still, this otherwise realistic Negro intellectual, who understands that the promises of “a new order of justice, freedom and security” are just so much mouth-wash under imperialism, refused to draw the conclusion of his own logic: only socialism can end colonialism and racial oppression.
Instead, Schuyler skirts this decisive solution, which is in the long run the only truly PRACTICAL answer for the Negro masses. He contents himself by stating that the Axis must be defeated, thus relinquishing the needs and demands of the Negro people to war requirements.
However, the responsibility for the soundest immediate and ultimate aid to the Negro masses rests with the revolutionary proletarian movement, as the only force grasping accurately the immediate and historic needs of all the oppressed and exploited.
 
Stalinists Betray Negroes
Significantly, the Negro writer, Horace R. Cayton, recognizes and is troubled with the role played by the revolutionary movement with respect to the Negro in the recent past and during the war. He writes in the Pittsburgh Courier of January 2:
“The entire left wing and progressive movement, to which large sections of the Negro population have looked for leadership throughout the depression to an extent, let them down by subordinating the Negro people to the war program.”
Cayton here penetrates to a central issue, namely, the necessity for all the oppressed to stand and strike out independently for their joint class and inter-racial needs as against the demands of the ruling class.
Note, though, that by the “left wing” Cayton can only mean the Stalinists. It is they whom the Negroes must castigate and completely turn their backs upon. For it is the Stalinists – supporters of Kremlin interests and the allies of one of the war camps – who have “let the Negroes down.” Through the years they have distorted and betrayed the needs of the Negroes and all the masses. Only the genuine left wing – the revolutionary outlook represented in the program of the Workers Party – has pointed a. clear road to the Negroes.
Mr. Cayton declares categorically that the Negro masses “now are more unified on the issues which confront them than they have ever been in their history ... Negroes are beginning to think alike.” He then asks why this new solidarity among the black people has not brought forth a living organization, program and leaders to give leadership to the Negro people?
This is indeed the central question: the need of a dynamic leadership, based on a definite program. It is here that all Negro organizations and their professed leaders run in a vicious circle and fail to examine where and how a dynamic leadership on a definite program can be achieved.
The interests of the Negroes are not uniform or homogeneous. They are also divided by divergent class interests among them. Some present an entirely bourgeois outlook, determined by their status as capitalists of varying importance.
 
Why MOW Fails
Thus, for instance, the fault with the MOW (March on Washington movement) lies in the fact that its leadership, from Randolph down, endeavors to appease the contradictory forces within its own movement and within the social order of capitalism.
Specifically, Randolph, a working class representative, but backed and surrounded mainly by a secondary leadership of middle class Negroes, declines to get tough with the powers that be, except on secondary matters. Supporting the war, they cannot see, or refuse to see, that the ruling class (with a tremendous Southern bloc of Jim Crowers in Congress) has, above all, its war aims to attend to, and concedes to the Negroes only what it cannot avoid conceding.
Only the organized labor movement, also taking a beating from boss and government, gives real protection to the Negroes who help make up its organization.
The overwhelming bulk of the Negroes are workers or poor farmers of varying degree. It is to be expected that labor problems as a whole are receiving greater consideration than ever before by the Negroes. Thus the California Eagle, in discussing the entry of thousands of Negro women into war industry, comments editorially:
“But of the greatest significance is the fact that they (the new Negro workers in industry – H.A.) are now in a position to be drawn into the full stream of the progressive labor movement, whose heroic efforts in behalf of Negro liberation are the hope of our people.”
 
White Labor Has Special Duty
A part of the Negro world therefore recognizes the relation and indispensability of Negro workers to the labor movement. However, the decisive responsibility for the integration of the new Negro workers into the labor movement rests with white labor. The California Eagle pointedly voices the Negro’s suspicions, as well as a friendly warning to the labor movement, to exercise its responsibility by cracking down on Jim Crow practices within the labor movement:
“What is imperative, however, is that labor recognize its SPECIAL duties to Negro workers. The simple statement that labor believes in ‘equality’ isn’t worth a tinker’s damn. Negroes are a submerged group in the body politic. Before there can be any talk of equality, a militant campaign to hoist colored workers up to the levels, of equal treatment before the law must be made. Labor cannot afford to /take the position of a friendly endorser of the fight for Negro rights. Labor must become the forefront of that struggle.”
Out of a fighting alliance and unity of Negro and white workers and the Negro masses to achieve the democratic, social and economic rights of the Negroes will ultimately come a conscious class struggle policy against the common exploiters and political rulers.
 




CHICAGO – Twenty American Legion Posts in Chicago have just formed the Chicago Council of Union Legionaires. These pro-union labor Legionaires, while remaining members of the American Legion, aim to counteract its anti-labor policy and practices. They condemn, the anti-labor fulminations of Roane Waring, national commander of the Legion and corporation boss of the Memphis, Tenn., street railways.
 
Oppose Legion’s Anti-Labor Policy
The Chicago Council of Union Legionaires has further declared itself in strong opposition to the open shop proposal adopted by the national executive committee at its recent sessions in Indianapolis.
The NEC also called for the adoption of the Wassworth-Austin resolution for compulsory military service, now before Congress. Such a law, declared the NEC, “would settle any crisis [strikes] anywhere,” since it would prevent any strike “against the government.” In avowing again its open shop policy, the Legion declares that no ex-soldier of the present war “shall be forced to join any trade union ... to gain employment.” Thus the American Legion consistently maintains its scabbing policy.
In fact, for nearly twenty-five years the American Legion, organized and continuously backed ever since by big business, has been the biggest single strike-breaking force in the country. Many worker ex-servicemen, duped into joining this outfit, soon became disgusted with the vicious anti-labor policy of the American Legion leadership and got out of the organization. Those who remained have been more and more aroused at the increasing insolence of the Legion’s program and leadership. More and more this program and leadership have expressed themselves along fascist lines, American style.
 
Big Dough Comes from Corporations
If anyone in labor’s ranks still has illusions concerning the American Legion, let it be noted that the National Executive Committee also adopted an “Americanism Program”; that is, an anti-labor program.
To remove any doubts about this, the NEC voted to accept $20,000,000 from “business sources,” that is, from the big corporations of America, in order to finance this “Americanism program.”
Recently, William Green, president of the American Federation of Labor, advised working men war veterans to join the American Legion today in order to combat the fascist and anti-labor elements of the Legion. This proposal is at least two decades too late. For today, Green’s advice is no good. Big business controls the Legion, hook, line and sinker. The ranks have never held office in it.
 
Labor Must Organize Veterans
Here and there, it is true, there have been evidences of resentment and opposition to the American Legion’s policy; Thus the South Fork, Pa., Post of the Legion sent an apology to John L. Lewis for Waring’s speeches against the United Mine Workers Union in recent months. The commander of the American Legion Post in Minneapolis, Jack Carrier, sharply attacked Waring, declaring his speeches “sound like Hitler and Goebbeels.” He advises Waring to “take off your Legion cap and put on the uniform of the National Association of Manufacturers.”
The Chicago Council of Union Legionnaires represents the best and most widely organized opposition to the Legion policies and leadership.
The fact that they have organized into a special group to defend labor’s interests: inside the Legion is to be welcomed heartily. Their action is tantamount to recognition of the Legion’s anti-labor policy and leadership, and of the need to fight them both in an organised way. But if they think they can convert the hidebound, reaction-ruled and boss-controlled Legion into an aid to labor, they will find themselves sadly mistaken. The bosses have their veterans’ organization. Labor ought to have one of its own.
However, apart from the worker ex-servicemen of World War I, there are already eleven million future veterans of World War II whom the American Legion is now endeavoring to enroll in the Legion.
As a first measure, the American labor movement (CIO, AFL, independent unions) must warn all worker-soldiers to steer clear of the American Legion. Moreover, the labor movement must now give serious attention to the integration of the worker ex-servicemen into the labor unions after the war. At the same time, labor must start working on the idea of forming a war veterans’ organization of workingmen.
 




The American Legion has announced that its membership today numbers 1,136,000, the highest in its history. These figures include some servicemen in the armed forces today whom the American Legion has been able to enroll. Despite the increases in membership, the Legion still remains unsuccessful in its labors to recruit the overwhelming majority of workingmen veterans of World War I. Nevertheless, the recruiting campaign of the American Legion poses today an extremely serious problem to the organized labor movement in regard to the worker-veterans of yesterday and tomorrow. What is to be done?
 
Worker-Servicemen’s Organization
It is time now for the labor movement (AFL, CIO, Railroad Brotherhoods, et al.) to take measures leading to the formation of a veterans or servicemen’s organization of workingmen.
It is time now for the organized labor movement unitedly to discuss this question and to emerge with recommendations and proposals.
The tentative name of a workers’ ex-servicemen’s organization Should be selected. A tentative set Of bylaws and a constitution should be formulated. The labor movement jointly should assign a committee to prepare a series of leaflets and pamphlets, setting forth why labor proposes a program for and the formation of a workers’ ex-servicemen’s organization.
One of the latter’s aims would be to counteract the reactionary organization and program of the American Legion. Just as the American Legion endeavors to reach all soldiers and present veterans with its scabby, fascist program, the labor movement must see that its literature, putting forth a progressive program for the veterans, reaches every union member and serviceman.
The national executive boards of the respective labor organizations should advise every local Union and central labor body to take up this question, with the object of crystallizing quickly positive views, a program and organization for the servicemen.
 
Defeat Reaction at Home
It will not be difficult to make the men and women in the unions, and the men and women in the armed forces, understand the validity of preparing the worker-veterans of World War II particularly for the storms ahead. Without a well-organized, disciplined army, no battles are won on the military front. Yes, American labor has enemies abroad; the fascists and Nazis everywhere are its bitter enemies. But labor has equally dangerous and reactionary enemies on the home or domestic front.
Labor must watch, circumvent and defeat these home front enemies, such as the bosses and their tools. The American Legion, with its present program and leadership, is an anti-labor organization. The Legion tries to use the ex-servicemen to maintain exploitation and capitalism in all respects. It is the job of labor to make common cause with the servicemen in the immediate and ultimate interests of labor and the ex-soldier workers.
Therefore it is time today for the labor movement to prepare all the necessary bases to recruit the ex-servicemen into a workers’ veterans’ organization just as fast as they are released into civilian life.
They must not become victims of American Legion propaganda and other reactionary forces in the country. As an obvious reason, therefore, the labor movement must reach and win the servicemen on labor’s side before the servicemen have a chance to become demoralized in the convulsive post-war world to which they will be returning.
 
Soldier and Worker Solidarity
A worker-servicemen’s organization is imperatively required which will maintain direct connections with the labor unions. The ex-servicemen must be in a position to turn to the labor unions as the instruments through which they will be able, to the greatest degree possible, to obtain jobs, either full or part-time.
Hence, more than ever the unions should try to increase their rights and powers on job hiring, etc., especially having in mind the released soldiers at that period. It is a necessity for the unions to cement a close alliance with the servicemen. The time to begin is NOW.
Whatever tentative organization and plans for a worker-servicemen’s organization are set up today by the labor movement, it must be clearly understood that, immediately after the war is over, a national convention of worker-ex-servicemen must be held. At that convention the rank and file soldiers and sailors themselves must ratify the form of organization and program of a worker-ex-servicemen’s organization; and elect all officers. By these measures alone, this veterans’ organization will set itself apart from the big business-controlled American Legion.
From the outset, moreover, all local veterans’ groups that are organized must be invited by the labor movement to send representatives or delegiates to the Central Labor Councils in each city. This is necessary in order to maintain direct solidarity between the ex-servicemen and the unions. Thus, too, the servicemen will have tangible evidence that the labor unions are really interested in their special problems.
In order that national policy and practice may be coordinated, the labor movement should also arrange to have the ex-servicemen represented in all its bodies, including the national executive bodies.
As a practical consideration, the unions should make special financial arrangements so that ex-servicemen may join or return to unions of their adopted or former trades.
 
Progressive Role for Servicemen
More so than the civilian workers, the ex-servicemen will find it difficult to adjust themselves in the post-war period. Their outlook, upon returning from the battlefields, can lead toward several conceivable developments, in which their role can be either reactionary or progressive and militant in relation to the labor movement. Certainly they will be in an aggressive, fighting mood.
The task of the unions is to make sure that these energies and moods are linked to and made organically a part of the interests of the organized labor movement. Then, the ex-servicemen’s post-war role can be a positive, valuable one. Now is the time – it is not too early – for the labor movement to look ahead and prepare its attitude and program in respect to the servicemen.
The proposal of William Green, president of the AFL, for workers to enter the American Legion to reform it is the wrong proposal today. Instead, the organized labor movement should take upon itself the task of initiating a program and organization of worker ex-servicemen of World Wars I and II.
 



Part I

Part II

Part III
 



In an article in the New York Times of May 31 entitled The Race Barrier That Must Be Destroyed, Pearl Buck, the novelist on the Orient, puts forward her solution for the “race problems” arising out of the imperialist war. She observes the discrimination and exploitation of the colonial peoples and sees all these peoples stirring as never before, in resentment against imperialist domination. And she asserts that the “colored man is no longer willing to endure his inferiority.” Her conclusion is that in the future the dominant white nations must “hew out our course not according to past lines of race and empire but along new lines of common humanity and cooperative equality.”
At no point in her long article does Miss Buck indicate what this “cooperative equality” looks like – so far as the masses of people are concerned. Their wages, hours of work, standard of living, political rights – of these she does not speak. Nor does she indicate how “cooperative equality” is to be achieved. Does cooperative equality mean socialism? Or does she mean by it capitalism along the lines of American “democracy”? The British style of “democracy” with ruthless colonial exploitation gives her some qualms. Besides, she implies, it is the United States, not Great Britain, which will decide the destiny of the colonial countries, assuming a United Nations victory. Thus, presumably, the “American way” (capitalist style) is what she would approve as a model, if only the American bourgeois order would lop off the “distressing” Jim Crow which bears an embarrassing resemblance to colonial exploitation and race superiority in the East.
Miss Buck writes:
“The plain fact of the matter is, and the sooner we realize it the better, that too many of the people of the East have not helped the people of the West in this war. The white man ... has been afraid to tell how desperate and hopeless it is ... If the Allies had been fully aided by the colonial population, Japan could have won no territory whatever.”
The statements are true. But apart from small groups in Burma, whom Japan has managed to buy over, the colonial peoples have not been stirred on behalf of the Japanese imperialists either.
Why not? If this is a “race war,” as Miss Buck indicates, why didn’t the masses of Singapore and Burma welcome their racial colored brothers (the Japanese) and aid them en masse in the struggle against British and Allied imperialism? Why don’t the teeming millions of the Indian people extend a hand of welcome to the Japanese and aid them in throwing off once and for all the white British imperialist yoke?
Miss Buck’s “race war” finds China (one yellow nation) on one side of the imperialist camp, subordinated today to the requirements of American and British imperialism; and Japan (another yellow nation) a spearhead of an ambitious rising imperialism on the other side. One yellow nation (Japan) unblushingly bombs and destroys another yellow nation (China), starving, wounding and killing millions of Chinese.
 
How the Colonial People See the War
With all this evidence before their eyes, the “colored” people cannot but instinctively feel that fundamentally their prospective colored “liberators” from “white” imperialism are not one whit different from their present rulers. They feel that if the Japanese imperialists were victorious they would carry on essentially in the same manner. The “people of the East” already feel that their interests as exploited people make it impossible for them to lift a finger for either side of the imperialist camps.
What Miss Buck doesn’t see, and what the colonial masses have yet to grasp, is that they are already a decisive factor in the entire war situation. They can decide their own destiny – free themselves from all domination and set their own independent course – the moment they realize their own strength. They must first put forward their own class program as exploited peoples; find means to arm and defend themselves; and then they will be in a position to expel all invaders. In this sense, the colonial peoples have but to take their own freedom. They do not have to depend upon the good will and “common humanity” of their oppressors.
The “whites,” the Western imperialists, are desperate, since they realize that the exploited masses not only do not aid them, but are more than likely to eliminate them from the scene altogether if opportunity arises. The Japanese imperialists also realize that their military conquests will turn to “scorched earth” if the colonial peoples whose countries they have taken over decide to resist the invaders.
Further, says Miss Buck, “It is possible that we are already embarked upon the bitterest and longest of human wars, the war between the East and the West, and this means the war between the white man and his world and the colored man and his world.” Here again is denied or ignored the essence of imperialism, which crosses all color lines. Japanese imperialists, pretending to be banner bearers of the colored peoples, have found it easy to ally their cause with the upholders of “Aryan purity,” the German Nazis. The manner in which the common people in each country will intervene will also cross race lines – depending on social and economic issues.
That the “colored man is no longer willing to endure his inferiority” is a fact. He has never been “willing” to endure it. He has not yet learned completely, but is learning fast, how to throw off the yoke. He is finding gradually that color and racial divisions are fostered by his oppressor to prevent his linking his destiny consciously as an exploited colonial with workers in other lands.
 
What Allied Imperialism Promises
“The truth is,” proceeding farther afield among the colonial peoples, “that India has become the business of the Allies, and is no longer the possession of any country ... Is this anti-British? No; in the truest sense it is pro-British.” Here again Miss Buck says more than she perhaps realizes. British imperialism has no standing among the Indian masses. The American imperialists are indeed making India THEIR BUSINESS. Note that the Roosevelt Administration, the great “moral” force in the “democratic” struggle against the Axis nations, has not stated or advised the Indian people to proceed to establish their national independence today.
Democracy? Independence? Abolition of imperialism? The United States SEIZES Martinique; the British SEIZE Madagascar. Do they advise and proclaim the independence of these colonies from French imperialism? Not at all; they are seized for “military reasons” and will be “held in trust” for the French Empire until after the war. And then back again to old imperialist ways!
“The tragic aspect of the whole thing,” concludes Miss Buck, “is that the barrier between East and West is an artificial one.” This is potentially an accurate and meaningful statement. But it is only the workers and all exploited peoples who can remove this barrier. By the class struggle which pits our class, regardless of race, color, creed or nation, against the imperialist class, regardless of race or color, will come the end of color division, discrimination and exploitation.
 



These articles endeavor to review the acts and conduct of the leading forces, individuals and organizations of the labor and revolutionary movement in Europe, particularly France. It is to be hoped that a knowledge of the period of the First World War, sunk deep into the minds of the working class movement, together with the kaleidoscopic and catastrophic events of the past two and a half years, will help prevent gross repetitions by the American workers in the present war; will give an impetus to further growth and development of a powerful, militant labor movement, with a corresponding revolutionary wing; and, lastly, will develop, out of the war itself, a mass movement to abolish war and bring lasting peace by the socialist transformation of society.
The period covered is roughly from the beginning of the war, August 2, 1914, to the Zimmerwald Conference, September 1915. The period covered has (1) a dramatic beginning, showing the great strength of the workers’ movement; (2) a lull with the complete capitulation of the leaders when national unity was the only slogan; and (3) a time of rising hope when the Zimmerwald Conference brings together a very few internationalists who are opposed to the war.
Prior to the outbreak of the First World War, on August 2, 1914, the greater European powers – Germany, France, England, Austria-Hungary, Italy and others – had witnessed the development of powerful movements of the working class, in their trade unions and their political organizations. Great confidence and hope was placed in the European labor movement. The belief grew that any attempts by the European ruling classes – the Germany of the Kaiser and the Junkers; the Russia of the Czar and landlords; the France of Poincaré and the Third Estate; the England of the King and the “City” et al. – to resolve their imperialist rivalries by war, would be defeated by the mass power of the working classes in all the countries of Europe, even as an earlier outbreak of the World War had been prevented by the mass threats of the working class, and the consequent danger, to the ruling classes, of social revolution itself.
Yet immediately following upon truly dramatic and dynamic signs of working class power or strength, we find a swift backward unfoldment of the workers’ movement, once war has been declared. First, resentment; then despair; a lulling of the class feelings and protests; and then the final complete surrender or capitulation of the official leadership of the European labor and political movements to social-patriotism, supine submission to the war-mad bourgeoisie in each country. National Unity (“Union Sacrée” in France), rather than class struggle, became the guiding star of a once great movement of the masses. Europe was drenched in blood for more than four years until the Armistice of November 11, 1918, finally brought an end to the horror.
The brightest and greatest beacon light of the working class that emerged from this holocaust was of course the historic Bolshevik Russian Revolution, beginning November 7, 1917, and it was its emergence which really terminated the slaughter which bourgeois commentators expected to last five years more. During all these years only a tiny force of revolutionary internationalists expressed and rendered revolutionary opposition to the war. Only a handful of them were able in the early days of the war to convene at the now historic Zimmerwald conference from September 5 to 8, 1915, to draw up a balance of the war and pass resolutions calling upon the working people once again to pursue a class struggle policy against the war.
What men did and why, in great moments and periods of history, is important. Not as information or knowledge alone, but in the lessons that are thereby offered to us for today, a time of even greater significance and decisiveness for the future of labor and the peoples of all the world. The First World War is now history. The Second World War is making history, but not yet history that can be recorded as finished. The working class and exploited peoples of all countries, of all the continents, of all colors, have it within their power to set the sign and seal on this history in its making, and to decide the course of history in their favor. The story of the First World War, in respect to the labor and revolutionary movement, can be a definite aid in the positive determining of labor’s course and destiny in the future.
 
Wars for “Democracy”
The First World War, history has firmly established, had its basis and deep roots in the economic-political rivalries of the contending military powers or nations. It was never, in its origins, prosecution or consequences, a “war for democracy.” Marxists had long demonstrated the contradictions in the capitalist mode of production and distribution in national and social relations. Hence they accurately predicted an explosion of the capitalist productive forces in the form of imperialist war. Imperialist war is an expression of the necessity of the rival imperialist nations or rival groups of imperialist nations to break through the economic and political boundaries of national states. The constant and self-perpetuating economic and social convulsions culminating in imperialist war are direct proof of the necessity for the workers to struggle against the limitations of the system of private property and the social order of capitalism itself. In their own interests the working class should be the first to learn this lesson. Its interests lie in combating the outbreak of war; and failing to prevent war, not to support the imperialist war while it lasts, but to strive to convert such a war toward its own ends, namely, the social revolution.
The First World War, by its very nature, failed to resolve the imperialist contradictions that were the basic causes for its outbreak in 1914. The Second World War, begun 25 years later, is now in its third year attempting with the same futile methods to resolve the same fundamental contradictions, under far more severe and aggravated economic, political and military conditions. The imperialist nations, whichever group may win a military victory, will fail again. The insoluble remains insoluble – on the basis of capitalist relations of society.
In the First World War the leadership of the working class, and thus also the working class, failed to achieve its historic destiny. In the Second World War the task of the revolutionists and the working class is again the same. Will the masses succeed this time, where they failed before? More certainly than at any time in history the fate of humanity depends on the answer to this question.
The history of the official labor and revolutionary movement, immediately preceding and during the First World War, represents a crushing indictment of the syndicalist (trade union) and socialist leaders in their respective countries. Their traitorous acts, their betrayals of the working class, their complete support of the First World Imperialist War – these things are known in large part by the European masses, and the revolutionaries in all countries. But a knowledge of their acts, and their reasons therefor, can be of value today to the American labor and revolutionary movement in laying out the course of labor here.
One may begin with the French labor movement as an outstanding illustration of the curse of opportunism that struck off the arm of revolutionary opposition and resistance to the war from the body of the French working class. It provides a potent illustration that militancy and desire for class action by the masses are easily frustrated or nullified unless the labor and political arms of the working class are guided always by a well-defined, clear-cut set of principles (theory) as their guide to action. The lack of such a consistent theory and principles in both the trade union movement and the French Socialist Party made inevitable a general policy of opportunism and then capitulation to social-patriotism on their part.
Between the syndicalists (General Confederation o£ Labor – known as the CGT), led by Leon Jouhaux, and the Socialist Party of France, led by Jean Jaurès, there had existed through the year a sharp division and a most intense antagonism.
 
French CGT – Hybrid of Unionism and Politics
The syndicalists had no doctrine or theory of the labor movement; that is, they professed none, endeavoring thus not to be “doctrinaire.” This lack itself boded ill to the organized French workers. The syndicalists wanted to be as broad as possible in order to avoid even any suspicion of sectarianism. This, in a trade union sense, is correct, if, by this, it is meant that the labor movement – its unions – are made up of the broad mass organizations of the working class. Such bodies admit any worker to their ranks irrespective o£ his political, economic, religious views or lack of them; provided only that such a worker observes the elementary principles of class solidarity and united union action and loyalty in strikes, etc. Such broadness – embracing and organizing every worker into a labor union – is a basic requirement for mass action and striking power for either economic or political purposes by the workers. No question of sectarianism as to the tactics and strategy of the labor movement is involved here, but just common sense. However, every job, every task of the working class requires its particular tools or equipment. Lenin commented succinctly on such matters by pointing out that while ordinary thin shoes may be used on smooth roads, rough roads or mountain climbing require cob-heeled boots. The course of the class struggle also demonstrates the need for ideas (theory) and weapons (tactics and strategy) to fit the situation.
The unique feature of the French Syndicalist Federation [1] (CGT) was not that it was a labor organization that professed no interest, concern or belief in politics, “politicians” and political organizations (as for instance the American IWW). That would be comprehensible, even if woefully wrong and disastrous in results. The unique feature of the CGT was that it was a hybrid of unionism and politics. [2] As a result of this hybrid or mixed character, the French syndicalists were unable to get along with the International Labor Union (International Labor Secretariat) or vice versa, since the latter was, in fact, a body limited to exchange information pertinent to the labor movement, wages, hours, etc.
On the other hand, the French syndicalist organization, professing no set theories or “doctrines,” actually had very definite views on working class political strategy and tactics. These unfortunately were not of a consistent or rounded character, as will be shown below. The CGT thus failed to follow through with the logic of its position, views or “politics.” The CGT, forced to react as a living labor organism to life and to the class struggle, put forward its politics or views in the International Labor Secretariat on such significant issues as working class anti-militarism and the general strike. The ILS, regarding itself as only an information body, rebuffed the initiative of the CGT.
 
French SP – Parliamentarians
The Socialist Party of France could fittingly be described as a party of parliamentarians, its people leaning more and more on electioneering methods and pressure to achieve the objectives of their party. This trend and emphasis on and toward parliamentarianism had continued and increased enormously since the entry of the socialist leader, Millerand [3], into the French government, as Premier, in June 1899, and of Briand in January 1913. With this early acceptance in essence of the dea of coalition government (which has become known in the contemporary period as the Popular Front), there followed unavoidably more and more general accord with methods of class collaboration on the economic and political fields, finally culminating in the easy surrender by the Socialist Party of France to the crassest and most disastrous epression of class collaboration, namely, social-patriotism.
There were, of course, differences in the French Socialist Party between various groups and individuals, but not of a fundamental character. These divisions were generally ironed out whenever the French parliamentarians wanted to unite against the syndicalists, whom they opposed with great vigor. The best expression of the parliamentarians was Jean Jaurès [4], the highly popular leader of the French Socialist Party, who can be described more accurately as a democrat than a socialist.
Belief in the utilization of the democratic state to advance the cause of socialism and to prevent the scourge of war was not confined to France but was characteristic of the other socialist or social democratic parties of Europe. Revisionism had taken a dominating hold on the European socialist parties since Eduard Bernstein had, with considerable skill, programmatized the concepts of reformism or evolutionary socialism in his book, Evolutionary Socialism. These concepts more and more were accepted in life, if not always in theory, by both the leadership and ranks of the social democracy. With diminishing success small groups of orthodox Marxists in the various parties struggled to maintain the banner of Marxist theory and practice as the First World War approached. The “Possibilists,” as the revisionists were known in France, came steadily to dominate the life of the French party.
 
Why the Second International Collapsed
In dealing in this article largely with the French labor and revolutionary movement of the war period, we are, therefore, not singling out an exception. Much is known by the working class of the perfidious rôle of the large and powerful German social democracy in the First World War – abject surrender to the commands of the Kaiser and the Junkers; calling upon the German workers to fight for the Fatherland! – actions that caused consternation in the working class movements throughout Europe.
The entire Second International, excepting the small genuine left wings that existed in the respective parties, was permeated, in fact, saturated through and through, with cretinist thought, with illusions of parliamentarianism as the sure and peaceful path to socialism and as the weapon with which to prevent any imperialist conflict. Even as the syndicalists, with their non-political and anti-parliamentary outlook, surrendered to the state, so likewise the European socialist movement, with the limited outlook of parliamentarianism as the proletarian instrument, capitulated before the bourgeois state when war was at their throats.
The split and wreck of the Second International were rooted in the division among socialists on the theories of reformist and revolutionary socialism; even as the splits and wreck of the First International were already rooted in the diverse doctrines of anarchism and scientific socialism [5]; and in the modern period the split and wreck of the Third (Communist) International are rooted in the division on the theory of socialism in one country – national socialism or Stalinism – and the theory of international socialism, the permanent revolution, as expounded by Trotsky and the Fourth Internationalists.
Even as the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 and the fall of the Paris Commune in 1871 were the great objective or external factors that sealed the doom of the First International, the First World War sealed the doom of the Second International; and the rise of fascism and the Second World War will seal irrevocably the doom of the Third International.
The Second International, after the demise of the First, continued to concern itself to such an extent with the anarchist groups, that, indeed, about the only thing that the Second International and its component parts agreed on was the elimination of the anarchist groups. Actually, anarchist doctrine had received smashing blows after the Paris Commune and had ceased to be an important influence in European working class matters, except in Spain [6], and to a small extent in Italy. In France, the anti-Marxist doctrines were primarily syndicalist and only tinged with anarchist doctrine.
That the Second International could preoccupy its mind with the anarchist groups was evidence of its failure to deal with the living issues of labor and the paramount issue of the war in a class and revolutionary manner. This preoccupation helped to turn these “socialists” in revulsion from anarchism and “direct action” to even cruder and, in its consequences, equally criminal reformist doctrine and parliamentary cretinism.
The Second International, moreover, could hardly be regarded as an International, except in form. It is now easy to say it is euphemistic to have called the Second International an International at all. Like its respective parties, the Second International was only superficially united on basic principles. Its units consisted of large amorphous bodies or memberships, mainly right wing or reformist, with centrist and small left wings.
 
Impotence Due to False Theory of State
What can be stated at this point, without anticipating the course of events, is accepted as axiomatic by the revolutionary Marxists (Fourth Internationalists) of today. That is, that the theory or principles of a movement are decisive for its life. A theory-less movement or a movement which rejects the known basic tenets of revolutionary Marxism is doomed in advance to defeat, either in surrender or futile struggle. Most surely is this the fate of such movements on the central question that faces them and the working class; that is, war. The French syndicalists, for example, with their lack and outright rejection of explicit and consistent political theory finally found themselves, from top to bottom, unable to move cohesively and able only to spout anti-militarist phrases and to talk about the general strike against war. But, as Trotsky said, “a general strike, be it ever so distinguished by mass strength, does not decide the question of power as yet, but only raises it.” The syndicalists denied or ignored the essential question: what should they and the masses they influenced do about the state power, the very real government of the French bourgeoisie – the very real and not at all fictitious instrument for oppression and control of the masses; and especially for corralling or driving the French workers into the imperialist carnage. The syndicalists did not concern themselves with the fundamental question: how were the masses to destroy the state power of the bourgeoisie and to establish their own political or state power – a workers’ state? Therefore, on the burning immediate issue of war or peace in Europe, all that the French syndicalists in the last analysis could do was to call for peace and declare themselves against war. In denying the state, they came at last to capitulate or kneel before the state; and not, alas, before a workers’ government (which has yet to materialize) but before the French bourgeois state they professed so strongly either to ignore or despise.
Likewise, the Socialist Party of France, because of its concept of the theory and practice of socialism also inevitably capitulated in the war crisis to the bourgeois state, to the French bourgeoisie. The revisionist concept that the capitalist state would grow by the process of peaceful development into the Socialist Peoples State, was ingrained in the minds and temper of the French Socialist Party. The great speed of development toward war in the months of 1914 entirely engulfed the organization and quickly paralyzed any appeals or action that the French organization could or did contemplate. Revisionist or reformist doctrines on the rôle of the Party and the road to socialist power resulted in early and swift demoralization of the party, its leadership and ranks, when the bourgeois war machinery began to smoke and then to roar its fires.
 
Masses Need Leadership Against War
The masses of Europe were against the First World War and had the power of numbers as well as of inclination against the war that finally engulfed them. (For example, in 1906 the proletariat of Sweden and Norway were powerful enough to prevent the outbreak of war between Sweden and Norway by a general strike.) It is clear today that the First World War represented the great defeat of the international proletariat. The masses, it can be repeated, were against the war. They had the power of numbers. They had the inclination to struggle against the war. But the masses cannot spontaneously achieve the defeat of the war objectives of the ruling imperialist class and the masses did not have a revolutionary leadership to guide their efforts. A force was lacking which could see the imperialist conflict in its true light and could advise the proletariat and peasants on a correct course o£ action.
What has been said for the European workers and peasants as a whole could be said particularly of the French labor movement. The workers’ movement had become strong and powerful numerically and had the potentialities of enormous striking power in whatever direction it decided to move. Both the trade union movement, the CGT, and the Socialist Party of France had had to live and grow up under the continual threat and menace of war. There may be cited the “Tangier Incident” in 1905; the Agadir affair in 1911, and the wearing and devastating Balkan wars. It is a calamity of the first order, therefore, that this potential great strength of the French masses against war and for workers’ power was nullified by the woeful lack of revolutionary theory and policy of the dominant leadership of the CGT and the Socialist Party.
In the French CGT, strong resolutions against war had been adopted at its various congresses, in 1904, 1906 and 1908. The resolutions each time grew more vigorous in tone. The 1908 congress asserted that the only boundaries that existed were not geographical, i.e., not between the nations, but between the classes. It was necessary, the congress concluded, to prepare for a general strike against war. Pamphlets in this direction had been issued and many demonstrations against war had been held. In the French Socialist Party the danger of war was constantly in the forefront of socialist discussion, literally from 1905 onward.
The last conference of the French Socialist Party before the outbreak of the war took place in Paris in the middle of July 1914 just three weeks before the war actually broke. The French conference considered a resolution for a general strike, which had been submitted to it jointly by Keir Hardie of the Independent Labor Party of England and Vaillant (the old Communard) of the French Socialist Party, for final adoption by the International Congress. Jean Jaurès, A. Thomas and M. Sembat supported the resolution, but Jules Guesde, leader of the left wing of the French SP, contended that general strike could not be decided upon because, first, the resolution under discussion specified the means to be employed to prevent war, whereas the previous International Congress had decided that all means were to be used. Second, Guesde stated, the general strike could not be decided upon as the weapon because inequality (in standards of living, strength, etc.) prevailed between the workers’ organizations in the various countries.
 
“Masses Won’t Cooperate”
Howsoever motivated, this argument is specious. Reformists have put forward such arguments through the years to justify upholding the practices and attitude of their own labor and political organizations and of their own government, as against the economically and socially weaker and less advanced countries elsewhere. People like Norman Thomas (see the Socialist Call, January 17, 1942) of the American Socialist Party have done so. So-called left wingers have used this argument to justify support of the present imperialist war against Germany since, ostensibly, the United Nations, while concerned mainly with their imperialist interests, are “more progressive” than Nazism. These are the kinds of arguments that have always been the bridge from class struggle and opposition to the imperialist war, to class collaboration and social patriotism. Their presentation by the “left” Guesde foreshadowed his complete capitulation less than a month after the beginning of the war when he entered the defense cabinet. Gustave Hervé, who for so many years had been a vociferous leader against militarism, also came forward against the proposal for a general strike of labor against the war. Said he, the future rabid social-patriot and red-baiter, the general strike could not be supported because the masses would not cooperate. All the features of the renegade, of renegacy, of compromise and vacillation are here revealed. Blame the masses; they aren’t ready; they won’t cooperate. Before the battle, as the bugle itself is to be heard, the leaders say the masses won’t struggle, whereas in fact the masses but await the call to struggle, and direction by their leaders. How often have these arguments and excuses been used by labor and political leaders to betray their supporters and followers just at the crucial periods!
It may be pointed out here, once again, the better to understand the apparent and real confusion among the leaders, that without exception the various socialist parties of Europe had strong beliefs, even conviction, that their respective governments would not attempt war out of fear of social revolution. Would that history had proved true their faith!
We may return, however, to an earlier period than the French SP Conference of July 1914 to give the graphic picture of the attitude and actions of respective labor and political organizations in the various countries with respect to the growing war menace. On several occasions, international solidarity and action had been achieved.
 
International Conference and Acts Against War
The international congresses of the Second International had passed resolutions against war. In 1907, the Stuttgart Conference unanimously declared that all means possible against war must be employed, and that war must be used as the opportunity to precipitate the end of capitalism. These are big words, meaningful words, coming from an international congress of socialists. Yet time was to demonstrate, only a short seven years later, that only a very few small groups here and there – for example, among the Russians, Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev; a few in France, Rosmer, Souverine, Loriot; in Germany, Rosa Luxemburg and Liebknecht; in the Independent Labor Party of England; in Switzerland, Fritz Platten – understood and characterized the war as imperialist on both sides and not worthy of support by the working people; advocated the continuation of the class struggle by the workers during the imperialist conflict; and consciously aimed to achieve the transformation of the imperialist war into civil war and the struggle for workers’ power (successfully achieved finally and only in 1917 by the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia). It was this handful of left or revolutionary groups in the various countries who, because of their sound historical and theoretical conception of the nature of capitalism and imperialist war, were alone able to view the European conflict in its true imperialist light and to advise the working people accordingly on their duties and tasks. But unfortunately, they were only a handful. Theoretical confusion and lack of revolutionary objective and will dominated the overwhelming bulk of the leadership of the trade unions and socialist parties of Europe. Chauvinism, social-patriotism won. Europe was drenched in blood for more than four years. Today, more than twenty-five years later, these same fundamental principles have yet to be grasped on a wide scale and a revolutionary and dominant leadership developed in the course of the Second World War.
In 1910, the international conference at Copenhagen considered the question of a general strike against war, but postponed decision until the next international congress, which would have taken place in August 1914. Already between 1907 and 1910 a change in attitude on the policy toward war was reflected in the important question of the general strike. The chief opposition at the Copenhagen conference to the general strike came from the German socialists. The workers of France, Germany and Great Britain had held joint demonstrations against war. When there was danger of war between France and Great Britain [7], the French and English workers had held such a demonstration. From 1911 on, demonstrations against war became a regular feature. Moreover, in 1912 the French CGT and Socialist Party, despite the differences and frictions previously described, had undertaken joint action.
In March 1913 the German Social Democracy and the French Socialist Party issued a joint manifesto on militarism and war. The outstanding features of this joint manifesto were the following: The people wish peace. The ruling classes create national hate. The socialists wish to resolve the danger of military conflict, of war, by arbitration. A militia (people’s army) should be substituted for the regular armies. (With the exception of England’s, all the armed forces were conscript armies). The burden of maintenance of the military machinery, of “defense,” should fall on the rich. The socialists of Germany and France, the manifesto went on to say, are aware of the misuse of the term “militarism” by the respective ruling classes, to incite the people against one another, and to cover their own sins, crimes and persistent preparation and drive for war. Hence the socialists of both countries will fight militarism.
The resolution was an interesting and significant one, both because of what it contained (viz., the above positive propositions) and because of its equally or even more significant omissions. The joint resolution of the great mass socialist parties of Germany and France against war, does not mention capitalism, the class struggle, imperialism. Thereby, these omissions, expressly and implicitly, with or without design, laid the political foundation for the abandonment of class action and solidarity, when the respective governments declared war; and for the passing over of the socialist leaders to “defense of the Fatherland”; to national unity and social-patriotism. When one speaks of “the people” only, and forgets the “working class”; when one speaks of “militarism” and ignores “capitalism and imperialism”; when one speaks of “struggle against war” and forgets “class struggle” – one may state that the militant struggle against capitalist war will not be consummated. This proved to be true in 1914. It has also been proved true in the period leading up to and during the present war with respect to the Comintern’s policy of a “popular front,” “people’s war” and “collective security” against fascism. Where the concept of the class struggle does not prevail, there is guaranteed the betrayal of the masses into war and, as a corollary, the gradual diminution or loss of their democratic and labor rights as well.
It stands out clearly, as we observe the variety of developments in the pre-First World War Period and the manifestations of strength and growth of the labor movement; and as we observe the evidences of weakness and uncertainty on the part of the various governments, that the masses were ready to respond to dynamic, militant leadership in the struggle against war, even as in the lesser struggles they had already carried through. The masses definitely expected international social democracy to give them the necessary leadership at the crucial time.
 
Capitalist Governments Fear Workers’ Movements
During this period there was evidenced the instability and uncertainty of the bourgeois regimes in their attitude and relations with the laboring masses. Ireland’s long struggle with the British ruling class was about to break into open civil war. In England the “Triple Alliance” (the alliance of the coal miners, railroad and transport workers) of the powerful trade unions was regarded by the British government and The City (the financiers) as a greater menace to its existence and future than the European Triple Alliance (Germany, Austria and Italy) of the powerful bourgeois nations.
Italy, scene of many-sided fights – anti-clerical, republican, peasant struggles and proletarian growth – was growing up politically under the direction of a strong Socialist Party. (Today one may recall that Mussolini was establishing his base for future strength and popularity and for his fascist “March on Rome” through editorial participation on a left socialist newspaper and in the socialist movement itself.) Italy’s famous “Red Week” had approached close to insurrection and the direct struggle for power by the masses. Two million workers had gone on strike. With the nearness of war, the Italian labor movement threatened another general strike unless Italy remained neutral.
Belgium’s labor movement was driving forward for its democratic rights and had engaged in a general strike to achieve universal suffrage. The Austrian Empire was beset and menaced by the various nations under her hegemony. The social democracy of Germany was growing almost from day to day, increasing its strength and influence over millions of workers and peasants, and even over large layers of the petty bourgeois or lower middle classes, as Zinoviev’s article [8] has so well established. Its numerical growth and representation in the National Reichstag, and in the states and municipalities throughout the German Empire was not just steady but phenomenal.
Only by a vote of 358 to 204 was the French government able to adopt the three-year conscription law.
In Czarist Russia the labor and revolutionary movement continued to find ways and means to manifest its growth and increasing strength. In 1912 numerous strikes took place throughout Russia. Perhaps the most significant action of the Russian workers was upon the occasion of the visit of Poincaré, President of France, to Russia in July 1914 to confer with his imperialist ally. The workers of St. Petersburg greeted the presence of this French imperialist warmonger on Russian soil with a great strike and demonstration against the Czar and Czarism.
The various governments well knew that they could not pursue a course toward war unless they could achieve a considerable degree of unanimity of the people behind them. The French government time and again insisted that it was for peace and that war was not in its mind or objective. Yet all the responsible bourgeois leaders of the various countries were fully aware that a compromise of the imperialist rivalries between the capitalist nations, short of war, was receding further and further into the background. Several times already incidents had been compromised by diplomacy immediately before the powder keg of the war exploded. Almost anything, just an incident, could precipitate the delayed imperialist war. (That incident, “an affair of honor,” was soon to come with the historic assassination of Duke Ferdinand of Austria by a Serbian.) So, loudly, the bourgeois government heads shouted and proclaimed a policy of peace. And feverishly they prepared behind the scenes for the inevitable war. The anxious populations of France, Germany, Austria, Belgium, England, all the countries, were constantly tossed between assurances of peace and predictions of the inevitability of war. It would almost appear that the hearts and minds of the common people were shuttled between war and peace so mercilessly that any conclusive decision, whether war or peace, might be a relief.
With only weeks (as history showed) before the outbreak of the war, the labor leaders began to place more and more reliance on the respective governments and their promises. With Austria putting pressure on little Serbia, the German social democracy found it possible merely to ask the German government to use its influence and good offices with the Austrian government to desist from its pressure and provocations.
[In the next section of this article we deal with the period of “national unity,” i.e., the first days and months of the outbreak of war. Unable, because of inadequate and false theory, to meet the onrush of the war events, the labor leadership capitulates almost immediately, the majority in the European political and labor organizations cowering on their bellies before the imperialist governments.]

Footnotes
1. For a comprehensive review of French Syndicalism and the rôle of revolutionaries in the labor unions, see Communism and Syndicalism by L.D. Trotsky.
2. We are not discussing here the imperative need for the labor unions to enter as an organized force into politics, and their relations to working class political parties. For example, the Workers Party is an advocate of the formation of an Independent Labor Party of the American workers, based on the labor unions. What is discussed above is why the mixed and confused character and outlook of the CGT regarding politics and political organization caused friction and finally disastrous consequences for the French working class with the outbreak of the First World War.
3. Millerand, socialist leader, entered the cabinet of the bourgeois government of Waldeck-Rousseau and Gallffet, the butcher of the Paris Communards of 1871, forgetting or ignoring that a socialist who joins a capitalist government either goes over to the enemy or puts himself in the power of the class enemy. In 1910 Millerand helped Briand break the railroad strike. By 1920 he had become President of France and was recognizing and aiding the counter-revolutionary General Wrangel in the latter’s fight against the Bolsheviks.
4. “A composite of national traditions, of the metaphysics of moral principles, of love for the oppressed, and of poetic imagination” (Trotsky’s description), Jaurès was truly a popular figure of the masses. Little is it to be wondered at, therefore, that the assassination of Jaurès so greatly affected the common people of France and internally hastened the demoralization of the French Socialist Party.
5. The anarchists, under the dynamic leadership of Michael Bakunin, had been significant instruments in wrecking the First International despite the heroic efforts of the scientific socialists, Marx, Engels and others, to prevent the theoretical and actual disintegration of this – the first important international organization of the proletariat.
6. Only in Spain, in the revolution of 1936 and in the recent civil war, did anarchism, with roots in the labor movement, again raise its head. Here again, because of its anti-statist theory, it could only bow in fact before the bourgeois republic and help cause confusion in the struggle against Franco’s fascists.
7. [The following note is attributed here. There is no other footnote in the printed version. – Note by ETOL]
8. Cf. The Social Roots of Opportunism, The New International, March, April and May 1942. [This note is incorrectly given as note 7 in the printed version. – Note by ETOL]
 



In last week’s Labor Action article we showed how labor-management committees are against the IMMEDIATE interests of working people. These committees have been developed to make racehorses of workers, with reckless disregard for their health and for established union standards. They aim to prevent strike actions needed to improve working conditions and obtain wage increases in accord with the rising cost of living. Moreover, with the aid of such committees, employers are able to keep workers from seeking and obtaining jobs which pay higher wages or offer better working conditions. Labor turnover has already been reduced from 25 per cent a year in the last war to 4 per cent in the present war. (New York Times, June 7) This is a reduction due in no small part to the functioning of the labor-management committees – a sugar-coated technique for “freezing” workers to jobs paying less, without resort to the decree which Paul McNutt avowedly is ready to employ.
The imperialist war offers the ruling class a golden opportunity (in its opinion) to use “national defense” and “national unity” not only to hog-tie labor to the imperialist war chariot; but also to take away step by step, through the labor-management committee’s, labor’s hard-won gains.
 
The Bosses’ Pattern for the Future
But the employers and the government have also an ULTIMATE post-war objective for the labor-management committees. As Wendell Lund, director of the labor production division of the War Labor Board has admitted, the techniques of cooperation between labor and management developed during the war are to provide a pattern “for the same kind of teamwork and cooperation in the days of peace.” (New York Times, June 7)
Why do the bosses want “teamwork” in the post-war period. First, the bosses have demonstrated their utter incompetence to avoid chaos in their own economy. No more proof of this is needed than the periodic depressions, the periodic capitalist wars and the inability of the bosses to produce effectively even for their own war. On the other hand, labor has demonstrated its indispensability not only as labor power, but also in developing ideas for production. Suspecting its own impotence and incompetence and dispensability, and confronted with the ability of the working class, the capitalist class wants a reorganization of industry with the cooperation or collaboration of labor. The bosses want everything labor can give them – in productivity, efficiency, ideas, as long as this is not accompanied by any threats to or inroads on their continued control, management and ownership of production.
As Wendell Lund said (New York Times, June 7):
“The men along the conveyor belts, or cutting dies, or drilling for oil, are a great reservoir of creative and constructive production, ideas that we have, as yet, hardly begun to tap.” The bosses can’t even run their own system, so workers have been and are being encouraged to devise means for more efficient production. Today, the government steps in to assist the bosses to get these ideas for efficient production by a system of awards, certificates and citations of the War Production Board. But to make sure that using these, ideas of the workers does not constitute a threat to the bosses’ retaining management of production, these awards are restricted to plants which have voluntarily instituted labor-management committees.” (New York Times, June 16)
In other words, the bosses, with the aid of the government hope to continue their exploitation of workers by tapping their ideas within the frame-work of labor-management committees.
 
Bosses Want Safe Labor Movement
Second, and more important, labor has been developing its strength and militancy in organization, especially in the great strikes resulting in the formation of the powerful CIO industrial unions.
Knowing that a militant labor movement can play havoc with the political and imperialist designs of the ruling class, the problem of this class is and remains how to devitalize a living labor movement and make it “safe and sane” or impotent to stand up for its needs, its living standards and democratic rights. The labor-management committees are the most powerful organizational device thus far improvised by the bosses in the present period to achieve this end, and they have no intention of relinquishing or ignoring the device made palatable at present by the “exigencies” of war.
In the past the bosses could rely on the safe and conservative old-line AFL unions. But this did not resolve the class struggle issue in relation to the millions of workers engaged in the mass production industries who pressed for organization.
When the NRA came into existence, it gave a tremendous impetus to union organization by giving government sanction to organization. To divert this organization into safe channels and to prevent workers from organizing militant unions, the bosses attempted to foist company unions on the workers. Company unions grew like mushrooms in the beginning of the NRA period.
On the other hand, the Roosevelt Administration, recognizing that it was impossible to stem the pressure of the workers for their own organizations, tried to channelize the struggles and their organizations into safe channels by the utilization of all kinds of government intervention in labor disputes.
But the company union methods of the employers and the government intervention methods of the Roosevelt Administration – both class collaborationist in purpose – failed to stop the organization of labor into strong industrial unions which carried out militant struggles. As a result of the rise in the economic situation in 1935–37, providing jobs for millions after lean years of unemployment, the CIO came into existence and demonstrated its right to continued existence by militant fighting methods (strikes, mass picketing, sit-downs, etc.). With all the internal difficulties, multiplied several times over, the organization and concept of the CIO still remain the great achievement and hope of labor on the economic front.
Had not the imperialist war intervened, with the resulting capitulation of the trade union officialdom before the offensive of the bosses, the CIO unions would have increased further in strength and militancy. As indicated by Philip Murray, president of the CIO, at the CIO convention in 1941 at Detroit, it is conceivable that they would have entered the political field independently as a workers’ political movement.
 
The Bosses’ Offensive After the War
Fearing the revival of the militant working class movement in the post-war period, the bosses even now seek to strengthen the labor-management committees at the expense of the bona fide unions.
But, in the post-war period, with millions of workers no longer needed for war production, labor will find itself in a much weaker position economically to combat the bosses’ offensive – a task which is difficult enough under the most favorable conditions of relative shortage of labor, strong union organization and militant workers.
TODAY, labor must prepare for the future by being on its guard against any attempts to devitalize its organizations. This means, concretely, that militants in the unions continue to speak up at union meetings and conventions for the maintenance of union standards and indicate their distrust of and opposition to the anti-labor purposes and practices of the labor-management committees.
 
Maintain Bona Fide Unions
It is the bona fide unions which have gained the experience, the technique and developed the organizational machinery for best resolving the problems of workers in relation to the employers. Any and all encroachments, small or large, upon union prerogatives should be resisted. There is nothing in relation to wages, hours, etc., that cannot be better done by the union itself than by the machinery of labor-management committees. These labor-management committees are only a variation of company unionism, a deadly menace to union organization. Unions only maintain their strength by constant vigilance and struggle – strikes, etc. In abandoning their gains and rights, the unions become unavoidably weaker. The ranks, not feeling the daily effects and not seeing the daily evidences of union efforts, tend more and more to lose their confidence in the unions, which are actually their best weapons. The labor-management committees hasten the weakening of the union structure and organism. The employers like that; the workers shouldn’t – and they should do something about it.
 
Ranks Dubious of Committees
The labor union officialdom, almost entirely, has permitted itself to go along, sometimes skeptically and reluctantly, but nevertheless going along with the formation of labor-management committees in order to get “efficient production” for the “war for democracy.” The Stalinists also – as servants of the Kremlin – have fully supported and in many cases have been directly instrumental in the establishment of labor-management committees. But the rank and file workers are more than dubious of the labor-management set-up. Their experiences so far indicate that these committees are not in their – THE WORKERS’ – interests.
As the war itself proceeds, and the effects of labor-management committees on labor standards and the unions show themselves clearly, the ranks of labor will begin to shake their head’s in protest and will say:
“Enough! Labor-management committees are committees of the bosses to manage the workers. Workers want no part of them. Workers will rely on our own organizations – our own labor unions.”
 
Worker Offensive Toward Worker Control
Today more and more workers are beginning to realize the need for workers to have a say in how production is carried on; to develop some control in and over production and eventually to take over full control. However, anyone who deludes himself or others that labor-management committees are a step toward workers’ control of production finds the answer in the manufacturers’ own statements to the contrary. A recent survey of manufacturers proved their satisfaction with these committees because they “in no way enable workers to take over management functions.” (New York Times)
Workers must achieve control of production through their own organizations – the unions, etc. (The relation of workers’ control of production to the capitalist system is not within the purview of this article, though decisive in the solution thereof.) In some cases, to protect their own immediate interests, unions have already gained the right to check the books of the bosses to ascertain profits, etc., and to make demands for wage adjustments and other improvements in working conditions accordingly.
WHEN WORKERS GET THEIR HANDS INTO THE MANAGEMENT OF THE PRODUCTIVE MACHINERY THROUGH THEIR OWN ORGANIZATIONS, THEY ARE MAKING IMPORTANT PROGRESS. THEY ARE DEVELOPING IDEAS WHICH IN THE COURSE OF THE ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL STRUGGLES BETWEEN THE BOSSES AND WORKERS WILL LEAD TO THE CONCEPT OF FULL WORKERS’ CONTROL OF PRODUCTION IN THE INTERESTS OF THE WORKERS EXCLUSIVELY. THAT MUST BECOME AND BE THE FINAL AND REAL ANSWER OF LABOR TO THE LABOR-MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES.
 







[In the first section of this article, published in the June number of The New International, we described the French labor movement in the period preceding World War I. The apparent strength of the labor movement and the mass opposition to the impending war were contrasted with the impotence of the French CGT and the Socialist Parties of the Second International. In this second section of the article, the false theories of the trade union and socialist leadership are proved by their utter helplessness and betrayal in the face of the catastrophic events of the imperialist slaughter.]





Then came the assassination and the Austro-Serbian break. The juggernaut was beginning to roll. Again Jean Jaurès, hoping to prevent war, rushed to the French government to receive assurances of peace – which were duly proffered, as before.
An emergency session [1] of the International Socialist Bureau was quickly convened at Brussels which was attended by Morgari (Italy); Hardie (England); Roubanovitch (Bulgaria); Vandervelde (Belgium); Troelstra (Holland); Haase and Rosa Luxembourg (Germany) as well as Jaurès (France). Jaurès declares: “It is our duty to insist that our government speak with force to Russia so that she abstains.”
Therefore, Jaurès rushes back to the French government, only to find that he has been deceived; that the war is really on and that the bourgeoisie intends to pursue its course to the end. Jaurès still stoutly maintains that the socialists will continue to campaign against the war and its further extension. The French Under Secretary of State, knowing that the die is cast, insolently tells Jaurès: “You do not dare; you will be killed at the next street corner.”
Prophetic words. The next day, July 31, 1914, Jaurès is assassinated. Thus ends a period. Of the sincere Jaurès it has been said that he was killed by his enemies and betrayed by his own party. With his death and that of the great German revolutionary leader, Bebel, Trotsky has said: “Their deaths marked the line where the progressive historical mission of the Second International ended.”
Two days later, August 2, just two days before the fateful August 4, Mueller, the representative of the German Social-Democracy, arrives in Paris. But, as he advises the French comrades, he is only on a visit for information! He has no authority to help formulate decisions, actions or policies on behalf of the German Social-Democracy. All communications were cut. Each Socialist Party, therefore, reserves the right of freedom of action. From his subsequent report back to the Germans one receives the impression that the French socialists would proceed to vote the war credits in the French Chamber as demanded by the French government.
 
Events Move Rapidly
What has been the rôle of the French CGT during these eventful days? On Monday, July 27, the CGT calls for a demonstration in Paris, to take place on the following Thursday.
But the masses are impatient to demonstrate their opposition to war. So, on that same Monday night, a demonstration of tens of thousands mills in the streets. Despite extreme violence and brutality on the part of the police, the demonstration goes on. It is not possible to stop or break it up. The syndicalist press comments on the “mobilization of the police and government against the workers.” Their press further asserts: “War is impossible because the people will not permit it.”
But feeling continues to mount. Patriotic pressure and hysteria are on the increase. Innumerable street fights break out between the nationalists and the socialists.
Because the feeling is so high and rises steadily, the CGT’s call for a demonstration is advanced one day, to Wednesday. But the government proscribes the gathering. Police are given orders to oppose with all necessary brutality the holding of any meetings in the vicinity. The neighboring transportation stations are all closed early in the evening. Arrests are made of anyone attempting to go to the meeting place. Nevertheless, many little meetings are held.
The CGT then issues a manifesto: “Down with War! War is no solution.” But the manifesto also says that the French people will cooperate with the governments who work for peace; and further says that Austria bears the guilt for the break and the consequence of war.
The CGT manifesto further calls upon the proletarians of all lands to unite for peace, but it puts the main emphasis on the democratic right to demonstrate in favor of peace. Thus, when a policy of offensive action is required, the CGT, on the defensive, puts its main emphasis on its democratic rights or civil liberties.
While the CGT is calling and proposing to demonstrate for peace, the outstanding exponent of peace in France, Jean Jaurès, is assassinated. Yet even after the assassination, Leon Jouhaux, head of the CGT, says: “The hour is grave, but not desperate. The cause of peace still has numerous partisans in the world.”
Following this, the CGT and the Socialist Party decide to call a joint international demonstration against war on August 9.
However, developments are now too fast to permit of proposals for anti-war action a week off. Nationalist and governmental pressure for war becomes greatly accentuated. Nationalism, chauvinism and social-patriotism swiftly overcome the officialdom of the CGT and the French SP. The capitulation to the “Union Sacrée,” to national defense and national unity is rapid and complete. “The fact of war, unbelievable as it is, must be admitted.” The fighter against war, Jaurès, lies on his bier. The call is issued for a peaceful demonstration at Jaurès’ funeral. Thus, the officialdom tries to cool the temper of the mass, who want a real struggle against the war itself.
Then: “It is not the German people we hate, but German militarism,” declares Leon Jouhaux. “It is not the German people we hate, but German Nazism,” (Green, Murray, Hillman, et al. in supporting the imperialist war of today). Official syndicalism, represented by the president of the Confédération Generale, Jouhaux, fades away in twenty-four hours. “He denied the state in peacetime, only to kneel before it in time of war,” said Trotsky.
By August 14, Jouhaux is calling upon the French workers to profit by the blockading of Germany to build up French imports and exports; but still he says: “This is not a war of conquest; it is a war of defense and liberation.”
 
Jouhaux “Explains” His Betrayal
Syndicalist Jouhaux follows in the footsteps of another betrayer of labor, ex-syndicalist and now war Premier, Briand. [2] Like the strike-breaker Briand, Jouhaux, too, offered his “explanations” for his betrayal of labor. These explanations in essence were:

If the German unions had followed the same action as the French syndicalists in trying to force the hand of the Kaiser, the war would not have occurred. Farthest from Jouhaux’s mind was the necessity for the labor leaders and ranks to put offensive pressure on their own government at home to take serious measures to maintain peace.
 
Karl Legien, German secretary of the International Secretariat, had made no reply to Jouhaux’s proposal for joint action at the Brussels meeting. In other words, thinks Jouhaux, a betrayal by Legien justifies a betrayal by Jouhaux.
 
The German social democrats had voted war credits. [3]

A Ministry of National Defense is set up in France. Jules Guesde [4] and M. Sembat, socialist leaders, enter the cabinet. This is only August 26, three weeks after Austria’s attack on Serbia.
The repercussions elsewhere were swift. Emigrés from Russia, such as the outstanding Marxists, Plekhanoff, Axelrod and Deutsch, and the anarchist, Peter Kropotkin, turned social-patriotic at once, declaring support of the war and, of course, for Czar and Fatherland; as the German social-democrats were for the Kaiser and the Vaterland; the French socialists for France and the Bourse; the British Laborites for God Save the King and Country, not to mention The City and the British Empire.
But fourteen social-democrats, to their revolutionary honor, walked out of the Russian Duma and refused to vote support of the war. And in Serbia, the unwilling victim and incident for setting Europe on fire, a united Opposition stood out against the war.
In France, the CGT proceeds to print the same false news about Germany as the capitalist press: “Germany is famine-stricken”; “Germany is powerless militarily,” and so on.
Indeed, the CGT press becomes even more docile than the capitalist press. Endeavoring to prove that national unity exists, it ignores the dissension within its own ranks. It fails to report Jouhaux’s functioning in the Committee for National Aid, apparently realizing that large numbers of its ranks would not rejoice that their labor leader performs anti-labor deeds. The CGT press fails to publish Pierre Monatte’s [5] letter of resignation.
Worse yet, from the standpoint of proletarian honor and dignity, the CGT press mutilates the letter of Rosa Luxemburg to the English socialists in which she analyzes the causes of the war and the failure of the international socialist movement to measure up to its duties and responsibilities in the war crisis. The CGT press printed only sections of her document, and then in such a way as to make it appear that all the blame for the collapse of the Second International lay on the German social-democracy.
 
S-D Cowers on Its Belly
It goes without saying that one should not minimize the shocking betrayal of the German social-democracy. Revolutionists, such as Leon Trotsky, had no illusions about and were far from idealizing German social-democracy. They did not expect revolutionary initiative and drive from the Second International leadership. Yet the capitulation of the German social-democracy hit hard. Trotsky states in My Life that he “could not even admit the idea that the social-democracy would simply cower on its belly before a nationalist militarism.” And the far-seeing and critical Lenin at first refused to believe the report of the Reichstag meeting of August 4 (in which the social-democrats voted for war credits) and suspected that the Vorwärts containing the report was a fake issue published by the German general staff.
The Austrian social-democracy likewise surrendered its principles without a struggle. Some of the leading circles, really nationalists with but the thinnest veneer of socialist culture and ideology, were actually pleased with the war. The Adlers, Victor, the elder, and Friedrich, the son, had greater realization of the effects of the war, although they were confused in their analysis. As a protest against the war, Friedrich Adler shot Count Stuergkh, the Austro-Hungarian Premier, an act of futility and despair, politically opportunistic and potentially dangerous. Marxists have long understood that individual terrorism is not only futile, but generally furnishes the excuse for an attack on labor in the name of law and order.
Illusions prevailed in socialist circles that the war would be it short one. They proceeded on the assumption that it was impossible for the bourgeoisie of the various countries to utilize their resources indefinitely, and in addition a long war increased the danger of social revolution to the bourgeoisie. Life has since taught us all that imperialist war and devastation can go on for years, with the primary destruction wreaked in agony, misery, hunger and death on the common people – until such time as the masses themselves consciously consider what to do about war or peace; and find the solution in peace through the social, the proletarian revolution.
Before proceeding to the beginning of disillusionment with the war within the ranks of the labor and socialist movements in Europe, comment is in place concerning the essential attitude of these movements toward war and the social order.
 
Illusions in German S-D Concepts of Power
The right wing of the socialist movement, it is clear, had early arrived at a reformist, parliamentary conception of the development of the working class and the objective of a socialist society. The German social-democracy is the best example of this. The substantial social and economic reforms achieved through parliamentary means only confirmed the greater part of the SD leadership in its long-accepted revisionist and evolutionary theory of social change through evolution. Their fundamental ideas unquestionably penetrated the mass of the ranks of the social-democracy and the German labor movement. The essence of this outlook, as indicated before, was that the capitalist state would evolve peacefully into the socialist people’s state. In time, this basic outlook of the social democracy on the development of the existing social order into the socialist society grew into the illusion that their substantial and growing parliamentary strength would prove sufficient even to prevent German capitalism from venturing into actual imperialist war. Equally false and reactionary in its consequences was the fact that the achievement of substantial reforms over a period of years caused the social-democratic leadership more and more to regard Germany as the first international foundation for a socialist order. From this developed finally the “defense of the Fatherland” and justification thereof for allegedly socialist reasons. The right wing never did accept the ideas and practice of revolutionary socialism, and thus their betrayal was perfectly consistent with their ideology. But the working class cannot be concerned with such abstract consistency. “By their deeds shall ye know them.” History correctly pillories the German social-democracy as traitors to the working class at the time of the greatest crisis for the working class movement – that is, war.
The centrist view was best represented by Marxists such as Karl Kautsky, theoretician of the German SD and in fact accepted internationally as the inheritor of the ideological legacy of Marx and Engels. Kautsky gradually passed from an international revolutionary position on the nature of capitalism and the road to power by the working class to a centrist and in time even entirely revisionist theory on many important questions. Kautsky’s authority carried enormous weight among all sections of the international socialist movement Leaders looked to him for leadership.
As late as 1912 [6], only two years before the outbreak of the First World War, Kautsky approached very closely to the Bolshevik position on the decisive questions of the working class movement. But his position swiftly unfolded thereafter, from a centrist adaptation to the war to vitriolic opposition to revolutionary ideas and practice, as exemplified by the Bolshevik Revolution. He who had defended Marxism in his polemics with Eduard Bernstein became finally the driveling apologist for the rotten deeds of imperialism. He avowed that capitalism was decaying steadily. Therefore, the working class should develop staying power and, by peaceful political experience, would steadily develop its strength and powers. Capitalism would wear itself out in the process. Thus Kautsky’s views only helped to inculcate a pacificist and passive outlook among the workers.
 
“National Socialism” Yesterday and Today
Of more than passing interest, indeed of crucial significance TODAY, is Trotsky’s explanation of the conception of national socialism, or the theory of socialism in one country, which motivated and dominated the outlook of the German social-democracy and the French Socialist Party – the leading socialist movements on the continent. This theory could only lead in practice to adaptation, capitulation and betrayal (whether consciously or not is here unimportant) of the proletariat to the Mammon of imperialist war. Instead of the battle of Armageddon, the Second International delivered the European masses to Gethsemane.
Moreover, it is not digression but supplementation and necessary conclusion, to show by analogy the even more terrible rôle which has been performed by Stalinism in peace and war during the past fifteen years in Russia, China, Germany and indeed internationally Here it is not necessary to do more than to suggest to the reader a substitution of certain terms in order to draw the significant and decisive lessons that the working class and revolutionary movement must learn for today and for tomorrow’s struggles: The suggested substitutions are placed in brackets in the text. [7] Here is to be seen by all who will look the living example today of confusing and betraying the working class, accentuated a thousandfold in the false theory and criminal practices of Stalinism.
“To approach the prospects of a social revolution within national boundaries is to fall victim to the same national narrowness which constitutes the substance of social patriotism. Vaillant to his dying day considered France [USSR] the promised land of social revolution; and it is precisely from this standpoint that he stood for national defense to the end. Lensch and Co. (some hypocritically and others sincerely) considered that Germany’s [USSR] defeat means first of all the destruction of the social revolution ... In general it should not be forgotten that in social patriotism there is, alongside of the most vulgar reformism, a national revolutionary Messianism which deems that its own national state, whether because of its ‘democratic’ form and revolutionary conquests [October], is called upon to lead humanity toward socialism or toward ‘democracy.’ If the victorious revolution were really conceivable within the boundaries of a single more developed nation, this Messianism together with the program of national defense would have some relative historical justification. But as a matter of fact this is inconceivable. To fight for the preservation of a national basis of revolution by such methods as undermine the revolution itself, which can begin on a national basis but which cannot be completed on that basis under the present economic, military and political interdependence of the European states, was never before revealed so forcefully as during the present war.
“The patriotism of the German Social Democrats [Stalinists] began as a legitimate patriotism to their own party, the most powerful party of the Second International [Third International]. On the basis of the highly developed German technology [collectivised economy] and the superior organizational qualities of the German people, the social democracy [Stalinists] prepared to build its “own” socialist society. If we leave aside the hardened bureaucrats, careerists or parliamentary sharpers, and political crooks in general, the social patriotism of the rank and file social democrats [Stalinists] was derived precisely from the belief in building German socialism [Russian socialism]. It is impossible to think that hundreds of rank and file social democrats (let alone the millions of rank and file workers) wanted to defend the Hohenzollerns or the bourgeoisie [Stalinist bureaucracy]. They wanted to protect German industry, the German railways and highways, German technology and culture, and especially the organizations of the German working class, as the ‘necessary and sufficient’ national prerequisites for socialism.
“A similar process also took place in France. Guesde, Vaillant and thousands of the best rank and file party members with them, and hundreds of thousands of ordinary workers, believed that precisely France [Russia] with her revolutionary traditions [October], her heroic proletariat, her highly cultured, flexible and talented people, was the promised land of socialism. Old Guesde and the Communard Vaillant, and with them hundreds of thousands of sincere workers did not fight to protect the bankers or the rentiers [Stalinist bureaucracy]. They sincerely believed that they were defending the soil and the creative power of the future socialist society. They proceeded entirely from the theory of socialism in one country, and in the name of this idea they sacrificed international solidarity, believing this sacrifice to be ‘temporary.’”
[To Be Continued]
[In the third and final section of this article, we deal with the revival of the working class movement in Europe, after its betrayal by the social-patriots. The international labor movement begins to recover its militancy and solidarity slowly but surely as Lenin’s call to struggle begins to be heard. The Russian Revolution approaches, demonstrating conclusively that the socialist solution is the only solution to the imperialist war.]

Footnotes
1. This was to prove the last International link between the Second International socialists for the duration of the war.
2. Aristide Briand, syndicalist leader, aided the government and French bourgeoisie to break the strike of the railroad workers in 1910 by nationalizing the railroads and then declaring that it was “illegal” to strike against the government. Briand’s progress in capitalist politics thereafter was rapid, culminating in the war premiership in October 1915.
3. The German social-democratic Reichstag fraction voted 78 to 14 in their fraction meeting for war credits to the Kaiser-Junker war, and in the Reichstag utilized the unit rule to have all the social democrats vote the credits. Haase, who turned out to be an Independent social democrat, or centrist, had voted against war credits in the fraction meeting but was the spokesman for the majority social democrats in voting war credits in the Reichstag. Liebknecht, also an opponent of the war, voting against war credits in the fraction meeting, obeyed party discipline in the Reichstag for the last important time. Later he became a leader of the Spartacus or revolutionary socialist group.
4. Jules Guesde, Marxist leader of the French SP, “who had exhausted himself in a long and trying struggle against the fetishes of democracy, proved to be capable only of laying down his untarnished moral authority on the altar of ‘national defense.’” (L. Trotsky)
5. Militant and revolutionary leader in the CGT. Comment on Monatte letter below.
6. See the brochure, The Road to Power, by Karl Kautsky.
7. The Third International After Lenin, pp. 68 to 71. Emphasis ours.
 



Eighty-four thousand garment workers in New York City are today completely unemployed. Less than 12,000 of New York’s 300,000 needle trades workers are employed on war contracts. David Dubinsky, president of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, and Frank Rosenblum, vice-president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union, state that before long the number of unemployed needle trades workers will be increased to 100,000–150,000.
This situation among the needle trades workers in New York City exists at a time when war demands have been absorbing the unemployed in other parts of the country. The source lies in the policies and actions of the Army and War Production Board in systematically ignoring the New York unionized shops and awarding contracts for making army clothes to sub-standard and non-union (scab) factories, many of them newly-built, in several states in the South.
The thousands of men and girls who are required for these Southern plants are drawn from farms in the cotton, grain and tobacco fields. The wages of these workers, who are nearly all engaged in industrial production for the first time, are 40 cents an hour, the minimum legal rate. The weekly average is $16 – a figure not even remotely close to the wage standards prevailing in the union shops in New York and elsewhere.
The Government, says President Dubinsky, “is creating a new trained force, new factories and a problem which will create post-war havoc.”
The leaders of the ILGWU and ACW unions charge that Southern congressmen have been successful in their pressure on the Roosevelt Administration to set up a scab garment industry in the South, with the ultimate objective of smashing the unions after the war through the non-union Southern plants. The needle trades union leaders correctly charge that the government policy is resulting in the beating down of established union standards and conditions.
To remedy the situation the needle trades unions demand, first, a “legitimate” share of the government contracts in order to assure work for the close to 100,000 unemployed garment workers. The unions state that almost every fabricated textile product that is needed for war purposes can be produced in New York’s women’s garment industry.
President Dubinsky also proposes that local manufacturers, particularly the large number of small shops, pool their resources to meet the competition of the Southern shops. Union officials also propose a program of retraining the needle trades workers to engage in new trades in light industry related to war production.
 
Union Officials Propose Wage Cuts
Clearly, these “solutions” do not suffice for the New York needle trades workers, who in any case must wait a long time for these jobs to materialize, if they ever do. Hence officials of the ILGWU declare their readiness to accept, and are themselves proposing that the garment workers accept wage cuts in order to get contracts for New York. But when the officials propose such a “solution,” they are STARTING ON THE ROAD TO COMPLETE DESTRUCTION OF THE LIVING STANDARDS FOR THE NEEDLE TRADES, WORKERS, AND THE SWIFT WEAKENING AND DISINTEGRATION OF THE UNION ITSELF.
Union officials themselves have admitted that nothing short of “complete destruction of living standards of the New York workers and their families would enable New York factories to compete with Southern employers, who get their labor for 40 cents an hour.” (New York Times, July 5)
Nor does such a “solution” suffice for the thousands of garment workers in the Southern factories who are being exploited by the employers with the connivance of the government.
These proposals are no answer to the problems and needs of the garment workers. Nor is the answer as meaningless, or meaningful, as that of an unnamed ILGWU leader who, when asked about this proposal to accept wage cuts, said: “What else can we do?”
This may be the reply of the union officialdom, at a time when living costs have risen 18 per cent; but it can hardly be the answer of the hundreds of thousands of needle trades workers. The effective answer to the union-breaking policy of the Roosevelt Administration and the Southern manufacturers lies elsewhere.
President Dubinsky, reporting on the state of the ILGWU to the general executive board in session at Atlantic City, June 13–14, pointed with pride to the growth and strength of the ILGWU today, as compared with its status ten years earlier, in 1932. The union now has 310,000 members, as against 40,000 a decade ago. The union is operating in twenty-nine states and has 325 locals. The industry, he reported, was 90 per cent organized. Greatly improved standards of labor – wages, working conditions, etc. – have resulted.
”In these ten years,” Dubinsky boasted, “we have succeeded in virtually eliminating general strikes, substituting negotiation, arbitration and mediation in their place.”
Yet, without here discussing this aspect of union policy and development, it needs to be pointed out that the union’s growth flows from the great militant struggles conducted for years by the garment workers against the garment employers; struggles led and participated in by tens of thousands of fighting, union-conscious, even socialist-conscious workers, over the heads often of the conservative leadership (Sigman et al.). The older garment workers will remember these facts graphically. The fruits in recent years have been reaped by the union membership because of these earlier struggles, and not because of the abandonment of a fighting policy for preserving and building the union. That is what Dubinsky failed to point out. And it is this aspect which bears directly on the present and future of the needle trades unions.
 
“Appeasing” Administration Won’t Get Jobs
The officialdom of the needle trades unions, (Hillman, Dubinsky, et al.) are the strongest supporters of the Roosevelt Administration and the imperialist war. Even as terrific unemployment is hitting the New York garment workers, the ILGWU is pledged to purchase $25,000,000 in War Bonds! The ILGWU, like the other needle trades unions, has pledged full support and collaboration to the government on its labor policy. It hence gave up the right to strike in the interests of war production, “national defense,” “national unity” and “labor peace.”
But what good have scraping and bowing, concessions and surrender done the needle trades workers? The Administration has had its way and will continue to have it. The “good will” of the needle trades workers has been answered with a “thank you” in reverse: namely, government initiative, sponsorship and financing of a non-union (scab) needle trades industry in the South!
Needle trades workers, with such a large proportion of Jewish workers, probably see and feel the menace of fascism, of Hitlerism, more sharply than other workers. Yet right now they might well ask, “What price glory and war now?” as they observe the Roosevelt Administration dealing blows at their union and unionism itself.
 
Common Problems of North and South Workers
But what about the newly industrialized Southern workers? They must also be considered. They too are workers and have rights and problems in the present difficult situation. Their problems and rights, and those of the needle trades workers in New York and other organized areas, must be considered as one common problem or there will be no positive solution in this period for either the New York needle trades workers or the Southern workers.
Not a word has been said in their behalf in all the comments and proposals of the union officials. But failure to consider also the plight of the Southern workers is reactionary from a worker’s viewpoint. Theirs is the right to earn a living. There is no “law” that says that garments are to be made only in the East.
The industrialization of the South, in the last analysis, is to be welcomed by unionists, militants, class-conscious workers. The tens of thousands of men, women and girls who are being taken from the farms and thrown into industry will be different people in relatively swift time. True, today they will bring all their backward views and prejudices with them into the towns and cities and factories. But industrial life will go a long way to change their outlook and practice. They (the so-called Southern “crackers,” “hillbillies,” etc.) will come to see, think and feel like the Northern needle trades workers as they face identical problems with profit-seeking, labor-hating bosses. These new Southern workers will learn fast enough, as did Southern coal miners, steel workers, and others, that their wages are too low for a decent living. They may be backward now. But they will respond to appeals and proposals to remedy their conditions by union organization.
So the right of these new Southern needle trades workers to earn a living in a new way must not be questioned, directly or indirectly, above all by unionists. The Southern workers are here to stay.
 
Organize the Southern Workers!
What, then, is the answer to this very real problem of existence confronting hundreds of thousands of needle trades workers in New York City? The answer is the only one that has ever proved successful in similar situations: ORGANIZE! ORGANIZE THE SOUTHERN WORKERS INTO BONA FIDE LABOR UNIONS – INTO THE RESPECTIVE UNIONS IN THE NEEDLE TRADES INDUSTRY!
The masses of needle trades workers must demand that their officials from top to bottom, from Dubinsky and Hillman down to the last local union official, undertake a fighting policy to ORGANIZE THE SOUTH!
This means, first of all, that the needle trades unions shall cease to depend on “favors” from their “friends” in government; shall cease to rely on the Administration to protect their interests. The Administration, whose real friends and allies are the Jim Crow congressmen and the labor-hating oligarchy of steel and coal barons, manufacturers, landlords and planters, will not seriously help the needle trades workers out of their economic predicament. The government – now engaged in the big business of running an imperialist war in the interests of capitalism – seeks the highest profit level and the lowest labor cost level. In helping to establish new factories in the South on a non-union basis, the government is only doing what it has been doing all along in other trades and industries – namely, passing the burden of the war costs onto the backs of labor by “freezing” wages and union organization, exacting no-strike pledges, etc.
 
It’s Been Done Before! Do It Again!
The ILGWU has $9,000,000 in its treasury, says President Dubinsky. Other needle trades unions undoubtedly also have large sums in their treasury. Use this money – as much of it as is necessary – to organize the new factories in the South. Money will never be better spent. There is no doubt that this means a great struggle. But unless the policy of no struggles, no strikes, is abandoned, the needle trades workers will find that all the remedies proposed By the union will not bring back jobs to the vast and increasing mass of unemployed needle trade workers.
Class collaboration and a non-struggle policy will get the needle trades workers nowhere. Unionization – and, certainly, the maintenance and extension of all the present standards of the workers – is the answer to the Southern bosses.
When factories were set up in New Jersey, Maryland, upstate New York and Delaware, the New York needle trades workers confronted a situation similar to that in the South today. They proceeded to organize and establish the union in the factories in these states. It was not easy, as the history of the needle trades unions shows. But the job was done.
 
Fight Back Against Wage Cuts and Scabbery
The South has been the scene of great labor struggles in the organization of the textile and steel workers, and in the efforts to organize the rubber and other workers. The job is a long way from being finished. For the present situation, the Roosevelt Administration is directly responsible. Garment workers – any and all needle trades workers who are or may be involved – must pick up the challenge to labor’s rights and fight back against wage cuts and scabbery.
Needle trades workers must campaign for and DEMAND THAT THE GOVERNMENT GRANT NO WAR PRODUCTION CONTRACTS WITHOUT A UNION CONTRACT. That will bring work into the already unionized shops of the East.
An organized industry is in a position to make this and other demands – such as a 30-hour week to absorb the unemployed and the minimum union scale – upon the government and industry in connection with war industry or production. An unorganized or yielding industry is in a position only to ask, to plead, to beg, but not to achieve its demands. That is why the demands and needs of the needle trades unionists can only be made effective by a union drive to organize the Southern plants.
 
Unionism Is the Issue
The needs of the needle trades workers today can be approached soundly only if the fundamental issue of scab shops versus union shops is met head-on. With millions of dollars in their treasuries and with large numbers of available organizers – plus new ones from the ranks – the needle trades unions must cooperate in a campaign of organizing the South and any unorganized plants elsewhere. The officialdom of the needle trades unions, in their own narrow bureaucratic interests, as well as in the interests of the workers, must understand this as a No. 1 task. Needle trades workers have to take the lead again to beat back the attacks of Southern employers who are backed by the government.
 



The course of the war so far should make it clear even to the wishful thinkers that dependence on the bourgeois democracies for a genuine struggle against the fascist order is illusory, in fact fantastic. That is, it is not possible for democratic capitalism, even under the pressure of the working class and exploited masses to transform this war from its present imperialist character into a bona fide political and military struggle against the fascist form of capitalism. This is evident from the example of Great Britain, which has now been at war with Germany for more than two and a half years.
Great Britain is one of the imperialist democracies whose end as a dominant imperialism is surely determined should German nazism be victorious and may be determined even if the United Nations are victorious. Note Britain’s steadily lessening hold on its empire during the course of the war, with America steadily achieving dominance in Canada, the West Indies and Australia. Note also that the recent report of the Phelps-Stokes Foundation on African Affairs (New York Times, June 23) suggests that the American government shall have a special administrative department on African affairs – a clear indication that American imperialism is taking over supervision of sections of Africa, as well as of the rest of the world. In this connection, it is interesting to note also the virtual admission by the Federation of British Industries (New York Times, May 30) that British imperialism in the post-war period depends solely or mainly upon American charity. The report reads in part:
We must bear in mind that at the end of the war the United States will be the most important economic unit of the world. The success of reconstruction will depend largely on the part America is prepared to play in it. It is essential that the United Kingdom and the United States should have an agreed policy with which the empire can associate.
This amounts virtually to begging American imperialism for some inkling as to the latter’s post-war plans with which British imperialism can be associated.
Britain’s hopes, from a strictly capitalist point of view, lay in retaining its hold on the British masses in support of the war, and in winning the backing of its colonial possessions (no easy task any longer! Vide India!) in the struggle against German fascist imperialism. The achievement of these objectives, so desperately needed by British capitalism, dictated a course of serious concessions to the colonial countries and to the British proletariat. But has this been the case? Certainly not!
 
Britain Has Conceded Nothing to Colonial Peoples
In respect to Britain’s outstanding colony, it is all too clear that the British imperialists have resisted every inch of the way any challenge to their political, economic and military hold on India. Stern necessity, after more than two years of German and Japanese victories, today compels Great Britain, with extreme reluctance, to make “concessions” (promises of dominion status to India after the war!) in the hope that the Indian masses will bring their support to Britain in the latter’s struggle against Germany and Japan.
That the British bourgeoisie endeavored to utilize a so-called left labor man, Sir Stafford Cripps, to make its proposals more palatable is in line with the historic method of using “labor” fronts to put over either unsatisfactory propositions or outright treachery. The ordinary coin of the British bourgeoisie is seen by all to be too patently counterfeit to pass any longer. That, so far, the British proposals have been rejected on various grounds, attests to the fundamental changes in prospects and perspectives created for the Indian masses as a result of the war. It is a fact that the Indian masses do not need these “concessions” from their historic oppressors. They have but to take them now, and even more. Should they decide unqualifiedly to pursue their future course without dictation from British imperialism, they can proceed by their own strength to establish their political independence and economic and social emancipation.
As far as Britain’s “democratic” objectives in the rest of her colonies are concerned, it it necessary to cite a few facts, not as familiar as those concerning India. A London dispatch published in the Amsterdam Star-News (New York Negro newspaper), April 4 reports that the British government has just sponsored a measure “in support of forced labor in Kenya Colony, Africa.” The African labor conscripts are to be brought to “work on private European farms.” The report concludes by saying that “the century-old plan of the exploitation of African labor ... is still the foundation of the economic and political policies of the British government and ruling class.”
From another direction, there is to be observed the growing demand by the British possessions in the Caribbean countries (West Indies) for immediate independence. In recent weeks the spotlight has been thrown on the British (and American) exploitation of native labor in the Bahamas at the rate of 81 cents a day! In the Nassau “riots” which grew out of this exploitation, British garrison troops shot into the demonstrators, killing two and wounding more than 30 others.
Wherever the setting sun of the British Empire shines, the story is the same. The British bourgeoisie is attempting by extreme brutality to retain its exploiting privileges as disillusionment with British imperialism increases. This disillusionment will be followed by the struggle for full independence and freedom.
 
The British Bourgeoisie and Fascism
The masses generally, not only in Great Britain, but throughout the world, have no illusions on the historic rôle and practices of “perfidious Albion.” Yet by persistent propaganda it has been possible to delude a good many people that Great Britain today is making important concessions to the British workers; maybe it is even on the road to socialism without the need for the British workers to remove their exploiters. Hence, it is said, (e.g., British Labor Party Report, May, 1942) the British workers should take advantage of this situation, first by full support for the military defeat of Germany, and then by making their demands on victorious British capitalism. Again, for the most part, this is standing matters on their heads.
The plain and stark fact is that Great Britain is fighting a war for its imperialist existence. Britain is not fighting fascism as a social order, but as a rival imperialism. The fight against fascism is only a by-product of the imperialist struggle and would be abandoned quickly by British capitalism if it could be assured of retaining its empire. Is more needed to show this than the policy of ex-Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin and the British Parliament toward Hitler in the years before the outbreak of war? This was a policy of good will and conciliation with Hitler’s fascism. Chamberlain continued that course. The present Premier, Winston Churchill, is a friend of fascism, both Italian and Germany, by his own frequent declarations. On January 21, 1937, Churchill said:
If I had been an Italian I should have been wholeheartedly with you [the fascists] from start to finish in your triumphant struggle against the bestial appetites and passions of Leninism ... I will say a word on an international aspect of fascism. Externally your movement has rendered a service to the whole world. Italy has provided the necessary antidote to the Russian poison. Hereafter no great nation will be unprovided with an ultimate means of protection against cancerous growths.
On November 11, 1938, Churchill is still saying:
I have always said that if Great Britain were defeated in war I hoped we should find a Hitler to lead us back to our rightful position among nations.
All these men have followed a steady course of not just appeasement and conciliation but understanding of Hitler’s anti-labor rôle. It was only Hitler’s hope or belief that he could gain everything by a smashing military victory and conquest that compelled the British to retaliate by war in defense of its vested imperialist interests. To conceive of the British bourgeoisie turning its imperialist war into a “democratic” war, much less a struggle against fascism in its political aspects, is to fly in the face of not just proven Marxist theory, but the facts of life, the course of the war.
 
The British Bourgeoisie and the British Masses
There are false illusions and notions that the British ruling class has made important concessions to the workers during this war. But this is not the case. The British workers have had to make persistent demands, engage in protests and also in strikes in order to enforce and try to maintain the economic and political rights they have achieved through decades of great struggles against their masters. British work-day losses through strikes still amount to 2,122 every day. In 1940 there took places 850 strikes involving 284,000 persons. In 1941, in the second year of the war, the number of strikes increased to 1,162 and the number of persons involved to 334,800 (New York Times, April 20).
The British rulers have, of course, used the exigencies of the war to justify their restrictions on the British people. But look at the struggle of the British workers to obtain decent and bombproof shelters in protection from German air raids. They are still not secured. Look at the continued great distinctions in the standards of living. Those that have wealth continue to live luxuriously. The Black Market exists for the bourgeois extractors of surplus value. Will the British government smash its Black Market which it could do so simply by wholesale arrest and imprisonment of these entrepreneurs of disaster and hunger? No! Yet the experience of Soviet Russia during the days of Lenin and Trotsky shows that a workers’ government is capable of largely destroying the effectiveness of these cruder vultures of society, by real efforts to smash the clandestine merchant marts.
The war has not, moreover, stopped the colossal profits of the British bourgeoisie despite the great taxations for war needs. For instance, in the New York Times of April 11 it is reported that dividends of 55¼ per cent (!) will be paid stockholders of a large Malayan tin company. The scorched earth policy in the Far East will not impoverish British stockholders, who will be “reimbursed” because demolition was carried out on government orders.
Furthermore, the much-vaunted high excess profits taxes in Great Britain provide guarantees that not all the accumulated capital of the British bourgeoisie will be lost after the war. (Indeed, the Conference Board on American Industry recently asked the American government to imitate the British system, according to the New York Times of June 8.) The British tax system “takes care” of “wartime profit incentive” by providing for post-war losses and “errors in wartime accounting” to be deducted from present excess profits taxes. Obviously the British bourgeoisie is making very sure that it will not lose anything after the war from any excess profits taxes which they may have to pay now as a sop to the British masses.
What about the democratic rights of the British people? Since 1935, when Stanley Baldwin, Conservative, was Prime Minister of Britain, there have been no general nation-wide elections for Parliament. Only a few by-elections have been held, and where some sort of opposition to the British government policy in the war manifested itself in such by-elections there has been something of a dither and insinuations by Churchill of treason.
Note the concern because Fenner Brockway, national secretary of the Independent Labor Party, an organization which has been considerably outspoken on several significant aspects of the character of the war, as well as on its conduct, contested a recent by-election. Obviously, the fear is that such by-elections, with their discussion of war issues and war conduct, might result in more freedom of expression on the war than the ruling class likes, even if only in a single constituency. (Brockway polled 25 per cent of the total votes in Cardiff East or 3,311 votes against 10,030 for the War Secretary, Sir James Grigg. This is a not insignificant achievement, showing that the British masses are thinking more and more along socialist lines to resolve the issue of the imperialist war, including the common people’s real desire for the complete freedom of India.)
 
Class Legislation in Britain
Far more significant is the fact that the British Trade Union Act remains in force to this very day. This act was decreed by Parliament after the great strike of the Triple Alliance Unions (the alliance of the railroad workers, transport workers and miners) in 1926 had brought British capitalism literally to its knees. The British Trade Union Act can be used at any time by the British government to crack down on any militant action, demonstration or strike struggles by the British workers. When the act will be used in any significant sense remains to be seen. That will depend on the attitude, militancy and aims of the British workers. What is important is that the Trade Union Act remains as the law of the land in relations with the British labor movement and can be invoked at any time. This act is as reactionary a piece of anti-labor legislation as a labor-hating bourgeoisie ever designed. It is comparable to the British “DORA” – Defense of the Realm Act – which was used so often to clamp down on dissidents, political and others, in the First World War. If there were any real semblance to democratic and socialist trends in Britain, British labor would have surely demanded, and British capital would have had to yield, the immediate repeal of the British Trade Union Act, a real chain around the neck of the British workers.
Rather than in a socialist direction, the course of the economy of Great Britain is toward totalitarianism or fascism.
The recent “nationalization” of the coal mines by the British government is a striking example of this trend in the economy. Nationalization of the mines has been a long-standing demand of the miners. In May of this year, 10,000 miners were on strike in Britain for wage increases. Within the last six months, 36,000 workers have been transferred to the mines at a wage loss.
The national board set up to manage the “nationalized” mines is “merely consultative.” “Management will be left in the hands of the present pit managers, who will continue to serve the owners though they are now subject to removal by the government. There will be no fundamental alteration of the financial structure of the mining industry” (New York Times, June 4). The “nationalization” plan has been described by A. Sloan, Scottish laborite, as “a shabby substitution foisted on the country.” Clement Davies, independent, asserted that the scheme was “quite irresponsible class legislation” (New York Times, June 11). In a single sentence of the New York Times of June 4, the class nature of the “nationalization” is proved. The sentence reads: “The Conservatives are pleased.”
The economic bases of the corporate state or fascist economy are thus being laid by the British capitalists. That a fascist political movement in Britain today has no significant base or influence is of course no guarantee against its drastic outbreak when the need of the capitalist-imperialists is dire. Through the vigilance and militancy of the British working class, certain democratic and trade union rights have been maintained. But at the same time there is not only the above-mentioned restrictions on general parliamentary elections but also the recent threatened ban on the Fourth Internationalist left wing (Trotskyist) paper as well as the ban on the Daily Worker (Stalinist organ) still standing from the days of the Stalin-Hitler pact.
Only if the proletariat intervenes and consciously aims for political power in its own right, with the object of establishing a socialist society can this trend be circumvented. Only under such conditions could the war against Germany take on a progressive character. But that requires the end of subordination of the British workers to the military and political requirements of British capitalism. In the development of their labor unions and political organizations in this direction, the British workers will find that their capitalist class will stop at nothing to prevent their economic and political exproporiation by the working class. [1] They will endeavor to set up their own fascist regime before they will bow before such a consummation of the workers’ struggle.
The British bourgeoisie will have recourse to any domestic or foreign measure to prevent an upsurge or overturn by the workers, and thereby a loss of the bourgeois power to exploit and oppress. Better less than none at all will be the British imperialist cry where vested interests and privileges are concerned.
 
A Labor Party Government or a Workers’ Government
But suppose a Labor Party government were to take over in Great Britain. Could the workers then give full or critical support to the military struggle against Germany? That would depend on its policy and program. A government of Bevins would not encroach on British imperial rights; it would not make fundamental encroachments on the British bourgeoisie as a ruling class; it would not confiscate capitalist properties; it would not abolish or enormously restrict the political rights of the British ruling class; it would not institute immediate measures for the complete release o£ British colonies and possessions from political and economic subordination to England. Such a Labor Party government could only be regarded as the executive committee of the British bourgeoisie.
This is the whole history of labor partyism and social democracy through the years. The German social democracy in 1918–19 saved the German Republic for the German bourgeoisie. Ramsay Macdonald, of the British Labor Party, bolstered English capitalism in the post-war crisis of 1920–21 by forming a “Labor” government. Today, in England, Bevin himself virtually admits that he acts only as the labor lieutenant of the British bourgeoisie. Defending himself against labor critics in Parliament on May 21, Bevin said:
I don’t care whether I lose my seat in the government or my seat in the House. I came into the government to help win the war. When that is done, let others go on to build the peace if they want.
In times of social crisis, the trade union bureaucrats (e.g., Hillman and Bevin) perform the task of dissipating the discontent of the working masses for the bourgeoisie. When the job is done they are ready to step aside, or are put aside by the bourgeoisie, as no longer needed. Without a revolutionary socialist program for workers’ power and workers’ construction of a socialist society, these labor lieutenants have no alternative but to hand back the government to the bourgeoisie when the job of suppressing and allaying the militancy of the workers has been accomplished.
 
The Socialist Appeal to the Masses
It is elementary that the British workers who are daily faced with the bombs of German fascism, give consideration to the military struggle. Their dead and wounded cry out aloud for vengeance against nazism. But their hope is not in support of a Churchill government or in a fake “Labor” government, but in a movement for a workers’ government having a clear socialist program. Such a movement would aim to establish now – in the midst of the war – the replacement of the Churchill government by a revolutionary socialist, government. Then, through the medium of a powerful socialist propaganda, a socialist government would appeal over the heads of the fascist Hitler government to the German masses – soldiers and working people – to overthrow Hitler and establish their own socialist government as the way to stop the war and achieve a lasting peace and a new, socialist order of society. That is the road for the British workers to take.
Many important and effective ways are open to a revolutionary government to reach the ears of the working people in other countries over the heads of the imperialist rulers, in time of war as in peace. The Bolsheviks in the early years of the October Revolution under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky, demonstrated what could be done. Outstanding are the peace negotiations conducted between Soviet Russia and imperialist Germany at Brest-Litovsk. Trotsky, the head of the Russian delegation, insisted upon open negotiations and thus made known to the entire world throughout the parley the nefarious demands of imperial Germany on workers Russia.
Various other means, adopted by Lenin and Trotsky, could be employed by a British workers’ government to reach the German working class at home and in the trenches. British military units would be ordered to fraternize with and to conclude immediate temporary armistices with opposing military units. German war prisoners would be given a short but intensive course in socialism and then sent back to the German lines to educate and win the German soldiers to the cause of the British workers’ government and to turn against their own rulers and oppressors. Planes would drop leaflets with socialist propaganda behind German lines, etc.
Equally, or above all, by its domestic program, a socialist policy on industry, the land, labor rights, political rights and so on, a workers’ government would be the inspiration for the German workers’ revolutionary insurgence against Hitler-ism. Such appeals over the heads of the Hitler regime cannot be defeated or crushed by the Gestapo or by military ruthlessness, as so many liberals claim.
Contrast these measures of a revolutionary socialist government with the recent “appeals to revolt” of the democratic capitalist (Roosevelt) and laborites (the British Bevin and the American Walter Reuther of the Auto Workers Union) to the German masses. These “appeals to revolt” are, first of all, implicit or explicit accusations directed against the masses of Germany and of the Nazi-occupied countries for “acquiescence in and support of” Nazi rule. They offer no socialist program for the revolt of the masses in the enemy countries against their rulers; and no proof that American or British democracy will be progressive (i.e., socialist and non-imperialist) either in relation to the workers at home or in relation to a conquered country. And finally, their sole “appeal” lies in their setting up as an example – democracy à la America or Britain.
 
Workers’ Fatherland and International Labor Solidarity
A British workers’ state can be a reality in the course of the war, depending on the swift unfoldment of events. Such a state, unlike the present regime or social order, would be worth defending with one’s life. The conditions making entirely possible the formation of a British workers’ or socialist government are not within the scope of this article, however. [2]
The historic example of Soviet Russia alone shoud give real hope and confidence that a British workers’ government could prevail against all odds despite opposition from rival imperialisms – (German or American). An appeal by a genuine socialist government to the German soldiers and working people would not fall upon deaf ears – or history is meaningless, especially German revolutionary history.
International solidarity on scores of significant occasions has proved very real in material and political wealth and strength, and has not just been a slogan or a manifesto. The workers of the world – American, German, British, et al. – rallied in many decisive ways to the support of the Russian Revolution, especially during the days of Lenin and Trotsky, in the struggle to maintain the Russian Workers Republic against the military and economic onslaughts of the world’s imperialist rulers. They would rally again, militantly, to the workers of any nation that took over power in their own name.
Let the Indian masses push ahead with their struggle for national independence and economic and social freedom, and it can be said unconditionally that the workers of the world will give real support, material and political, to the Indian cause. Let the British or German masses establish a revolutionary socialist government and the workers of the world will demonstrate their class solidarity.
From the depths of this devastating carnage of imperialist war will emerge the renewed and revitalized international solidarity of all the exploited, a resurgence and growth of the revolutionary movement and the sharp enhancement of the prospects for the establishment of world socialism. All the more reason, therefore, for the working class in every country – in the United States, Great Britain, etc. – to learn the lessons of the imperialist war. They must come to understand the origins of the Second World Imperialist War and the course and trend of the democratic imperialists in order to prepare themselves for their day on the morrow.

Footnote
1. After the First World War the British ruling class regarded the Triple Alliance of the powerful British labor unions as a greater menace to its existence and privileges than the European Triple Alliance, because the former represented a. real threat to its complete existence as a social class.
2. For a review of England’s political crisis, see an article by Henry Judd in the June 1942 issue of The New International.
 




1) Exposing a Scheme to Wreck Unions

2) The Bosses’ Substitute for Genuine Unionism
 



Nine hundred labor-management committees have been established in the United States. Information already available shows that the employers are satisfied with the way the labor-management committees have worked; and that they hope to maintain such committees in the future. Union militants throughout the country, on the other hand, are beginning to recognize that such committees are actually hostile to the interests of the workers and require at least to be curbed.
Labor-management committees, in one form or another, are not new as anti-union weapons. The employers and the government are always anxious to “promote better understanding” (so they call it) between workers and themselves. But “understanding” between conflicting economic and class interests is not so easy to achieve except on the basis of capitulation by one or the other. In times of “national emergency” the bosses try to force the workers to give up their gains in the name of “national unity.”
 
Experience of British Labor
In Great Britain the British employers have managed to establish similar bodies called works councils. The purpose of these works councils was to stave off militant strike action by English labor. These “councils were tried after a law forbidding strikes failed, because jailed workers produce nothing.” (New York Times, April 20)
In one plant the management wanted to establish such a works council in 1937, when the plant was already 70 per cent organized. The management proposed that the workers’ representation on the council include representation from the 30 per cent non-union workers. The union correctly objected to this proposal as one which means going over its head and depriving it of its right to represent all the men in the plant.
The union realized, too, that a works council would undermine the attempt to organize all the men into the bona fide union, and would encourage disregard of the union by the unorganized workers. The company had to drop the proposal of the works council in the plant at that time.
 
Fined $50 for One Day’s Absence
However, because of the war pressure, there is now in effect in this plant a works council made up of ten from the company and ten from the workers, with alternating chairmen. The worker chairman, however, is always a “long-term employee.” This council has appointed a sub-committee which hears cases of absentee workers, made up of three from the management and two from the workers. The workers are obviously getting the worst end of this “promotion of better understanding” outfit. The importance of hearing cases of absentee workers under the present conditions of speed-up and long working hours is clear. How anxious the employers are to penalize workers for absence from their jobs is obvious from a case in England of a worker who was fined ten pounds, or almost $50 for one day’s absence from his work.
However, the works councils have not succeeded in preventing British labor from striking for its rights, as is demonstrated toy the figures on recent British strikes. British work day losses through strikes still amount to 2,122 every day. In 1940 there took place 850 strikes, involving 284,000 persons. In 1941, the second year of the war, the number of strikes increased to 1,162 and the number of persons involved to 334,800.
Despite the often crass desires of the British labor union officialdom to establish class collaboration – under the label of “national unity” – between the workers and the bosses, British workers still enter into open bitter conflict with the bosses to protect their interests. Such developments will increase in the future. In the United States, also, the class struggle, including resistance and opposition to the labor-management committees, will express itself probably even more sharply and militantly than has been the case in recent periods in Great Britain. The character and scope of the gigantic strikes of masses of workers in establishing the CIO unions lend weight to this prediction.
 
Labor Gets It in the Neck
Today the labor-management committees are regarded by big business and the government as the best means to establish the spirit of “national unity” during the “national emergency”; that is, the imperialist war. The employers and government maintain that the wide establishment of such committees is necessary to achieve “efficient production” of war goods, and to eliminate bottlenecks in production and in worker-boss relations.
In fact, labor gets it in the neck with such set-ups. Production is speeded up, without wage scales being correspondingly adjusted; work is harder; and working conditions more injurious to health. Labor-management committees will more and more try to chisel down union standards, established through long and bitter struggles by the workers.
How ready American employers are to use extreme measures to speed up production is indicated by their attitude to absentee workers. This is a problem which is becoming increasingly acute for workers as the work week becomes longer and fatigue sets in. Sharply symptomatic of the employers’ attitude is the declaration of W.S. Newell, president of the Todd-Bath Shipbuilding Co., Portland, Me. (New York Times, April 20) that his workers would either “work or fight in the shipyard or Navy”; and that “workers absent from work would be turned over to draft officials.” As in the case of British works councils, labor-management committees in the United States would serve as additional pressure on the workers for this kind of speed-up with its reckless regard for the health of the workers.
 
Corroding the Union Machinery
Equally important, in time more important, than the immediate practical consequences to labor, is the steady corrosion of the functioning of the legitimate trade unions by the labor-management committees. The employers will try to build up gradually the power of these committees by persistent and clever propaganda built around the “patriotic issue” of the war; by playing favorites among the workers; by the use of company stooges (potential scabs); and by the nursing of anti-union elements among the workers, Thus, they hope to devitalize the legitimate unions by ignoring the regular union machinery for the adjustment of grievances. In due course they will even try to replace the normal collective bargaining machinery of the unions. There will be an increase of company union practices, compulsory arbitration, and indirect intervention of the government agencies on the side of the employers.
If this is painting the picture blacker than is yet the case, it is because it is necessary to state clearly that this is the unavoidable logic of the labor-management committees unless labor consciously intervenes to prevent this development.
 
Some Union Leaders See Dangers
Some labor leaders are conscious of the danger to the very existence of the unions in the establishment of the labor-management committees, even though they now find it necessary to accept their formation. For example, the Auto Workers Union, while advising its locals to set up such committees, also advised and warned the workers not to place their regular union leaders – the shop stewards, grievance men and union executive board members – on the committees. They correctly feared that if this precaution was not taken, the result might be the relegation of the regular union and its machinery into a secondary position of subservience to the labor-management committees.
The action of the UAW, properly understood, is an implicit recognition that the labor-management committees are in actuality hostile to the interests of the workers and require, at the very minimum, to be curbed.
The UAW has grasped half the lesson. Many other unions, despite their past combats with the employers, are today too placidly accepting the institution of the labor-management committees. They hope that when the “national emergency” of the war is ended the unions will be able to return to their former status.
What is yet to be learned by the unions, in the course of the war itself, and in the post-war period, is that they must combat the labor-management committees as potentially and actually the deadly enemies of legitimate union organization. Indeed, labor in time, and at the first favorable opportunity, will have to see to it that the labor-management committees are removed from the scene, or the labor-management committees will destroy the unions.
 
Stack Cards Against Workers
Labor-management committees in actuality are weighted in all important aspects on the EMPLOYER side. The cards are stacked against the workers on these committees. Those unionists who mistakenly hope or believe that they can protect labor’s interests by serving and putting forward labor’s demands on these committees will find that the bosses have the upper hand on these committees and can easily side-track the demands of the workers.
An “employee representative” on a company union or “employer-employee council” was always recognized to be a stooge of the company. Today, too, “employee representatives” on the labor-management committees – who are placed there by the union or the workers as genuine union representatives – may find themselves unwillingly acting as stooges for the employers because of the employer pressure backed up by the “war emergency” pressure. Experience has shown that militants cannot successfully buck this set-up with workers’ demands, while functioning within the set-up itself. At best they can try to expose the workings of these committees, or get off such committees before they find themselves thoroughly discredited in the eyes of their fellow workers.
The only immediate answer and weapon of the labor unions to the encroachments of the labor-management committees is to refuse to yield any particle of union rights and privileges to these committees; and unconditional maintenance and development of the regular union machinery for purposes of collective bargaining and in the adjustment of the daily grievances in the plant through the shop stewards or other union machinery.
[In the next article we will deal with the labor-management committees as symbolizing the bosses’ pattern for the post-war period in worker-boss relations.]
 




A fascist program is built primarily on a hostility to the labor movement. Evidence that the American Legion fulfills this requirement is to be found throughout its history.
The record shows that, beginning with the resolution on labor adopted at the first Legion convention in 1919 to the recent national convention at Kansas City in September 1942, the American Legion has favored throttling labor’s democratic and labor rights. It has fought against the use of the strike weapon in any form and at any time by labor.
Its attitude to strikes in wartime as expressed by Roane Waring at the recent AFL convention, and in a recent report adopted by the Legion’s National Executive Committee is only a dramatic extension of its fundamental attitude to militant action and labor unionism, as well as to civil rights. But that is not all ...
 
Preparedness Against Labor
The record shows that the Legion is always ready to “cooperate” with the authorities (police, FBI, Department of Justice, etc.) against all whom the Legion, or others, label as “radicals,” and it does so in the interests of maintaining so-called “law and order.” Indicative of its determination to be on the front lines against labor is the unanimous decision once passed, by the executive committee of Chicago Marine Post No. 273, calling for the formation of a citizens’ police force of 5,000 “carefully selected American Legion members” to assist the police “in riots, disasters or whenever needed.”
In the same way, vigilantes, Ku Klux Klanners and other anti-labor, Jim Crow and fascist bodies have “cooperated,” with or without the official authorities, in putting into practice their conception of “law and order.” Yes, the Legion “cooperates” and “aids”; and it is always with the masters of society – the bankers, industrialists and landlords.
So far as can be ascertained over a period of years, one cannot find a single case where the Legion has supported the workers in a dispute or conflict with the bosses. But, contrariwise, there are all too many cases where the Legion has openly aided the employers against the workers.
At this point it is well to take note that the American Legion has deep roots in the government itself, not only in the military bureaucracy and apparatus, but in the intimate councils of the Roosevelt Administration.
Especially today, the Legion’s military and conservative point of view carries unquestioned weight in the determination of military and labor policy.
At the recent national convention of the Legion, speakers included Secretary of the Navy Knox, Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson, War Manpower Commissioner Paul V. McNutt, former Assistant Secretary of War Louis Johnson, recent head of President Roosevelt’s mission to India; the hard-boiled disciplinarian, General (”Yoo Hoo”) Ben Lear; and such an outstanding “employer of labor as W.P. Witherow, the president of the National Association of Manufacturers. All these military and administrative officials of the government are prominent members of the American Legion and two of them (McNntt and Johnson) are former national commanders.
All these speakers directed their major remarks against labor and its demands. Strikes, “even for a day,” “cannot be tolerated.” Profits were also included in their remarks; the speakers called upon employers not to be “selfish” in this “national emergency” and not to “pirate” labor from war plants to ensure greater profits for themselves. But these remarks were delivered with the admonishment of a fond parent, and most certainly not with the harshness and vehemence of the threats against labor. For the Legion, the major task on the domestic front consists in “controlling labor” during the war and in peacetime.
It may be said that the attitude of the American Legion toward wealth is in inverse ratio to its attitude toward labor. The faith of the Legion in great wealth is something to behold. For years the American Legion Monthly has carried articles consistently friendly, for example, to bankers – articles generally written by bankers themselves.
 
Jingoist and Militarist
The Legion professes to believe that the cause of war is rooted in man – that is, in “human nature.” Greed, malice, jealousy, hate – these factors, says the Legion, make war inevitable. That these are manifestations of social, economic and political rivalries between imperialist powers, the Legion prefers not to see, at least, to say. The simple conclusion the Legion, draws is that between brief periods of war, the nation spends its time arming to the teeth for the next war. Hence the American Legion has always favored the largest army and navy armament proposals (they haven’t been enough till now); permanent universal conscription, etc.
Nevertheless, for two decades the American Legion bus been vehemently isolationist on foreign policy. That is, the Legion declared or hoped that the United States could best get along by itself, without being or becoming involved in European or world political-economic problems. Meanwhile, of course, America must arm itself to demonstrate it was ready to ward off any “attack.”
The Legion’s peculiar provincialism and lack of historical outlook are perhaps best shown in this combination of isolationism with an acceptance, as a matter of course, of the inevitability of a Second World Imperialist War. The latter acceptance has enabled them to function as the loudest bellowers for transforming America into a militarist-imperialist nation second to none and as the advocates of those domestic measures which in time produce a totalitarian-dictatorial regime alone fascist lines. Thus big business has been able to exploit the Legion’s, nationalist-militarigt spirit for its imperialist ends. (Later, fascist demagogues will try to utilise these Legion concepts toward the fascist goal itself.)
Therefore, it is no accident that Legion leaders now proclaim and propose the abandonment of its isolationist position. “Isolation is dead,” proclaims Lynn U. Stambaugh, recent national commander of the American Legion.
Moreover, the Legion, in addition to being ready to continue its normal role of (1) helping to keep “peace” at home – that is, helping to keep labor strapped; and (2) helping to whip up “100 per cent Americanism” sentiment, is (3) now ready to take on the duty of helping to police the world after the war. America today has the “role of destiny,” says the American Legion Magazine (September 1942).
1. Summing up, the American Legion is an incitement and provocation to organized labor and to the exploited masses generally. The working men who are ex-service men of the First World War recognized this by refusing to join the American Legion. For although there are four or more million ex-service men from World War I, only about 20 to 25 per cent have ever joined the Legion. At present the Legion claims its highest membership, over one million.
2. Imperialism looks ahead to the chaotic post-war period and the problem of “keeping labor in its place.” Thus, for example, an article by Ralph Robey, professor of economics at Columbia University (American Legion Magazine, August 1942), significantly entitled, Our Third Front, sums up the major task of the American Legion and the bourgeois ruling class:
“We must make certain that the collectivists don’t take us over.”
Clearly, the specter of revolution – of socialism – haunts the Legion, as it does the capitalist class. Therefore, the Legion has been given its orders, to wit: intensify your anti-labor campaign.
The American Legion was an “insurance policy” for capitalism against bolshevism and workers’ unrest and dissatisfaction in the period after the First World War. The American ruling class expects the Legion, once again; this time in the period after the Second World War, to be an “insurance policy” against a militant labor movement and a potentially revolutionary movement. That is why the government and the capitalists give every possible political and organizational support to the American Legion. That is why President Roosevelt recently authorized the American Legion to organize NOW the soldiers and sailors of the Second World War.
 
Interests of Service Men
3. The labor movement, on the other hand, must recognize the American Legion for what it is – an anti-labor, reactionary organization, bitterly hostile to the immediate and ultimate interests of workingmen.
The service men of today, together with the ex-service men of tomorrow, must not be drawn into the web of this tool of big business, to become a reservoir for prospective fascist demagogues and interests.
Since the overwhelming majority of the service men of yesterday, today and tomorrow are either workers, or men whose interests are linked to the workers, the mass of service men must look to the labor movement for the preservation of their rights and interests. Similarly, the labor movement must also look ahead and aim to integrate and reintegrate the workers now in the armed forces into the labor movement when the imperialist war is finally finished.
 




In June 1941, under the threat of a mass march on Washington by the Negroes, President Roosevelt set up the Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC). Great hopes were placed in it by Negro organizations who saw in its establishment evidence of the Roosevelt Administration’s good faith in seeking to break down Jim Crow. At the beginning, the FEPC carried through some investigations and publicized the problem to some extent; it exposed some of the many firms that flagrantly practice Jim Crow.
On July 30, 1942, President Roosevelt, despite protests from Negro and labor bodies, transferred and subordinated the FEPC to the War Manpower Commission. The excuse he gave, that the WMC offered greater administrative possibilities for suggesting the hiring of Negroes, could not disguise for one moment the fact that his action was a slap in the face of the Negroes.
When Roosevelt transferred the FEPC to the WMC, it became dependent on Congress for funds to carry but its work. The FEPC complains it has neither funds nor adequate personnel to pursue its work. The budget provides but small funds for this committee. The huge bloc of reactionary Southern congressmen – bitterly hostile to the Negro, and determined to prevent, in any way possible, open agitation or hearings in Southern cities on Negro discrimination – have stood resolute against any instrument (FEPC) or proposals (poll-tax abolition) aimed at breaking down Jim Crow in any degree.
 
FEPC Is Weak Sop
Roosevelt’s control of Congress (especially with today’s slim Democratic majority) depends largely on these Southern congressmen. Roosevelt, therefore, makes the necessary concessions – to the Southern congressmen, not to the Negro masses. Thus Roosevelt is directly responsible for the lifeless condition of even this very meager sop – the FEPC. The FEPC, according to a recent Washington dispatch, “for months has been virtually without power to investigate an avalanche of complaints of discrimination against Negroes” in obtaining jobs. Today it is making “a last-ditch fight for its existence.” (New York Post)
Negro organizations, such as the NAACP, National Urban League, March on Washington Committee, etc., which refuse to exert mass pressure on the government and on employers, since that would “embarrass” Roosevelt, have begged for “teeth” to be put into the FEPC. But they themselves are not clear as to what these “teeth” are. The fact is, incisive power for the FEPC depends on exposure, investigations, mass public opinion, etc., directed against Jim Crow.
Complaints and charges of Jim Crow have flooded the FEPC from all over the country. For the past several months large numbers of charges relating to the failure to employ Negroes on the railroads have reached the FEPC, forcing it to announce that it would hold hearings on December 7, 8 and 9. From New York City alone over 1,000 complaints charging discrimination against Negroes, Jews, Italians and others have been received. But the FEPC has continued helpless and floundering.
 
Organize Public Trials!
Negro organizations or groups must take open cognizance of these grievances in a direct and cumulative manner! Through the Negro and white press, through the action of the many Negro organizations, and through the issuance of special leaflets they must announce that PUBLIC HEARINGS ON DISCRIMINATION will be held by their organizations.
The March on Washington Committee, the NAACP and other Negro organizations ought, jointly or singly, to hire halls, and then call upon the Negro workers to come and state specifically how they have been Jim Crowed in trying to get jobs, or Jim Crowed on the job. Churches and other Negro institutions can be asked to give their halls for such public hearings and trials.
PUBLIC TRIALS must be held of those responsible for Jim Crow. Let juries, witnesses and judges be selected from those who will attend these gatherings. Let them sit and pass judgment on the iniquities of Jim Crow; and, more significantly, endeavor to examine the basic causes and cure for discrimination, segregation, etc.
Let the Negro organizations invite white workers and labor unions to these meetings and trials, and give them the opportunity to say what they are ready to do to aid the Negroes in smashing Jim Crow.
Let the proceedings of these assemblages be widely and dramatically publicized both before and after the meetings. Send reports of such proceedings to the LABOR UNION PRESS particularly.
Let elected representatives of these open trials and hearings be delegated to go to union meetings and request the opportunity to address the local unions and central bodies on what the Negroes are endeavoring to do to break down Jim Crow, to obtain jobs, and so on.
 
Develop Mass Pressure
Such PUBLIC HEARINGS by the Negro masses are only one form of the necessary mass pressure on the bosses and government. Out of them will follow other forms of mass pressure on a wider scale – such as mass marches on city halls and factories; mass picketing of Jim Crow factories, etc. These kinds of hearings and actions, initiated and stemming directly from the masses, will prove a hundred times more effective in the struggle against Jim Crow than occasional, arbitrary and limited hearings by the FEPC or other government agencies. Moreover, it will establish who is with the Negroes, and who is against them.
Such public hearings are one task which the Negro masses themselves can undertake and demand of the leaders in their organizations.
Moreover, the white workers too must now intervene more actively against Jim Crow. First, by forcing changes wherever necessary in their own unions (for example, the boilermakers and machinists in the AFL) to cease Jim Crow practices on membership rights and on jobs.
In the attitude reflected in the resolution on Jim Crow, adopted by the recent CIO convention, denouncing racial and religious discrimination, is provided an effective weapon in cracking Jim Crow, provided, of course, such resolutions are implemented by the unions and on the jobs by militant action whenever necessary to compel employers to hire and utilize Negroes on an equal basis.
Further, as the white workers entirely eliminate Jim Crow in their organizations and combat Jim Crow by the bosses, then the Negro masses will see in the labor movement their real ally against Jim Crow and all exploitation. Then there will be no looking to “white hope” Administrations or to feeble FEPCs. Only thus will the Negroes realize that the LABOR road is the road to victory against Jim Crow.
The magazine, Survey Graphic, in its study of the race issue in its November number, calls its article, The Unfinished Business of Democracy. But capitalist democracy is both unwilling and incapable of doing or finishing this job. For capitalism does not extend the basic economic and democratic rights of the masses in this epoch, but rigidly regulates, limits and, when necessary, does away with them. The race problem is labor’s problem – yes, “The Unfinished Business of Labor.”

Since the above was written, the FEPC has announced that, after long months of stagnation and inaction, it plans hearings on discrimination in Detroit, St. Louis, Cleveland, Philadelphia and Baltimore.
A flood of charges of discrimination against Negroes in war plants and industry generally has at last resulted in FEPC obtaining some funds, far short of its request, to reopen its work for a brief while in a few localities.
Note that the cities listed for hearings DO NOT INCLUDE SOUTHERN CITIES! Is this another deal of the Administration with the Southern Democrats?
At the same time it is announced that the hearings scheduled after long delay on Negro discrimination on the railroads have been postponed still further, from December 7 to January 25, 1943.
As to enforcement of past FEPC rulings, L.W. Cramer, executive secretary of the FEPC, stated that “no comprehensive picture was yet available.”
The delay and slowness in FEPC efforts, while hundreds of thousands of Negro men and women continue to be victims of Jim Crow, only lend emphasis to the imperative necessity for independent public hearings and militant mass actions by the Negroes themselves, aided by white workers, to smash Jim Crow.
 




The profits of the railroad companies in 1942, as compared with the same period in 1941, have increased so enormously (121 per cent gross and 60.2 per cent net AFTER federal tax payments) that the OPA and Economic “Stabilizer” James Byrnes have deemed it publicly expedient to petition the Interstate Commerce Commission to cancel the freight and passenger rate increases granted the railroads last spring.
Nevertheless, the companies are preparing to resist strenuously the demands of the four railroad brotherhoods, the switchmen’s and the fifteen non-operating unions for substantial wage increases to meet rising living costs. The New York Times reports that the OPA and Byrnes petition “was intended as a warning for the five (operating) unions not to ask for a wage increase.”
The weapons that the railroad bosses intend to utilize in the wage dispute are indicated in a recent editorial of the Wall Street Journal:
“Under the whole dispute” between the companies and the rail workers “lies the fundamental question which has never yet been answered: ‘How much is too much?’ and another: ‘Are security holders people?’”
 
Wages or Dividends?
Workers can agree that these are the issues involved, although they draw different conclusions. In other words, two main questions emerge out of the dispute: one, the “legitimacy” of the wage demands of the railroad workers; and, two, the fundamental question of the private property system itself – of capitalist ownership and control versus workers’ ownership and control.
In endeavoring to show the “unjustness” of the wage demands of the railroad workers, Elisha N. Friedman, railroad-consulting economist, states (New York Times) that the average yearly wage of the passenger engineers is $3,650; passenger conductors, $3,322; and freight engineers, $3,237 – or an average of $3,333.
To get this average Friedman cites wage figures at the very top group of railroad workers. Indeed the Wall Steeet Journal itself admits that the average yearly wage of employees in the train and engine service at present is only $2,600 plus – a discrepancy of $700 per year!
Moreover, the railroad companies and their apologists always endeavor to single out the better-paid four brotherhoods to “cover” the greater exploitation of the more numerous lower paid railroad workers: the maintenance men, laborers, carmen, even the machinists, etc. Sufficient proof of this distortion of the actual situation is the fact that the fifteen non-operating unions are making as one of their main demands today a minimum wage of 70 cents per hour, or a weekly wage of $28 for forty hours – hardly a munificent wage scale.
The top section of the railroad workers (the four brotherhoods) after several decades have obtained gains and rights which most workers have yet to achieve. They attained their status through their strategic position in the industry, by strong union organization, and by the threat to exercise their striking power to effect their demands.
For example, it was NOT “good will” by the railroad corporations, but strong unionism which has resulted in the rail men establishing wage allowances ranging up to five years for permanently discharged workers; and in lifting yearly wage averages for the engine and train workers from $1,346 in 1916 to the present level. The problem for other rail workers is to aim for the standards achieved by the brotherhoods.
 
The “Poor Railroads”
In great anguish, Mr. Friedman declares: “The whole concept of private property (on the railroads) is rapidly dissolving ... The investor is being expropriated.” Where will it all end, he cries, as he expands on the “excesses of labor.”
Well, what about the “pauperized” railroads? A constantly decreasing share of railroad revenues, Mr. Friedman states, is left for paying fixed charges (after deducting operating costs); i.e., for interest payments, dividends, surplus, etc. Not that there isn’t anything left; there just isn’t enough, says Mr. Friedman.
However, note that even in the years 1932–37, there were never any losses for the railroads, although in this same period, the employment of workers was at its lowest. The railroads, earned money. It was not the railroad owners and the coupon clippers, bless their souls, who had to go hungry or subsist on relief.
Still, railroad spokesman and apologist Friedman is concerned with the “decreasing ability to pay a return to security holders who have supplied the funds necessary to build the plant and provide the equipment.” Friedman ignores the obvious fact that these same investors have in the course of years been repaid many times over in interest payments and dividends. For the most part, the original investors and purchasers of stocks and bonds have handed down these securities to their children or others, who have lived without having to lift a finger ever since.
 
Over a Billion in Profits
The truth is that today, as before, the investors or stockholders are neither active nor useful factors in the railroad industry. Nevertheless, they continue to receive the benefits of labor’s efforts in the form of interest, profits or dividends – all variations of leeching. And, like leeches, they are completely unnecessary in running a railroad.
For the current year now ending for Class I railroads (the group under consideration), NET earnings available for interest, dividends and surplus – after payment of all expenses and taxes – are $1,525,767,289 (or over one and a half billion dollars). Or more than 5 per cent of the total railroad plant investment of $26,000,000,000. The “net” available for 1942 for interest charges, dividends and surplus is nearly three times the interest charge – a tidy income and profit even for “big shots.”
Moreover, the Wall Street Journal reveals that in actuality the net capitalization outstanding against plant investment is only eighteen billion dollars, the other eight billion having come from surplus labor – that is, profits realized from labor and turned back into the investment – into the means of production. These figures alone challenge the case of the railway companies’ spokesmen and validate the demands of the railroad workers for wage increases. The railroads still run at a substantial profit; and car loadings are at their highest.
“How much is too much?” Well, certainly not the wages received by railroad or other workers. Not while workers continue to give surplus labor to the employers – surplus labor which then becomes transformed info profits and dividends for the bosses and coupon clippers.
What, then, of Mr. Friedman’s complaint that “the investor has been starved ... the unfortunate investor in railroad securities who has created jobs for the workers, who in turn expropriate him.”’ The investor – the poor, forgotten man who creates jobs for the workers, and so on.
 
Nationalize the Railroads
To test the alleged value of railroad owners and stockholders, let the railway workers take over control and management of the railroads. Let us observe, then, if with investors and owners eliminated are superfluous and unnecessary baggage, the roads will not run as well or BETTER – plus better wages and working conditions for the whole mass of railroad workers. The best interests of the railroad workers lie in that direction.
Today, not only should an railroad workers – the Big Four, the switchmen and the fifteen non-operating unions – demand and receive wage concessions. They should go further and demand the nationalization of the railroads under workers’ control. Theirs is the ability to run the railroad industry. The fundamental questions which the Wall Street Journal asks can only be properly answered along these lines.
 




The American Legion, declaring itself to be “100 per cent American,” might be expected to uphold the Constitution and the Bill of Rights; and to stand for the democratic and civil rights of all the people. Moreover, the Legion says it is “for the Constitution” AS IS, emphatically proclaiming (American Legion Magazine, editorial, October 1942): “This nation is going to remain a constitutional democracy.”
But just exactly how does the American Legion believe in upholding the constitutional and civil rights of Mr. John Doe, Mr. Common Citizen or Mr. Bill Workingman?
 
100 Per Cent Labor-Baiting
The first thing you learn is that to be a “100 per cent American” you have to agree 100 per cent with all the Legion stands for and to combat the “insidious program of bolshevism, radicalism, etc.” To be specific, the American Legion’s definition and advocacy of civil rights means the following:
1. Barring all “subversive” publications from the mails. It would also forbid the passage of such publications in interstate commerce.
The Legion not only would, IT DOES, “discourage” newsstands and stores from carrying and selling labor publications.
2. Free Speech? Certainly. But then, says a Legion convention resolution, “Free speech stops where treason begins” – and the Legion sets the standards and limits.
3. The American Legion was two decades ahead of the Rapp-Condert Committee in shouting about “disloyalty in schools,” in advocating teachers’ “loyalty oaths.” As ex-National Commander Hayes plainly put it: “Check (spy) on the teachers in your schools.”
 
The Cry Against “Aliens”
4. “Aliens!” – that, too, has always been the alarm signal of the American Legion. So the Legion has stood for the deportation of aliens; has sought to stop immigration for ten years; and opposes employment of any aliens by the government! But actually the American Legion has never cared two raps about “aliens” as long as the millions of foreign-born workers who were employed in the coal, iron ore and copper mines, the steel mills, railroads and other basic industries, slaved uncomplainingly for long hours, miserable wages and bad working conditions.
The “alien” problem begins for the Legion, as it does with all the capitalists and their apologists, when the foreign-born workers go militantly on strike for their interests, help to organize strong labor unions and insist on their economic and political rights.
In the Legion’s eyes, such people, even if they are Mayflower descendants, are “aliens” who, if they can’t be deported, ought at least “to be shot.” That is what the Warings and other Legionnaire spokesmen really believe and advocate.
5. For years, moreover, these “100 per cent Americans” have stood for so-called “European” customs. For instance, the Legion has always advocated compulsory finger-printing for all, with an eye primarily on its utilization for spying on and blacklisting militant workers.
The Legion knows how to improve on the anti-labor techniques of employers; and, gradually, Legion ideas have made their way in all too many respects.
6. Though it professes to believe in the Bill of Rights – for instance, in “free assembly” – the American Legion has gone about trying to prevent labor and radical meetings by “discouraging” landlords from renting halls to such groups or organizations. It began this noble work as early as Armistice Day, November 11, 1919, when Centralia, Wash., Legionnaires made a premeditated attack on the IWW headquarters, resulting in injuries and deaths. Although, Legionnaires invaded the hall, it was several IWW defenders who were sentenced to long prison terms. A repenting Legionnaire, Edward Patrick Coli, later exposed the Legion’s plot and worked for the release of the Centralia victims from prison.
 
Against Free Ballot
7. Respecting voting rights, the Legion’s opposition to permitting “communists” on the ballot is well known.
Thus, for example, when the Communist Party in the State of New York (for which we hold no brief, as LABOR ACTION readers know) presented petitions this year containing 50,000 signatures to place their party and ticket on the ballot, the American Legion, in line with its entire past course toward labor and “radicals,” challenged the petitions and did its utmost to prevent the Communist Party from appearing on the ballot.
Moreover, if the American Legion had its way, such organizations as the Workers Party, SWP, SLP – in fact, any organization advocating in some form the abolition of capitalism would be proscribed as “un-American” and, hence, not entitled to the rights of the Constitution and Bill Bill of Rights. The Legion’s similarity to Hitler’s concepts are quite marked on all these scores.
8. In the First World War, war hysteria resulted in the persecution and jailing of thousands of men and women. A large number were sentenced to long prison terms. Even long after the war ended, the American Legion, true to its character, strongly opposed the release of the political prisoners. Today its position remains the same, as is indicated by its opposition to the release from prison of Earl Browder, Communist Party secretary (even after the latter was out-percenting the American Legion itself in his support of the imperialist war and on his phobia, opposition to and hatred of genuine working class militancy).
 
A Menace to Democratic Rights
All this and more the American Legion has stood for and continues to advocate. Therefore, one can only describe the “100 per cent American” Legion as a MENACE TO THE CIVIL AND DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE, AND THE WORKERS IN PARTICULAR.
Roosevelt’s authorization to the American Legion to organize the present members of the armed forces only serves as a spur to the Legion to continue without hindrance, indeed with permissions its reactionary program among the young generation of soldiers and sailors.
9. The American Legion officialdom waxes angry and indignant when it is charged with being fascist in its outlook and practices. But an examination of its record of intolerance, opposition and persecution of labor and liberal elements through the years demonstrates its fascist characteristics in many significant aspects. An editorial from a Southern newspaper, the Roanoke, Va., World-News, expressed itself as follows on the character of the American Legion:
“The American Legion program has marked similitude to the fascists and Nazis ... It is intensely nationalistic ... In prating of Americanism, it speaks the language of Hitler and Mussolini.
“With their soldier caps add uniforms, they assemble in the same manner that characterized Hitler’s Storm Troops in the days that Hitler was waging his struggle for power.
“In their concern for self, rather than the body of people, they resemble the Brown and Black Shirts.
“Like the Nazis and fascists, they are intolerant of all thought that is not like theirs. They are aroused to a fury by any concept not fitting into their smug scheme of things.”
They are ready “to squelch, by strong-arm ways individuals and groups who do not agree with them. And in this, again, they agree perfectly with Il Duce and Der Fuehrer.”
Later-day developments, since the time of this editorial, attest to its accuracy to describing the fascist characteristics and potentialities of the American Legion. For a knowledge of its leadership, its composition, its interests, its association with big business, it is, moreover, not difficult to see how such an organization could be used by demagogues in the coming period for definitely reactionary ends; and, ultimately, to put over a fascistic program.
 




A proposal for New York City to purchase and operate a power plant (the Staten Island Edison Co.) is before the City Council for consideration. If adopted, the proposition would go before the city’s voters on a referendum to be held next January 30. Meanwhile, a committee representing 36 organizations, composed almost entirely of commercial, real estate, local Chambers of Commerce and taxpayers’ groups from the city’s boroughs, voices the “most intense opposition to the purchase,” according to former United States Attorney, Charles H. Turtle, the chairman of these groups. They are opposed on principle to municipal ownership, or to the city’s participation in “private business.”
On the other hand, trade unions, civic organizations and the American Labor Party favor the purchase of this public utility. Representatives of the CIO, the Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union, the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, the American Labor Party and other labor and civic organisations have appeared before the City Council on behalf of the proposition.
 
The Real Issue
These groups cite that there are more than 2,000 municipally owned power plants, in large and small cities where far cheaper rates prevail than in privately owned utilities. For instance, the 1941 residential service rate in Cleveland was 80 cents from the city plant and $1.00 from the private owners. In Manhattan the charge by the Consolidated Edison Co. for the same kilowatt hour time consumed is $1.65. Through the purchase of the Staten Island plant, it is hoped to reduce considerably the electric and gas rates on Staten Island and throughout the city.
It is well known that the profits of privately owned public utilities are enormous. Only through the pressure and exertion from small salaried and wage worker groups have municipalities been able to take over the ownership and direction of such utilities. True, municipal ownership of utilities has always been a political football. Opportunist politicians and reformists have been agitating this question for decades, while never daring to pose the real issue of private property as an institution and as the basis of the social order. But even their prostitution of the issue is not a sufficient objection against real socialists demanding the limitations on private property when possible.
 
Not Socialism
Municipal ownership of power plants, markets, etc., are palliatives and meager ones too. Those who talk about this as “socialism” in any sense at best confuse workers on what really constitutes socialism – namely, the social ownership and control of the means of production and distribution by the masses and the ending of the profit system. Under municipal ownership, profits continue for private investors; that is, the bankers, capitalists, etc., who purchase, the city’s bonds and receive their profits in the form of interest and dividends.
If, nevertheless, labor favors city ownership of public utilities and other enterprises, it is because, in a limited and small sense, they can benefit the masses. Consumers are overwhelmingly workers and small petty bourgeoisie. They benefit from the cheaper rates and avoid thus being gouged by the utility corporation. The high prices of monopolies are indirect taxes passed on to the workers to supplement their basic exploitation at the point of production – in the workshops.
 
With Workers’ Control
Revolutionists qualify and supplement their support of city ownership in given instances by specific worker-protecting proposals. Just as, nationally, the Workers Party advocates, in respect to the basic industries – e.g., the war industries – the nationalization or conscription of these industries by the government under workers’ control; so, on a small scale, the acceptance of city ownership of a given enterprise or utility is accompanied by a demand for workers’ control. At union meetings and public gatherings, municipal ownership must be explained or advocated from this broader social and labor standpoint.
 
Strong Union Necessary
Further, it must be pointed out, efforts are made, in the case of city-owned enterprises, either to prevent unionization or to limit union rights of the workers in these plants. The pretext for this on the part of the local governments, supported by employers, is that employees already have “sufficient” protection as civil service workers and through the receipt of pensions.
Merit status for jobs and pensions are welcome; from the workers’ standpoint they are a legitimate part of employees’ rights. But experience shows that a strong union, maintaining full union rights – the right to strike, etc. – is the best protection not only for retaining these benefits, but likewise for general working conditions – wages, hours, etc.
With this understanding and approach to such questions, revolutionary workers are in favor of such a specific proposition as the municipalization of the Staten Island Edison Co.
 




When Roane Waring, national commander of the American Legion, declared at the recent American Federation of Labor convention that, if he had the power, he “would shoot” a worker who goes on strike now, his statement doubtless surprised and shocked many people. But to those who know the record of the American Legion, Waring was merely taking advantage of the imperialist war to announce more publicly than before an anti-labor policy which the American Legion has always itched to carry out. In view of that statement and its long-standing anti-labor policy, a meager news dispatch of the Associated Press (October 30) takes on special significance. The dispatch reads:
“President Roosevelt signed legislation today making members of the armed forces serving in the present World War eligible for membership in the American Legion. American citizens serving with any country allied with the United States also would be eligible.”
Quite conceivably there are today many workingmen who do not know about the anti-labor role that the American Legion has performed through the years, and in whom such an endorsement by President Roosevelt (”labor’s friend”) of the American Legion may occasion no surprise. Recent events and utterances by Legion spokesmen may have helped to awaken them. Even so, the entire labor movement must establish a clear knowledge of and attitude toward the American Legion, so that neither the appearance nor shameful utterances of Roane Waring and others can ever again find a place on a labor platform or convention. The history of the American Legion bears looking into, in order that labor may better understand that here is one of its potent enemies – today and tomorrow.
The basis for the formation of the American Legion was laid at a conference held in Paris, France, March 15–17, 1919, a few months after the armistice ending the First World War. This preliminary gathering was called upon the initiative of Lieut.-Col. Franklin D’Olier of the general staff of the Army; Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, Jr., and other National Guard and Army officers. The first convention was held on Armistice Day, November 11, 1919, at Minneapolis, Minn. An official report states that it was necessary to “round up delegates,” one of the problems being “to find men who had the railroad fare to attend the convention.”
 
Army Ranks Distrust Legion
A petition of the Private Soldiers and Sailors Legion of the United States, presented to Congress on August 15, 1921, demanded that Congress repeal the Legion’s charter because it had been formed with “unlimited funds” received “from sources which have never been revealed.” This petition showed with what suspicion and doubt the ranks of the soldiers looked upon this hastily-formed ex-servicemen’s organization. Their suspicions were well founded. The record finally shows that big business interests and top military men organized and backed the formation at the outset to the tune of $257,000.
Why? Let Lieut.-Col. D’Olier explain:
“After the armistice, bolshevism was the bogey. Disgruntled soldiers had provided the manpower for the cataclysm in Russia.”
The purpose of that ex-servicemen’s organization, its leaders have made clear, was to fight bolshevism and the newly formed republic of workers, peasants and soldiers of Soviet Russia. The task and aim of the American Legion today are essentially the same: to fight all progressive labor and radical movements on the ground that they are “subversive.”
 
Red-Baiting – Their Weapon
To the Legion, “subversive” means any form of radicalism or labor militancy: bolshevism, communism, socialism, pacifism, liberals, aliens, labor organizers, militant labor unions, and even the American Civil Liberties Union. It has red-baiting and anti-labor propaganda down to a fine art, conducting it today under the cover of “national unity” for the imperialist war.
The American Legion is controlled and directed by a handful of men at the top: by the national commander and national committee. Conservative, middle-aged men with a military background, plus business interests – firm believers in and beneficiaries of capitalism (for instance, Waring, the national commander, is president of the Memphis, Tenn., Street Railway Co.) – being anti-union is second nature to these Legionnaires. Fully 80 per cent of the rank and file of the veterans of the First World War have steered clear of the American Legion, realizing in some degree the anti-progressive role of the American Legion through the years.
But what, about the remaining 20 per cent Who have joined the American Legion? They have a fundamental economic and social outlook which can be described as 100 per cent for capitalism. The Legion’s membership, and not only its ruling group, is largely middle class: independent farmers, business men, professional people, lawyers especially, and also skilled workers. In a more exaggerated and crudely reactionary form, the Legion represents the views and aims of the upper and medium middle classes. It is, therefore, ruthless in its hatred and opposition to anyone or any organization that advocates any change in private property relations. The Legion, therefore, regards itself as the “best insurance policy” for capitalism.
 
Pillar of Big Business
Big business has always realized the value to it of a permanent servicemen’s organization of former soldiers, sailors, marines, etc. For 23 years the capitalists have given the American Legion unstinting support as a pillar of conservatism and reaction.
Today the big bourgeoisie are looking far ahead – to the post-war period – even while the Second Imperialist World War still rages and indicates no end. Valuable as have been the services of the American Legion in the past decades, the imperialist ruling class sees in this organization an even more valuable instrument and ally in the future, That is why President Roosevelt has signed this important measure enabling and authorizing the American Legion to undertake immediately, NOW, campaign to organize the men serving in the armed forces today.
The bankers, the big industrialists, the military caste, who were instrumental in the first instance in organizing the American Legion, understand clearly that their post-war political and economic perspectives include an ex-servicemen’s organization that can be depended upon to serve their ends.
(Continued in next week’s issue)
 




Step by step the government has proceeded, in the name of “war necessity,” to handcuff labor into greater helplessness.
The Administration is not accomplishing this strangulation of labor’s living standards and labor unionism by quick, direct smashing blows, as carried through, for instance, by Hitler. In this country, such a method would have resulted in too great a social, industrial and political reverberation. The American ruling class has at least learned that lesson from fascism. Hence American capitalism has gone ahead more subtly with the development, from its viewpoint, of favorable objective circumstances, before resorting to government, decree and force.
The most recent and significant act of the government in enchaining labor was accomplished through President Roosevelt’s order of October 3, as contained in the Price Control Law. Roosevelt’s decree (1) virtually nullified labor’s right to strike; and (2) abolished, in fact, labor’s right to genuine collective bargaining. A new peak – its highest so far – in the evolution of government labor policy has thus been reached in the climb toward a complete authoritarian policy against labor.
A summary of the main steps and measures of government policy toward labor in the past period, particularly since America’s direct entry into the imperialist war, is necessary now so that the labor movement and the workers generally will awaken to their extreme danger. Labor must re-orient its course soon, before it is too late!
Labor’s standard of living must come down – that has been Roosevelt’s view since the United States joined the war. Therefore, in actuality, and by design, “wage stabilization” (which has today reached the stage of “frozen” wage scales generally) has at all times meant a consideration of the ways and means of driving the living standard down. Essentially, this end could be accomplished only if the workers could be prevailed upon, or compelled, not to struggle for their rights – specifically, not to strike and organize. The Administration has therefore proceeded on a direct offensive against the workers’ right to strike.
1. The government swiftly accomplished a major objective when it obtained a voluntary agreement with the officialdom of the CIO and AFL and their respective national affiliates to give up the weapon of the strike for the duration of the war. The leaderships of the various unions have worked with might and main to carry out the government’s desires. They have cracked down on those workers who have gone on strike to defend union and living conditions, despite government edicts and agreements of their leadership. The record of the official union leaderships, it can be flatly stated, has been almost consistently a record of betrayal and surrender of labor’s needs and rights. But “agreements” were only the beginning.
 
Government Breaks Strikes
2. Where agreement with the union officialdom failed to stop strikes in defense industries, the government soon showed its teeth through direct intervention of either the Army or Navy to break certain strikes: beginning with the Army’s intervention in the North American Aviation strike in Los Angeles, followed by similar strike-breaking actions by the Navy in Kearny, N.J., shipyards, Bayonne, N.J., and other places. All, of course, in the name of the “war emergency,” and, ironically enough, “class peace.”
3. Still another government goal was attained when the AFL arid CIO labor officialdom agreed to the establishment of labor - management committees. The labor-management committees have uniformly proved to be instruments in the hands of the bosses, as is shown by their record and by the resentment of rank and file workers against their operations. It is no wonder or accident that the EMPLOYEES hail the formation and development of this class collaboration medium as the greatest gain of the war to respect to employer-worker relations. And it is that, indeed, for their continuation and extension, both in numbers and scope of function, means the scuttling of bona fide labor union organization and functioning.
4. But the government is well aware that class collaboration instruments, in which the workers are in direct relation with the bosses, can blow up in face of the undoubted needs of the workers. Therefore, the government proceeded to establish several agencies for intervening in labor-employer issues and conflicts, notably the War Labor Board and its conciliation service.
A full examination of the record of the War Labor Board (not in place here) would show that WLB policy itself has evolved and expanded in many directions. An appeal board at first, mainly for consideration of wage and hour issues, the WLB quickly took over powers of deciding the degree and character of a union itself in a given plant. For example, union maintenance clauses; then “wage stabilization” rulings irrespective of the merit of the wage demand; and even penalization of unions for striking – all these are decisions not clearly established as WLB powers at the outset.
More precisely and significantly, from the worker’s standpoint, the evolution of the War Labor Board consistently has resulted in: (1) The lowering of labor’s living standards in accordance with the Administration’s outlook on wage standards; and (2) union “maintenance” by governmental sufferance or permission, instead of by active union functioning and demonstration of its own strength.
 
Decrees Nullify Workers’ Rights
5. However, powerful and influential as the WLB has proved, the Administration was still fearful of labor’s resentment and the possible outbreak of labor actions: strikes. Therefore, it took still another measure, far more meaningful than any hitherto, to hog-tie labor’s interests and needs.
By Roosevelt’s Executive Order, as enunciated in the general Price Control Order, the right to strike under any circumstances became a dead letter so far as government policy is concerned. Second, direct negotiations between the bosses and the workers in regard to wages, working and union conditions, etc., also became a dead letter. For any wage contracts arrived at through this customary procedure are VOID unless the government itself sanctions and approves the agreement!
Thus the institution of collective bargaining, already reeling from government blows and from the abandonment by the union leadership of the use of striking power, is formally buried – presumably only for the duration of the imperialist war.
 
Revive Fighting Policy!
But it must be further noted that when reactionary, anti-labor legislation (e.g., the Smith Bill) was introduced in Congress before Pearl Harbor it failed of enactment because of strong, vocal and militant opposition by organized labor, which recognized the deadly significance of such legislation. One year later, the bitter enemies of labor have achieved the same end through Roosevelt’s executive order.
Hence, by decree and dictatorial practices – in a process as yet far from completed – the Roosevelt Administration steadily and persistently marks out its course in relation to labor’s needs and demands ... In next week’s article we shall show how deeply and far-reaching government labor policy has developed in these directions; and the dire consequences of this policy to the labor movement unless the working class turns consciously to a militant policy of resistance.
 




In last week’s article we described several stages in the evolution of government policy toward labor – labor’s “voluntary” agreement not to strike; the government’s strikebreaking intervention in several important strikes; the establishment of the class collaboration machinery of labor-management committees; the role of the War Labor Board; and, finally, Roosevelt’s decree of October 3, nullifying, in actuality, labor’s right both to strike and to collective bargaining.
All these developments show clearly an evolution toward government by decree and other dictatorial practices in relation to labor. What follows below strongly confirms the basic direction of government labor policy.
 
Veto Power Hits Labor
1. In the execution of Roosevelt’s order, special roles and authority are assigned to several government agencies and persons, including the veto power by one agency over another in employer-labor agreements and decisions. In other words, the government today not only assumes the power to approve or nullify any direct agreement arrived at by collective bargaining between the employers and the workers; but, further, one government department or agent (WLB, OPA, Byrnes) is able to invalidate the decision of another, thus again leaving negotiations on labor standards hanging in mid-air or altogether washed up.
From sad experience in the past, the workers know that when many hands (conciliators, mediators, arbitrators, etc.) meddle in the pie, they lose even the crust. Checks and balances by government agencies operate in the interests of the employers.
2. But the run-around for labor doesn’t stop here. Even if both these powerful agencies – WLB and OPA – approve a given company-worker accord, then James F. Byrnes, director of Economic Stabilization – has the authority to say “NO!” – in the name of preventing inflation. Thus, even apart from Byrne’s anti-labor record and attitude, it is clear that labor’s immediate interests and needs have fallen into the hands of one man with dictatorial powers whose only concern is the advancement of imperialist war objectives.
 
Throttle Labor
3. What, further, is the meaning of the dictatorial trend in government-worker relations for the immediate period and after the war?
Hitlerism (Nazism) is rule by complete totalitarian and dictatorial means, both in peace and wartime. Its policy is clear, and labor is able to recognize it as its enemy without any doubt.
On the other hand, the Roosevelt Administration – the erstwhile “New Deal,” “friend of labor” and proponent of “democracy” – evolves its course gradually but surely. Yet already it has plainly declared: this is total war, and total war justifies any measures.
Will labor’s rights be restored after the war? No responsible imperialist spokesmen are categoric, even in words, about this, because they know better. On the contrary, all authoritative and qualified authorities admit that the economic controls established during the present war will be continued after the war as an economic necessity for imperialist survival and functioning. Old-style (laissez-faire) democratic capitalism economy is over. So is old-style politics or government.
Political conceptions and methods in time always fall into line with economic trends. Developments point and lead toward a greater administrative and military bureaucracy in the post-war period, if imperialism still rules.
4. Part and parcel of these developments are the signs and demands for an even greater curbing of labor and labor unionism NOW AND AFTER THE WAR, both by outspoken reactionary elements and by Administration supporters.
Especially flagrant are the attempts of certain elements to depict every legitimate effort of labor struggle as criminal. For example, Roane Waring, national commander of the American Legion – an organization of great influence in powerful, conservative quarters – declares that, if he had the power, “he would shoot” a worker who goes on strike now. Such a person, in the Legion’s eyes, “is a criminal, a saboteur, a traitor – and as such should face the consequences.”
“‘Treason’ is the word for strikes,” is the bald statement of the New York Daily Mirror (editorial, October 19). Its label for AFL workers who struck the Western Cartridge Plant, Alton, Ill., is “Outlaws!”; for the workers who went on strike at the General Cable Corp., Bayonne, N.J., its cry is “Hoodlums!”
These criminal terms used against these and other workers who have and will stand up in the future for their needs and rights are the psychological foundation which the American Legion, the Daily Mirror et al. are laying up for today’s and tomorrow’s legal and extra-legal (vigilantism, etc.) activities against workers and their organizations.
Liberals, optimists, Stalinists and labor bureaucrats pretend that these extreme and strong declarations are not really representative of the views and aims of the ruling class. This is shown by their persistent pleas for rebuke and castigation of such elements by the Administration. They even protest that no less a person than Rear Admiral Emory Scott Land, chairman of the United States Maritime Commission, is merely a deviation, one anti-labor man lost in a crowd of labor friends.
But not all the explanations in the world by Land, or “hush” campaigns by the government, can disguise the fact that Land’s “shoot organizers at sunrise” statement was a spontaneous expression of the real attitude of the big-wig representatives of the American ruling class toward unionism.
The Navy has always been fiercely antagonistic toward labor unionism. It is no accident that the Navy shipyards have always been known as the “graveyards” of unionism. Today, when the Navy is the largest employer of labor in the country, the bitter anti-union declarations of Navy spokesmen in the recent period have been of direct and ominous significance to labor’s need to organize and maintain organization of these workers.
More felicitous spokesmen of the bosses, such as “public representatives” (Wayne Morse) on the War Labor Board and other government representatives, do not call for “outright shooting.” But, for example, the WLB punishes militant strikes in its own way – that is, by denying union maintenance clauses to striking workers. And these elements call persistently, if quietly as yet, for “union regulation” (of strikes, funds, etc.) by law, “as necessary,” now and after the war.
Significantly, last August in a WLB decision, two EMPLOYER representatives on the WLB, entering a separate opinion, demanded extensive union regulation through the WLB: specifically, proof of “worthiness” for union maintenance clause; no financial support for any political organization or candidate, etc.
On that occasion, the chairman of the WLB, William H. Davis, expressing the majority opinion, objected to the “union regulation” proposals of the employer representatives as an “extension of control” of WLB powers “beyond the frame of reference under which the tribunal acts.” He also asserted that the extension of “a continuing control by the board over a labor union would be to indulge in the worst vice of administrative tribunals.”
But “public representatives” are catching up swiftly with the employer outlook on “union regulation”; and government regulation (by the WLB, OPA, Byrnes, Roosevelt) has now gone far beyond the original conception of only establishing contractual obligations between the employers and workers.
“Union regulation” is indeed coming into its own; unfortunately, with the sponsorship or stand-aside attitude of a weak, stupid and often treacherous union leadership. These men do not see that the government’s union regulation policy is destructive of all genuine unionism; and will leave labor helpless when it comes face to face with the onslaughts of the ruling class in a chaotic post-war period.
 
Workers! Prepare!
The workers have jobs today, even though with living standards in the process of being sharply lowered. But the main streams of organized labor have given up, both freely and reluctantly, their major union rights – the right to strike and organize NOW, when workers are employed. When the war is finally over, labor will run up against vast joblessness, accompanied by social, economic and political ferment and chaos.
If labor is unable to maintain its rights now, it will find the obstacles and struggles many times more difficult later. In these battles, which will go beyond economic struggles, labor will face a ruthless, relentless, dictatorial regime and an employing class which will not hesitate to try to defeat and crush the working class beyond recovery for an indeterminate time.
Today the world is in flames. Tomorrow, after the war, it will be in rags. That is the dismal outlook of imperialism for the masses, in war and peace.
Government labor policy, the record proves, has undergone a steady change from an attitude of support and benevolence to restrictions and outright hostility toward labor, except in cases where the unions bowed to, and functioned as instruments of, an imperialist government and its interests. The Roosevelt Administration is today only carrying out and leading the main course of American imperialist destiny.
For every immediate and ultimate reason, therefore, it is better for the workers now to learn the lesson of the ever-present conflicts with the ruling class: Namely, to fight today to maintain and extend union rights and organization – even if the fight is not always a winning one – in order to be able on the morrow to better withstand all onslaughts and to forge the new better, world of socialism.
 



When 10,000 Pittsburgh building trades workers struck over the wage scale Donald M. Nelson, chairman of of the War Production Board, threatened “drastic action” against workers undertaking an “unpatriotic strike” unless the strike was ended immediately. AFL international union officials denounced the strike as “unauthorized.” Local union officials stated ominously that unless the men returned to work at once, “their cards could be lifted.”
When Colorado coal miners, temporarily unemployed, marked time pending a pick-up in their trade, the Colorado Industrial Commission, through its unemployment compensation division, cut off unemployment compensation in order to force coal miners into the METAL mines. When workers at the propellor plant of the Curtiss-Wright Corp., Beaver, Pa., struck over the issues of a wage increase, the union shop and dues check-off, the Beaver draft board threatened to reclassify deferred workers and actually suspended some deferments already granted.
When 1,000 American Magnesium Corp. workers, Buffalo, N.Y., struck over a wage issue, Army officials summoned the men, to return to work; William H. Davis, chairman of the War Labor Board, denounced the strike as a “contribution” to enemies of the United States; union officials labeled the strike “unauthorized” and urged the men to return, to work.
 
Combined Opposition
In each of their efforts to maintain their living and working conditions by militant action, workers are more and more confronted with a triumvirate of opponents: (1) direct pressure and attacks from the bosses; (2) threats and denunciations from the government – local, state and national; and (3) criticism and opposition, instead of cooperation, from a supine, yielding union leadership. Yet, obviously, workers don’t just walk off their jobs or strike or slow down just for the fun of it. They need their jobs to live, and if they strike, it is for very good reasons.
But the three-headed combination against them – the bosses, government and weak-kneed, kowtowing union officials – is a tough one to beat. Of course, the workers don’t fancy attacks upon them by employers as they observe the huge war profits and watch Congress protect the interests of the money bags. However, they expect the bosses to oppose them and to gouge them for every possible nickel of profit.
But the government – isn’t it “neutral”? Isn’t it a friend of labor? This is the notion that is fast being dissipated as more and more workers find one government, institution, or another – in the name of “national defense,” “patriotism” and “national unity” – chiding, attacking, striking or petitioning workers. When these efforts fail to deter workers from fighting for their rights, then the government steps in with threats of forced labor, “draft reclassification,” etc.
For example, on the Pacific Coast, in the Bay Area shipyards, “loafers” are being “weeded out” and their names are being “sent to their draft boards for reclassification” (New York Times, August 13). Shipyard employers and Navy officials, presumably with the aid of “conscientious workers” and some union stewards, are collaborating in this big game hunt against the “loafers,” who are all too often workers standing up for their rights and objecting to the ruthless speed-up and exploitation.
And then there’s the case in Denver, Colo. (at Lowry Field Airport), where truck drivers demanded pay for a period when a loading machine broke down, the delay obviously being the responsibility of the employer.. Resuming work, the men slowed down the speed of their trucks to enforce the demand for lost-time payment. A Denver city official demanded that the Denver Rationing. Board immediately recall all tires issued to the truck drivers; at the same time advising the contractors tor cut these men from lists of future “defense” jobs (New York World-Telegram, August 7). The report laconically closes with the statement that “the slowdown stopped at once.”
 
Government as Strikebreaker
To clinch the argument, there is the case of the Bayonne, N.J., workers of the General Cable Corp., whose demand for a ten cents an hour increase was denied by the War Labor Board. They then struck over the heads of the union officials. “Unauthorized strike,” said the officials. The government (Roosevelt) stepped in then and broke the strike by turning the plant over to the direction of the Navy, in the interests of “war production” – and, naturally the preservation of the company’s interests.
Yet the cause of the Bayonne workers’ strike was simple enough. The men weren’t earning enough to live decently. One strike leader said:
“The Army will get us pretty soon, anyway. I’m going in the Navy soon, myself. Well, we want all that’s coming to us while we’re still here.”
“Sure,” growled some of the husky young fellow’s standing near him.
 
Strike-breaking Union Officials
And whose interests are some union officials serving? Union officials; in the instances cited, as well as many more that could be given (for example, Arkwright Textile Co., Fall River, Mass., strike; Bigelow-Sanford Co., Amsterdam, N.Y. carpet workers’ strike), have been either stupid or weak or worse in labeling these strikes “unauthorized.” Such characterization enables the bosses and the government agencies to jeer at the militant workers, to gloat over the weakness of the union, to appeal to the less resolute workers to return to work, to authorize scabs- – and in all too short a time to break the strike.
And then there’s the direct strike-breaking, action in San Francisco of Dewey Mead, business agent of Painters Local 1158, who ordered thirty, union painters to scab against fellow painters of San Rafael Local No. 83 who were out on strike on a federal housing project in a dispute “over violation of safety rules.”
“When the United States government,” said Mead in “justification,” “asks me for men, I’m going to send them.”
It is clear, that a general extension of Mead’s theory – “You can’t strike against the government” – can only result in destroying any possibility for labor to maintain its rights and gains and its union organizations as fighting organs against exploitation. For more and more the government is not only intervening against labor in employer-worker disputes, but is actually itself entering the field of production as a boss.
 
Serve Labor – Or the Bosses?
Indeed, the labor bureaucrats always do their utmost to show how safe and indispensable they are to the ruling class and the government of bourgeois democracy. In wartime, they outdo themselves in groveling before the government and betraying the workers. Yet the unions today, more than ever, must assert their class independence, from the bosses and the government; and insist on their democratic rights to carry through strikes, for their protection.
In this period of capitalist decline, the unions (1) either become subordinate to the interests of the capitalist class and scuttle their own future or (2) they raise themselves to a class conscious understanding of their role and endeavor to develop themselves into bodies working toward a revolutionary transformation of society, together with other, working: class organizations – political, cooperative, etc. There is no middle ground.
The workers have already made too many concessions – official, abandonment of the right to strike, wage concessions, overtime pay, etc. But when, in order to maintain a half-decent living standard and working conditions, workers; find themselves forced, to strike, they must be able to count on the support of their union officials, and not their strike-breaking opposition. If this isn’t the case, these union officials must be gotten rid of and replaced by militant leaders,
The triumvirate against the workers must be broken up. The first task is within the ranks of labor: namely, the demand of the rank and file that the union officials work for THEM – and not the bosses – and cease acting in concert with the bosses and the government against the ranks of the workers.
 










1942


Number
of Strikes


 


Workers
Involved


 


Working
Days Lost




January


  31


  13.000


     46,000




February


  57


  27,000


   119,000




March


  74


  39,000


   167,000




April


  95


  43,000


   170,000




May


144


  45,000


   137,000




June


192


  85,000


   255,000




July


 222 


   81,000 


    234,000 




Total


815


336,000


1,128,000






The report of the War Labor Board on strikes in war industries exclusively during the first seven months of 1942 are [sic!] informative and revealing, not only for labor’s future efforts and aims, but also as indicative of the future efforts and aims of the employers and the Administration.
A significant feature of the figures published in an adjoining “box” is that 300,000 workers disregarded the “no strike” agreement of the Administration and the union officialdom and struck to protect their interests.
The Administration, attempts to minimize the importance of these strikes by simple arithmetic, declaring that less than 3 per cent (or an average of eight out of every 10,000 workers) of the total, number of workers employed in these industries went on strike.
Nevertheless, the evidence shows that the Administration, while continuing to pooh-pooh the strike figures, prepares to and is ready to crack down on every manifestation of labor struggle and militancy.
Why does the Administration have this two-faced attitude? First, it wants to give every worker the feeling that he is isolated, that his grievances are exceptional, and that his militancy would arouse no support. But more important is the fact that the Administration heeds the judgment of the National Association of Manufacturers and other employers to these matters.
The National Association of Manufacturers speaks out more plainly on the meaning of the “wildcat” and “outlaw” strikes. The employing class is very much aware of the strength and power residing in labor’s hands should the latter become conscious thereof and choose to use it. The NAM points out that “Less than 1 per cent of American labor [because of its strategic place in industry – H.A.] could effectively halt production of virtually every tank and plane under construction today.” Employers and boss commentators from every side describe these strikes as evidence of a worsening situation on the labor front and the general disintegration of the “spirit of unity.”
The Administration policy of minimizing the strikes only confuses the public mind, complains the NAM. “The walkouts,” declares the official NAM statement on the subject, “serve to emphasize the growing rebelliousness of labor minorities which continue to ignore the appeals of both union leaders and the War Labor Board.”
Correct on both counts. The manufacturers recognize that increasing numbers of workers are unwilling any longer to surrender their interests and are conducting strikes – that is, pursuing the class struggle.
So the government in its own way takes heed of the warnings of the NAM and big business interests generally, in respect to labor’s small but growing resistance and militancy. Threats of “drastic action ... even to the application of the laws of treason, if necessary” (spokesman of the War Labor Board) take on flesh and blood. Further, the “benevolent” Roosevelt Administration, the “friend of labor,” has now clearly indicated its policy which is more and more quickly becoming a reality, namely:

Freezing labor to its jobs.
Freezing wages.
Reclassifying draftees who resist boss victimization.
Nullifying collective bargaining agreements by executive order (e.g., premium pay) or by War Labor Board decision.

To counteract, if possible, the growth of strikes, labor officials demand greater representation in the government administration (on the various government boards), hoping this will give them prestige with the ranks. They hope that such recognition or “prestige” of labor will compensate for lack of gains or even losses. Instead of pursuing a policy of demonstrating labor’s very real independent power, they thus act as servants of the ruling class rather than as representatives of the working class.
When 300,000 workers strike in war industries – with all the dangers of discrimination, black-listing, job loss, draft reclassification, and despite tremendous pressure and overt threats from the government, the bosses and a weak union officialdom – this is concrete and positive evidence that a growing section of labor is looking first to labor’s interests and needs.
The ranks understand very well that the bosses have taken advantage of the “no strike” pledge to bear down on them. Local union leaders, being closer to the ranks and their wishes, have often gone along with the strike decisions of the ranks over the heads of the international union officials. The government and the employers suspect the militancy of the local leaders and will stop at nothing to forestall it. Recently, for example, two CIO local auto union leaders (committee-men) were barred from a plant at Flint, Mich., and taken off the picket line by Army officials in order to investigate their “loyalty.” (New York Times, August 30) In still another case (Western Cartridge Co., Alton, Ill.), a local union president was suspended for entering a restricted area of the plant, causing a strike which even William Green, AFL president, described as due to the “arbitrary anti-union tactics” of the company.
The conclusions one must draw from the strikes of the past months are:

The sentiment of the ranks against the “no strike” policy will become larger and sharper, even though repressive measures or legislation may hinder actual strikes.
 
Those who stand in the way of a return of labor to a militant policy will be regarded with increasing suspicion by the ranks as either enemies or agents of the bosses within labor’s house.
 
The rank and file will give more consideration to house cleaning, with the object of obtaining better, more militant leadership.

 



The “Black Market” – the bootlegging of rationed and price-ceilinged goods – has steadily increased. Its development has already reached a stage where, according to District Attorney Frank S. Hogan of New York, there is a danger of a return to the “lush days of prohibition – a period of hi-jacking, open corruption and gang murders.”
The Black Market has invaded big fields (for example, steel), where the producing capitalist is involved. But it is the growing Black Market in articles of consumption – foodstuffs, furniture, gasoline, wearing apparel, and so forth – that is of immediate concern to the masses. It is the daily lives of working people – men and women and children – that are immediately and directly involved by the cruder and greedy merchant capitalists of varying sizes and importance.
What are the causes of the development of the Black Market?
1. A small section of the population (bourgeoisie, upper middle class, etc.) have high or substantial incomes.

They are able to obtain or commandeer a larger part of the supply of rationed and price-ceilinged goods because of their ability and readiness to pay high prices.
 
For the masses there results a decrease (1) in the quantity and (2) the quality of goods available.
 
There results, despite government price ceilings on numerous items of consumption, an increase in prices of mass consumption goods.

These results are achieved in various devious and circuitous ways by unblushing merchant capitalists – manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers:

Standards or quality or size, of articles are cut – but the original prices remain.
 
A slight change in the size or form of the product – the regulations then permit a change in pricing as if for new items on the market.
 
”Upgrading” quality of goods – for example, the selling of “good” meat as “choice,” etc., recently exposed in the meat packing industry.
 
The lower or lowest prided products are discontinued and new, higher-priced items are introduced.

These things happen daily. Why?
 
“All the Traffic Will Bear”
The aspect of the Black Market under consideration here is that related to the merchant capitalist. The attitude or philosophy of this section of the bourgeoisie is to “charge all that the traffic will bear.” As a group they obtain their margins or profits on the pennies or nickels side, depending on volume circulation or sale of goods. But if opportunity is provided to turn an extra penny by sacrificing volume, why not?
So, especially when goods are so scarce, this element of the bourgeoisie decides to slough off the “lower class” customers and cater only to the “higher class” ones. The expedience of charging considerably higher prices serves this purpose.
The social outlook or philosophy of this capitalist group is that of the big bourgeoisie, who already have the ownership and control of the major resources of the means of life, guaranteeing them huge profits and income at all times. The merchant capitalist thinks – and tries to act – like the landlords and the bankers (who, because they own his property, really determine his destiny and daily life) – and not like the butcher, the baker and candlestick maker, upon whom he really depends for his better sales.
Fundamentally, therefore, the Black Market’s source, actually is in:

The disparity of incomes between the bourgeoisie, the middle class and the mass of workers and poor people.
 
The profit system (capitalism), of which profiteering is only an exaggeration of what it already is.

Above all, the real Black Market is the system of capitalism itself – which exploits the masses; and then adds to their exploitation and misery by monopoly prices. The real Black Market thieves and bootleggers are first of all the great monopolies, which are in a position to set the prices. Moreover, as the patent controllers of new techniques, inventions, etc., they prevent such improvements from being used in production, where they would bring better goods for the masses at lower prices.
The other Black Market, the scavenger Black Market, is an outgrowth of the imperialist war which brings an opportunity for the cruder vultures of capitalism to operate. In the desire for extra profits, they will defy such laws as hinder their profits; and will risk such penalties as are involved – at present light and comparatively inconsequential.
The legal procedure for prosecution at the same time is so involved, cumbersome and long-drawn-out as not to phase these obvious profit-hunters.
Government Won’t Stop Black Market
The cold truth is that the capitalist class and the government – the latter with its many agencies and thousands of government bureaucrat investigators of Black Market practices – will not seriously stamp out the Black Market – any more than the government of capitalism can be expected to stamp out capitalism itself. So far as any remedies are possible, and there are some, it is the masses who will have to endeavor to invoke the proposals and fight for their adoption.
The control of food supplies particularly (and consumption articles generally) must be taken out of the hands of the food (and other) monopolies and the middlemen brokers – out of the hands of boss control. Their concern is never with giving the masses full value for their money or labor.
The masses obviously cannot afford to pay Black Market prices, even with wage increases – since the latter are more than lost today through various taxes and higher prices. The burdens of the imperialist war (abroad – in the blood shed on the battlefields; at home – in every way which concerns their pocketbooks) are being foisted on the masses. The lack of consumer goods today in several fields only makes it more imperative to devise and adopt protective measures for the working people. Government “investigating committees” – of which there are already an overflow, developing a tremendous and costly bureaucracy – are not the answer.
 
For Committees from Masses
But committees of the masses – these are possible. Committees made up from the trade unions, women’s auxiliaries of labor unions, from groups of housewives, consumer cooperatives and also representation from the employees of the large food and related consumption corporations, and even from the small retail shopkeepers. Such broad, active committees are most concerned and in the best position seriously to investigate the problem of prices in consumer goods.
Such committees would really be interested to seek out and find food and other consumer goods lying idle (i.e., unsold, awaiting an even more profitable market) in warehouses, granaries, etc.
Such broad committees – once they achieve certain strength – would not tolerate food rotting away for lack of picking or harvesting, or insufficient profits for the big farmers or middlemen, who face labor shortages because they refuse to. pay agricultural laborers a living wage. Such committees would DEMAND that all goods be made available for mass use.
Such committees would seriously aim to LOWER PRICES and, equally important, assure EQUAL RATIONING.
Such committees can also be formed on a broader mass basis – BLOCK COMMITTEES of housewives, small storekeepers, etc. – cooperating with the major committees. Incorporating larger numbers into the consideration of immediate and elementary problems, such block committees could meet virtually overnight and work out their proposals and demands on the government authorities and employers.
Such broad committees would have sufficient authority and strength, considering their wide representation from labor organizations, etc., to hold large mass meetings and demonstrations where the masses of workers and their families – especially those workers engaged in producing the consumer goods in question – could be made intimately acquainted with the price and rationing problems, and measures for common action and remedy worked out.
In addition, such committees would endeavor to work out ways and means for an alliance with the poor farmers to ensure that agricultural products get to the cities; and are sold or distributed to the masses at prices and on terms agreed upon between representatives of the farmers’ groups and organizations of the workers.
In the First World War, especially in the smaller cities, the farmers came in at announced intervals to sell directly to the consumers. Today fears are being voiced by the large chain merchandisers that such direct marketing may again interfere with their ability to set prices at obviously higher levels.
But all the foregoing is just another way of stating that only the mass control and direction of their needs by the people can assure to the working people the receipt of the minimum necessities of life. The means outlined – these broad committees, the organization of the exploited peoples – can help to put a dent in Black Market prices and practices; and, more important, can expose and curb to some extent the big profit aims of big business.
In the efforts of these working sections of society to achieve some of their immediate needs and aims, they will come better to realize that Black Markets and profiteering and exploitation – and the imperialist war itself – are rooted in the economic order of capitalism; and that only the abolition of the latter by the action of the masses can solve their problems in a fundamental manner.
For it must be understood that distribution is always ultimately controlled by those who own and control production. Today the bosses own. Tomorrow, in the Workers State, the workers would own production and would therefore be in a position to control and direct distribution in the interests of the working masses.
 



With increasing frequency disputes between the bosses and workers are being sent to the National War Labor Board. Many workers regard the board as a pro-labor instrument. Labor unions are often ready to certify their grievances to the War Labor Board and look forward hopefully to the outcome. But a brief examination of the operations of the War Labor Board shows the facts to be considerably different.
 
The Bosses’ Interest
The employers are today more and more willing to employ the board in settling disputes, because the results over a period of time are of major benefit to them. The eagerness of the bosses alone should be sufficient reason for the workers to be suspicious; but let us turn to the concrete evidence.
In a wage dispute between the Western Pennsylvania Motor Carriers Association and the Teamsters Union, AFL, in Pittsburgh, the operators insisted that the matter be turned over to the War Labor Board. The workers refused, on the ground that too much delay would result, and that many working conditions provided for in the tentative contract could not be made retroactive. (New York Times, June 22)
Labor unions are submitting grievances to the War Labor Board which require speedy settlement if the immediate interests of the workers (cost of living, union status, working conditions) are to be protected. WLB intervention means long delays before a decision is handed down. Meanwhile, the burden is carried by the workers, and profits for the bosses increase.
Collective bargaining conferences on the demand of the 157,000 steel workers in “Little Steel” (Republic, Youngstown, Inland and Bethlehem) for a $1.00 daily wage increase, union security and the cheek-Off took more than nine and a half months! Hearing the arguments of the Steel Workers Union and the steel operators before the panel of the WLB alone consumed four and a half months. Even after the panel of the WLB admitted the ability of the bosses to pay the $1.00 a day increase, the WLB voted a miserable 44 cents a day increase. (The meaning of the Steel and Remington Rand decisions has been discussed in previous issues of Labor Action – Editor)
Philip Murray, president of the CIO, had previously described the case as one of the “best classic examples” of “cooling off periods” and declared that the restraint and patience of the workers merited “special commendation.” (!) (New York Times, July 2)
The “cooling-off” periods have been and are being used by the employers and the government to make extensive propaganda against the workers’ demands, to which the capitalist press gives dramatic front page headlines. The Office of Price Administration blasted out proposals that the steel wage increases be limited to 5 per cent as ah “anti-inflationary” step (the same OPA whose “attitude” Harvey Brown, president of the International Association of Machinists Union, declares “perils the entire labor movement and the future of collective bargaining as an institution in this country.”)
A radio speech by Harold Smith, federal budget director and one of the President’s closest advisers, was headlined Ban on Wage Raises Demanded by Smith. (New York Times, July 2) A week later President Roosevelt was hailed by the press as opposed to the wage increase for Little Steel since it would increase the cost of living.
 
Labor Fields the Bag
Decisions of the War Labor Board are today generally compromised with loopholes for the bosses that leave the workers holding the bag. Take the decision of the War Labor Board on the Federal Shipbuilding & Drydock Co., Kearney, N.J., April 24, and the Ryan Aeronautical Co., San Diego, decision of June 18. The maintenance of union membership decision in both cases allows for a pre-enforcement period during which employers can use their notorious methods for intimidating workers from entering and into leaving the union. For union security, too, is not retroactive. How important this period is to the bosses was shown when Roger Lapham,
employer member of the WLB, who has always “resisted the inclusion of a union security clause,” stated (New York Times, June 18) with regard to the Ryan case:
“The case is noteworthy because for the first time it recognizes one of the main principles the employer members have contended for, since it makes it plain to any union member that he has 15 days to resign from the union if he does not want to be bound by the maintenance of membership clause.”
 
States Favor WLB Power
Then, too, the insatiable appetite of the imperialist war and the cry for “national unity,” in addition to preventing militant action by the workers, are used to nullify decisions of the WLB that appear favorable, to labor, as, for instance, the “forced savings” or “increased wages” in the form of War Bonds. Recently, moreover, it became apparent that the WLB is recognized by the ruling class to be a more feasible instrument for this kind of “war-propagandized” decision than even the state mediation board machinery. In Syracuse, Where the Machinists Union appealed to the state for mediation arbitration against the E.C. Stearns Co., Justice Cross of the New York Supreme Court favored the War Labor Board as against the state machinery, declaring:
“The War Labor Board has plenary power in carrying out that policy to take into consideration the essential interrelationships of military and civil requirements ... and any and all pertinent factors that bear upon the adjustment and stabilization of Wages.” (New York Times, July 5)
So useful have the National War Labor Boards proved to the employers and the government that Governor Green Of Illinois has decided to appoint a State War Labor Standards Board that would permit employers to violate state labor laws!
 
Curb Worker Militancy
Because of their faith in government intervention, unions are relaxing their vigilance even when the government steps in with obviously union-breaking methods. In the case of the textile workers’ strike at the Arkwright Corp., Fall River, Mass., the WLB authorized the hiring of scabs to break the strike for wage increases. The International Union aided this scabbery by repudiating the strike as “unauthorized.”
It is an unhealthy symptom in the labor movement when William H. Davis, chairman of the War Labor Board, can state (New York Times, May 10): “There has not been a single authorized strike since Pearl Harbor. Every time a wildcat walkout occurs, the WLB has found union officials to do all they can to end the stoppage.” That is, the union officials are curbing the workers in their efforts to protect their interests, their unions and their living standards.
 
Direct Negotiations Best
The inroads on the vitality of the labor unions made by the employers and governmental agencies have been many. The examples cited prove the need of once again insisting on direct collective bargaining, depending primarily on their economic and bargaining strength. Direct negotiations with the bosses, holding the strike weapon in reserve if that fails, is the procedure that workers must follow.
Consideration of strike action is always before the union and its members. Only when forced by external pressure which they cannot control or resist indefinitely should labor accept a third agency (WLB, mediation, arbitration, etc.) to resolve its struggles with the bosses. In each instance the unions should make it clear that they accept the intervention of a third agency only under pressure, with reluctance and distrust.
Such an attitude in itself favors them in any possible decision of the state or national boards. Thus the normal machinery of labor unionism can be maintained and strengthened; the vigilance of the unions will not be relaxed; intervention by the government will be more exceptional and will operate in each instance in such a way that the government agency will find itself forced at the very least to regard the workers’ strength as formidable.
 



On August 18 the War Labor Board rejected the demand of 21,000 Western Electric workers, Kearny, N.J., plant for a general wage increase of ten cents an hour on the ground that such an increase would be “contrary ... to the national program for wage stabilization.” The WLB awarded increases of three to five cents an hour to a section of the workers.
A brief review of the struggles of the workers for the past period graphically exposes, first, the utterly baseless, iniquitous and fraudulent side of the bosses; and, second, the complete futility of workers placing their hopes on the WLB for a fair judgment of their demands.
In hearings which began on April 30 before a panel of the War Labor Board, the Western Electric Employees’ Association (an independent union) called for an over-all wage increase of ten cents an hour from the Western Electric Company in order to meet higher living costs and correct the company’s slow and one-sided method of adjusting wage rates. The company’s proposition was entirely unsatisfactory, with the result that the panel declared it would submit recommendations to the full War Labor Board, with a decision expected by May 20.
 
1. “Making Too Much Money”
The adamant attitude and “difficult” position of the Western Electric Co. in respect to the wage increase jumps at one as verbatim reports before the War Labor Board hearing are revealed.
As evidence regarding the company’s financial status, the union submitted a copy of the following letter to a private individual from H.B. Thayer, then president of the Western Electric Co., which an investigation by the Federal Communications had revealed:
“The Western Electric Co. is making too much money, and at the present time it would be enormously harmful to that company and to our general interests if it were known what its profits were. I trust that there will be no information given out until matters are in better shape.
“I think it well for you to destroy this letter.”
 
2. Taxation by Misrepresentation
In the face of its unquestioned and established ability to pay the proposed ten cents an hour wage increase, the Western Electric Co. had the brass to contend that it was better, more patriotic, to pay, taxes to the government in the “national emergency” than to increase wages. There are no limits, dear brothers, to the duplicity and gall of the PAY-TRIOTEERS when they want to avoid disgorging even a little of their swollen profits to the workers. A second letter of the aforesaid president of the Western Electric company to one of the company stockholders, introduced by the union, punctures holes in this “patriotic” taxation argument of the company, to wit:
“The taxation situation in Illinois is getting to be almost impossible. The laws are not clear and the application of them takes the form of legalized blackmail, particularly on the large taxpayers. This law in the state of New York, under which we propose to incorporate, seems to be admirably suited for our purpose. We have wanted for some time to capitalize our surplus, BUT HAVE WANTED TO AVOID THE PUBLICITY OF ‘MELON-CUTTING.’ For obvious reasons we want as little publicity on this proposition as possible, either before or after the event, which is my reason for asking you to consider this in the light of a confidential communication from me.”
Presumably the company must think the workers are pretty gullible or naive, when, on the one hand, it opposes wage increases on the ground that these reduce taxes to the government and – on the other hand – it devises such elaborate schemes and plots to avoid paying taxes.
 
3. Job Insecurity
Workers cannot afford to forego wage increases in the name of wage stabilization, not only in view :of their present needs and requirements but also because they have no guarantee that they will not be thrown out of work next month or year. This is especially true in the case of the Western Electric workers, as an excerpt from the brief submitted by the union to the WLB on the matter of job insecurity and labor turnover at the Kearny plant of Western Electric demonstrates:
“This company has the reputation of wielding as ruthless an ax with respect to jobs as does the headman in Germany who deals with marked victims. The labor turnover at the Kearny works has been greater than in any other manufacturing industry so far as. New Jersey is concerned, and this is the statement, not of the union but of the New Jersey State Department of Labor, The average labor turnover for 1938 in New Jersey was 18 per cent while at the Western Electric, Kearny works, it was 43 per cent.
“In 1930, 22,000 were employed at the Kearny works and in 1933 less than 4,000 were employed. In 1937, the payroll increased to 9,500 and in 1938 the payroll dropped to 5,000. Length of service or rate of pay is no guarantee that an employee will not be affected by the next or future layoff. The tragic implications involved in such discharges are emphasized by the fact that the skills developed by employees on jobs of the Western Electric Co. are of little or no use in outside industry.
“The short employment life of a Western Electric worker at the Kearny plant is an important factor to be considered in any wage adjustment. It would be shocking to one’s sense of justice for the company to be able to take off the cream of prosperous years and leave employees the skimmed milk (and very little of that) during the lean years.”
The Kearny union, is beginning to grasp the “to hell with the workers” attitude of Western Electric, which is only a more crass example of the attitude of the BOSS CLASS everywhere. That class will resort
to any measure – deceit, duplicity, crime – and will use might and main to hold what they have. Harsh experience will show to the Kearny workers, as it shows to other workers, that a strong union and the readiness to use that strength, is necessary to protect their interests to, the extent possible under the capitalist order.
The Kearny workers have just learned what “a sense of justice” means – (1) to the bosses and (2) to the War Labor Board (the government) so far as the workers are concerned. In the last analysis, when the basic economic and political interests of the employers are concerned, the bosses and the government stand together in opposition to the needs and interests of the workers. For the Western Electric workers at Kearny, the WLB’s policy of “wage stabilization” means the continuance of huge profits by the company and a continued low living standard and job insecurity for the employees.
*
As we go to press a news dispatch, carries the significant announcement by the Western Electric Employees Assn. of Kearny, N.J., that they have refused to participate in ceremonies awarding the Army-Navy “E” to the Western Electric Co. for its war production efforts. The union, in its statement, denounced and gave as a reason for its decision, the company’s failure to maintain fair labor standards. The anti-labor practices of the company, in the name of patriotism and “national unity,” have thus been dramatically exposed by 22,000 workers who demand their rights “at home.”
Simultaneously with this action the union, following a membership meeting, announced that it was petitioning the War Labor Board to reconsider its ruling for a meager 3–5 cents an hour increase to a part of the workers, in view of the unanimous recommendation of the board’s panel for a wage increase of 5–8 cents to a greater number of employees.
The union’s petition says directly that the views of the panel cannot be “so completely overruled by the board without precipitating disturbing feelings of restiveness, uneasiness and general dissatisfaction among so large a number of workers as are involved in this case.” This plain-spoken attitude of the union is a favorable omen. Western Electric workers, too, like increasing numbers of workers elsewhere, are taking note of the peculiar workings of the WLB; for example, where panels of the WLB have proposed more favorable rulings for the workers, only to have the WLB ignore the recommendations.
 







(The June New International article dealt with the strength of the European working class movement before the First World Imperialist War, at the same time analyzing the inherent political and theoretical weaknesses which imply its later collapse. The consequent betrayal by the socialist and labor leadership was described in the July issue. We now enter upon the stage of reviving militancy and internationalism which foreshadow the Russian Revolution.)





So the war raged on. The “short war” quickly lengthened from days and weeks into months and years and “military experts” from all walks of life came to view its devastation and duration as “indefinite.”
In France, “the party, most of whose members were mobilized, had lost its best forces. The locals and federations no longer met. Political life was suspended. For a year it was a veritable eclipse of socialism.” The treason of the socialist leaders had “led to the collapse of the entire party. Those who remained clear-visioned and faithful to socialism could not make their voices heard; all civil liberties were suppressed, meetings were forbidden, the censor blanked in the newspapers every expression of a point of view different from the official and governmental point of view.” [1]
 
Three “Socialist” Congresses
As several months of the war pass, repercussions in the organizations of the Second International and the labor movement of Europe begin to appear. A Socialist Congress is called by the neutral countries for December 1914 to be convened in Copenhagen. The executive body of the French CGT, by a vote of 22 to 20, decides to take no notice of the invitation to participate. Pierre Monatte and Francis Merrheim (president of the Union des Métaux) protest this act of sabotage of the international solidarity of labor and demonstrate their protest by resigning from the executive committee of the CGT.
With only 16 delegates representing the neutral Scandinavian countries and Holland, the Congress is convened in January 1915 and passes a resolution calling for peace. The French syndicalists, now up to their ears in support of the imperialist war, have the effrontery to call the Scandinavians cowards and hypocrites, saying that their voices are those of eunuchs because they are not directly involved in war.
A few weeks later, on February 14, 1915, a conference of “socialists” is held at London, a conference, however, which permits as participants only the socialists whose countries are on the side of the Allied Powers. The British government actually encourages (and perhaps was the initial stimulus for) its convocation. By excluding socialist representation from Triple Alliance countries and even from neutral countries, such a conference could only aim at reinforcement of patriotism in the name of socialism. Moreover, the London conference is strictly a get-together sponsored and directed from the top. The rank and file of the Socialist Parties are not even informed about this conference, much less asked for opinions or advices on its character and purpose.
Resolutions are adopted by the London conference: The conference notes the imperialist causes of the war. But, it asserts, the invasion of Belgium and France menaced national independence; a victory of the German imperialists would mean the end of democracy and liberty in Europe. Hence, the conference resolutions conclude: Support Allied imperialism now and, at the end of the imperialist war, the Socialist (Second) International will have the duty of uniting the International to suppress secret diplomacy; to work for disarmament; and to create an organ of arbitration to prevent wars thereafter.
 
London Conference of the International
It is to be noted that the London conference, even aside from its illusions or belief in the “war for democracy” and hence its support of its own imperialism, has no working class perspective for the post-war period. It adopts proposals entirely predicated on a continuation of bourgeois rule following the war. Moreover, the proposals adopted for the amelioration of war dangers have been demonstrated to be completely illusory and utopian. Disarmament by agreement of imperialist powers who must arm to the teeth to protect what they already possess and endeavor to increase further their imperialist control at one another’s expense! Arbitration when wars today begin unproclaimed, and so forth.
Even more appalling from a revolutionary standpoint, coming from a conference which calls itself socialist, is the lack of a revolutionary perspective to bring an end to the war. The London conference does not envisage the goal of socialist or workers’ power and a socialist economic and political program for the post-war period. The Socialist Party (Second International), then as now, was not really convinced ideologically of the validity of the socialist solution to the evils of capitalism and to the scourge of imperialist war. It did not consciously develop the will to struggle toward the socialist assumption of power and the socialist reorganization of society. That is the empirical way and it always results in unworkable or unimportant palliatives or proposals to reform the beast of imperialism. Whatever the intentions of the conciliationists and reformists, the results are uniformly devastating to the workers. The first “World War for Democracy,” with the help and sponsorship of the socialists and labor capitulators, labored only for the victory of the Allied imperialists (“democracies”) and thus could only produce the Versailles Treaty. Today, the Norman Thomasites, with their post-war councils and their “Youth for Democracy” leagues, prove themselves legitimate heirs to the imperialist-bloodstained legacy of the social-patriots of the First World War. The proletarian revolution is not in their calculations any more than the Russian October was in the program or expectations of the Second International and syndicalist patriots.
Another significant episode takes place with the injection of the Russian Bolsheviks into the proceedings. Maxim Litvinoff forces his way into the conference, declaring his protest at the decisions being taken and proclaiming the non-participation of the Bolsheviks in this social-patriotic gathering. On behalf of the Bolsheviks, he demands that Emile Vandervelde of Belgium and Jules Guesde and M. Sembat of France quit their cabinet posts; and finally, that the Belgian and French Socialist Parties clearly renounce the national blocs (popular fronts) which support “national unity.” (Incredible as it may seem, this is the same Maxim Litvinoff who has been the leading exponent of Stalin’s popular front conceptions. At present Soviet ambassador to the United States, he is noted for his espousal of collective security between the Allied governments to encircle Germany and for the Stalin-Laval pact between Russia and France in 1934.)
The revolutionary socialist elements thus indicate to the Allied “socialists” their emphatic opposition to the abandonment of principled policy and demonstrate their unflinching resistance to the growing crimes of Russian czarism, which is participating in the Allied “democratic” cause. These revolutionaries also extend the hand of solidarity to the revolutionary social-democrats of Germany and Austria – Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg and others.
To the London conference of social-patriots, the Central Powers social-patriots have only one answer – a similar conference of Central Powers “socialists” scheduled for April 1915. Thus the “socialists” in each camp align themselves on opposing imperialist fronts, maligning the name of true socialism, which stands for international class solidarity.
 
Labor Militancy Begins to Revive
Resistance to the war develops slowly and with difficulty. After nine months of war, the French Federation of Metal Workers is able to issue a May Day statement in respect to the war. Since the war, its official organ, the Union des Métaux, had been unable to appear because of lack of funds. The journal relates facts and information suppressed by others. It discusses the capitulation of the CGT. It reports the appeal of the German workers (April 4, 1915) for peace and socialism – an appeal which the CGT had ignored. Moreover, the publication refuses to print material in support of the London conference on the ground that this so-called socialist conference was sponsored by the Allied governments to promote their war objectives.
Merrheim’s protests and that of his Metal Workers Union cause a stir among workers wherever the actions become known. To intimidate others who might be inspired by Merrheim’s action to follow suit, rumors are circulated that he has been placed under arrest.
The Socialist Party press continues publication all the while. Permission for its continued publication is obvious in view of its crass pro-war position. Nevertheless, it is obvious from the columns of the paper that the leadership is far from being in good repute with the rank and file. Space is continuously devoted to an effort to explain and justify to the ranks their desertion by their leaders. These justifications become harder to find after Jules Guesde and M. Sembat enter the war cabinet on August 28, 1914.
At the same time, the Socialist Party is constantly under attack from the right nationalists. The latter accuse them of having hindered the war efforts by their earlier proposals for peace. The embarrassing predicament of the Socialist Party is evidently that all of those who differ with the dominant ruling group or administration are not principled but tactical and secondary. (Witness the attacks today on the America Firsters, who were the bourgeois isolationists, by the war-made Rooseveltians, who were the bourgeois interventionists.) By their failure to maintain a consistent stand against war, the social patriots are open to attack from the right for having impeded preparedness before the war. From the left, of course, the real basis for attack on the French socialists (and other Second Internationalists of that stripe) is that they deserted the proletarian cause and proletarian opposition to war and went over bag and baggage into the camp of the imperialists.
Next René Nicod enters a protest against the war. His protest is answered by his mobilization into the armed forces.
As the human waste and futility of imperialist war become increasingly evident, the ranks of the Socialist Party begin to become more vocal in their discontent and criticism. The locals begin to meet again. The flag of opposition is raised when, in June 1915, the Federation of the Haute-Vienne adopts a critical resolution which asks for immediate moves toward the establishment of peace. The resolution which cites the action of Liebknecht in Germany and recalls the resolutions of the pre-war international congresses, serves as a rallying point of oppositionists to the war in the next period.
The women and youth have also begun to move in an oppositionist direction. In March 1915, the Women’s Socialist Conference is held and a youth conference takes place in April 1915. Both conferences take positive stands against the war. Significantly, both conferences have delegates from the Central Powers, the Allied Powers and the neutral countries. At these conferences are present delegates who are soon to become adherents of the Third (Communist) International. These elements find themselves combating two other trends: one, a pacifist outlook toward the war; two, a centrist outlook and proposals.
The regroupments in the labor and socialist movements begin to take clearer shape. Over the opposition of Jouhaux (leader of the CGT), a conference of syndicalists is called by a vote of 19 to 10; Jouhaux finally relenting upon the understanding that the conference be limited to one day. His hope is clearly to render the opposition helpless by making discussions brief and unimpassioned. The conference adopts a resolution to achieve understanding with the workers’ organizations in the belligerent countries. Jouhaux endeavors to mini-mire the differences between himself and the oppositionists by making an appeal for a “just peace.” By incorporating this proposal in his resolution, he aims to split away or dissuade anti-war oppositionists from support of the more specific and concrete left wing stand on the war. The resolution introduced by Merrheim and representing the left wing contains as its central concepts: “THIS IS NOT OUR WAR!” and “THIS IS ENOUGHI” His resolution receives 27 votes.
It will be noted that the CGT and the French socialists (and similar elements in other countries) issued calls for a “just peace” from time to time. But all these calls were empty and meaningless, whatever their intent, because they did not ring out clear and straight on the fundamental aspects that alone could strike root and evoke response from the workers. They did not include a denunciation of the imperialist war and of the imperialist governments on both sides. They did not state clearly and boldly that this was not our war. And they did not assert precisely and unambiguously that the class struggle and its conscious continuation, in times of war as in peace, was the fundamental principle.
The bureau of the Second International had not met since the beginning of the war. Even after the bureau’s office had been moved to The Hague (neutral territory), the French socialists refused to attend, despite special arrangements made for them to meet at a different time and not with the Germans. So deep had social chauvinism penetrated the body of official French socialism.
However, Grimm, the Swiss socialist, makes his way to Paris, and reports on the socialist groups of the left that are in existence in Italy, Switzerland and Germany. Plans are discussed and made for regularizing connections among the anti-war socialists. Morgari, the Italian socialist, insists upon the convocation of an international gathering. Emile Vandervelde, right wing socialist who had entered the Belgian cabinet and was a strong supporter of the Allies, resists the proposal and says he will fight against the convocation of such a conference. But the opponents of the imperialist war are determined. The Italian Socialist Party, which had remained fundamentally on an internationalist course during the war, takes the initiative in calling the international congress. Zimmerwald approaches the first beacon light of the reviving spirit, militancy and internationalism of the working class out of the war morass and spiritual collapse of the masses.
The Second International had collapsed. Capitulation to the imperialist war had rendered this certain. Elementary lessons of the theories of socialism had ben forgotten or disregarded by the officialdom of the Second International and the respective parties and by the theoryless elements in the labor organizations.
 
Opponents to War Convene at Zimmerwald
History, revolutionary history, had to be made again. Zimmerwald was to prove the first firm step in the consolidation of a small group of revolutionary internationalists, who understood thoroughly that the years ahead were stormy – representing essentially either times of war, reaction and misery for the masses (with brief interludes of relative peace) or social revolution, the effort of the proletariat to come into its own.
A preliminary conference for Zimmerwald is held in July, 1915. Present are representatives from the Italian and Swiss socialists, Axelrod from the Russian Mensheviks and Zinoviev from the Bolsheviks. The Bolsheviks want to exclude wavering non-revolutionary elements from the pending Zimmerwald conference. Others want to bid for support from the centrist groups. Lenin, from the left, asks for uncompromising opposition and condemnations of the social chauvinists. Repudiating their defense of the fatherland, he offers in its place a program of revolutionary action.
Opposition to the war gains momentum, and proof that Zimmerwald is not an isolated phenomenon is found in the fact that two weeks before the Zimmerwald gathering, thirty members of the social democrats in the German Reichstag refuse to vote for the war credits and leave the Chamber.
The Zimmerwald Conference is held in secrecy. Delegates good-humoredly remark that half a century after the founding of the First International, it is yet possible to hold all the internationalist delegates in four stage coaches. But, remarks Trotsky, they were not skeptical and looked forward to their work at Zimmerwald.
Conspicuously absent at Zimmerwald are Jules Guesde, M. Sembat, Renaudel and J. Longuet, all of France; Emile Vandervelde of Belgium, Plekhanoff of Russia, Karl Kautsky and Eduard Bernstein of Germany, and Adler of Austria. History records that, having surrendered ignominiously to social patriotism and social chauvinism and having abandoned or totally disregarded the principles of socialism and the working class movement, never again did these once significant figures of the international socialist and labor movement return to the revolutionary road.
The British government refuses passports to members of the British Independent Labor Party and the British Socialist Party – among them Ramsay Macdonald, who was opposed to the First World War, although he later turned renegade to the cause of socialism. Karl Liebknecht manages to send a message from Germany where he had been imprisoned for revolutionary agitation against the war. Delegates are present from the Russian social-democracy and social revolutionaries, and likewise from Italy, Poland, Rumania, Bulgaria, Sweden, Norway and Holland. The French syndicalists of the left are represented by Merrheim. The representative of the French SP is Bouderon. Both men are mainly pacifist in outlook.
 
Lenin Calls for Struggle Against War
The conference lasts from September 5 to 8, 1915. A joint statement representing the French and German opposition to the war is issued and characterizes the war as imperialist and NOT OUR WAR.
All sessions of the conference are animated, even stormy. Lenin, who holds the extreme left position, regards the majority of the other delegates as pacifist in their outlook toward the war. On several questions he is a minority of one, even within the group of the Zimmerwald left. It is Lenin’s conviction that the delegates should make a complete break with centrism and the centrists who wished to reform the Second International. He believes that the foundations of a Third International should be laid.
Trotsky is close to the Zimmerwald left on all decisive questions but is not formally a member of it. He endeavors to play the rôle of conciliator between the Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks. Rakovsky, later the leader of the Rumanian Bolsheviks and member of the ECCI, takes a centrist position on this occasion, hoping for the reformation of the Second International.
On the thirty-five delegates at Zimmerwald, Lenin can count on only seven or eight. His left resolution on the war is opposed most violently by the German, French and Italian delegates. In accordance with the procedure of the conference, the left draft resolution is not presented since only twelve delegates vote for its presentation and nineteen against.
Lenin finally accepts the majority resolution which is restrained in its criticism of the centrists in the hope that this group can still be reformed into a genuine socialist international movement. The resolution calls for a policy of irreconcilable class struggle, but does not specify the forms which the struggle should take. It does not insist that the socialists in the parliaments should refuse to vote war credits; it does not demand that the socialists in war cabinets should quit the ministries of national unity and national defense; it does not call for open opposition in the Parliaments to the war; it does not call for legal and underground propaganda against the war nor for street demonstrations and strikes in protest against the war. While accepting the resolution, Lenin nevertheless emphasizes that it is futile to call for peace without revolutionary struggle.
The Zimmerwald Conference sets up a permanent enlarged executive committee to plan further action and struggle. (This committee is dissolved in March 1919 at the founding congress of the Third International.)
Following Zimmerwald, the CAP (Commission Administrative Permanente) of the French Socialist Party passes a resolution repudiating the Zimmerwald Conference and movement. However, the middle of the road opposition to the majority (Longuet, etc.) begins to grow. The British ILP prints the resolution adopted at Zimmerwald. The bureau of the Second International vigorously fights the Zimmerwald decisions and resolutions.
Thus, Zimmerwald stands – repudiated by the social-patriots for its first efforts at resuming international class solidarity, and criticized by the left wing for its failure to adopt the revolutionary consequences of its anti-war position. Nevertheless, it marks the beginning of encouraging and serious responses from anti-war elements, especially the youth. Through this conference, impetus is given to the anti-war elements in Germany, in France, in Russia and elsewhere.
 
The Russian Revolution Approaches
The Spartacists of Germany begin to enlarge upon their activities. The French CGT, confronted with rising disillusionment and dissatisfaction among the workers, finds itself forced to organize a campaign of self-defense against the accusations of having accepted and endorsed the imperialist war and also of having been against the resumption of international relations between labor. One notes a revival of the pacifists. The intellectuals begin to study the causes, the roots of the war. At the same time, working conditions become more intolerable. Women especially suffer from low wages and long hours. The CGT majority, in an attempt to revive its lost prestige among the workers, offers to plead the case of the workers with the government, claiming special powers because they have private access to government officials. This proposal to make the demands of the metal workers a football in the game of palace politics is refused by Merrheim.
What next? With the commencement of the war, the state power of the bourgeoisie in the respective countries became stronger. At the moment, it alone appeared the stable force in society, as chaos spread everywhere. The labor and socialist movements had surrendered at the outset to social patriotism and national unity, betraying the interests and losing the confidence of the masses whom they led. Failing to see in vigorous class opposition to the imperialist war the real opportunity for labor and all the oppressed, they had become mere adjuncts in the imperialist state power.
From the course of the war, from the behavior of the labor and socialist officialdom and from the reaction of the masses, this much is clear: Before the commencement of war, at the moment of its outbreak, during the war itself – at all these times, the problem of “what must be done” revolves about the question of the relation of the working class movement to the state, to the governing powers and to the imperialist class they represent. Imperialist war, the most critical and cruel expression of the class struggle in society, even more than the interludes of peace under capitalism, poses before the working class the need of socialism. More dear than at any other time is the necessity for the working class to achieve state power in order to bring an end to imperialist power and to lay the foundations for lasting peace through the new social order of socialism. This lesson had yet to be understood and applied during the First World War. It is first applied by the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party under the leadership of Lenin. But before the emergence of this event, which really raises aloft the flag of world socialism, two years more of blood are to drench the earth.

Footnote
1. From Boris Souvarine’s account of French Socialism during the War in the American Labor Year Book, 1919–20.
 



Government policy in awarding contracts to non-union (scab) industries has swelled the New York City unemployed to 400,000.
Priorities and lack of raw materials have thrown many hundreds of thousands out of jobs as war plants are closed or production curtailed for various periods of time.
The swift growth of unemployment does not, however, mean that total employment is not rising, and rising rapidly. Nevertheless, it is significant that despite that rise, unemployment is also going up. With priorities and scab contracts accounting for the greatest part of that unemployment, it is nevertheless worth noting that even the old time scourges, speed-up and rationalization, are adding to the unemployment lists – though, of course, not on the same scale as in the past.
So, for example, the New York World-Telegram reported that “production men have devised so many short cuts” that fifteen plants are now doing the jobs planned for twenty-five. What happens to the workers in the extra plants? They get it in the neck while they look for new jobs. The bosses, of course, reap the benefits of improved production.
 
What About Jobs?
Again – despite the peak employment of today, the question remains: what about regular jobs at decent wages and standards for those whom the war machine alternately sucks in for long and wearing work and then rejects?
The answer lies in the basic inefficiency of the boss system. Employers are ruthless in their quest for profit. They have no regard at all
for the lives of the workers. Despite the requirements of their own war production they are still unable to organize so as to provide constant production and employment. They still “organize” and “rationalize” workers out of jobs.
Efficiency and inefficiency, priorities due to scarcity and lack of planning – all are rooted in capitalist methods of production. But, above all, it needs to be emphasized and re-emphasized that a prime cause of unemployment in certain cities today is the deliberate policy of government and management to place work where labor is cheapest; that is, where labor is not unionized!
The attitude of numerous trade union, officials and the lamentation (in New York) of the American Labor Party are no solution. They have wailed and begged for a few crumbs of employment here and there.
ALP officials, expressing the prevailing opinion of union officialdom, say in effect: “We should not be penalized by the government’s efforts to find cheap labor ... or forced to worry about scab industries.” But what do they propose? Nothing that will do the jobless workers any real good. They collaborate with the Roosevelt Administration and its plans. And as in the case of some union leaders in the needle trades industries – offer wage cuts as a reward for work.
Do these officials consider a campaign to demand: NO GOVERNMENT CONTRACT WITHOUT A UNION CONTRACT? Do they undertake a campaign to organize the South and unorganized industries everywhere? Do they consider mass demonstrations and protests to demand adequate maintenance for workers displaced by priorities, conversion or speed-up? No! They rely instead upon a favor granted here and there by the government.
But the attitude of a group of 1,000 North Tarrytown, N.Y., auto workers points a way. “Members of the Local Chevrolet, General Motors, UAW-CIO staged a one-hour protest when a ten-day shutdown was announced July 10.” (New York Times, July 25.) Today more than ever, workers can demand and make every effort to achieve a number of improvements in their standards. They must first demand $1.00 an hour minimum pay with maintenance of union standards on hours, overtime, etc. Adequate lunch periods, paid vacations – these are in order for all workers.
These are needs of workers today, in the interest of their health, safety, living standards and absorption of the unemployed. These demands, made in the interests of the workers themselves, are quite different from the recent recommendation of eight government agencies that the maximum work week should be forty-eight hours, with one day a week rest; that there be a thirty-minute meal period and vacations. The government makes these recommendations in the interests only of efficient war production and not out of regard for the nerves, health, wear and tear on the workers.
 
Other Demands
A second vital and reasonable demand is: the increase of unemployment insurance rates, at the expense of the bosses and government, to maintain living standards. And third, where unemployment occurs as a result of improvement in technique of rationalization, the employers and the government shall guarantee work to the dispossessed workers at other jobs in the industry or in other industries (if the workers want them), for a period of years, at no less than the previous wage scale.
Today this is a legitimate and mandatory need, as is recognized in part in the pending merger between the Western Union and Postal Telegraph companies, which will throw out of work 5,000 of the 9,900 Postal Telegraph employees. The company maintains that a clause calling for employment for five years of workers employed before March 1941 “is too severe.” But the Union of Commercial Telegraphers AFL, correctly advocates that the companies and the government (in a bill to be enacted into law by Congress) shall “provide for the continued employment of all workers for seven years after any consolidation.” It is efforts and demands along this direction which will awaken workers (and the employers) to the fact that the needs of the workers stand before any speed-up developments, mergers, rationalization, etc.
 
Pass on Benefits
Fourth, the benefits (not lay-offs or unemployment) of improved production, rationalization, ingenuity, etc., shall be passed on to the workers in some direct form or manner. The proposal of the president of the Commercial Telegraphers Union is in the right direction. In the specific instance, he proposes that a five-day, forty-hour week be guaranteed all employees in any merger; 50 per cent of the money saved through mechanization of any telegraph system shall be set aside for severance pay for employees dropped after the seven-year period; and that a government subsidy be provided, if necessary, to guarantee the labor-protecting provisions.
Yes, such demands are in the right direction – the protection of workers.
On the labor front directly, unionists must increase their cry for no government contracts without a union contract, as an aid against scab industries and lower living standards.
Employed or unemployed workers today feel more sharply the effects of capitalist conditions of life: on the job, in the home, at the front. They carry the load, as they always have. The bosses are the disorganizers of production as they are the disorganizers of the lives of the masses. The only real organizers of production can be the workers – but in their OWN, not the bosses’, interests. That means, finally, that the real rights and living standards of the workers can be achieved only when the workers, to the exclusion of the exploiters, have control of production.
 



Dear Comrade Editor:
In his clear and valuable letter to the Editor (Labor Action, August 24), Brother Jacoby takes issue with, my article on the crisis in the needle trades (Labor Action, July 20) on one point, to wit: “There is no ‘law’ that says that garments are to be made only in the East. The industrialization of the South, in the last analysis, is to be welcomed by unionists, militants, class conscious workers.”
Jacoby contends that while this is abstractly correct, this industrialization is a conscious effort of military officials to break the Eastern industry and its unions and is not a natural or necessary expansion of the garment industry.
It is certainly necessary to expose the motive and aims, as our article did, of the Southern congressmen who have successfully exerted pressure on the Administration and connived with the Army officials to establish non-union Southern plants. But the establishment of these Southern factories is a fact. More Important, top; is the fact that thereby has been treated a mass of new, non-union factory workers. What is to be done about that? Tell them to get out of the factories? Nobody suggests such an absurdity.
Therefore, it is relatively unimportant, except as a matter of exposure of employer-governmental aims, HOW these Southern plants came into existence. When Northern employers imported Southern Negroes to work in the huge steel, meat packing and other industries, in the North, it also was relatively unimportant HOW the hitherto agricultural working Negroes got into the factories.
The basic task then became (and in a large measure still remains) for the unions to abandon (as the CIO unions in large part have) their own Jim Craw bars and to organize the Negro workers side by side with the whites into the unions in order to protect the existence of the unions and their standards.
The comparison is not only analagous; it is quite identical with the prime necessity today for the garment unions in the East to ORGANIZE THE SOUTHERN NEEDLE TRADES WORKERS to preserve their unions and their union standards. Every other immediate aim is also necessary, but in all important aspects these are real only in proportion to the degree and militancy with which an organizing campaign is recognized as the KEY to the crisis in the needle trades.
Therefore, what is necessary are the following:

A militant class struggle policy by the unions; abandonment of the union officials’ policy of behind-the-scenes deals or seeking “favors” from the Administration, with the membership kept virtually in the dark.
 
Membership meetings and MASS DEMONSTRATIONS to exert pressure for the workers’ demands – the maintenance of existing union standards, jobs, etc.
 
The demand for NO GOVERNMENT CONTRACT WITHOUT A UNION CONTRACT.
 
An allied needle trades unions campaign to ORGANIZE THE SOUTHERN PLANTS.

The maintenance of the needle trades unions on solid foundations is the fundamental question at stake. That solid foundation is, menaced by and therefore contingent on what is done about the Southern non-union shops. The union standards – employment, wages, hours – flow from the state or degree of organization of the unions, as is of course obvious from the effects already on jobs, proposed lowering of wage standards, etc., in the East.
Unless the southern plants are successfully organized, the weakening of the needle trades unions will go on apace, and with it the destruction of the living standards of the workers.



 


H. Allen



 



Aircraft workers are indignant at the runaround which their legitimate grievances and demands have been receiving from employers and the government. Four months ago, in the “Equality of Sacrifice” program of the UAW-CIO, it was stated that “in industries where sub-standard wages (less than $1.00 an hour) exist, wages shall be increased to insure a decent standard of living,”
Well, a large part of the 1,250,0000 workers now at work in aircraft, or expecting to be in the near future, are making less than $1.00 an hour, while living costs increase and profits climb enormously. Therefore, the CIO and AFL have presented joint demands for wage increases. These include increasing the present 60 cents an hour minimum to 95 cents an hour for the lower paid workers; and increasing the minimum for skilled workers from $1.52 to $1.60.
 
Aims at Job Freezing
Unwilling to permit the negotiations to take the normal channel of collective bargaining, the government entered into the picture by calling a conference of the workers, employers and government in Los Angeles, July 9. The conference was called “to prevent possible migration of employees from one plant to another, or to other industries” where wages are higher. (New York Times, July 10)
In other words, the government, by its own admission, called the joint government-labor-management conference to freeze aircraft labor to their present sub-standard jobs.
Paul Porter, wage stabilization director of the War Production Board, was appointed chairman of the conference. His title alone would indicate that he is interested in freezing wages, but as additional evidence there are his own words, after the conference opened, to the effect that “the President’s seven-point program obviously rules out the Ford Willow Run (Detroit plant) wage rate as applied here” (Pacific Coast), because it “would unstabilize employee relation in other war and essential industries, especially on the Pacific Coast.”
 
Need Wage Increase
Clearly, by “unstabilizing” employee relations, Porter means that if workers in one industry get their just raise, workers in other industries who need a raise will also want one. But that is to the interest of all workers and though stated by Porter as a threat, it should be interpreted by aircraft workers differently; namely, that they can assist in giving a much-needed boost to the wage levels of their fellow workers who sweat away at sub-standard wages.
The three-cornered conference opened on July 9. Two days later the airplane manufacturers called upon the Office of Price Administration to propose a stabilized wage scale. Obviously the manufacturers know that the OPA bread is buttered on their side.
The OPA is headed by Leon Henderson, who is rapidly getting himself a well-earned reputation for interpreting “equality of sacrifice” to mean “give it to labor in the neck.” The OPA recently tried to put a spoke in the wheel of the wage demands of the steel workers then pending before the War Labor Board by declaring that the steel workers’ increases should be limited to 5 per cent. And the same OPA has been assailed by representatives of the Steel Workers Union, the machinists and others unions as an agency whose efforts endanger the entire system of collective bargaining processes.
 
Stalemates Workers’ Demands
On July 16 the aircraft conference came to a stalemate – and recessed. The excuse given by the manufacturers was that “divergent views” in the government agencies made it impossible to agree. Then why did the manufacturers call in divergent government agencies? Others say that “too great wage increase demands” made it impossible to come to a solution. Here we have the real crux of the problem. The aircraft workers need and demand higher wages. The employers deny that they need these increases.
The employers arbitrarily have taken a limited time period of one month (the month of May) to declare that the average weekly wage of the aircraft worker in that period, was $46.75, or an hourly rate of 95.6 cents. If this is so, what are the manufacturers blustering about? The aircraft workers are demanding a 95 cent minimum. By the manufacturers’ own figures, the demand of the aircraft workers for a Wage increase would really he a wage cut!
The truth or facts are elsewhere. Significantly enough, the employers do not cite weekly and hourly wages over a longer period of time – the past year or even the last six months. Is it because the average weekly rate over a longer period would conclusively show sub-standard Wages and, with increased living costs, a low living standard? If and when the wage rates of the past period are made available, it is safe to predict this will prove to be the case.
The aircraft workers are obviously pressing on their representatives, the union officials, for action, wondering why “equality of sacrifice” must mean only workers’ sacrifice. As the UAW-CIO statement on the parleys admitted: “The UAW-CIO views with alarm the reaction of the workers” if the conference does not provide the necessary relief. That is another way of saying that the aircraft workers are sore and demand the raises to which they are entitled; that they can stand so much and no more, or else must consider more drastic action on their part to achieve their demands. No wonder “STRIKE” is in their minds more and more as the only road to take.
The aircraft workers cannot wait around while government agencies make up their minds upon some way to save President Roosevelt’s face (which was supposed to be turned toward labor) while actually at the same time freezing the workers’ wages. Even now, during the recess, one Administration group is reported “favoring a law by Congress to freeze for a period of 90 days all wages over 50 or 60 cents an hour” while the Administration and Congress “observe” the movement of living costs. Then the wage question would be “restudied” and a decision would emerge in due course.
 



The First World War ended in a victory of Anglo-American and French imperialism, the defeat of German and the emergence of the Bolshevik Revolution as the one beacon light of the masses.
Between the first and second world imperialist conflicts, German imperialism revived and under the leadership of Hitler is striving for world domination. The origins and cause of the Second World War demonstrate that the problems and difficulties of the capitalist nations were not resolved in the first war – indeed were accentuated to an extreme. The death battle now being fought is to establish, if possible, the unquestioned domination of the world by American or German imperialism, British imperialism having already become definitely subordinated to the United States. Whether or not a third imperialist holocaust will be visited upon society is contingent upon the consciousness or actions of the proletariat and all the oppressed peoples during the course of the war itself and after – toward the achievement of world socialism.
This article concerns itself with the hopes and plans of the American bourgeoisie in the event of an American victory in the war, indicating almost exclusively the domestic aspects of their policy.
The length of the war, it goes without saying, will color the character of the world and the form of any peace, primarily in the sense that it will determine the degree of desperation to which both the bourgeoisie and the proletariat will be driven. The duration of the war has been estimated by bourgeois spokesmen anywhere from five to fifteen years (Baruch) to forty (!) years (Ambassador Joseph P. Davies and Donald M. Nelson). Little wonder, then, that the ideas or proposals for peace (e.g., the Atlantic Charter) have been nebulous and platitudinous – since the bourgeoisie is sure only of its main objective – to maintain the capitalist set-up, and will decide its tactics, methods and slogans according to the concrete situation (militancy of the proletariat in the defeated countries, existence of revolutionary proletariat at home, existence of workers’ states abroad, stage of colonial revolutions, etc.). Howsoever clouded in sonorous phrases of freedom and liberty, all proposals are definitely imperialist in their economic aspects and include a good big police dub as an essential adjunct – since “justice” as the password is not sufficient to disguise exploitation as the practice.
Pope Pius XIII [sic!], in his broadcast from Vatican City, June 13, 1942, showed his clear understanding that any imperialist peace proposals are the equivalent of scraps of paper. Said he:
We well know how, in the present state of affairs, the formulation of specific proposals for a just and equitable peace would not have any well-founded probability of success. Indeed, every time that one speaks a word of peace, one runs the risk of offending one or the other side ... In fact, while one side bases its security on the results obtained, the other rests its hopes on future battles.
This statement is as true of political-economic conflict as it is of military battles. For the key imperialist nations, America and Germany, have an identical problem of imperialist expansion to resolve, with war today as the means toward that end.
The sharp, swift growth of the power of American monopoly capitalism prior to the war has exhibited itself clearly during the war itself. The centralization of capital (its international centralization in fact, e.g., the international cartels) has proceeded rapidly, with little business being forced to and through the wall. Big business (bankers, et al.), viewing the economic order through world eyes and not just national eyes, understands that an attempt at the greatest economic expansion in American history is in order, and is imperative if it is to exist and maintain its system. In other words, whatever propaganda and lip-service to bread, butter, milk and security, political freedom, etc., may indicate to the contrary, the American bourgeoisie must proceed in the post-war period to super-exploit the world’s toilers in other lands, while continuing to exploit the American workers. For American imperialism, running true to form, it is as much a case of expand or bust as it is with German imperialism.
 
“Planned” Super-Exploitation of World
American imperialism aims to dominate the entire world – and not simply the colonies or undeveloped areas – in the economic-political-military sense. More specifically, it intends to police and ration the world in order to maintain the capitalist world. “Feed the world,” yes, that will be the task of American imperialism after the war, if proletarian revolution does not conquer; feed the world just enough to keep the people strong enough to work, but too weak to break through capitalism’s weakened chains and reorganize the world on socialist foundations.
To police the world, to feed the world “in return for its labor” (New York Times, June 24), to develop the super-exploitation of the masses in Europe, Africa, Asia, Latin America, etc., American imperialism will introduce, more and more state-capitalist controls into the economic processes in relation to foreign trade and investment. International banks and cartels, dominated as they will be by American capital, will be closely linked with government boards of economic warfare (or welfare, as they may be called in the post-war period).
Such rigid supervision may produce a temporary “stabilization” for a period. But the process of such “stabilization” is two-fold. Either a revived or insurgent imperialism, attempts to arise out of the defeated or subordinate powers to pit itself against American imperialism – or a revolutionary proletariat arises, equally seeking an outlet from American imperialism but not on the same terms, since it must carry out its struggle against all imperialisms. Through more intense use and development of the means of production, through further rationalization, through industrial revival of economically destroyed countries and through the industrialization of undeveloped areas, the weight and numbers of the industrial proletariat will be greatly increased (relative to a native bourgeoisie which may be completely helpless). The organization of the proletariat for its own ends takes place over all obstacles. The proletariat, despite all defeats, rises again and again, like Phoenix from the ashes, but wiser; and moves again on its historic road toward social emancipation. There is no peace, no cessation of struggle in this world – without the achievement of world socialism. The choices are as before: either rival imperialisms plunging the world into the Third Imperialist World War or the international socialist revolution.
The imperialist world of tomorrow is an utterly black one. The America of tomorrow, if it remains capitalist, is also an utterly black one [1] – bureaucratic, militaristic, totalitarian. Those who dismiss the bureaucratic-militaristic-totalitarian trends of the war period as episodic and remediable in a post-war period are talking of a period which will never come under capitalism. The capitalist “tomorrow” about and for which liberals desperately speculate and plan is either only an interval between wars or an indefinitely protracted war.
 
Government Regulation Protects Big Business
Accompanying state capitalist trends in regard to international affairs will be comparable developments in the domestic economy. The authoritative National Resources Planning Board, speaking through its director, C.W. Eliot, asserts that it will be necessary to maintain many of the economic controls made necessary by the war (New York Times, June 15). He is right. The war is only hastening the process of governmental interventions and controls over the economy of imperialism. While, possibly, some of the more obviously superfluous governmental agencies may be lopped off as the result of experience, the demands of any remaining arch-individualists of capitalism will fall on deaf ears. Capitalist anarchy, even and especially under a monopolistic capitalism, requires regulation through its political instrument, the state or government, in order to prevent utter chaos. To use the phrase of Herbert Hoover, “the economic measures necessary to win total war” which “are just plain fascist economics,” will prove equally necessary in the post-war economy of American imperialism, whatever democratic political forms may exist to delude the masses as to the realities of life (because the masses will yet be strong enough to require delusion).
One Professor Cumberland may continue to demand that American capitalism “get rid of planners, government controls, high taxes, etc.,” but the professor thinks of a world of laissez-faire capitalism that was on its way out years ago, and is now definitely through, with only lingering, passing manifestations of “rugged individualism” in American economy. Those frontiers have been crossed, never to return. Big business, big, big business, rules the roost and will continue to do so as long as capitalist society remains.
The war has only accelerated the process of centralization and concentration of industry and finance into the dominant hands of finance capital. The post-war period will not change but continue this development under more aggravated conditions: namely, social crisis; vast unemployment or its state capitalist equivalent, relief-unemployment or forced labor; demobilization of millions from the armed forces (though probably not all), etc. Even if the desire may be there to placate a distraught and ever-weakening middle class, no one has yet devised a way to turn back the clock of economic development for long. The reality today is that “twenty-four thousand small manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers might be forced out of business by priorities orders and war needs by October 1” (Philip D. Reed, chief of the war industries branch of the War Production Board before the House of Representatives Small Business Committee, July 9). These small businesses will not return after the war. The National Association of Manufacturers’ nine-point program for business and labor (New York Times, June 27) bluntly advises the government to “refuse to subsidize distressed industries.” These smaller industries, struggling hopelessly in competition with the large, powerful concerns, are vanishing – and will continue to in accordance with the relentless course of a pyramiding and whirling economic structure that throws off its excess debris, once a part of the whole. This structure, this top, appears like a healthy organism while it spins; only when it topples does one observe that it is top-heavy (monopoly capitalism) and that it has tossed all else aside.
 
Manufacturers Want Guaranteed Profits
Business and political leaders are aware that government intervention into business is unavoidable. Note the trends and tremendous increases in government subsidization and aid to capital. At least one-third of the nation lives in 4,500,000 tenement, rural shacks, hovels, etc. Nathan Straus, former administrator of the U.S. Housing Authority, proposes that the government subsidize a vast post-war housing program. Bonds would be sold to banks, private investors, etc. The “only cost” would be the annual subsidies, which would last for sixty years. Similarly, Germany guarantees the six per cent profits to its businessmen. This indeed is not “competition” with private business. The government does the job and hands over the interest-profit to business in view of the latter’s “investment” and “risks” in government-guaranteed housing bonds. The Strauss housing proposal demonstrates the utter uselessness of private property instruments in the creation of social values and needs of the people. They are only vultures who gorge on six per cent interest-bearing bonds.
The manufacturers, like all true-blue business men, want their profits continued, in fact, guaranteed, in the post-war period. First, they insist upon refund of a substantial percentage of the excess profits taxes. Second, they generously permit themselves allowances for “reserves and contingency funds” though the cost of their machinery and fixed capital is already entered as part of their cost and therefore fully provided for. The crowning point, however, is the stipulation that post-war conditions are not to be allowed to endanger unfulfilled war contracts existing at the end of the war. These, according to the second point on the manufacturers program, shall be carried out by the government in any case. Heads I win, tails you lose.
While taking such elaborate precautions for their own self-protection after the war, the manufacturers stipulate that wages are only to be “as high as post-war conditions warrant.” Evidently the manufacturers’ eyes are on labor’s demands. They don’t like minimum wage requirements, preferring the keen competition of unemployed millions for jobs. As they so euphemistically put it in Point 5 of their nine-point program: “Labor and capital can prosper only when prices of goods and labor” result in an adequate encouragement of expansion of production. In other words, they won’t assume the initiative in stimulating and expanding production unless they are “encouraged” (bribed) to do so by adequate profits obtained by chiseling down the wages of labor.
The manufacturers’ aim is to relax the vigilance of labor now and thus to create, if possible, a condition of extreme organizational weakness in labor in the post-war period. In this objective they have the assistance of the Westbrook Pegler of the Administration – Thurman Arnold – who delineates a postwar capitalist society flowing with milk and honey, in which there will be presumably plenty for labor. Arnold, therefore, accompanies his hosannas to a rosy capitalist future with persistent attacks on labor’s efforts to protect itself by preserving its organizational strength.
 
Government Controls Weaken Labor
The policy of the present Administration in respect to labor is increasingly to draw the labor organizations into dependence upon it. But the continued penetration of one or another governmental agency (e.g., WLB, OPA) into the processes or struggles of labor versus the employers contributes to devitalizing and corroding healthy, living unionism. The labor unions need to shake themselves loose from the grip of governmental domination and influence, or they will wittingly or unwittingly become the instruments of the imperialists. That is, unionism, if it is to live and develop, must proceed along independent class lines, including a politically independent rôle. Unionism which cannot move or make decisions without governmental approval, or constant government intervention of various agencies or description, can in the end result in a modified form of “corporate unionism.”
The government is not a neutral agency. It represents capitalist interests and objectives. It presents a front of benevolent government toward some of its creations, such as the National Youth Administration, Works Progress Administration, CCC camps etc., where it is the employer of labor at wage standards far below normal rates. Yet, although not expressly forbidden in the case of NYA and WPA, the government makes it most clear that any attempts at strikes for the redress of grievances or the economic improvement of their lot meet with the strong disapproval of the government and will result in the removal of the workers from their jobs. Thus the government, presumably standing above the classes, functions in such bodies as an intimidatory or outright strike-breaking agency. The extension of this outlook and practice can be looked for in the next period as one or another of the departments of government become an employer-government instrument. Through such means are developed further the bureaucratic-authoritarian characteristics of the bourgeois ruling class and its state instrument, making it even more imperative for labor to endeavor to establish its independent identity and means of struggle for the future.
Moreover, when labor already – for reasons of “national defense” or “national unity” or any other cause – lets rest or gives up its most powerful weapon – the right to strike; when it leans or depends on Administration or government agencies for support of its needs – it first of all obviously weakens its fighting strength and powers of resistance to the employers’ offensive. But equally significant and decisive in the long run, it (even if unwittingly or unwillingly) makes it easier for the dominant imperialists to force upon labor a rôle of subservience to American internationalist-imperialist objectives – the achievement of super-exploitation of, and super-profits from, the masses in other countries – in return for a few crumbs to American labor.
American imperialism may be able to and probably can yet afford an “appeasement” policy toward American labor, deciding definitely to “recognize” labor unionism provided the latter limits its rôle and demands to more modest proportions. That is, American imperialism may decide to play American labor against the workers of the rest of the world, by giving American labor certain preferments, for the privilege of relative class peace, or the achievement, within limits, of class collaboration on an American scale, so long as American labor permits it to proceed unhindered to the super-exploitation of labor and the masses elsewhere. That is the manner in which “labor aristocracies” developed in the past decades. While there will not be again the comparatively affluent “labor aristocracy” of the past – based on a growing and forward-moving capitalism requiring this labor – it is conceivable, in fact probable, that an American imperialism, internationally dominant, may seek such a peace or understanding with the officialdom of American labor, and succeed in lulling sections of American labor to quiescence. To counterbalance this latter tendency or development, American labor must begin to think in international terms of solidarity with all the oppressed and working peoples of the world.
 
American Labor and Super-Exploitation
Another section of the capitalist class thinks along the line of head-long collision with the American working class now and in the post-war period. F.C. Crawford, president of Thompson Products, Inc., speaking at the round table conference board of the War Labor Board (May 21), headlighted by the addresses of Herbert Hoover and Paul V. McNutt, lamented the “restrictions” imposed by labor unions on capital. Management, he declared, must find a way to put a greater number of independent, i.e., company unions, into the field to function on a national basis, “Wagner Act or not.” Professor Leo Wolman, erstwhile aide and adviser to the Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union of America, addressing this same conference, was concerned with whether labor unions will permit management to function properly in the post-war period in the operation and administration of industry.
However, the trend in economy and in politics is toward more governmental controls for essential capitalist aims and needs; and it is unlikely that the dissatisfied section of capital in relation to labor policy will succeed in replacing the present trends with one of open, head-on collision to smash labor unionism.
Roosevelt, the outstanding exponent of liberal bourgeois democracy from the days of the NRA till now, has understood the historical necessity for governmental, authoritarian controls or interventions into the affairs of labor and capital in order to preserve the capitalist order at all. Roosevelt realizes that a major historic function of the capitalist state is to control labor and regulate relations between the contending capitalist groups; in the process, the most powerful bourgeoisie, of course, emerges as the gainer and victor.
Imperialism inevitably breeds war, today’s – and tomorrow’s, with intervals of peace or “preparedness.” The regimentation and militarization of both men and resources to a degree never before conceived is in character with the struggle of the imperialists to resolve their rivalries by military means. The Army and Navy authorities press for control of the productive forces of economy itself. They are not satisfied just to receive into their hands the tanks, guns, planes, etc., produced by labor in the factories. When it is observed that the Navy is the largest employer of labor in the United States today (New York Times, August 9), it is simple to comprehend why militarism and the militaristic concepts of life rapaciously reach out for influence and domination in all walks of endeavor. Opposition within labor’s ranks has until now been a major factor in preventing the extension of military influences more directly into civil affairs and the operations of industry (New York Times, June 27). But the House Defense Migration Committee charges and criticizes Donald M. Nelson, head of the War Production Board, for alleged “transfer of authority over procurement and production to the armed forces,” contrary to Roosevelt’s Executive Order of January 16 for civilian control and operations thereof. (New York Times, August 11). This charge or development signifies that the pressure, demands and needs of the Army and Navy military heads is proving more powerful than Executive Orders intended to stem the trends for military direction and control of industrial production.
At the same time, also, it must be noted how military concepts and controls already adversely and pertinently affect democratic and labor rights. Since certain plants are under military control the military authorities have used this pretext to deny to workers their constitutional rights to distribute leaflets and papers to aircraft and other workers. The extension of the powers of the military regime into industrial production will only result in military declarations against heretofore matter of course labor union activities, press and leaflet distributions by unions, political organizations, etc. Or, in another direction, witness the great difficulty or outright failure of members in the armed forces to receive their union publications from home. “You can’t strike against the government” – a cry some labor knaves also have at times invoked to prevent strike action by dissatisfied workers – is a procedure and policy which militarists accept as divine right. The government’s or state’s main purpose is to serve as the executive committee of the ruling class as a whole – to keep labor in its place. The growing power of the military arm of the state in a period of imperialist war of indefinite duration, can only signify that the rôle of the government as strikebreaker (e.g., North American Aircraft) will be accentuated in the next period, particularly the utilization of the military regime for this purpose.
American imperialism is proceeding rapidly toward a militarized economy. For instance, the House voted an appropriation of forty-three billion dollars to the military, the greatest in American history, thus placing greatly increased power into the arms of the military regime. A mass army of ten to fifteen millions, perhaps more, is now in preparation for the the present war. Conscription is scheduled to remain a permanent institution after the war. Legislation, for submission to Congress around January 1, is in preparation by Senator Wadsworth, (co-author of the present Selective Service (Conscription) Act). According to these plans, one million youth between the ages of 18 and 21 are to be trained yearly, with provision made for five years of reserve service for the conscripts. How extensive the permanent standing army and the military training program will be in the post-war period are still undecided. But the trend is obvious. Government bureaucracy on a tremendous scale, plus steady intertwining of military concepts and controls into the bureaucracy, are hastening the development of a bureaucratic-militarized economy of imperialism.
This development stands out more patently as one observes the budding plans for the conscription of the masses for industrial production. Paul V. McNutt, director of the War Manpower Division, has made this objective of the government amply clear, apparently only as a measure for this war. Babes in arms, the enfeebled and the aged alone will find themselves exempt from either a conscripted military, industrial or agricultural force in this war, according to plans. The regime of tomorrow, as required by the imperialist bourgeoisie, is a great governmental bureaucratic-military apparatus and régime. It would be foolish to state that all this is coming about at one fell swoop, or that every imperialist element consciously sees or desires such a development. But the steady penetration of the apparatus of government instruments, including the military, into civil and industrial spheres, must lead one to conclude that this trend is not accidental, but the course of an imperialism seeking measures to maintain an anarchic social-economic order from swifter inner corrosion and from blows from a militant working class. A totalitarian trend, far yet from being crassly fascist in form, and with the democratic trappings losing their original strength as time passes, best describes the direction of American imperialism for the post-war period.
 
American “Democracy” and What It Means
Regimentation is making its way into the lives of the people, into their very homes. While this process has by no means reached the European stage, the parallel is nevertheless there. To prevent a sharply rising discontent and dissatisfaction with living costs and standards of the masses of people, while the bourgeois class reaps enormous profits and lives luxuriously, the government has introduced rationing cards on some consumer articles to insure minimums for the masses. Ceiling prices for many goods are also invoked toward this purpose. But since they cannot actually satisfy the needs and demands of the masses with the adequate means of life or with living standards even closely commensurate with the efforts and contributions of labor, the bourgeoisie are forced to resort to direct and oblique measures of force to carry through their war objectives now, and to reinforce their economic structure. Thus come about and are observed the deprivation of civil and democratic rights of the people – directed first against easier victims – minority groups; then labor militants; and finally, generally.
Civil or democratic rights of the people, of the workers, are relative. The degree of economic prosperity of the country, even in peacetime; the intensity of the class struggle; the growing desperation of the classes trying to protect their interests – all affect the practices and life of civil rights. War, the extreme, most devastating, brutal and bloody expression of the conflicts between the rival bourgeoisie and also of the class struggle, cuts heavily into democratic rights, first as measures of “war expediency” and then as corollaries of the character and development of the imperialist post-war economy and government. No one will say that there have been wholesale deprivations of civil rights in this war so far. But not all actions may be regarded only as wartime measures. Examination of the 10,000 aliens who ‘have been arrested so far would show that the arrests as a whole are baseless and intimidatory in purpose in respect to militant labor activities generally, and particularly by foreign-born or foreign-descent workers. Some may find it possible to regard the conviction of the members of the SWP and Teamsters Local 544 in Minneapolis as isolated and episodic. But this action, even before American entered the war, can be more correctly viewed as symptomatic of the aim of employers, government and class collaborationist-reactionary union officials to destroy the militant Minneapolis labor movement – objectively and partially subjectively pitted against the boss system.
While some may pass over the more than 1,200 persons thus far convicted or charged with “subversive” activities, draft violations, etc., one cannot ignore another more dangerous and symptomatic action in respect to labor’s rights, free speech and a free press. This concerns the decision of the U.S. Supreme Court that local authorities have the power to impose prohibitive taxation upon members of religious sects distributing literature and soliciting contributions. The group in question is Jehovah’s Witnesses. It is obvious how easy can be the extension and utilization of this decision against the labor and revolutionary press. As long as such a ruling prevails, labor publications are in constant danger of being wiped out through the medium of a financial subterfuge, thus nullifying the so-called constitutional guarantees for free speech and press. That a New Deal Supreme Court legalizes such a policy adds evidence to the inroads of totalitarian and authoritarian concepts in the life of the country.
 
Regimentation and Crime
The regimentation of society develops sharply under circumstances of war and social crisis, and under conditions of monopoly capitalism with its socialization of production for capitalist ends. Discipline, the draft, regulations, food “passports” (ration cards), etc., are invoked by the bourgeoisie to conduct their war and maintain “law and order.” Such discipline and regulation are handed down from above to the masses, who resent such orders and demands, and defy or evade them if the penalties or dangers are not too great. Quite different is the self-discipline and order maintained by the masses themselves when they realize that regulatory measures, no matter how extreme, are in their interests; and, in fact, are initiated and fostered by themselves. For example, in times of strikes and, on an historic landscape, social revolution, the workers are the first to proceed to establish discipline and order among themselves; set up their own “law and order” committees; arm themselves for defense and offense. They carry out no predatory acts, and where individual workers violate regulations, the workers efficiently discipline the violators. One does not observe systematic looting or crimes when workers have taken over and concern themselves with the group or social, and not individual, interests or objectives.
Contrariwise, under capitalist conditions in times of depression, mass unemployment and social crisis, there is observed a vast increase in restlessness and so-called crimes against property. The demoralization of human beings, rooted in economic insecurity, is taken for granted by the bourgeoisie in such periods. More police and court actions, perhaps an extra dole provision; and the capitalist class has “taken care” of the “crime wave.” But war, witnessing employment at its peak, brings an attitude of lawlessness toward the social order in a different manner, As District Attorney F.S. Hogan of New York notes (New York Times, July 10): “Crimes” against property have decreased, due to relative prosperity. But in addition to the swift growth of the Black Market in rationed goods for consumers (and “Big-Time” Steel), there is a sharp increase in crimes of violence due to “tremendous” social and economic changes, causing “restlessness,” etc.
Where such disillusionment and “restlessness” do not result in a social consciousness, such elements develop reactionary conceptions – each man for himself and the devil take the hindmost – and gangs or groups with such a philosophy. They become the material for fascist demagogues, even as a similar process of disillusionment and “lawless” outlook among demobilized soldiers makes the latter prey to reactionary or fascist movements. Reactionaries and fascists will make use of such elements from the civil and armed sections to build a base for a broader fascist movement in the future. Such elements (individualistic, undisciplined and programless), it is to be noted, easily adapt themselves (Italy, Germany) to the program and organization of fascists. They carry out ruthlessly ‘the demands of the fascist leaders and organizations against the workers or people, provided the fascist leadership at the same time permits them privileges – economic, social – and, apart from their duties, individual leeway. They are the material, also, from which anti-union “goon squads” are often formed. The present trends explain and contribute to the growth of such elements, and demonstrate that the mass base of fascism does not require importation from abroad, but can and does grow on native soil.
To attempt to regulate capitalist production and capital-labor relations, to maintain capitalism itself, the American bourgeoisie must rely in the coming period as never before on its increasingly powerful political superstructure, in peace as in wartime – despite the awesome costs of state rule today and its destructive and limiting effects on individual bourgeoisies.
 
World Socialism or Total Imperialist Chaos
Monopoly capitalism endeavors to uproot the world for investment and expansion, convulsing the world with blood in its need to expand in order to live; and breeding state capitalism, which is at one and the same time the fullest and final expression of capitalism’s economic-political development and its death agony. But state capitalism offers to the workers only a continuation, in even “worse form and content, of exploitation, misery and destruction. Dread of the masses – the fear and knowledge that the latter are seeking a permanent and better solution to the dilemma, are uppermost in the minds of the bourgeoisie. Walter D. Fuller, chairman of the board of the National Association of Manufacturers, states explicitly (New York Times, May 21):
Unless democracy, liberty and tree enterprise provide security and happiness for the people of this country, those principles might be abandoned after the war ... They are determined to have this better world of greater security one way or another, and if they don’t get it through present principles they will look elsewhere.
“Present principles” for Fuller, of course, means bourgeois democracy. But the imperialist order cannot change its essential content and direction to include those who nostalgically seek a return to “the good old days” when capitalism could afford bourgeois democracy. Today the vanguard of the bourgeoisie “looks elsewhere” – to state capitalism to preserve the capitalist order – while the vanguard of the proletariat looks to socialism.
Only socialism, which rests its base on the highest techniques of production that capitalism has produced; and is unhindered by the profit motive, would permit of the free development of the means of production and distribution with the object of use.
Only socialism on a world scale can abolish imperialist war. Only socialism can bring self-discipline and self-development -instead of bureaucratic regimentation. Only socialism can make administration the servants of men and the master of things – rather than the bureaucratic master of men and the servant of capitalist monopoly production. Only the socialist reorganization of society can be the answer and road open to the masses.

Footnote
1. The black picture to be indicated, while amply demonstrable for economic trends, is far from consummated so far as trends in all other aspects are concerned. The intensity of the class struggle on the morrow, the degree of economic, social and political desperation in relation to the aspirations of labor, will determine the rapidity with which American capitalism will turn to extended, broad totalitarian methods and instruments to attempt to preserve itself as a class. It is, however, entirely legitimate and necessary for the revolutionary movement to take note of these unquestionable totalitarian trends of American capitalism and to prepare the proletariat for defense and offense. Further, it must be said that any plans of the imperialists to achieve an organization of their anarchic system of production and distribution will fail, as they failed following; the First World War. This inevitable failure is rooted objectively in the contradictions of capitalist production and subjectively in the inevitable collisions of the proletariat with capitalist rule.
 



The juggernaut of the war is rolling along rapidly and sounding the death knell of large sections of the middle class. Hundreds of thousands of small businesses, ranging from the smallest of retailers to small wholesalers, service and distributing concerns, amusement places, construction companies and industrial manufacturing concerns, either have been or will be wiped out as the war plunges ahead. The destruction of tremendous numbers of the lower and upper middle classes will, in the course of the war itself, hasten the growth of social dissatisfaction and disturbances in these groups. Equally important, this development has a direct relationship to the economic and political course of the American working class.
Big business – monopoly capitalism – is not much concerned over the fate of small business. To the extent that it recognizes a business and social problem in the mass elimination of large sections of the middle class, it is also aware that nothing substantial can be done to improve matters for these minor capitalists. For the great financial and industrial lords know very well that the war has only accelerated the process of the centralization and concentration of wealth, business and power in the hands of the monopoly trusts. Many lose their property (capital) as it becomes concentrated and centralized. “One capitalist always kills many” (Marx). This process may take place through outright loss, bankruptcies or sales by the small-property capitalists. In any event, either a single powerful capitalist takes over; or, as is more commonly the case at this phase of centralization of capital, a group of monopoly capitalists take over control, ownership or both, of the former wealth of small business or capitalists. Moreover, big business intends to let this process of capitalist centralization and concentration take its course still further, during the war and after.
Thus, as this development is speeded up as a result of the war economy, the great mass of the remaining petty bourgeoisie of varying size and importance are caught in the middle even more firmly between the major classes in society – the big bourgeoisie and the proletariat. The imperialist war compels the stream-lining of production and distribution along the lines of big business aims and methods. These are: to win the war for the American bourgeoisie; and, at the same time, to make profits. Vast numbers of the middle class (independent owners of property and salaried employees) must pay the price as victims of imperialism’s course. So, too, in a sharper and more direct exploitive manner, capitalism passes the burdens of its system and its war on to the workers.
The Roosevelt Administration undoubtedly is concerned with the effects of the mass destruction of small businesses, and thus of the middle class, in relation to its present war plans and in relation to the social-political effects in the future. Nevertheless, the Administration also recognizes as inevitable the overwhelming domination and ownership of private property by the great monopolies; just as it realizes that the conduct of the imperialist war requires the highest degree of governmental control from above – through a highly bureaucratized and military administration. An imperialist war economy can only be managed through a powerfully centralized and authoritative government. Thus, while the Administration “recognizes” small business, even notes its “usefulness” at times, it knows very well that the efforts of small businesses are powerless to affect significantly the course of economic-political developments. The government knows it has an economic and political problem on its hands, but cannot offer a serious solution.
The Administration has established numerous committees and agencies intended to help small business out of its hopeless dilemma. These committees and agencies fuss, fume, procrastinate and then produce duds, so far as any serious aid to small business is concerned. Whatever remedies are proposed or administered can at best be only temporarily, if at all, ameliorative, and can only cover an insignificant number of businesses. Small business men, while despairing, recognize this. For big business runs the big show and takes the proceeds of war orders as well as other business. The struggle of the middle class is a lost cause.
 
The Death Rate of the American Middle Class
It is interesting and important to observe the swift decimation of this social category (which Marx clearly indicated) and the reaction of several segments of small business.
The Department of Commerce lists 2,750,000 small businesses of all kinds. The Index, publication of the New York Trust Co., makes manifest (New York Times, September 21) that the “small manufacturers unable to convert to war production or to continue their normal output, face a bitter struggle for survival, as do many of the nearly 2,600,000 small businesses engaged in distribution or services.”
This dark statement is concretized in the case of the small industries as follows:

There are a total of 184,000 (both large and small) manufacturing concerns. Of these only 45,000 (or less than 25 per cent) can be converted to war production in some form.
 
By October 1, 24,000 manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers would be forced out of business as a result of priorities and war needs, according to the prediction, as early as last May, by Philip Reed, chief of the war industries branch of the War Production Board.
 
Since then, the death rate of small business wholesalers and retailers has increased considerably beyond that prediction, as is abundantly clear from the report of government economists (Department of Commerce) to the Senate Small Business Committee (New York Times, September 30). They estimated that 300,000 retail stores, 20 per cent of the total, would close up shop by the end of 1943.

These same economic analysts recommended the “orderly liquidation” of large numbers of small enterprises as against the continuation of “profitless competition.” Thus, as Marxism demonstrates, monopoly capitalism coldly permits or ordains the destruction of the middle class elements whenever their tenuous preservation interferes with “normal” economic development or profits. Capitalism is the great expropriator of the many capitalists by the few, as well as the exploiter of the laboring majority by a parasitic minority.
In desperation, small industrial plants have pooled their resources in order to obtain war orders, in accordance with the recommendations of the Senate Small Business Committee and the War Production Board itself. Five hundred such pools were quickly formed. (Three hundred are already dissolved for lack of work report of the Senate Small Business Committee). The war orders received by the remaining pools proved meager.
The procurement procedure of the government’s own procurement agencies is greased for big business, for the large prime war contractors. So complains small business as it continues to hope for “extensive revisions” in their behalf. But will this policy of, by and for big business be changed in any important way for the benefit of small industries? No, because small business does not have the economic strength, the resources or possibilities, nor does it have the political strength (despite its numbers) to make serious and significant requests for favors. It is unable to make demands or to encroach upon big business and monopoly government. Still less is it able to exercise economic force (strikes, boycotts, etc.), should such a thought even enter its head.
Listen to the lament of a representative small steel operator and the revealing testimony of others before the Senate Committee investigating the “defense” program, in which the government is virtually the sole customer:
“Unconsciously (sic!) and by reason of circumstances,” sadly stated a small steel operator (J.M. Budke, Parkersburg, W.Va.), “the business (steel orders) was given to these large companies.”
And how does big business so easily direct orders its way? The Office of Production Management (OPM) recommends the appointment of steel company representatives to serve on the OPM sub-committee which decides the priority orders. This sub-committee (Bent Committee) includes former or present officials of five large steel companies (Carnegie-Illinois – U.S. Steel subsidiary, Bethlehem, Republic, Inland and Youngstown Sheet & Tube) but not one representative from the small steel companies.
Question to Roland C. Allen, deputy chief of the WPB’s iron and steel branch: “Why did you not appoint representatives of smaller companies?”
Reply: “It never entered my mind ... I just looked upon them as individuals ...”
A direct, even honest, answer, showing that the monopolies take a certain set-up for granted. They regard the markets as theirs; especially the market provided by government orders for imperialist war needs. It is their war and their profits, too.
 
The Decline of Free Enterprise
The complaints which fall upon deaf ears are that “small business does not have adequate representation in the administrative agencies ... many of which overlook that the future of free enterprise is dependent on its maintenance” (Senate Small Business Committee, October 5). But twenty and more years of the steady decline of capitalist “free enterprise” and the persistent, unchecked and inevitable growth of the centralizing and concentrating tendencies of capital toward ever greater domination by industrial and finance (monopoly) capitalism, indicate that the future of free enterprise is past. Longings, nostalgia and day-dreaming will not re-create the old conditions. The historic order o£ the day is: monopoly capitalism full-blown, with its devastation and wars. Or proletarian power and the reorganization of the means of production along socialist lines. Meanwhile, as illustration and development show in all important aspects, big capital continues and will continue to take a “thumbs down” attitude toward the laments, requests and demands of small business; and the government will heed its master.
Briefs issue forth opposing either monopoly capitalism or “regimented” socialism, and calling for a system of capitalist “free enterprise” on modern wheels. Peter F. Drucker, widely known for his work on The End of Economic Man, is one of these (see Total War Requires Free Enterprise, Saturday Evening Post, October 3). So far as his comments bear on the subject of this article, one must declare that Drucker also exemplifies wishful thinking. Even his presentation of the facts on the manner of functioning of the capitalist order runs contrary to his proposals. Nor is there any serious evidence adduced that capitalism can possibly be transformed along his conceptions.
Individual enterprise and responsibility, he fears, “will be undermined without anybody’s noticing it.” The American people are apathetic, feeling, he acknowledges, that they have no personal stake in “free enterprise.” Drucker recognizes the “monopolistic tendencies” of big business. He examines the Administration’s taxation policy on war profits; specifically, that profits shall be regulated on the basis of invested capital, and shows clearly that the government’s policy “makes it possible only for a very rich man or corporation to start a new business.” But government tax policy is only in accord with the functioning or innate direction of business and reflects it in all essentials. It is a big business war which the government runs and regulates and, with minor allowances, business and governmental policies (economic and political) run along parallel lines.
This is the only reasonable, sound explanation and reply to Drucker’s criticism and lament that government policy is dealing heavy blows to small business. Government tax policy, says Drucker, is “generous to heavy industries which stand to make the war profits (if any).” It “discriminates against the very businesses which are likely to suffer most under a war economy. Above all, it penalizes individual initiative and enterprise and favors the big corporations ...” What particularly surprises Drucker in all this is that a New Deal group, professing particularly opposition to big business, sponsored a big business policy. This only shows that even an astute man, such as Drucker, when he wants to see something else, fails to see that the New Deal is now simply the War Deal and has no choice but to cut its cloth to the imperialist pattern.
Such remedies or sops as the great monopolies toss to the middle class have proved futile. They are either abandoned outright or they lie dormant. For example, the American Business Congress – composed of small manufacturers – declares that the Stanley plan to aid small manufacturers in obtaining sub-contracts has had some success, particularly in the Chicago region. But opposition from the War Production Board, beginning with the suspension of the Stanley plan’s Directory of Contract Opportunities, has practically destroyed this instrument for succorring small concerns. Small business protests, even calls mass meetings. But big business, ignoring or not taking seriously its own proposals (via WPB and other government agencies) to hold together dying small business, allows them to be scuttled. This attitude toward the weak trades or industries was expressed in still another way in the war and post-war program of the National Association of Manufacturers when it advised the government to “refuse to subsidize distressed industries.”
Basically, today, the government is equivalent to big business, and vice versa. Just as workers have no say in the dictation or direction of the fundamental policies of the government, so likewise is small business, or the middle class, shut out, except to pin-prick and lament. This is clearly, if dejectedly, recognized by representatives of small business. The president of the national wholesale druggists, serving 60,000 retail druggists, says:
“The government is dealing directly with corporations of tremendous size ... monopolistic in character ... The small retailers and the small wholesalers Would be a thing of the past.”
And, interpreting capitalism to their likes, interests and prejudices, this small business representative declares that such would be “directly contrary to the true system of private enterprise.” But the monopolists do not appear disturbed thereby, and indeed are satisfied with the change from myriads of small private businesses to a handful of huge private monopolies.
Big business is conscious that its sops to small business are not even a drop in the bucket. Even here, however, as in the government’s grant of $150,000,000 for loans to smaller war plants, its first concern is of the rival imperialist nations with which American imperialism is waging war for world domination of markets and resources: “Will the money (the proposed loan) help to kill a Jap or German?” (New York Times, October 1)
 
“The Government as Undertaker”
In all other respects, in reality, “the government is taking an undertaker’s attitude in regard to the retailers’ wartime problems” (L. Hahn, general manager, National Retail Dry Goods Assn.). Washington, he complains, is giving attention to “how the retailer may go out of business in an orderly fashion.” He would like to know “how to keep alive, not how to have a fancy death.” But little help of consequence will be forthcoming, it may be predicted, even though Donald Nelson, head of the War Production Board, proposes to create still another board (this one a war liabilities adjustment board to help small concerns in war efforts and post-war adjustment). Still, he acknowledges, small business casualties would be “high” despite all the government might do. The more realistic or brassly bourgeois-minded Senator Robert Taft of Ohio, opposes even the formation of such a board, saying that it is a “hopeless” task to aid 1,800,000 retailers because survival is possible for only a year or two for those that might be granted help. Hence, big business policy toward small business is, in substance, for “orderly liquidation.”
Like the bourgeoisie itself, government economists (Department of Commerce) likewise are precisely clear concerning the fate of small business and the direction of American economy. Therefore proposals and recommendations made before the Senate Small Business Committee (September 30) included, besides proposals for countless outright liquidations, the following measures:

To limit the entry of new concerns into trade fields except in “defense” localities;
 
to limit stores in one field taking on new lines of another;
 
to concentrate the remaining businesses “in a few nucleus concerns,” with compensation for closed firms.

Thus, succinctly and coldly, these government economists, proclaiming the early demise of hordes of middle class businesses, declare at the same time that old style (laissez-faire) capitalism is forever gone. For what becomes of “free enterprise” and “rugged individualism” when one may not enter any field of business? When one may not freely invest capital in order to expand in new directions? Capital investment
ceases to be free. And the final recommendation for the concentration of business “in a few business concerns” (following British example) is a direct recognition that the concentration and centralization of business and industry are not only the natural developments of capitalist economy but, moreover, that they constitute the only means of economic survival for the remaining sections of the middle class financially equipped for such combinations. Thus, too, the government economists, whose business it is to know the truth about the course of American economy, proceed to reduce to euphemisms the conceptions of Thurman Arnold, the advocate of unrestricted competition and free capitalist enterprise as the American post-war economy.
 
Petty Bourgeois Elements Enter Working Class
What do these developments mean for the middle class, and what is their meaning in relation to the working class? This is our prime consideration. Only a small part of this middle class will be re-absorbed into other businesses, continuing as private property institutions with a degree of “independence.” Another portion will find minor jobs and posts as part of the constantly increasing government bureaucracy and apparatus.
The major portion of these elements, however, will be forced into the working class, except in so far as the armed forces now absorb them. They will carry over the psychology, interests and ambitions of the petty bourgeoisie. As a part of the working class or labor movement, they can become ideological and organizational obstacles toward labor’s progress. First, because of their previous private property associations and interests, such elements could easily be duped, baited or utilized by employers for reactionary and anti-labor ends. Employers could dangle enticements and hopes for economic and prestige advantages to many of them and thus hold in check incipient dissatisfaction and a turn to a common life and interests with their fellow workers.
Second, and more significantly, because of their residual conceptions and desires, they could especially become a prey to demagogues of a fascistic variety appealing to their property instincts. True, these uprooted small business people haven’t any property any longer, and had very little before. But the constant din about property rights employed by fascist demagogues is a drum which can catch their ears.
Thus, wittingly or unwittingly, these declassed middle class forces can become tools of the most reactionary forces in society. In fact, out of their ranks could emerge also some of the leaders of reaction. This is the record, among other factors, of the rise and advance of fascist organizations in Italy and Germany. Such groups – the middle class in general – provide the social basis for fascism as democratic capitalism disintegrates; and particularly if the proletariat under the leadership of the revolutionary party does not step forward to establish socialism, taking the petty bourgeoisie with it.
On the other hand, these elements can become an integral, organic and progressive part of the organized labor movement. Their business experience and intelligence, their initiative and even their enterprise could well be utilized by the working class movement. This, provided the labor movement recognizes here a special problem and consciously endeavors to educate, organize and integrate these elements into the ideas and practices of a militant labor movement. Teaches them, for example, that they must cease to look backward, in the hope of re-absorption again into a small business or middle class existence; teaches them, further, that they are now a part of the working class, and must actively link their interests and actions to the labor movement.
In so far as there are also involved the workers formerly employed in these thousands of small businesses, they can and will enter more swiftly, directly and easily into the industrial life of mass scale production; and can, without difficulty, become a living part of the labor movement.
 
Labor Movement Must Integrate New Elements
The labor movement must be careful be avoid the pitfalls of anti-Semitism and, instead, to welcome and absorb the numbers of former small Jewish petty bourgeoisie into its ranks. Past experience shows that this can easily be accomplished if the labor movement holds out a fraternal hand. Discrimination and prejudices, hurtful to labor and helpful to the employers, are also easy to develop among the workers. This is demonstrated in the discriminatory and Jim Crow policies pursued in the past and still followed by many labor unions toward the Negro workers, who also entered the industrial field relatively late. Such labor unions fall for and play the bosses’ game.
The fascists and Nazis cleverly carried anti-Semitism to its logical extreme. First they expropriated the larger and upper middle Jewish bourgeoisie (crying, “See! See! Here are your enemies!”) for the benefit of their bureaucracy and the big “Aryan” bourgeoisie, thus combining demagogy in politics with profit and wealth. Then they further developed the scapegoat methods to cover their intensified exploitation o£ the working class and peasants and their wholesale extermination, incarcerations and deportations of the Jewish masses. This invidious development and result in America must be guarded against by the conscious policy of the organized labor movement toward the integration of all new workers, including the Negro, the former Jewish petty bourgeoisie or “alien,” into the labor movement upon a completely equal basis.
What, finally, must be concluded concerning the latter-day developments in a large section of the middle classes? The social picture and class divisions are, in certain respects, altered. Properly seen and analyzed, these developments are in the interests of the working class, now and ultimately.
The specific weight and gravity of the industrial proletariat, already the great majority of the population, thus become even greater in relation to the capitalist class. The needs of the imperialist war today give employment to the masses as in no other period. This will include the hundreds of thousands of former petty bourgeoisie. Thus, too, the imperialist war enlarges and helps to consolidate the workers, first, at the point of production in the mass production industries and, second, through the impulsion and need for union organization, among these larger numbers engaged in factory life as workers for the first time. Not even “frozen” union organization can stop this process of education, ideological change and organization in due course.
The class lines and cleavages between the major classes-big bourgeoisie and proletariat – come to stand out more clearly. These changes in class relations – the greater polarization of the classes at extremes – thereby actually narrow the basis of capitalism. Specifically, the social-economic upheavals in a substantial layer of the middle class, particularly the lower middle class, must therefore be utilized in the immediate and coming period to the advantage and interests of the organized labor movement and, ultimately, the aims of the revolutionary movement.
 
Labor Must Lead Toward Socialism
American capitalism is emerging with its own “collectivist” order: the rigid control and ownership of the means of production and distribution in the hands of a small group of monopoly capitalists. The problem of today and tomorrow is the transformation of this anti-people’s “collectivism” (not yet fascist in its political manifestation) into social ownership and control, that is, the control and ownership of the means of life by the masses; by all those able and willing to engage in socially useful tasks, physical and intellectual. These forces will include, besides the proletarian masses, the millions found today among the functionally useful middle classes in production and distribution and the services (professionals, teachers, etc.) and also the functionally necessary managerial and supervisory forces employed in production.
Continued control of the destiny of the world by the monopoly capitalists, by imperialism, can only mean strangulation of the masses and world-wide reaction. In its narrow profit and power interests, imperialism limits production itself. Imperialism prevents the full utilization of all technological and scientific advances. Imperialism uproots all peoples, the middle classes, the working class, the exploited colonial peoples, placing them at best on a subsistence basis, and then finishes them off by death through imperialist war. A way out of this chaos and horror does exist.
Only socialist production, socialism, can freely and abundantly utilize the forces of production and distribution and make possible consumption on a scale never yet remotely realized. Socialism is ready for the task of making use of all forces, machine, science, the human forces, in the social and cultural interests of the masses. Socialism, not imperialism, alone can be the architect of the future of humanity.
The main instrument in the direction and road toward socialism is the working class. It is decisive in this task because capitalism and history have placed the workers in an indispensable position in relation to production itself. The political task of the working class is to realize that their decisive relation to the productive forces is also the key to the struggles in defense of their daily interests, and their social interests of tomorrow.
The middle class forces now dislodged and tossed to the dogs by capitalism and also the millions of the lower middle class elements and salaried employees still in existence, must learn, and learn soon, that their destruction or liberation is bound up with the choice they make: the linking of their lives with the big bourgeoisie or with the proletariat. The proletariat and the revolutionary movement must consciously help them to make up their minds to choose the side of history, of the advancing proletariat. This choice will be a positive factor in the political road the working class itself must take: the road to independent class power by the masses and the establishment of the socialist order.
 




The War Labor Board has denied the union security clause or maintenance of membership to two locals of the Federal Union of Chemical Workers-AFL. The reason? Because these locals “struck in violation” of the national no-strike agreement of the AFL and CIO officialdom. In other words, the War Labor Board is now PENALIZING AND PUNISHING labor unions which employ their only real weapon – the strike – in fighting for their demands.

The first case is of 700 workers in the Monsanto Chemical Co. and the New England Alcohol Co., Everett, Mass. These workers had won a wage increase, but the employers had refused to comply with the decision. Therefore, the gypped workers, deciding to use their last and only effective weapon, conducted a five-day strike to enforce demands for a union security clause and the stalled wage increase.
 
In the case of the workers of the General Chemical Co., Buffalo, N.Y., the War Labor Board, after having the matter in its hands for OVER THREE MONTHS, scuttled the union maintenance demand of these workers. Why? Because the union engaged in a work stoppage of A FEW HOURS.
 

Workers Must Use Strength
In acting to punish strikers, the War Labor Board asserts that while it is in existence, workers have no “need or justification for strikes,” and, hence may not use economic pressure to obtain their demands ... or else!
But workers know very well, as many have learned from their own experiences with various government agencies and the bosses, that they must continue to employ economic force to achieve their ends. For in the final instance this is the only pressure they have to back up their demands. Neglect or failure to exercise the threat of this pressure – the strike – when workers feel it necessary, means that the workers lose out. In such cases, employer pressure, which is steady, real and persistent and is exerted on the government openly or behind closed doors, always wins out – modified only to the extent that the bosses and the government fear the workers will really exercise their economic strength.
 
Workers Are Slandered
In decreeing against workers who strike (e.g., the chemical workers), the War Labor Board claims that the workers are “irresponsible” and show the “wrong spirit” in striking. The cries of “national unity” and the “war emergency” are thus employed by the government and bosses to attack workers defending their interests. But further, the WLB slanders the workers. STRIKES ARE RARELY “IRRESPONSIBLE.” Workers don’t leave their jobs just for fun. Very strong grievances and very real economic needs compel workers to resort to strike action and then only when they cannot prevail upon adamant employers in any other manner.
 
Play Bosses’ Game
The “labor representatives” on the WLB concurred in these penalizing decisions against the unions. Their disgraceful behavior is the direct result of their general and fundamental role as members of government agencies. These trade union “representatives” or labor “leaders” want a passive membership which doesn’t “make trouble.” They are actually afraid of the ranks. In “transferring” their union activities to, or becoming a part of, the government apparatus, they more and more sell but the workers, except in so far as the rank and file constantly show their readiness to use their strength and pressure.
Those labor officials (in or out of the government agencies) who act as though the War Labor Board was labor’s “white hope,” are thus surrendering labor’s normal rights to government intervention and decree, which are becoming ever more severe and permanent in their application. For unions which lack the right of authority to use their power and strength when needed are unions in name only.
Although the War Labor Board in many instances has granted unions the “maintenance of membership” provision, this is hardly sufficient to maintain a strong labor union. And when the WLB, on one pretext or another, arbitrarily takes away even such crumbs of protection for labor, it is a further warning that workers must themselves protect their own interests.
 
How Build Strong Unions?
A stable union membership, confident and disciplined, can only be achieved by a membership which insists on its democratic and labor rights TODAY, in wartime – the right to strike, etc. – as before. Likewise, healthy unionism will strive to re-establish, on the economic front, genuine collective bargaining between the employers and workers – a condition which no longer exists in fact (as was pointed, out by a leading delegate to the recent convention of the Auto Workers Union) since labor gave up the right to strike.
The coal miners union showed the way to get what labor wants and must have – union conditions, the closed shop – only a readiness and determination to use its striking power. They demanded. Others listened and then gave in.
Until these lessons are learned, the WLB and other government agencies will continue their arbitrary and harsh decisions against workers.
 




“War threatens all civil rights.” Such is the view of United States Attorney General A.D. Biddle. There, have been periods of gross abuse, when hysteria and hate and fear ran high and when minorities were unlawfully and cruelly abused. The present war is no exception. Inroads are being made on civil liberties – on the democratic and labor rights of the workers and people generally in this country.
While not in every instance uniform or national in their application, they are nevertheless sufficiently numerous to cause concern to labor TODAY, not to mention their implications for tomorrow. The illustrations given below are by no means all-inclusive, but indicate some of the more flagrant deviations from “normal” democratic procedure.
The Roosevelt Administration already finds it necessary to explain and defend its actions as inquiries and protests are made from liberal and labor sectors. But despite murmurings and protests from these quarters, the Administration continues its practices. It cannot do otherwise, since the government’s policy is rooted in historical circumstances, which increasingly compel a course toward authoritarian and dictatorial conceptions.
 
Ruthless Evacuation of Japanese Americans
1. Immediately after America’s direct entry into the imperialist war, the government evacuated thousands of Japanese on the Pacific Coast. These people had been living there all their lives or for many years. Yet they were ruthlessly uprooted and ejected from their homes, lands and work places.
Not even the elementary constitutional provisions or devices were invoked on their behalf; for example, no examination as to their “loyalty” or any distinctions between American-born (citizens) or aliens. Never before, either in war or peace has any such wholesale invasion of the rights of Americans taken place on the basis of national origin. The analogy to German’s wholesale persecution of non-Aryans is too stark to require comment. The American bourgeoisie is too desperately pursuing its war to be concerned with democratic and ordinary human rights. It is intent on creating wholesale hatred of the “slant-eyed, bespectacled” yellow Japanese “dwarfs.”
 
Denies Right of Asylum to Anti-Fascists
2. Recently, the Laval-Petain Vichy government of France promulgated plans to deport thousands of Jews from France to areas in Eastern Europe occupied by Hitler. Indignation and protest swept over this country. The United States Secretary of State, Cordell Hull, felt impelled to issue a statement expressing lamentation and shock at the Laval-Petain Decree against the Jews.
But Hull did not accompany his denunciation with a declaration invoking the right of asylum; that is, to admit these otherwise death-assigned Jews to the United States through the immediate mass issuance of visas to these victims of Laval-Petain-Hitler. And why not? Because the United States does not want anti-fascists of working class origin, especially if there are revolutionaries among them, admitted to this country. The “welcome” sign is hung out only for those of bourgeois and royalist origin and station.
The failure of the Roosevelt Administration to act in such a way as to relieve the plight of millions of refugees – not only the Jews of Germany, France, Austria and Rumania, etc., but also the Spanish working class victims of fascist France – is only a wholesale and more recent manifestation of a gradual reversal of policy of the United States government on the right of asylum.
Actually, in recent years, the right of immigration or asylum for “reds” – for revolutionaries, even if they are political refugees – has been a dead letter. The United States for them is impenetrable, except through accident. As the American Civil Liberties Union has correctly protested:
“No person should be refused admission to the United States on the ground of holding objectionable opinions. The present restrictions are wholly opposed to our traditional policy of political asylum.”
But democratic traditions notwithstanding, the American bourgeoisie waves its hands toward – Santo Domingo, Mexico, Patagonia. These places are for the refugees. For a declining capitalist order finds it necessary to set up barriers against “ideas” and determined militants and revolutionaries who give voice and organization to their views. To grant to these refugee masses the right of asylum might result in admitting opponents of capitalism and real fighters against fascism. Their suppression and exclusion are therefore not an accident, but part and parcel of the class interests of the American capitalist class.
This is the meaning, also, of the efforts of the Administration, through Attorney General Biddle, to extend the legal bases for revoking the citizenship of naturalized citizens.
3. The crass prosecution in the Minneapolis Case (Teamsters Local 544-CIO and Socialist Workers Party members), ordered by Roosevelt on the demand of the reactionary union official, Tobin, and carried out under the supervision of the great “liberal” Biddle, cannot be lightly passed over, occurring, as it did, even before America’s entry into the war.
One can also add such evidence as the revival of criminal syndicalism procedures in the states; the increasing number of arrests and trials on sedition charges; the arrests of thousands of aliens and the increasing and significant violations of free press. None of these can be passed over as only “wartime exigency measures.” Rather, they indicate and form a pattern of the future.
 
Dies Committee – An Invitation to Anti-Labor Smears
4. It seems to be the practice among some of the liberal and labor forces to laugh or sneer at the efforts of the Dies Committee. But one cannot ignore the Dies Committee, which, with continued congressional appropriations, pursues its anti-labor, anti-radical and red-baiting smearings. Thereby is laid the “ideological” and political groundwork for further legal and extra-legal attacks (vigilantism, etc.).
The propaganda of Dies and his co-workers is obviously receiving encouragement from higher bourgeois sources who look to the future. These elements recognize that sharper attacks on labor and its organizations in the future – accompanied by “legal” and illegal raids, searches and seizures; false jailings, singly and en masse; deportations if possible – require a long period of propaganda preparations, which are only apparently ineffective at present.
Moreover, it must not be overlooked that the efforts of the (supposedly ridiculous) Dies Committee have unquestionably already caused countless unknown numbers of liberals, radicals and ordinary workers to pull in their horns; to hesitate to speak out their opinions; to decline to join movements or organizations organized to carry out a specific or general objective of labor.
Indirect and highly publicised falsification thus achieves its ends in an important and typical bourgeois-democratic fashion. The organised labor movement particularly can and must not only demand the dissolution of the Dies Committee, but must continue to expose its role as a part of the blatantly reactionary trends of the ruling class. For instance, when the labor movement recently took a serious part in the agitation for the removal of the poll-tax as a voting requirement for soldiers of the poll-tax states, the effect was noticeably felt in Congress.
American capitalism is steadily moving to supplant in fact, if not yet entirely in form, the parliamentary machinery of the American capitalist government with a bureaucratic-military regime. Steadily, the powers of the executive (the President) supercede the legislative (Congress). The President in turn delegates decisive powers to members of the military, not only in relation to military but industrial manpower, and with respect to labor’s use of the strike weapon.
Does the judiciary (the Supreme Court), the third arm of American government, intervene to curb the growth of the President and to reinforce the legislative arm? No! The Supreme Court follows the executive, as once “it followed the election” in the era of the flowering bourgeois democracy. It is therefore significant that in the field of civil liberties, affecting the masses directly, the record of the Supreme Court for the past year has “constituted a set-back” (report of the American Civil Liberties Union).
The civil and democratic rights of the people, of the workers, are in any case always relative. Such rights as exist gradually developed during the expansion of capitalism, which brought universal suffrage and other civil rights. In the present period, the decline of capitalism has, contrariwise, brought gigantic inroads on the parliamentary system and methods as the political instrument of capitalist rule. This is noticeable in the classic countries of bourgeois democracy – Great Britain and the United States.
Where fascism and nazism dominate, the total elimination of democratic rights is a matter of course. The “democratic” countries exhibit the same signs and trends.
“War measures” are the excuse today for gradual curtailment of civil and economic rights of the working people. Tomorrow they will be the “necessary” measures of the imperialist order in the post-war periods, if imperialism is not destroyed during the war itself. Therefore, with the growth of American capitalism along bureaucratic-military lines, it becomes necessary for the American masses to be on guard to protect, to the greatest possible degree, their civil and economic rights.
The organization of labor’s forces, the strengthening of the labor unions, the understanding of the need to build workers’ instruments of defense (Workers Defense Guards) against legal and hoodlum attacks, the organization of an independent political party of labor – these are some of the measures for labor’s defense and offense in all respects against capitalist encroachments on its hard-won rights.
 



The Twice-a-week APPEAL will soon be here – a fact, and not just a hope and ambition. The requirements of the day-make this a certainty. Tremendous events are unrolling before all our eyes. The revolutionary press is essential to reflect these stirring and decisive developments, affecting all lives; but more important, to help to direct them in the interests of the working class and exploited peoples everywhere.
A truism, but fundamental: the revolutionary press is the major educator and organizer of the labor and revolutionary movement. Trade union and political organization of the working masses needs enormously to be speeded up. The revolutionary Party, the Socialist Workers Party, needs to be geared to meet the needs of the hour on the labor and political fronts, in the United States and internationally.
The APPEAL is a decisive instrument in this work. The members and sympathizers of the Socialist Workers Party are rallying and will rally still more strongly to our press and Its needs. THE TWICE-A-WEEK APPEAL IS NOW A NECESSITY. BECAUSE IT MUST, IT WILL BE! HAIL THE TWICE-A-WEEK APPEAL! On the road to a DAILY APPEAL!
 



On October 27, 1928, James P. Cannon, Martin Abern and Max Shachtman were expelled from the Communist Party of the United States, by the latter’s Central Executive Committee at a Plenary Session, for espousing the platform of the then Russian Opposition led by L.D. Trotsky. Simultaneously, Maurice Spector was expelled by the Canadian C.P.
Anticipating the bureaucratic action of the Foster-Browder-Lovestone Communist Party leadership, we made swift preparations to present our case to the Communist Party ranks and to the working class, and two weeks later, on November 15, 1928, there appeared The Militant, published as the organ of the Opposition Group in the Communist Party 5,000 copies were printed and distributed widely in New York and throughout the United States.
 
Only a Handful
Hard labor, as never before or since, went into the publication of the semi-monthly Militant There were at the beginning but a handful of comrades to publish distribute and sell the paper. Resources were slim, but the comrades rallying to the Opposition Group in the various cities were intensely devoted to its cause and displayed tremendous energy and also pledged heavily of their financial resources to get out the paper. Communist Party gangsterism arose to prevent the sale and distribution of the Militant but this did not stop the growth and spread of the paper.
In New York, Max Shachtman, Joe Carter, the present writer and very soon more comrades, including Italian and Hungarian groups which joined us, distributed the paper to newsstands, sold them on the street corners and in front of the Daily Worker office and the “Coop” restaurant. Militant salesmen were slugged but sales went on just the same.
In Philadelphia, Chicago, Minneapolis, Boston and other points, comrades Leon Goodman, Sol Lankin, B. Morganstern, Arne Swabeck, Albert Glotzer, Oscar Coover, Louis Roseland, C. Skoglund, V. Dunne, Charlotte Shechet, A. Konikow, L. Schlossberg and others there and elsewhere joined in the ‘Jimmie Higgins’ labor, and The Militant went marching on, despite all obstacles.
 
Circulation of 3,000
Circulation varied during the early months, but, if memory serves rightly, at least 3,000 Copies were regularly printed. Since the printing was done by a commercial printer, the cost was very high; but the development of a pledge fund to sustain the The Militant carried the paper through precarious weeks.
Our Press unquestionably has been the chief instrument, above any other human or physical medium, in the creation, maintenance and development of what is now the Socialist Workers Party and the Fourth International movement. It started as an expression of the left wing opposition movement in the official Communist Party and Communist International, but events dictated far-reaching and deep-going changes to the point today of irreconcilable opposition to all the political and organizational degeneration of the Stalinist Paries. The important and decisive shifts and changes in the labor and revolutionary movement are clearly and better indicated in our Press than in that of any other labor or revolutionary organ, and that applies from the period of Nov. 1928, the beginning of The Militant, to the present day, ten years later, in the Socialist Appeal and New International.
 
In the Early Issues
The first number of The Militant contained the declaration, For the Russian Opposition by the three expelled conirades, around which declaration they called upon members of the Communist Party and Young Communist League to rally. But, as evidence, too, of our continuing close ties to the official Communist Party, we began the publication in The Militant of the thesis of the former Minority (Cannon-Foster bloc) in the Communist Party, entitled The Crisis in the Communist Party of the United States, directed against the Lovestone-Wolfe majority.
But more important, The Militant began publication in serial form of the now famous and historic Criticism of the Draft Program of the Communist International by L.D. Trotsky, a copy of which had been smuggled out of Russia after the Sixth Congress of the Communist International through Comrades Cannon and Spcctor.
With its publication, along with dissemination of the contents of the Real Situation in Russia (the program of the Bolshevik-Leninists in Russia and containing also the sections on the falsification of the history of the Russian Revolution) the eyes of members of the C.P. and Y.C.L began to open and the Opposition Group made headway very slowly but steadily. Our forward march was also made easier by the publication of documents showing the extreme Right Swing the Russian Party was then making (rise of Kulak influences; slowing down of industrialization etc.).
 
Campaign for the Weekly
On February 15, 1929, The Militant published the newly-drafted Platform of the Opposition Group. Discussions began. On May 17–19, 1929, the Chicago convention of our forces convened, and the historic Communist League of America was formed – another great milepost of our progress. But with the organization of our forces nationally, there came greater ambitions and immediate goals. The semimonthly Militant was being issued regularly, but was already proving insufficient for our needs. After thorough deliberation, especially a consideration of our small numerical forces and the financial strain it would mean, it was decided nevertheless to conduct a campaign to raise a fund for a weekly Militant. The sum set was $1,500 – an amount which would seem like a $25,000 campaign now, considering the relative number of members and sympathizers then and today.
Moreover, the campaign for a weekly Militant was linked to the aim of purchasing our own printing equipment – first, a linotype – in order to ensure the weekly’s appearance. Despite initial doubts and hesitation, the organization as a whole swung into the campaign with high morale and confidence. Six months later we had our linotype machine. On Nov. 30, 1929, the first issue of the weekly Militant appeared. Not long afterward we secured a printing press and with the devoted aid of comrades and sympathizers, the weekly continued to surmount repeated crises and to appear regularly.
 
Pioneer Publishers
But the achievement of a weekly Militant and our own printing plant, small and crudely equipped as it was, both mechanically and in labor power, meant even more for our organization and movement. It made possible the creation of Pioneer Publishers. There commenced a period of publication of pamphlets and books, small and large, by the Communist League of America, and later Pioneer Publishers, which brought strength and prestige to the revolutionary movement in the United States and also throughout the world, particularly in the English-speaking nations.
A list of the pamphlets and books issued would fill a few pages alone. Suffice it that in this way the literature of the revolutionary wings in Russia, Europe, Asia and North America became widely known, which not all the machinations and bloody purges of Stalinism can ever wipe out or destroy. They belong to us, to history and humanity’s future forever. Thereby, to quote a phrase of Trotsky’s “great vistas for Marxism” were opened.
 
The New International
From the preparations and foregoing achievements (weekly Militant; our printing plant; Pioneer Publishers) flowed later and naturally another achievement and necessity for our movement; namely, the publication of The New International magazine, our theoretical organ, regarded today as preeminent in the field of Marxism throughout the world.
Here too skeptics were confounded. A monthly 36-page magazine, with a two-color cover, at such a low price! Can’t be done. You’ll break your necks. But the will found the way, and in July, 1934, the first issue of The New International appeared, first as a monthly, then as a bi-monthly. It was discontinued two years later after June 1936 while the Bolshevik-Leninists endeavored to function for a period in the Socialist Party. With the formation of the Socialist Workers Party, The New international recommenced publication in January, 1938, and has appeared regularly each month for ten months straight. Its circulation is above 4,000 (4,300 in October), very high for a theoretical organ and over twice the average circulation in the first period of the magazine.
 
The Socialist Appeal
A few words, also, to fill in briefly the course of the paper. Fusion of the A.W.P. and the C.L.A. into the Workers Party merely brought a change in the name of the paper from the weekly Militant to the New Militant, continuing previous revolutionary policies. This was in December, 1934. Entry into the Socialist Party later, in July 1936, by the Workers Party forces resulted in suspension of the New Militant; but soon the revolutionists found a press to express their views. Utilizing the Socialist Appeal, a printed organ issued in the S.P. by Albert Goldman, the left wing forces soon developed the Appeal into a monthly magazine. A year ago the Appeal was converted into a weekly newspaper and as the official organ of the S.W.P. it continues the revolutionary traditions or the Militant and New Militant.
 
Events of a Decade
Our press has recorded through this historic decade of 1928-1938 all the significant events of the period and has truly offered guidance to the revolutionary forces and the labor movement generally in all fields. A few of these major events – which, by the way, also definitely record stages in development and attitude of our own organization – were: the decline of Bolshevism and the rise of Stalinism in Russia; the events in Germany – the development of German Fascism; the struggles in France; the rise and fall of Popular Frontism; the developments in Spain before and during the civil war; “prosperity” and the economic and social crisis in the United States; labor struggles; the C.I.O. movement; the growth and foundation of the Fourth International, and so forth at great length. All this forms part of the record of our press.
One must mention, too, if only in a word, that the youth movement managed to issue Young Spartacus and now the Challenge, thereby laying a sound foundation for the mass movement of youth which our Youth organization must and can build.
 
Building the Press
It is not necessary to dilate in florid and many words the simple fact: The press is our major organizer. By now this should be ABC to every member of our organization, and each member should put as a first task the need to build and spread widely the circulation of all our press: Socialist Appeal, The New International, Challenge, Pioneer Publisher’s pamphlets and books.
In this connection it may be well to point out that on each occasion when a special effort was made with our press; when issues and emergencies of great significance arose and our movement endeavored to react in stronger and better organized fashion to them, our movement made big gains – in prestige, and politically and organizationally. On three occasions in past years the weekly Militant or Appeal was transformed for brief periods into a tri-weekly. These were on the occasions of the rise to power of Hitler; the time of the “hotel strike in New York, and only a few weeks ago the events in Czechoslovakia.
Those achievements show the road the press must travel. For a permanent, larger and more frequent Socialist Appeal; for a greater New International.
BUILD THE PRESS!
 



The “Ideological Campaign” is on in full swing. Resolutions supporting the C.E.C. in its expulsion of Communists from the Party are being adopted in various places.
One street nucleus in Pittsburgh, without defining or explaining a word of a single fundamental issue raised by the Opposition Communists, manages to use such expressions as “counter-revolutionary”, “social democratic”, “menshevik”, “renegade”, nine times in two sentences totaling 19 lines.
The resolution of the Kansas District Committee does not mention the expulsion of two pioneer Communist fighters, Buehler and Kassen, from the D.E.C. and the Party for fighting the expulsions, but does manage to betray its complete lack of knowledge of the position of the Russian Opposition. For instance, it accuses the Opposition of stating that Socialist construction in the Soviet Union is a myth, “when all facts available prove the steady development of the socialist production.” Well, who says otherwise? The issue is: Can the development proceed faster? To what extent? By what means and on what basis is the socialist economy to be developed further? What are the limitations? Can there be the development of a complete system of socialism, as the Draft Program of the Comintern states, without the aid of the proletarian victory in one or more European countries?
What does the Russian Opposition say on this point?
“The domestic problem is, by strengthening ourselves with a proper class policy, a proper inter-relation of the working-class with the peasant, to move forward as fast as possible on the road of socialist construction. The interior resources of the Soviet Union are enormous and make this entirely possible (Our emphasis). In using the world Capitalist market for this purpose, we bind up our fundamental historical calculations with further development of the world-proletarian revolution. Its victory in certain leading countries will break the ring of the capitalist encirclement, and deliver us from our heavy burden. It will enormously strengthen us in the sphere of technique accelerate our entire development in the city and village, in factory and school. It will give us the possibility of really creating socialism ...” (The Platform of the Russian Opposition, pp. 86–87, The Real Situation in Russia, Harcourt, Brace and Co.).
We quote the above now only to call attention to the absurd manner in which “Trotskyism” is being “discussed” without for one moment examining the actual economic, tactical and political proposals of the Russian Opposition. Unfortunately they have been largely suppressed. But through the columns of The Militant the American Communists will have the opportunity to judge for themselves. Then we are confident the resolutions will change their tone and character.
 







Vigorously Pressing Its Revolutionary Line Before Widening Groups of Workers, The Party a Completes Year of Activity



Formed in April 1940, following the split with the Cannonites (SWP), the Workers Party has completed one year of well-rounded activity. The Workers Party has carried on in the principles and program of revolutionary Marxism – translated into the modern epoch, on the fundamental program of Bolshevism. Any efforts by this or that individual to derail the movement off the revolutionary course have met with complete failure. Born in the difficult period of a split in the ranks of the Fourth International and the beginning of the Second World War, the Workers Party has consistently put forward the revolutionary anti-war position before the working masses. It is as an active revolutionary, anti-war party that our organization, from top to bottom, has made its mark and will continue to do so in the future.
The Workers Party has demonstrated actively that it can carry on against the stream of growing patriotism and social-patriotism and class-collaboration policies in the labor movement. The organization is politically and organizationally sound and stable. Its political line and activity gradually make their way, Below are sketched briefly, for the information of the sympathizers of the party and readers of our press, some of the highlights of the Workers Party life and activity in the past year.
*
A few days after the Workers Party was formed, a special May Day issue of Labor Action, official organ of the Workers Party was gotten out for distribution on May Day. This was the first number of Labor Action. The Workers Party held an open air May Day demonstration in New York City at Columbus Circle.
The early weeks of the party were given over to the establishment of the necessary departments of work and institutions. Less than four weeks after the party’s inception, Labor Action emerged as a weekly newspaper. Despite all hardships, the membership and sympathizers of the party have maintained our excellent weekly paper.
Likewise, the theoretical organ of the party, The New International, continued to appear, but, with our limited resources, only as a 16 page publication. The Challenge of Youth, monthly organ of the YPSL, continued regularly.
 
A Wide Range of Activity
Realizing that it would be the revolutionary anti-war activity of our movement which would be the determining factor in the future life and development of the Workers Party, the political committee decided on a national tour by Max Shachtman. national secretary. This was the first of the party’s important anti-war activities. This lengthy tour by Shachtman, in which he put forward the position of revolutionary internationalism on the central issue – the imperialist war – proved a big success.
The party, during the past year, has consistently endeavored to engage in the widest possible variety of work – public activity, trade union work, organization and field work, etc. – and at the same time to develop the necessary measures to ensure the ideological and political consolidation of our party on firm Bolshevik foundations. With the aid of objective factors, the social composition of our organization has significantly changed so that the membership is now becoming increasingly proletarian in its composition. The recruits who have come into the party in the past year have been almost entirely proletarian.
 
Branches Orient Toward the Unions
The party has organized and functioning units or potential units in: Syracuse, Rochester, Buffalo, Cleveland, Akron, Detroit, Ann Arbor, Chicago, Seattle, San Francisco, Oakland, Berkeley, Los Angeles, San Pedro, Houston, Kansas City, St, Louis, Streator, Louisville, Columbus, Youngstown, Pittsburgh, Washington, Baltimore, Philadelphia, Mt. Carmel, Newark, Boston, Lynn, Worcester, and Fitchburg, as well as members at large in other cities. In the past year, thriving branches have been organized in Buffalo, Kansas City, Mo., and Baltimore.
Trade union and industrial work has developed in important sectors of industry, particularly in Massachusetts, California, Missouri, New York, Ohio and Illinois. Measures were taken by the recently-held March plenum of our party to implement concretely certain phases of our trade union work. The change in the social composition of the organization has reflected itself in the trade union work of the organization, and, conversely, the trade union and industrial work of the organization puts its stamp on positive changes in the social composition.
 
Press and Negro Work Spurred
Our major instrument, Labor Action, is regarded as an outstanding labor and revolutionary publication and persistently makes its way among more and more of the industrial proletariat, sharecroppers, Negroes and other exploited elements. The sale and distribution of Labor Action before factory gates in various cities is proving enormously successful, and brings Labor Action and our party more and more steadily to the attention of wide masses of workers. The circulation steadily increases as a result of the fact that more and more members are being drawn into the systematic sale and distribution of the paper. A task of the future is to maintain our weekly organ and to double its circulation. The membership feels confident of being able to accomplish this in the next few months. Special editions of Labor Action (e.g., the Negro and CIO numbers) have been issued on occasion.
The local organizations have displayed a commendable initiative in several instances and are showing themselves entirely capable of the development of local work (the issuance of local literature, agitational and propaganda leaflets, etc.). Local New York conducted one energetic congressional election campaign during which thousands of pieces of literature were distributed, scores of public (street corner and indoor) meetings were held – a campaign in which the membership engaged with its full force.
In order to develop and guide the work of the local organisations more directly, the national office has engaged regularly in field work and has had its few functionaries in the field for considerable periods of time.
Work among the Negroes was conducted, particularly in Chicago, and latterly in New York, as well as in several other cities (Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Boston, etc.). One pamphlet (10,000 copies) on the Negroes was issued and was quickly disposed of among Negroes who were more than eager to read what our Party has to offer as a solution toward the Negro’s problem. The national Negro department of the party is today in a position to function more systematically and one can easily expect a sharp increase in the scope of the Negro work. For several months a national Negro organizer has been utilized by the party in the eastern area.
 
Pamphlets and Tours Popularize Party
Our organization, despite its smallness and limited resources, has nevertheless regarded national public tours on the burning issues of the day as a paramount activity and necessity, In the space of one year our party has conducted two extensive national tours by Max Shachtman, national secretary, and David Coolidge, labor secretary; at this moment a third national tour is being carried through by Max Shachtman. It is a considerable effort and achievement for a small revolutionary organization in this period – an effort which has not been challenged or equalled by another political organization, in the working class movement.
Our party, as a tendency of the Fourth International movement, has endeavored to demonstrate actively its international solidarity with the exploited workers and peasants and colonial peoples throughout the world. Within a month after the Workers Party was formed it took steps to establish contact with Fourth International movements in other countries.
A few penny pamphlets have been issued to date by the party: My Friends – A Fireside Chat on the War (addressed to the Negroes); This Is Not Our War, a manifesto of the Workers Party on the imperialist war; Conscription – What For?, The recent plenum decided to. issue a series of popular and fundamental pamphlets on various issues before the working class, and these will appear in rapid succession.
The issuance of popular leaflets has also been planned: one on the lease-lend bill having recently been issued, and another (on May Day, 1941) came off the press a few days ago and has been widely distributed in all parts of the country.
The youth organization (YPSL) has also, during this period, conducted systematic activity among the working class youth and students. It has regularly issued The Challenge of Youth, one of the finest of revolutionary youth publications of any period, and has also published a number of popular penny pamphlets to the working class youth and Negro youth. The sale and circulation of these pamphlets has met with very considerable success.
In the field of refugee and defense work, the organization has worked with various committees engaged in raising money to aid the stricken revolutionary refugees abroad and in obtaining visas.
While the organization has endeavored to conduct activity in all the fields of working class endeavor, the party has not neglected its internal life and development, though much more still needs to be accomplished. In order the better to review and to plan the work of the organization, two plenums were held since the formation of the party, and the second national convention is now being planned for the earliest possible date.
 
Education Goes Hand in Hand with Work
In the field of internal education, bulletins and reports have been issued by the national education department. Greater cohesion and national planning are now being undertaken. New York, Chicago and Los Angeles were especially successful in carrying through classes and workers schools. In order to assist still further in the ideological and theoretical development of the membership, as well as to serve the advanced workers and sympathizers of our movement, The New International, monthly theoretical organ of the party, was recently increased in size from 16 to 32 pages and every effort will be made to continue the publication, on the new basis.
A brochure, The ABC of Marxism, dealing with the fundamentals of Marxism in all their important aspects, is now off the press.
The party has endeavored to carry out the principles of democratic discussion and during the past year has issued eight internal bulletins on various questions. Internal discussion, membership meetings, on a local or branch scale, have been carried on without in any way interfering with the external life of the party. Indeed, the internal discussions and the issuance of internal bulletins have contributed much to the clarification of the membership on important issues, and thus have also made it easier to conduct the external activities of the organization. Both the internal and external organs of the party (The New International, Internal Bulletin) have carried articles on the issues being discussed by the membership, such as the Russian discussion (still being conducted); on Germany; the nature of Bolshevism; war and military policy; etc.
*
The foregoing is but the briefest summation of the efforts of our party in the one year of its life to date. The party has had to carry on against tremendous obstacles and not everything has been milk and honey by any means. There have been losses of this or that individual who dropped by the wayside; but these have more than been matched by new recruits who have shown their calibre and ability to function as revolutionists.
The Workers Party is not a large organization – yet. But its membership has its roots solidly in the groundwork of Bolshevik theory and practice; its political line is clear, its membership persistent and determined to execute, the party’s program despite all obstacles. The members (and those of the YPSL too) are therefore confident of the future of the Workers Party and the Fourth International, and intend to carry on toward the goal of the socialist reorganization of society.
 



The second half of the National $10,000 Organization and Press Fund Drive must go over the top on scheduled time. The twice-weekly Socialist Appeal is at stake.
Without doubt our Party and its sympathizers are quite capable to insure the maintenance of our most important instrument for spreading the program of the Fourth International and the Socialist Workers Party.
Our semi-weekly paper has been maintained without missing a single issue since our twice-a-week was established. One must not even contemplate a retreat, but, on the contrary, must look forward to increased frequency of the Socialist Appeal.
The Party branches in the past have responded to the requests for the necessary financial assistance to sustain the Socialist Appeal. By a similar response in the second half of the campaign there can be no doubt but that our Press can be maintained and established on a sounder footing than ever.
The reports from the Party branches throughout the country indicate their readiness to proceed with full speed to fulfill their quotas. We are confident that all supporters of our revolutionary Press will make every effort to fulfill their quotas for the National Organization and Press Fund Campaign before February 1st.
 

