


BRIGHTON SOCIALIST Party members were shocked and saddened to hear
of the sudden death of Rod Fitch.
Rod moved to Northampton some years ago although he always looked
us up when he came back to visit his family.
Rod was a tireless fighter on behalf of the working class. He was
active as a supporter of Militant [Ed.: now Socialist
Party] in Brighton Kemptown Labour Party and became its parliamentary
candidate in 1983. Standing on socialist policies Rod achieved the
best vote for Labour in a region which saw the biggest swing to the
Tories after the Falklands’ War victory. He received a tumultuous
standing ovation from hundreds of supporters at the count. He was
source of inspiration to us all.
Perhaps Rod will be best remembered for his anti-fascist work. Rod
was able to bring together representatives of our local Jewish and
Asiacommunities with the labour movement. The growth of the fascists
and their intimidatory marches and public sale of racist literature
was dispersed and brought to an end by the large mobilisations of
anti-fascists which Rod organised.
Rod will be sadly missed and remembered with affection here in
Brighton. Our condolences and deepest sympathy to his family.
 




The mood of the Southern Region Annual Conference of the Labour
Party was one of bitterness and anger at the Tory government, and a
determination to get rid of them as soon as possible.
However a number of delegates made clear that it was not enough to
rely on the unpopularity of the Tories, it was essential to build a
mass democratic Labour Party committed to socialist policies.
With this in mind, delegates rounded on the regional executive for
the evidence they wanted to submit to the commission of enquiry. This
included the abolition of the women’s section on the NEC, the LYPS
representative to be elected by the constituencies at the annual
conference, etc. As one delegate put it, these proposals are to the
right of the CLV.
A number of older delegates came to the rostrum to oppose what
they saw as a direct attack on the LYPS, the life-blood of the movement.
Ron Hayward representing the NEC presented Militant
supporter Cathy Wilson, Isle of Wight’s Labour candidate at the
general election, with the shield for the best performance on party
building, nearly 10% of the Labour vote at the election having joined
the Party.
There couldn’t be a better answer to the claim that Lord
Underhill (referred to as Lord Underhand by a delegate) has made that
Militant drives people out of the party.
In presenting the award, Ron said, “I wish your brand of
socialism and organisation would invade the mainland.”
A composite demanding all-out opposition to the cuts was passed by
an overwhelming majority. This composite called on the Regional
Council to inform all Labour groups and all Labour members on
regional and area health authorities that it is their role to oppose
cuts in their services, and to support trade union action against the cuts.
One indignant Labour councillor got to the rostrum protesting that
councillors didn’t need to be reminded of their duty. Another
councillor replied that this didn’t accord with his experience –
some needed to be reminded regularly (to loud cheers). “If we don’t
carry out party policy we should be kicked out.”
The composite’s concluding paragraph stimulated the largest part
of the discussion dealing as it did with the experience of the last
Labour government.
The dying remnants of the right wing, notwithstanding the fact
that a number of unions had come to the rostrum in support of the
composite, desperately tried to get 15 delegates with credentials to
stand for a card vote to be taken.
The chairwoman waited for what seemed like an age for the right to
muster their forces. One by one they got up until they reached the
grand total of eleven. To applause and cheers the conference declared:
“That the Labour Party must now reject the strategy
pursued by the last Labour government, of attempting to work within
and reform the present economic system, and instead campaigning for
the election of a Labour government committed to carrying out a
fundamental socialist change in society based on the public ownership
of all major industries, the banks and financial institutions, under
worker’s control and management.
“Only then can a Labour government ensure investment in
industry and low interest rates, which can bring an improving
standard of living for ordinary people, together with full employment
and improved public services.”
The Militant meeting held immediately after a long day at
conference attracted 46 delegates. £60 was raised for the fighting
fund. As for the CLV, their meeting was cancelled – a sign of the future.
 




Last year’s conference took a historic step when it carried
through mandatory re-selection of MPs. This was a long overdue
reform, repeatedly demanded by the majority of party activists, but
previously blocked by the right-wing parliamentary leadership with
the help of some of the trade union leaders.
If this year’s conference reflects the will of the party’s
ranks, and also rank-and-file activists within the unions, it will
allow no reversal of re-selection, and will carry through two further
democratic steps, on the manifesto and the election at conference of
the party leader.
Since last October, the parliamentary right wing, with the rabid
support of the capitalist press, have manoeuvred might and main to
block the extension of democracy at Blackpool.
Both the spokesmen of big business and their shadows within the
Parliamentary Labour Party fear the political consequences of the
thorough-going democratisation of the mass party of labour.
The battle over party democracy can only be properly understood in
the wider context of the struggle for a mass, socialist Labour Party.
Party activists believed that the last Labour government would be
able to take radical action in line with Party policy. Certainly, the
February 1974 Election Manifesto had been the most radical
since 1945. But after its formation in 1974, the new Labour
government rapidly came under the pressure of big business, rapidly
abandoned most of its promised reforms, and actually began to
implement counter-reforms against the working class.
 
The right-wing leadership of the PLP ignored the views of the rank
and file, and subsequently sealed the Labour government’s fate with
its attempt, contrary to conference and TUC decisions, to impose the
5% pay policy. Naturally, therefore, support rapidly grew within the
Party for rule changes which would establish the constituency
parties’ control over Labour MPs, and make the PLP and the
parliamentary leadership accountable to the party as a whole.
Precisely because the campaign for greater Party democracy is part
and parcel of the struggle to commit the Party at all levels to
socialist policies, the right wing, supported by the capitalist
media, have been steadfast in opposing it.
The millionaires’ press wants the right to decide not only the
representatives of its own party, the Tories, but those of the Labour
Party as well.
The three issues which will be voted on at this year’s
Conference are vital if the Party as a whole is going to have any
control over its representatives in Parliament. Labour MPs must be
the representatives of the Party. Although in election law parties do
not officially exist, in reality the overwhelming majority of voters
vote for the Party, not the individual candidate.
The reality is, that in the years of post-war boom, when the
majority of workers were politically quiescent, the Parliamentary
Labour Party was largely taken over by middle-class professionals –
lawyers, doctors, academics and the like – who saw the Labour Party
primarily as a vehicle for their own parliamentary and possibly
ministerial careers.
Neither they, not their Fleet Street friends, complained when they
were selected by general management committees that were often small,
inactive and out of touch with working class voters.
 
How many right-wingers – like Brown, Marsh, Taverne, Jenkins,
and a host of others – climbed up the ladder via the Labour Party
and then, as soon as they got the chance, jumped into well-paid
business appointments or state sinecures, repudiating Labour and
declaring in favour of a “centre party” or the Tory Party itself?
Newham NE Labour Party’s battle to oust Prentice, who vigorously
resisted re-selection – backed by the Tory press and infiltrators
financed by the National Association of Freedom – was completely
vindicated by his defection to the Tories.
Yet, whenever a party attempts to call its MP to account, there
are howls of anguish from the right-wingers who assert a divine right
to their seat so long as Labour holds the constituency.
They are backed by the media because the capitalist class fear
that the respectable gentlemen of what they were used to regarding as
their “second eleven” are going to be replaced by parliamentary
representatives who will stand by the policies of the party – and
act as tribunes for a working class determined to fight the
capitalists’ assault of their living standards and rights.
 
The right wing have repeatedly made it clear that they defend the
misnamed ‘mixed economy’, that is the capitalist system. They are
opposed, in reality, to any attempt to put into practice Clause IV,
part 4 of the Party’s constitution, the kernel of the Party’s
basic socialist aims.
It is because the right wing stand on the basis of defending
capitalism that Reg Prentice so easily fitted in with the Tories, the
party of big business. This is why since 1976 NATO has given £32,335
to the right-wing’s ‘Labour and Trade Union Press Service’.
Labour Party members understand that if we are going to avoid
repeating the experiences of 1964–70 and 1974–79 then it is
essential that full Party control is established over Labour MPs.
In the same way, the Party as a whole, through its elected
National Executive, must be able to decide what goes in the election
manifesto and elect the Party leader. Many Labour MPs have for too
long considered themselves a law unto themselves. Now it is time to
bring them under the control of the Party as a whole.
 
On the election of the Party leader, the National Executive
Committee is likely first to put before the Conference a resolution
which will establish the principle that the leader should be elected
by the party as a whole, not just as at present by Labour MPs. If
this is passed, Conference will then discuss a resolution that the
leader be elected at the Annual Conference, with the trade unions
having 50% of the total, and the Labour MPs and Constituency Labour
Parties 25% each.
There will be two amendments to this motion: the first will say
that the voting should take place as a normal card vote; and the
second that the votes should be equally distributed, with the trade
unions, Labour MPs and CLPs each getting a third of the total vote.
After the amendments have been voted upon, the final resolution will
itself be put to the vote.
Because it is vital to safeguard the character of the Labour Party
as a party based on the trade unions, Militant will be calling
on delegates, after voting in favour of the principle of the Party
electing the leader, to support the first amendment to the NEC
resolution.
If that is defeated, then delegates should oppose the ‘three
thirds’ proposal because it would further weaken the trade unions’
position. However, Militant will call on delegates to vote in
favour of whatever final resolution emerges, because any change that
allows the party as a whole to elect the leader would be a step
forward from the present situation.
This Party Conference could mark a big advance towards
establishing real democratic control. But victory on the
constitutional issues will not in itself mark the end of the struggle.
For decades, since 1918, the goal of the Labour Party has been to
transform society, to lay the foundations of a socialist society. The
current crisis of capitalism is a living proof that we are still
faced with this task today.
But in order to achieve that ambition, it is necessary also to
transform the Labour Party into a mass, socialist Labour Party – a
party with a mass membership, firmly based among working people,
committed to implementing a socialist programme, and with a socialist leadership.
The task which still lies before us is the dual one of rebuilding
the mass membership of the Party and committing both the Party and
its leaders to a rounded-out socialist policy.
 




As the Chairman himself said, the opening session of this year’s
Southern Region Labour Party Conference was one of the quietest in
memory. But that soon changed when the delegate from new Forest CLP
moved a resolution calling for the annual re-adoption of MPs. It was
carried overwhelmingly, despite the Executive’s opposition.
Another resolution rejecting the idea of state aid to political
parties was moved by Rod Fitch, Brighton Kemptown. He pointed out
that state aid would mean the leadership would become more
independent from the rank and file than they are now.
He closed with a fighting contribution with this declaration,
“Don’t go to the state cap in hand, come to the movement and we
will provide the means and I will tell you how to get the finance.
Carry out the Manifesto, stop attacking our living standards and
carry through a socialist programme.”
In the general debate delegate after delegate came to the rostrum
to demand MPs be responsible to the rank and file and pointing out
that the problem of party finance was a political question. “Let
them live on workers’ wages and give the remainder to the party,”
demanded one delegate.
The housing debate graphically illustrated the lunacy of 350,000
building and supply workers being on the dole while hundreds of
thousands were desperately in need of a home. The EETPU put forward a
resolution calling on the Government to increase the house building programme.
 
Housing
But as Terry Pearce and Ian Warwick, the delegates from Wokingham
point out, to provide the funds without crippling repayments to the
moneylenders we must nationalise the financial institutions.
Conference agreed and passed an amendment calling on the
government to take into public ownership the financial institutions
and the building and building supply industries.
Conference also passed a resolution supporting the LPYS Spanish
Young Socialists Defence Campaign and a collection was held (details
next week).
The debate on the economy was the liveliest of the Conference and
to say the government’s policies were given a hammering would be an
understatement. Resolutions were passed that rejected the idea that a
redistribution of wealth in favour of working people could be
achieved through wage restraint whether voluntary or compulsory.
A successful manoeuvre to prevent voting on an emergency
resolution rejecting the Budget and the proposed 3% limit on wage
increases was met by loud booing from the delegates. The trade union
officials, not wanting to be tied by this policy and knowing they
couldn’t persuade their delegations to vote against the resolution,
didn’t want it to be discussed.
A contradictory resolution calling for selective import controls
and stricter controls over investment abroad on the one hand and
public ownership of the monopolies, banks and financial institutions
on the other, was passed. But if public ownership and control of
industries and banks is really the aim, the first two points become
superfluous as we would be in control of trade and investment anyway.
 
Alternative
The resolution from Portsmouth North and Brighton Kemptown,
carried overwhelmingly, was much clearer, calling for an enabling act
to carry out the immediate nationalisation of the 200 monopolies,
banks and finance houses and a socialist plan of production.
The Conference has rejected the government’s policies and drawn
up the socialist alternative. This should now be fought for in all
sections of the trade union and labour movement.
 




The 30th annual meeting of the Southern Region of the Labour
Party takes place in Worthing this weekend. The agenda reflects the
growing opposition from the rank and file to the policies being
carried out by the Labour government.
Cuts in public expenditure come in for the harshest criticism.
Resolution after resolution deplores the effect the cuts will have on
services and employment.
On unemployment, the motion from AUEW (TASS) no. 26
Divisional Council, says that it “pledges increased support for the
campaign against unemployment and factory closures. The myth must be
shattered that unemployment is a necessary evil to solve the economic
problems of capitalism.”
An amendment from Eastbourne CLP outlines the way the fight
against unemployment should be developed:
“We believe that redundancies can be halted by the
immediate nationalisation of factories threatening closure without
compensation and re-instatement of the workforce. We also demand the
opening of the books and work sharing with no loss of pay in the case
of redundancies without factory closures.
“This economic crisis is the crisis of capitalism and
capitalism must pay for any hardship caused by redundancies or closures.”
Eastbourne CLP also takes up the blocking role of the House of
Lords and calls for its abolition. The question of the democratic
control of Labour Members of Parliament is taken up by the New Forest
CLP who “endorse the view that Labour MPs and prospective
candidates should be subject to annual re-adoption.”
Fareham CLP in an amendment demands that MPs “should only
receive the average wage of a skilled worker as well as receiving
necessary expenses these to be audited by the labour movement.”
Hastings CLP condemns the Labour government for sending a
representative to the funeral of the fascist dictator Franco, and
calling for support to be given to the LYPS campaign on Spain.
There are a number of resolutions that call for a return to
Labour’s Manifesto and take up the question of wage
restraint in a capitalist society.
The amendment from Brighton Kemptown CLP to the resolution from
Portsmouth North, points the way forward for the labour movement.
“Growing unemployment coupled with falling living
standards and collapsing social services demand emergency action. A
bold socialist programme is needed. This meeting calls for enabling
legislation to carry out the nationalisation with minimum
compensation under workers’ control and management of the 200 or so
monopolies banks and finance houses which control the economy. The
investment strike, the anarchy and wastefulness of capitalism could
then be ended and replaced with a socialist plan of production which
would end the stupidity of 1½ million unemployed at the same time as
plant lies idle and achieve an irreversible shift in the balance of
wealth and power in favour of working people and their families.”
 




The 1976 Conference must be seen as one of the most important
for decades. It marks a watershed in the development of the labour
movement and in the life expectancy of the Labour government itself.
An atmosphere of crisis permeated the Winter Gardens and the ghost
of Ramsay MacDonald haunted the corridors of the Imperial Hotel.
At the TUC conference opposition to government policy was
expressed in muted terms, and the social contract was endorsed by a
massive majority. In the eyes of the government the scheme must have
seemed to be set fair for the party conference. In advance
resolutions concerning mandatory reselection of parliamentary
candidates and resolutions on nationalisation of the big monopolies
had been removed from the agenda using the guise of the archaic
‘three year rule’. With this example of blatant political
censorship and with careful stage management, the leadership hoped
that government policy would be endorsed by conference establishing
firmly the party leader.
After they had successfully defeated a number of attempts to get
the excluded resolutions back on the agenda, their hopes appeared to
be confirmed. They could not have been more wrong. The bitterness,
anger and frustration which has been building up in the ranks of the
movement could not be contained. It burst through time after time in
the course of the debates.
The decision to nationalise the top banks and insurance companies
cannot be overestimated. The National Executive document, despite the
abstention of the TGWU, GMWU and ASTMS, was carried by 3,314,000 to
526,000 – a six to one majority.
Bill Mullins [Solihull] moved a resolution which called for
the whole of the banking and insurance industry to be brought into
public ownership. Referring to the NEC document, he pointed out that
this was the first time that the party had proposed to nationalise a
profitable sector of the economy. “The frothing at the mouth that
had followed the announcement of the nationalisation plans showed
that Labour had touched a raw nerve. For the monopolies have played
about in the currency markets and have made hundreds of millions of
pounds.”
The conference made their decisions despite enormous pressure. The
hysterical ranting of the City of London, the withdrawal of support
for the pound by the Bank of England, the blackmail by its
international counterparts, and the dire warnings of the Tory press
were all to no avail.
Tumultuous applause greeted the closing sentence of Mikardo’s
speech when he said “the Prime Minister said he will oppose the
proposals, I myself will support them, and that makes it one all. Now
I want Conference to score the winning goal”.
 
Prentice
When the results was announced, the sombre face of Callaghan
contrasted starkly with the joyous feeling that spread through the
conference floor. An enormous unbridgeable gap has opened up between
the ranks of the movement and the right wing Cabinet led by Callaghan.
This was also demonstrated by the attempt to get Prentice
reinstated as the Parliamentary candidate for Newham North East led
by Frank Chapple from the EETPU. This move was rejected with a
derisory handful of votes in favour. Throughout conference
differences were expressed in a way not seen since the period 1929–31.
On the first day there is no question that the opponents of the
social contract won the argument. But the platform won the vote. Ted
Mooney [Liverpool, Walton] said inflation was running at a yearly
rate of 21% based on last month’s figures. This was despite two
years of wage restraint, which had led to a fall in living standards
of 8%. This showed that wage increases were not the cause of inflation.
Mike Levene [Coventry South West] challenged Denis Healey’s
forecast of 6% growth. “This is completely utopian”, he said .
“And so was his forecast that unemployment would fall to 700,000 by 1978.”
Pat Wall [Shipley] complained that successive incomes
policies and wage freezes since 1961 had done nothing to help the low
paid or strengthen the economy.
 
Social Contract
Neither Bryan Stanley who replied for the National
Executive nor anybody from the rostrum denied these arguments.
Instead the platform invoked a theme they were to use again and again
during the conference – ‘Opposition to wage restraint or the
social contract would bring down the Labour government and let in the
Tories.’
But it is precisely these policies which are a sure recipe for the
defeat of a Labour government. Socialist policies would strengthen
that government. Nevertheless the burning anger about unemployment
mounted as delegate after delegate complained to the government for
allowing unemployment to rise to one and a half million. Delegates
demanded that the government take immediate action. As one pointed
out, determined action was supposed to have been taken to halt
unemployment under the terms of the social contract. But all the
contribution of Albert Booth, the Employment Minister, amounted to
was that ‘we are as worried as you are’ ‘there are no easy
answers but we must stick to the social contract!’
 
Hostility
The press deliberately distorted the mood at Conference. In the
main the reception given to Healey after his speech on the IMF loan
on Thursday was one of hostility, and the TV cameras must have had a
difficult job finding groups of delegates who could be viewed as
‘enthusiastic supporters’ of his speech. The attempt by some of
his Cabinet colleagues to stage a standing ovation fell flat.
Delegates were furious when Healey tried to save face and stood up
and waved his hands in the air like a victorious prize fighter for
the benefit of the TV cameras.
So too with Callaghan’s speech on Tuesday morning. The reception
could best be described as cool. It was a speech that was a throwback
to the days of Gaitskell. His pugnacious bully-boy arguments could
have been made by any Tory Prime Minister. The speech amounted to a
vigorous defence of the profit motive and a call for sweat, toil and
tears by the working class in order to save capitalism from collapse.
Eric Heffer put it at the Tribune Meeting: “What are members
of the National Executive to say to a speech which the Daily Mail
can represent as a speech that would have sounded well enough from a
Tory Prime Minister with his back to the economic wall.”
The mood of delegates in itself was a reflection of the mood in
the CLPs and trade union branches. It built up to a crescendo in the
debate on cuts in public expenditure. The motion from the National
Union of Public Employees backed local councils which refused to cut
public expenditure and called for a campaign by the labour and trade
union movement against the cuts. It was carried by a large majority.
It was of enormous diplomatic importance, showing the contradictions
inherent in the political situation. On the one hand conference voted
for the maintenance of the social contract and on the other hand they
voted against one of its most important aspects in the eyes of the government.
Whatever the confusion it must be without precedent in the
history of the Labour Party that the party conference has
called on Labour councillors to refuse to implement the policies of
their own government!
 
Revolt
This is another graphic illustration of the rising revolt of the
rank and file against the policies of the right wing Cabinet. Their
sole basis of support now resides in the Parliamentary Party.
This conference showed in outline many uncanny a parallel with the
period before the formation of the National government in 1931. There
were open clashes between left and right and violent altercations
between members of the NEC which were leaked to the press. There was
great disenchantment within the trade unions. There were heated
discussions in trade union delegations sometimes boiling over into
angry shouting matches. Rumour and counter rumour circulated the
hall. This was commented on by the Chairman in his closing remarks
and also in the press.
Conference is no more than a reflection of the processes
developing in the labour movement itself. It signposts the general
direction in which the labour movement in heading. The sign of this
year’s conference is unmistakable! “Warning coalition ahead!”
 
Spending Cuts
Referring to the conditions required for the new £2,300 million
loan from the IMF, the Guardian on Friday said:
“There is much apprehension at Blackpool this week, as
much amongst the ‘social democrats’ as on the left. A further
round of heavy spending cuts coming on previous cuts which all too
clearly have failed to deliver dividends in retaining confidence will
make it impossible for Mr Jones and Mr Foot to hold the line ...
“... today they have all gone home from Blackpool
leaving behind a party more at war with itself than any time since
the days of Gaitskell ... the Prime Minister and the great majority
of his colleagues in the Cabinet and the Parliamentary Party are not
in business to proclaim the breakdown of capitalism and engineer the
arrival of a fully fledged socialist society. If that means civil
war, the government against the party, then so be it.”
 
Conspiracy
All this is a terrible warning to the ranks of the movement which
they will ignore at their peril. There is a substantial number of
Labour members of Parliament who would cross the floor of the House
and join the Tories without looking out of place. The conspiracies
against the labour movement that are taking place behind the scenes
will not be defeated by making concessions to the right wing. It is
only by the NEC alerting the party to these dangers and boldly
mobilising the ranks of the movement behind a socialist programme to
transform society, that the conspiracy to split the labour movement
can be defeated.
 




On Monday the Labour Party Conference took a vote in favour of
the “social contract” policy of the government. But this hid an
underlying mood of bitterness among delegates. This mood was
reflected particularly in the debates on unemployment and the cuts.
There is anxiety and confusion among the rank and file over what
programme and strategy should be adopted. It was exhibited in the
contradictions between the response of delegates to speeches from the
floor and some of the votes that followed.
Ted Mooney [Walton CLP] moved a composite on incomes policy
which called for a 35 hour week and £50 a week minimum wage tied to
the cost of living. He argued that no matter what the sacrifices
workers were called upon to make, the capitalists would not invest in
manufacturing industry. He quoted the Economist:
“Industry may be deciding that it is mad to expand
capacity and employ more labour for a rate of return in profits
currently around 3–4%. Money put into gilts will effectively yield
13–14%.”
Pat Wall [Shipley CLP] who is also President of Bradford
Trades Council, was given a tremendous ovation from conference. In a
fighting speech, he outlined how the social contract had resulted in
a 8% fall in living standards. Unemployment was now one million and a
half and still rising.
“None of the successive wage policies since 1961,” he
said, “has done anything to strengthen the economy or help the low
paid. Only the taking over of the commanding heights of the economy
could achieve the manifesto aim of a fundamental shift in the balance
of wealth and power in favour of working people.”
Heather Rawling [Leceister South] and a member of the
Labour Party Young Socialists was also given resounding applause by
delegates. She called for socialist policies to deal with
unemployment. Unemployment had affected the youth very badly.
209,000 youngsters were on the dole. “It is bad enough,” she
said, “to be thrown on the scrap heap at 60 or 65. But at 16 it is
a real tragedy.”
Bryan Stanley, on replying on behalf of the National
Executive, was forced to take up Pat Wall’s contribution. But he
did not name him. Stanley said that the claim that opposition to
government policy was building up in the rank and file was not true.
Bryan Stanley pointed to the support that the trade unions had given
to the policy. Some union conferences had voted for the social
contract against the advice of their own executives.
But what else could be expected when no alternative was put to
trade unionists? As they would see it, if they did not go along with
the policy, there would be anarchy, chaos and the return of a Tory
government. It was this trust and loyalty of workers that had been so
successfully played upon by the Labour and trade union leadership.
The ‘left’ offered no alternative.
But now this situation was changing, the loyalty of the rank and
file is not a blind one. Every day that passes makes clear to workers
that the policy is a failure. Rather than solving their problems it
makes them worse.
The debate on the cuts coincided with lobbies outside against the
cuts and unemployment. It was a better indication of the future
fighting approach of the labour movement. A motion which rejected the
public expenditure cuts called for unity by the labour and trade
union movement to resist the cuts. This was carried despite the
attempts of the NEC to have it remitted.
 
Disillusionment
Alan Fisher [NUPE] moving the composite, warned conference
that the cuts, if carried through, could lead to disillusionment.
This would lead to the destruction of the Labour Party at the next
General Election.
“There is no shortage of money to invest,” he said,
“the problem is to get that money directed into investment. To
bring this about there had to be public control of the banks and
financial institutions. If the cuts went ahead the resolutions passed
on pensions, health and education would not be worth the paper they
were written on. It will jeopardise the social contract. It will make
a major increase in unemployment.”
Geoff Cuthbert [Cardiff North West] said that “on
travelling to Blackpool, I read in the paper that Jim Callaghan
referred to the NEC proposals on the nationalisation of the banks as
an ‘albatross around our necks.’ I disagree with this, I believe
that an albatross is already there: the cuts in public expenditure.”
The composite called for Labour councils to refuse to implement the
cuts.
The speech by the Prime Minister, Jim Callaghan, on Tuesday
could have been made by a Tory or Liberal. There was not an atom of
socialism in anything he had to say. Even his attack on racialism
which drew the only enthusiastic applause from the delegates was
followed by a call for strict control over immigration. He obviously
intends to carry out Tory policies in the interests of the capitalist system.
At one point in his speech he asked delegates to hold on to their
seats in order to take in what he was about to say. He said:
“The willingness of industry to invest is due partly to
overcoming inflation but also depends on industry being left with
sufficient funds and I mean by that that they are able to earn a
surplus which is an euphemism for saying that they must make a
profit. If industry cannot generate new funds to buy plant and
machinery we will not get any investment and Britain will continue to
go downhill.”
Obviously Callaghan will pursue any policy in a pragmatic way that
he thinks will help to prop up capitalism. He does not consider the
cost to working people and the unity of the party.
 
Tribune Group
Callaghan angered delegates when he made a disgraceful attack on
the elected NEC, the ‘Tribune Group’ and the Labour Party Young
Socialists. This conflicted glaringly with his earlier statement that
he wanted the closest possible relationship between the party and the
government based ‘on mutual respect’. He said:
“I believe that the relationship between the TUC and
the government has developed faster than the relationship between the
government and the NEC. But I do not want to retreat behind the stock
phrase that the government must govern and the NEC must go to hell.”
But there is blurted out precisely what he is saying! By ‘mutual
respect’ he means ‘do what I say or else.’ He suggested that
the NEC should include local government representatives on its body.
He said there should be an investigation by the party into so-called
“socialist sectarians” who have infiltrated the party. He said
nothing about the Liberals and the Tories who have infiltrated over
the years. Then he went on to say that he is not in favour of witch hunts!
He said “Is the party satisfied with the youth movement which
has only half the branches that it had ten years ago and is dominated
by a single brand of socialist sectarianism?” We might ask him if he
is satisfied with the loss of 16,984 members of the adult party since
1974, with many parties just shells of organisations and only 650,000
individual members out of a potential 11 million now organised in
trade unions who could be members?
Signs of the mood of the rank and file were expressed in the
stormy applause at the announcement that Norman Atkinson, the Tribune
MP, had defeated one of the main supporters of government policy,
Eric Varley, for the job of party treasurer. Also conference
overwhelmingly rejected the appeals of Reg Prentice and Frank Tomney
against the decision of their constituency parties not to reselect
them as candidates for the next election.
There was a big reception for the speech of Tony Benn. He said
that the party was “paying the price of thirty years playing down
the criticism of capitalism, while soft peddling its advocacy of
socialism. The socialist programme of nationalisation put forward in
the 1945 election united the party and led to an overwhelming victory
in those elections.”
The Militant meeting on Tuesday was packed out with over
two hundred delegates and visitors, some from the lobby that took
place against the cuts. £95 was raised for the Fighting Fund.
 




Unemployment is rising at an alarming rate. Official figures,
delayed through action by Government clerical workers, thinly
disguise the spectre stalking millions of worker’s homes.
Estimates of three quarters of a million already on the dole
have been made. The West Midlands Confederation of British Industry
are making ‘contingency plans’ for one million out of work.
But these numbers are daily supplemented by those on short time
working. The Daily Mirror (11/1/74) said that “thousands of
firms are putting their staffs on short time working ... hundreds of
thousands of people are now working a four and a three day week. And
some firms are openly saying that their workers may have to go on a
two day week.”
This means that millions of working class people face sharp cuts
in income. Overtime, on which millions rely for a living wage, is
being cut back on a wide-scale.
At the same time, prices are increasing faster than ever. The
Daily Mirror Shopping Clock passed £9 – their basket
of groceries now costs 83½p in the pound more than in November 1970!
 
Prices
Price increases in the pipe line are immense. Fuel, transport,
post and the passing on to the workers of increased prices in the
nationalised industries as a result of the budget, will al pinch hard
in the next couple of months.
Against this background, Denis Healey, Chancellor of the Exchequer
in a Labour Government, had the affrontery to say:
“It is far better that more people should be in work,
even if that means accepting lower wages on average, than those who
are lucky enough to keep their jobs should scoop the pool while
millions are living on the dole.”
To those just laid off, such words must seem bitter mockery.
“Lucky enough to keep their jobs!” What a phrase for a Labour
Minister to use! It’s straight out of the book of the employing
class who think they are doing the workers a favour by providing them
with work. No wonder it was so warmly received in those circles!
Neither is it accidental that the speech was made only hours after
Healey and Wilson had met the CBI leaders, who left the meeting
saying they felt “optimistic and encouraged.”
So they should be when Labour leaders are so pliable as to dance
directly to their tune!
To use Healey’s own words, “That is what the social contract
is all about.” All the discussions about the need to “strengthen
its guidelines” comes down to that. In the eyes of Big Business,
workers’ standards have not been held back enough. Mounting
pressure is on the Labour Government to hold back wages by one means
or another. The threat of massive unemployment is an additional whip
to crack over the heads of workers considering how to maintain their
living standards.
The Sun newspaper spells it out:
“Increased welfare benefits, full employment,
maintained living standards and a wages free-for-all, however
desirable, are too many sacred cows ... Something has to go ...
so-called ‘free collective bargaining’ is the least important.” (11/1/74).
A clamour about the dangers of recession, bankruptcies and
horrific levels of unemployment is reaching deafening proportions.
But what is never said is this: whose crisis is it? If the rich few
who own and control productive industry in Britain who in fact
control society, face a crisis, then why should the working class be
presented with the bill?
Through the mass media the workers are alternatively cajoled then
threatened, in a process designed to prepare them to accept lower
standards. That is the essence of Healey’s speech. And all this is
to prop up a system which can offer no future to working people in
Britain or internationally.
 
Europe
It may seem surprising but the rate of unemployment (officially
and before Christmas) was lower in Britain than in almost any other
capitalist country in Europe apart from Sweden. Even Australia has an
admitted rate of over 4% – a post war record.
More than anything, that reflects the power of the trade union
movement in Britain to resist redundancies. But now the dam is
beginning to leak. No longer can the bosses hold back from attempting
to enforce their will.
This enormous power, just hinted at by the Shrewsbury lobby (see
other report) can and must be mobilised to enforce its will.
No level of unemployment is acceptable; neither are lower wages. If
the bosses cannot even guarantee a full weeks’ work then the
leaders of the trade unions, and of the movement in general must use
that as an argument to expose the rottenness of the whole capitalist system.
Already some trade union leaders have begun to echo the fears and
anger of their members. Healey’s speech was repudiated by Jack
Jones, Hugh Scanlon and Clive Jenkins along with numerous other trade
union leaders and left wing MP’s. But what they have not done is
campaign to explain that the threat to jobs and standards follows
directly from the crisis of the capitalist system and consequently,
mobilise the movement around a socialist programme to take society
out of the hands of the rich and put it into the hands of working people.
It is not enough to lambaste Healey and the other Labour leaders
for giving in to the pressure of the bankers and businessmen. What
else would they do if, as they do, they start from the position of
defending the so called ‘mixed economy’ which again and again has
been proved to mean the rule of a handful of big monopolies?
 
Profits
Big Business invests and produces for a profit. If profits are
squeezed, then they will cutback. But profit is the unpaid labour of
the working class, and so to increase profits it is necessary to hold
down real wages and social spending (Increased profits on the basis
of raising ‘productivity’ through new investment raises exactly
the same question. They will only invest if they are confident of the
future profits).
That is why the CBI were shouting so much before the budget which
handed them Â£1,600 million, now being paid for by the workers.
That is why to argue that the problem would be solved simply by
raising wages to increase consumption, as does Hugh Scanlon (echoed
in the editorial of the Morning Star on Monday, January 13th)
is insufficient.
The reaction of workers is to fight redundancy with any weapon at
hand; to demand work sharing; if necessary to occupy the factory. But
the demand for work-sharing under present conditions faces us with
the furious resistance of the bosses to such measures. Their idea is
to ‘share out the misery’ – among the workers, not including
themselves they would hasten to add. Socialists would argue for no
redundancies, sharing the work and no loss of pay – at a minimum a
guarantee of average earnings including overtime.
Although the question has been taken up by many union leaders who
declare opposition to redundancies, they fail to follow it through to
its conclusion – the need to nationalise the factories under
workers control and management as the only guarantee of jobs.
This allows capitalist ‘thinkers’ like Peter Jay of the Times
to turn the argument on its head:
“Given that limitation (e.g. the crisis in Britain) it
is argued the only way to keep unemployment in check, is to share the
available income and earnings and opportunities as evenly as
possible. One man’s pay increase becomes another man’s or his
own, unemployment” (14/1/75).
And the leadership of the Labour Party seem to substantially agree
with this!
The Labour movement has to answer with all its might that the
‘limitation’ of the capitalist system and its crisis are no
acceptable. If the employers cannot afford the worker to be shared
out with no loss of pay, then that is an argument for taking them
over, and running them in accordance with a democratic plan of production.

OPPOSE ALL REDUNDANCIES AND SHORT TIME WORKING
 
SHARE OUT THE WORK WITH NO LOSS OF PAY
 
NATIONALISE THE 250 MONOPOLIES WITH COMPENSATION PAID
ONLY ON THE BASIS OF PROVEN NEED

 




An article appeared in The Observer of the 31 August 1975 in which its author Nora Beloff attempted to discredit the supporters of this paper – the Militant. Many rank and file Labour and Trade Union members must have asked themselves why The Observer should have chosen to use its front page to launch an attack on us, to be followed by a gaggle of geese by other papers up and down the country.
The answer is obvious of course. They see growing support for our ideas. They see working people more and more prepared to struggle to protect their jobs and living standards. They see their friends on the right wing of the Labour Party coming under pressure from the rank and file. They see their hold over the Party slipping and they dread the future. Therefore they need a bogey to try and provoke a witch-hunt, as if that would stop the elemental movement of the working class anyhow.
We are confident that the Party will refuse to be stampeded by the Tory press. We express our ideas in an open fashion. We make no secret of our determination to struggle for a fighting leadership and a democratic socialist Britain. In the best traditions of the Labour Movement we will test our ideas in open debate, as Nora Beloff in the worst traditions of the capitalist press will fight for its millionaire owners against any move to the left in the Labour Movement, using any method, as an examination of her material over the years will show.
For example, she wrote:
“At his request I have agreed to withdraw my suggestion that he had promised to support direct action to make the Trade Union Bill unworkable since this might give the impression that he was personally inciting violence.”
The above quote was taken from an article written by Nora Beloff for The Observer on the 5 December 1970. Who is she referring to? The writer of this article? One of the readers of Militant? A mysterious conspirator?
No. In the above case the person in question was none other than Harold Wilson. In the same article which appeared on the 5 December 1970, she went on to say:
“Politicians like poets must be allowed rhetorical licence.”
I think that quote could be well applied to some political columnists, not least Nora Beloff.
“I am sorry to trouble you again (I’m not normally a great one for writing to the papers) but I must remark that your Miss Beloff in a frantic desire to avoid admitting she could conceivably be wrong tries to wriggle out of one gross inaccuracy by perpetuating another. Her second shot at attributing to me, without quoting a shred of evidence – opinions I have never held or expressed is as baseless as the first.”
“Her standard of accuracy is evident by the fact that she wrote that the ‘Tribune’ Group is smaller in this Parliament than the last and when I wrote to tell you it’s bigger she rests her case on some third parties who believe it is weaker in this Parliament than the last. The second hand beliefs of third parties are no substitute for the facts.”
The above quote is an extract from a letter which appeared in The Observer. Who wrote the letter? The supporters of this paper complaining about a recent article? Wrong again. This particular letter appeared on the 13 of June 1971 and was written by Ian Mikardo. Despite the fact that Ian Mikardo was a member of the Tribune group, and I think could claim to know what his own opinions are and the size of the group he belonged to. Nore Beloff apparently knew better.
I think that the two quotes I have given would be sufficient to show how much reliance should be placed on Nora Beloff’s assessment of leading figures in the Labour Movement. Her account of the role they play and political views they hold should be treated with extreme scepticism to say the least, as they would be by any honest thinking member of the Labour Movement. Since when did the capitalist press and its millionaire Tory owners ever espouse the cause and interests of the Labour Movement and the working people.
The capitalist press will always seek to misrepresent and discredit any Labour figure that reflects and represents, even if only for a given period , a movement of the working class, which seems to the employers to threaten their profits and questions their power and what they consider is their right to rule.
For example, Nora Beloff on the 1970 Labour Party Conference wrote:
“The dominating figure at this years Labour Party Conference has been Mr. Jack Jones. Mr. Jones behaved as if the platform were a dock and Mr. Wilson and his colleagues self-evident traitors to the socialist cause.
“Mr. Jones succeeded in getting the Conference to reject out of hand any ideas of incomes policy.
“The first question that needs to be asked is how far the Party’s rank and file share Mr. Jones’ Red Flag definition of socialism.”
She went on to say:
“Judging by the motions adopted and rejected at Conference the Labour Party might seem to be lurching wildly to the left.”
The thought that the Labour Party might be moving to the left fills Nora Beloff with horror and in this she accurately reflects the concern and fear felt by the ruling class. They see the danger, posed to them and their system, now that their hold over the Party through the right wing leadership being challenged by a re-awakening of the rank and file of the Party, this might lead to the selection of representatives more sympathetic and understanding to the problems of the working class!
In the same article she went on to say,
“Union leaders dispose hundreds of thousands of votes representing members who are not even consulted.
“Real people (she said) would not want a Labour Government to frame its policies in accordance with decisions of a Conference dominated by union bosses.”
Can we expect her to say the same about the TUC decision to accept the £6 limit and the cut in living standards that goes with it? I somehow doubt that, although if the decision had gone the other way the whole of the capitalist press would have screamed in unison that the “Union Bosses”, to use Nora Beloffs expression, did not represent the views of their membership.
She continued:
“Mr Jones specifically declared he would oppose any form of wage planning until capitalism was abolished and replaced by a fully collectivised people’s democracy. In this he claimed to be speaking for the masses, though it might seem relevant that only 0.1% voted Communist at the last election.”
“It might seem relevant that only 0.1% voted Communist” says Nora Beloff, note the innuendo, the attempt to discredit the views expressed by Jack Jones at the time, by the hoary old red scare tactic. In the same article Nora Beloff quoted Hugh Scanlon as saying “If the Tory assaults on the Trade Unions are to be repulsed we will need the support of everyone in the Labour Movement.” She goes on to say:
“But can the Labour Party afford to support them? The Parliamentary group know how damaging it would be for the party to be tied up with union militancy.”
Her concern for the Labour Party is really touching, but notice the reminder to the Parliamentary Party of where their duty lies, just in case some of them forget it.
The right wing of the Party can always rely on Nora Beloff to advise them. For instance on the 29 November 1969 she wrote:
“Left wing union and constituency reps combined yesterday to ensure that the Government policy towards the Common Market will get a rough passage at the Conference when it is debated ... But as before the Government need take no notice of resolutions.”
She was referring to the composite resolution on the Common Market moved by the T&GWU. We had noticed Labour Governments are inclined to ignore our Conference decisions Miss Beloff, but no doubt they are gratified that you noticed and approved.
Nora Beloff is also very concerned about the independence of Labour MPs as she wrote on October 31, 1971:
“The left wing are making no secret of their determination to impose extra-Parliamentary controls over the Parliamentary Party. In last weeks debate Mr. Norman Atkinson of the ‘Tribune’ Group insisted because the Labour Party represents a variety of opinions it must accept the rank and file decisions taken outside Parliament.
“The threats to the independence of MPs come not only from the party’s former chairman the extremist Mr. Ian Mikardo, but also his successor Mr. Anthony Wedgwood Benn, now as dedicated as he was to the concept of imposing militant control over elected representatives.”
On October 3, 1971, in an article entitled Why they gun for Jenkins she wrote:
“Conference is now left wing Marxist dominated… The Labour left which wants to exploit public anger about the economic situation is certainly helped by Mr. Heath’s calculated abandonment of what used to be called consensus politics. Rage over the apparent managerial indifference to the spread of unemployment and what can only be called distressed areas has given a new impetus to the left wing leaders, Mr. Hugh Scanlon and Jack Jones who advocate not reform but overthrow of the present mixed economic system. (my emphasis).
“Conference cannot of course force its decisions on the PLP, MPs are responsible to the electorate not conference.”
Again on October 10, 1971, in an article entitled Nora Beloff our political correspondent tells how the Party dealt with its Red Guard. She waxed lyrical:
“The Party’s Red Guard – helped by Ian Mikardo’s partisan chairmanship (note the insinuation), the voting strength of the militantly Marxist Trade Union leaders and the dedication of ‘Tribune’ fundamentalists mounted an all-out anti-Jenkins campaign ... But in a magnificent display of revived political virtuosity Harold Wilson neutralised them at least temporarily.”
Miss Beloff can be relied upon to rush to the defence of the so-called ‘moderates’ and lash out at anybody who dares to suggest that Labour Party Conference should determine policy or that the rank and file of the Party should have control over Labour MPs. They must be independent, independent to ignore all those who worked so hard to put them there, independent to abandon the Party Manifesto, independent in other words to carry out the needs and dictates of Big Business and their mouth-pieces in the press.
In an article entitled How class warriors are using Europe in trying to take over the Labour Party she wrote on October 31, 1971:
“The Common Market now has shaken Labour to its foundations, produced a mood of turbulence and rage and brought to a head the struggle for control between the moderate Parliamentarians and the hard line class warriors.”
 
Renee Short “Extremist”
“What is at stake is not whether Roy Jenkins and his friends win next months elections for the shadow cabinet (though the vote will be highly significant) it is whether MPs directly responsible to the electorate are to retain control over party politics or whether the Common Market row will provide the chance take-over by the left wing extremists who repudiate the two fundamentals of modern Britain, a mixed economy and a Parliamentary democracy.”
And she goes on to say:
“Ever since the ultra left won control of the major unions – and thus the block vote over Conference – there have been sporadic but always unsuccessful efforts to capture the Party.
“Left wing extremist Mrs. Renee Short exposed the reality last weekend when she publicly repudiated the whole Wilson era and called for an end to the mixed economy – which could only mean the nationalisation of everything.”
I’m sorry if that’s a distortion of what you said Renee, but that’s what Nora Beloff interpreted you as saying and she has demonstrated how unbiased and (to use a journalistic phrase) ‘objective’ she is.
In another article she gives the views of unnamed third parties, a favourite method of Miss Beloff’s when she wants to get a message across:
“A row is brewing in the T&GWU decision to review the record of their 27 sponsored MPs before deciding whether to endorse them again at the next election.
“There are some Labour Organisers including at least one Trade Union leader who believes that the constitutional anomaly of having MPs sponsored by what amounts to private pressure groups must stop.”
Militant will give a prize to any reader who can names the Trade Union Leader and the highest number of Labour Organisers. First prize will be a bound copy of Nora Beloff’s articles, second prize – three copies.
Any move to the left in the Party is faithfully reported in Nora Beloff’s column in a fashion calculated to give the impression that the originators are plotting behind the scenes. For instance she wrote on the 9 June 1968:
“The first combined campaign by left wing politicians and Trade Union leaders to capture the Labour Party has begun. The initiators include two members of the National Executive, Tom Drieberg and Ian Mikardo, as well as the director of Tribune, Michael Foot and the leader of the Transport Workers, Frank Cousins. They hope for a public disavowal of Government policies at Labour Party Conference in the Autumn. Failing this they are ready to dig in and fight a protracted struggle to pull the Party away from what they derisively call consensus politics and back to the class struggle. Many weeks of gestation with private meetings and deals between the various people and groups involved have ended with an agreed text entitled Socialist Charter.
“The organisers tell me their aim is to capture the Party from the bottom up.”
The history of the Labour Movement is littered with scare campaigns from the Zinoviev Letter to Churchill’s claim, splashed in the press, that if Labour won the 1945 election there would be a new Gestapo. But they will be of no avail; no scare stories can hold back the movement of the working class once aroused. In 1945, on programme of nationalisation, Labour had a landslide victory at the polls. In the coming years, the producers of all wealth, the working people, whatever the difficulties, whatever the set backs, will move in their millions against the real conspirators who live off the backs of the workers, the handful of monopolists, property tycoons and press barons.
We would argue that although the media is a powerful weapon in the hands of the ruling class, the real determining factor that will decide the way the working class will move in the future is rooted in the problems of their everyday life, problems which cannot be solved on the basis of capitalism and require a socialist system to solve them. Despite all their capitalist propaganda, they will be unable to halt the struggle for socialism and prevent the new world the workers will build.
The Militant is a valuable weapon in this struggle – a paper, with no millionaire backers, but built on the pennies and shillings of working people. We call on all our readers to help us expand the size and sales of their paper, so we can print the truth and play a part in countering the lies and distortions of the Tory press.
 




The death of Ray Apps at the age of 77 is the loss of a great fighter.
Ray was born and brought up in London but moved to Brighton in the 1950s where he met his future wife Joyce. He worked in many jobs – from market porter to bus conductor – and became active in Brighton Labour Party where, in the 1960s, he came into contact with the ‘Militant’ group (now the Socialist Party).
After long and deep discussions, he became a Marxist and joined Militant; from then on discussion and debate in our ranks, to which he made a major input, informed his work.
Ray was an active trade unionist all his life. When working for the Brighton Evening Argus, he led the van drivers’ branch of the print union NATSOPA. Under his leadership, this disregarded part of the workforce gave management an unwelcome lesson – the editing and printing of a newspaper was nothing if it could not be delivered to newsagents!
But Ray’s main arena for 20 years was the Labour Party. From the 1960s Brighton Labour Party had been a left wing beacon, organising campaign after campaign, putting forward resolution after resolution to the Labour Party conference – in those days a genuine forum for debate, unlike today’s corporate beanfeast.
As delegate from Brighton Kemptown, Ray was probably the best-known rank and file delegate. The high point came when after turmoil following attempts by Labour Party members to unseat MP Reg Prentice, who later defected to the Tories, Labour’s NEC was forced to appoint a special committee to consider a constitutional amendment on this issue.
Ray was delegate to this committee, representing rank and file members, and his debating skill and attention to detail won over the committee. He convinced them to ask the conference to approve a rule change so that local constituency Labour parties would have the right to reselect MPs between elections.
As a regional full-time worker for Militant, and part of its national leadership, Ray was an inspiring leader, prepared to make sacrifices and expecting others to do likewise. Although the kindest of individuals he could be scathing, especially to those he referred to as ‘sick hamster comrades’ after a (possibly mythical) comrade who excused his absence from an important meeting by “Sorry Ray, my hamster was sick”.
The 1980s saw a continuing battle between Militant comrades, who fought to keep the socialist flag flying, and those who wanted to turn Labour into an ‘electable’, big business friendly party.
When Labour won control of Brighton council, three Militant members were among the newly elected councillors. With other left-wingers they formed a ‘rebel’ group who opposed the council’s implementation of the Poll Tax and use of bailiffs, as well as defending the interests of council tenants and workers against the right-wing policies of the Labour group led by Steve Bassam (now Lord Bassam of Brighton). Ray insisted on weekly meetings with the Militant councillors to discuss every issue.
On the instruction of Labour leader Neil Kinnock (now Baron Kinnock of Bedwellty), Brighton Labour Party was suspended and ‘investigated’ by party organiser Joyce Gould (now Baroness Gould of Potternewtown). When Ray and six other Militant supporters were subsequently expelled, an editorial in The Times crowed: “Now the Labour Party Conference is an Apps-Free Zone”.
Ray also recognised that when conditions change, Marxists have to change tactics. The collapse of the Labour Party from a workers’ party at bottom into the “grotesque chaos” of Blair and Brown’s openly capitalist New Labour “project” saw Ray on the side of those, like the present Socialist Party, who recognised this and changed course.
Although this meant rupturing relations with long-term acquaintances, like the late Ted Grant, he fully supported the independent tactics of the Socialist Party and the idea of a new, mass workers’ party.
Ray was always a riveting speaker. In 1969, at a student-led squatter group meeting held upstairs in a pub, Ray – the lone Militant supporter – lambasted the speakers as a gang of petty-bourgeois intellectuals, betraying desperate working class people.
Job done, he decided to slip down for a pint. To his horror, as he walked downstairs he heard the tramp of feet behind him – a large proportion of the 100-strong meeting had taken him to be leading a walkout, and followed him!
Ray is honoured as a working-class leader, a Marxist and a Trotskyist until the day he died. His memory will be cherished by those privileged to know him. He was predeceased by his wife Joyce who had supported him and worked with him for 52 years. We send our condolences to his sons John and Chris and all his family.
 




“It’s no excuse for stealing, but my mum has had a hard life. She has a mortgage to pay and only social security to live on.
“My dad has had three heart attacks; my brother who lives at home has been out of work for over a year and is receiving treatment for severe depression.
“She gave the sweets to our kids, she feels guilty because she can’t give them much. I told her they understand.”
The mum in question was appearing at Brighton Magistrates’ Court charged with stealing £2.79 worth of groceries.
When asked if she had anything to say in answer to the charge she could only manage to say in a barely audible whisper, “I’m sorry, Sir.”
Her married son was speaking on her behalf. You could feel the air potent with suppressed anger, as if everyone wanted to cry out, “Let her go.”
The G&MWU shop steward sitting next to me exclaimed, “How on earth has anyone the right to sit in judgement on that woman.”
There were about 50 dustmen and roadsweepers in the public gallery to support three of their mates, who were next on the list charged with offences arising from their activities on the picket line.
They were fined a total of £100 for fighting to end low pay. One young dustman summed up how most of us felt:
“That could have been any one of our wives or mums. We have got to do something about this bloody lousy world.”
 




In a desperate attempt to halt the helter-skelter slide of British
capitalism, the Tories have unleashed a torrent of ruthless
anti-working class measures.
For big business, a crisis situation demands crisis measures –
and to hell with the consequences for working people.
In Thatcher and Co. the bankers and boardroom millionaires have
found a representative more than willing to carry out their brutal demands.
Since they came to power in May, one section of working people
after another have been hit or threatened with the sharp cutting axe
of the Tories in the hospitals, schools and other public services, or
by hard-faced employers whose determination to keep wages down has
been resolved by the Thatcher government at Westminster.
Now whole steel towns are to be closed down. Nationalised
industries, such as British Rail, are faced with massive redundancies
as part of the Tory’s de-nationalisation threat. Public and civil
services, and the jobs that go with them, are to be cut.
Remember that Tory election poster which above a long line of
actors posing as a dole queue, cried out: ‘Labour isn’t working’?
Rising unemployment has put paid to any hypocritical Tory promise
of reducing the number of unemployed.
Unfortunately, however, there was a ring of truth about Labour
‘not working’. Despite all the well-meant promises of reform by
the 1974 Labour government, the catastrophic decline of diseased
British capitalism shattered any illusions about them being implemented.
That is why this year’s Labour Party conference must give a bold
and firm socialist alternative to answer the anarchy of the profit system.
In the coming battles workers will more and more be looking to
Labour for a lead. Already, in many local elections – only five
months after the Tory victory – Labour councillors are being
returned with decisive majorities.
In one area of Luton, for example, in a bye-election in a safe
Tory seat, a Labour councillor was returned and the Tories were
reduced to third place!
But if Labour campaigns on the record of the last government, it
will not succeed! Wage restraint, public expenditure cuts, and
anti-working class policies will never be rallying calls for the workers.
Only bold socialist policies, with a clear commitment to a minimum
wage, a 35-hour week, and end to unemployment, and a comprehensive
education and welfare system must be the mainstay of any Labour campaign.
Then Labour would win mass support for an energetic fight against
the Tory government and for the sweeping return of a Labour government.
To ensure that socialist policies are carried out by the next
Labour government it is essential that the calls for party democracy
are carried through. For the labour movement to put their trust in
the Labour Party, it must be sure there is rank and file control over
their representatives.
The Labour Party must use all its resources to expose waste and
anarchy of capitalism, and to map out a socialist alternative.
 




Dear Comrades,
Peter Willsman’s letter (Militant, issue 464) contained a supposed quote from a speech I made at Canterbury Labour Party.
When I read it I was much amused at the obvious distortion of what I said. I felt it did not merit a reply from me, as Peter Lush had dealt with the main arguments very well.
Willsman is so hurt by my disregard for his falsity, however, that he has seen fit to circulate Labour Party activists around the country with previous correspondence written by Campaign for Labour Party Democracy members in reply to articles I wrote last year on the reselection of Labour MPs.
There have been very sharp differences between myself and some members of the CLPD on questions of strategy and tactics. These have always been conducted in a comradely way, however, on the basis of differing ideas rather than personal vendettas.
Peter Willsman is abusing his position as an EC member of CLPD. They are concerned to further the course of Party democracy and as far as I am aware support no particular political programme, Militant, Tribune, Willman’s if he has one, or any other.
In the speech I made at Canterbury I never even mentioned Bournemouth: that is a figment of Willsman’s imagination. The claim I made at Canterbury was that if the programme of Militant was to be adopted by the Labour Party we would sweep the country in the election and the Tories would be reduced to a rump in Parliament.
That rump may or may not include a Tory MP from Bournemouth who may or may not be an ex-Colonel who arrives in a bathchair loaded with hand grenades.
Willsman reveals his contempt for working people by his suggestion that they would be unable to relate to and support such a programme. But we are confident the labour movement would win overwhelming support for such demands as a 35-hour week and a £70 minimum wage.
To secure such demands and the full fruits of their labour, would require the public ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange.
Yes, Comrade Willsman, the working class would respond to such a call from their mass organisations.



 


Fraternally
Ray Apps
Brighton Labour Party



 




Dear Comrades,
Dave Hughes’ letter (issue 471) makes an important contribution
to the debate on the future of the labour movement. He is right to
point out that the labour movement must be seen to lead the fight on
behalf of all the oppressed minorities.
We must be the most resolute fighters in their defence, just as we
must be in the forefront of the fight back against the Tories, and
this means mass action not speeches in Parliament or Council
Chambers. Our discussion would be abstract and sterile indeed, if
limited to a debate on a manifesto for the next Labour government.
We would deserve to be dubbed armchair philosophers if we retired
to the drawing room to debate the future, while our class are engaged
in a desperate struggle to defend jobs, living standards, social
services and trade union rights.
Just a cursory glance through any issue of Militant will
show that our supporters are involved in all, and to the forefront of
many of these struggles.
However it would be an error in the opposite direction to adopt
the ‘struggle is all’ approach of some of the sects, who throw
themselves into one campaign after another, making no attempt to
generalise these struggles and link them to the need to change
society. They just add as an afterthought the need for socialism.
I do not, of course, imply in anyway that this is the position of
Dave his letter leads inescapably to the need for a transitional
programme as put forward by Militant.
Theory and practice are not mutually exclusive but are
indivisible. Marxist theory is not for study by learned professors.
Theory is the distilled experience of the class struggle and a guide
to action by the working class.



 


Ray Apps
Brighton Kemptown CLP



 




Denis Healey used a fringe meeting at Labour’s Southern
Regional Annual Conference recently to fire another salvo at the
left, and at Militant in particular.
Healey referred to the Social Democrats as “my friends”, whose
policies he agreed with, his only criticism being that they had left
the party.
Despite a free buffet lunch however, only 47 turned up to hear
Healey’s views.
There was a “widespread” view in the party, Healey asserted,
that we should not spend six months on the election of deputy leader.
In other words, Tony Benn should not be standing.
Yet even while Healey was speaking, this idea was crushingly
refuted. Three hundred people, including most of the conference
delegates, were giving a standing ovation to Tony Benn at a meeting
organised by Kemptown Labour Party.
From the platform, Rod Fitch, prospective parliamentary candidate
for Kemptown, and Alan Huyton of the LPYS national committee, both
gave their support to his candidature.
Tony Benn made it clear that the deputy-leadership contest was not
about personalities, but the need for socialist policies and a
collective leadership to carry them through.
Rod Fitch was loudly applauded when he said that the Party needed
a leadership democratically answerable to the rank and file.
“Whatever the leadership may be,” said Rod, “if
they try to work within the framework of capitalism, then they will
fail – and we will face defeat and a government even more
reactionary than Thatcher’s.”
On the previous evening, Militant held a successful public
meeting. There was certainly more support than for Denis Healey’s
nosh-up, and a collection raised £89 in support of Marxist ideas.
 




In the weeks prior to the selection of Rod Fitch as prospective
parliamentary candidate for Brighton Kemptown, the local paper the
Evening Argus, conducted a vitriolic campaign against
‘Militant’ supporters and Rod in particular.

The candidate they wanted selected was meanwhile given favourable coverage.
The Argus claimed:
“Militants want the selecting made while they are
dominant. They may lose strength on the party’s policy making body
the GMC at the next AGM.”
This ignores the fact that the Party had been waiting for NEC
permission to proceed for eighteen months as we were anxious to have
a candidate in the field as soon as possible.
As for our losing support, at the AGM after the selection of Rod
our support in Kemptown has grown rapidly as the Argus was
forced to concede with the headline “Militants Tighten Grip.”
Cllr. Tom Forrester who has defected to form a new centre party
stated in the same article “this confirms my worst fears.”
We have standing as a New Centre Party candidate in a local
bye-election, a certain Mr. Cameron, who a few months ago stood as a
National Front candidate in St Peters ward and received 15 votes!
Rod’s selection has engendered tremendous enthusiasm. The local
labour movement has rallied round him.
Countless party members have sent in messages of support, the
Council Labour Group, the Trades Union Council, who have appointed
their past president to liaise with Kemptown Labour Party to mobilise
active union support.
Party membership is growing by leaps and bounds, and more trade
union branches are affiliating. We have our own local Labour paper
distributed to 15,000 households answering media distortions.
Our roots are deep in Brighton’s working people. Our support
continues to grow because of our ideas and record of service to the
labour movement over two decades.
Quinten Barry our candidate in the last election sums up how were
are viewed as real Labour loyalists, when in a letter to me he states
“in a long gruelling campaign I was encouraged every morning by
your enthusiasm and tireless work.”
True, Andrew Bowden the Tory has an 8,000 majority, but we are
confident that with socialist policies and necessary organisation we
can beat off the social democrats, smash that majority and return a
Labour MP for Brighton Kemptown, as part of a massive majority for
Labour at the general election.
 




At a 2,000-string Labour rally in Brighton last Saturday, the
Party’s activists and supporters gave their unmistakable answer to
Labour’s enemies who have been furiously attacking the party’s
“swing to the left.”
The Party leader, Michael Foot, was greeted with an ovation by the
packed audience in the Dome.
Most significant, however, was the overwhelming and enthusiastic
endorsement of Rod Fitch as Labour’s new parliamentary candidate
for the Brighton Kemptown constituency.
Rod [a well-known supporter of ‘Militant’] as well as the
local party itself, has come under a barrage of criticism from the
party since his recent selection.
The former Labour MP for Kemptown, Councillor Dennis Hobden, was
greeted with tremendous applause and cheering when he said:
“When I was an MP, Michael Foot often came to speak at
meetings for me, and when Rod Fitch is the MP, Michael Foot, I’m
sure, will speak on platforms with him also.”
“The press have rushed to publicise our two defectors.
But they have not mentioned the number who have joined the party in
the last three weeks alone.”
Clive Walder, of the Labour Party Young Socialists and Regional LP
Executive, also referred to the press campaign against Militant
supporter Rod Fitch. To deafening applause, he said, “I for one am
glad that the Labour Party has selected Rod – it is returning to
its working class roots!”
Clive really caught the mood of the rally with a fighting speech
urging the need for socialist policies, for the implementation of
Clause IV, with the nationalisation of the big industrial and
financial monopolies under democratic workers’ control and
management. Labour must campaign, Clive said, for a 35-hour week, an
Â£80 minimum wage, and a job for all. There should be a programme of
useful public works as part of a socialist plan of production.
The two local defectors to the ‘social democrats’ referred to
by Councillor Dennis Hobden were Councillor Tom Forrester and his wife.
Another councillor attracted to the social democratic party which
Forrester is trying to establish locally is Councillor Ray Searle.
His only claim to fame in his time as a Labour councillor was that he
played “good cricket” with the Tories in the council team.
But are the social democratic defectors a serious threat to Labour
in Brighton? Last week’s Stanmer by-election shows that we have
little to worry about, provided Labour continues to campaign
energetically on socialist policies.
Tom Forrester, as self-appointed leader of the local Social
Democrats, issued a statement urging people to vote Liberal in the
election. The Liberals took up the defectors’ attacks on the
alleged Trotskyist and Militant ‘domination’ of the Labour Party.
In spite of these “red-scare” tactics, the Labour candidate
won with a majority of 7000 votes – more than all the other
candidates put together.
The most bizarre candidate was one Ian Cameron, known in Brighton
as a member of the fascist National Front, who appointed himself as
representative of the “New Centre Party for Social Democracy”. He
got a mere 38 votes. The official NF candidate got only 22 votes.
The Tories didn’t even put up a candidate.
 




“We are getting more competitive” was the brutal mindless
comment of Norman Tebbit, Mrs Thatcher’s new minister for union bashing.
The “suburban skinhead” was commenting, on Tuesday’s
official unemployment figures which came within a hair’s breadth of
three million.
The official figures in 2,998,789. The real number is more like
4 million, if women and other jobless people who don’t register and
workers on special “job-saving” schemes are included.
Tebbit would be right if Britain was competing in an all
European unemployment championship.
Unemployment in Britain almost doubled (up 88%) between April
1979 and April 1981. In twelve other West European countries hit by
the world recession, however, the average increase was about one
third (30%).
With cretinous confidence in “free market forces”, Mr.
Tebbit thinks mass unemployment is good for business. But Thatcher
and company have not received a vote of confidence from the City
financiers and big business.
Quite the contrary.
Overseas investment in stocks and shares is currently running at
£900 million a month. Since the Tories removed exchange controls,
British investment in overseas stocks and shares has jumped from
quite a low level to £5,000 million over the last year.
British businessmen have also bought £10,000 million in foreign currency.
Despite the Tory cuts, despite the unemployment, despite the cut
living standards, the profit-seekers are boycotting investment in
British industry.
The rate of profit in British industry is too low for the city
speculators. This, of course, does not mean that the boardroom moguls
have to suffer personally.
Recently released company reports show that 27 directors of top
companies paid themselves a total of £2,258,728. Seven directors got
over £100,000 each.
One firm, an advertising agency, Greers Gross, handed its top
executive a salary of £103,000.
In Caxton Hall last week, the magistrates’ hearing on the
Playboy Club’s gambling license, gave a glimpse of the
millionaires’ lifestyle in Thatcher’s Britain.
While British industry goes to rack and ruin, wealthy punters
squander millions at the gambling tables. The Playboy Club is accused
of writing off bad debts for regular punters of £10,000s, in some
cases £millions, each.
There were also massive losses in another London gambling house
last week – the Stock Exchange. A small increase in interest rates
triggered the biggest one-day drop on the market for five years.
Under the profit system, which operates through the blind anarchy
of the market, the jobs and living standards of millions of workers
are gambled away as if at the roulette table.
Mr Tebbit’s advice to workers is that they must “work harder
and better” to avoid losing their jobs.
But even The Times (17 September) had to admit: “when it
comes to the length of working hours, the British worker is amongst
the most industrious”. Workers in Britain have longer hours, fewer
holidays, and generally lower pay than their counterparts in Europe
or North America.
The system is rotten!
Far from curing diseased British capitalism, the Tories are
bleeding their patient to death.
In the process, workers are currently being thrown on to the scrap
heap at the rate of 58,000 a month. More and more low-paid workers
and their children are being forced into poverty and misery.
Labour’s Annual Conference in Brighton must respond to this
situation. Conference must adopt bold, socialist policies – not
only to oust the Tories but get rid of the corrupt system they are
trying to defend.
Conference must also lay down the lines of a campaign, involving
the trade unions and the whole labour movement, for mass action to
force a general election and prepare the way for the return of a
Labour government on socialist policies.
The capitalist press will hysterically denounce the Brighton
Conference as a symptom of the “chaos” and “anarchy” in the
Labour Party. Feigning concern for Labour’s electoral prospects,
they will hypothetically claim that the conference is damaging the
chances of a Labour victory in the next general election.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Millions of workers will be looking to the Conference for a real
alternative to the Tories. They will be attracted, not repelled, by
bold socialist policies.
The ranks of the labour movement, as well as workers outside it,
are impatiently waiting for action to bring down Thatcher’s government.
 




As reported previously, the National Executive Committee of the
Labour Party voted by 15 to 4 to accept the Majority Report of the
Working Party on reselection of Members of Parliament.
According to information received to date, the NEC will circulate
all affiliated organisations with copies of the Majority’s
proposals, together with the Minority Report, for information.
We must now ensure that all affiliated organisations will be given
the opportunity to submit the rule changes suggested by the minority
as amendments to those of the majority at the next annual Party
Conference. This will require that affiliated organisations insist
that the NEC proposed amendments are printed in the preliminary
conference resolution booklet, circulated to affiliates, to allow for amendments.
The Campaign for Labour Party Democracy, at its recent Conference
in Oxford, refused to support the Minority report. We find that
inexplicable when the report was drafted and agreed with myself and
by two of the most ardent and hardworking members of the Campaign –
its Vice President, Jo Richardson MP, and EC member Bernard Kissen.
The Minority report was also fought for and supported on the NEC
by Joan Maynard MP, who was not only President of the Campaign, but
whose record of the struggle for democracy in the Labour Party is
second to none.
With the possibility of Constituency Labour Parties actually
losing, rather than gaining, powers of control over their MPs if the
Majority proposals are implemented [see Militant,
No. 406], it is vital that the rank and file of the Labour
Party, including supporters of the CLPD, unite in support of the rule
changes proposed by the Minority Report.
 
Rank and file control over MPs
In every Constituency Labour Party in the country demands have
been made by ordinary party members that there should be democratic
control over Labour MPs to endure their Parliamentary representatives
really do represent the policies decided upon by the party. The
difficulties faced by Constituency Parties in selecting new
candidates in place of sitting MPs (e.g. Newham North East, who had
to battle for months against Reg Prentice, who has since proved his
contempt for the Party by joining the Tories) resulted in over 60
Constituency Parties submitting resolutions to last year’s Party
Conference demanding an easier method of reselection.
The solution proposed in the Minority Report of the NEC Working
Party fully answers this need and entirely reflects the sentiments
expressed by Party Conference. It proposes that Clause XIV, section
7, of the Constituency Party rules should state:
“If at any time this Party is represented in
Parliament by a member of the Parliamentary Labour Party, procedure
for the selection of a Prospective Parliamentary candidate shall, as
outlined in Section 3, be set in motion not earlier than eighteen
months and not later than thirty-six months after the sitting Member
was elected to Parliament.
“a] The sitting member shall automatically be placed
on the short list unless he or she wishes to retire.
“b] The General Committee may at a specially
convened meeting intimate by resolution its desire that he or she
must retire at the next General Election. A Member of Parliament
against whom such action is taken shall have the right to appeal to
the NEC on the grounds, and only on the grounds, that the correct
procedure is carried out.”

Ray Apps was member of the NEC Working Party on Reselection.
 




Dear Comrades,
Paul Schofield’s claim that Militant supporters back mandatory reselection of Labour MPs is incorrect. Some have given support in a personal capacity, but others have opposed it. In any case, my criticism was of Militant itself. Of course Militant has always paid lip service to the idea, but neither Paul Schofield nor Tony Mulhearn can point to any practical steps it has ever taken.
On the contrary, Militant has always echoed the establishment’s arguments for the present system, and connived in the establishment’s manoeuvres to prevent a vote on the principle of the 68 identical amendments submitted to the last Party Conference, by consistently pressing for additional demands. The 1977 Conference overwhelmingly accepted the NEC’s promise to sponsor at the 1978 Conference “automatic reselection in the way and sense” of the 68 identical amendments.
The NEC Working Party on Reselection was set up to break that promise, and although the Minority Report comes closer than the Majority Report, neither corresponds to the NEC’s promise. Unfortunately you did not publish the CLPD Secretary’s letter explaining our exact position, which is not as Ray Apps claims.
The Working Party has been condemned by every Regional Labour Party Conference which debated it. Instead of promoting splits in favour of three individual Working Party members – however well-meaning – Militant supporters should join CLPD in standing by the clear wishers of Conference and the labour movement as a whole.



 


Yours fraternally
Victor Schonfield
Treasurer
Campaign for Labour Party Democracy





Change of Tune
Ray Apps replies:
Instead of taking up the arguments put forward in several substantial articles and letter in the Militant, Victor Schonfield resorts to jibes and distortions.
The best answer to his latest attack is the letter he wrote to me at the time of last year’s Annual L.P. Conference (5 October).
Dear Ray: The meeting of re-selection delegates was a bit better attended than Monday’s - over 30. The following views were proposed, put to votes, and carried nem con, and I was asked to pass them on - am putting them in writing in case we miss each other!

(1) The meeting felt that the NEC request to remit should be accepted no matter what. It was better to have some chance next year than none until 1981.
(2) The meeting asked you to note that theirs was a democratic decision after full discussion, and hoped you would respect it accordingly.
(3) The meeting endorsed your shrewd tactics in exploiting the situation to get the best possible assurances out of the NEC, and confirmed wholehearted support of the composite.

Several delegates gave apologies for absence and either said they would accept whatever decisions were reached, or else gave their own views roughly on the above lines. Looking forward to the debate, and good luck with your speech.



 


Fraternally
Victor Shonfield
(My emphasis –RA)



Does this letter not completely contradict what he is now saying? Has Comrade Schonfield such a short memory?
It was the composite moved by Brighton Kemptown which ensured that the issue of reselection was debated by conference. (Well in advance, we had advised the CLPD on how they should formulate their resolutions to ensure they were debated; but they ignored this, and their 68 amendments were (wrongly) excluded from the agenda.)
The remittance of the composite, which CLPD clearly supported at the time, surely implied that the NEC, or a committee appointed by the NEC, would draw up new proposals. Once the motion had been remitted, should we then have washed our hands of the subsequent argument until the next time it came up at conference?
In fact, together with Jo Richardson, a vice president of CLPD, and Bernard Kisson, a prominent supporter of CLPD. I continued to fight on the working group for proposals that matched up the assurance given to Conference.
Our proposals, now the minority report (see Militant, nos. 400, 409), include both guarantees of a fully democratic, mandatory re-selection procedure and the retention of paragraph B (rule 7 clause XIV, Party rules) as an ultimate safeguard. If Comrade Schonfield disagrees with the report, he should say why, setting out arguments, not fire off unsubstantiated denunciations.
Finally, Comrade Schonfield says Militant “unfortunately” did not publish the CLPD Secretary’s letter. Militant was quite willing to print this (long) letter and was preparing a reply. But after at least two conversations between Vladimir Derer and the editors, Comrade Derer then told us that he did not want the letter published.
Militant is still prepared to publish Comrade Derer’s letter, or a new letter. We are not frightened of arguing our case and taking up criticism.
 




Victor Schonfield, like some of the other leaders of CLPD, is
surely seeking scapegoats for his own confusion and bungling.
The possibility that we may finish up with less democratic control
over MPs than we have at present has been brought about by their
obstinacy and refusal to admit mistakes, the greatest of which is to
under-estimate the opponents of extending the democratic control of
Constituency Labour Parties over MPs.
Victor Schonfield says I have an obsession with Paragraph (B). It
is true I have consistently fought for the retention of this clause
and will continue to do so. However, it has never been at the
expense of my support for mandatory automatic reselection. The
two complement one another.
Instead of making unsubstantiated allegations, Victor Schonfield
should ask the CLPD supporters on the Working Party how hard I
battled for mandatory reselection, which is the main theme of the
Minority Report. Incidentally, the issue of automatic
reselection was decided by the Majority before we went on to discuss
and vote on what was to replace Paragraph (B).
I warned CLPD some months before last year’s Annual Conference
that I believed they were giving a hostage to fortune by calling for
the removal of the right of a CLP to pass a vote of no confidence in
their sitting MP at any time of their choosing. This democratic
right, providing the proper procedure is carried out and used
properly, can be a powerful weapon in the hands of the Party rank and file.
This should be retained as an essential “reserve power”. It
became all the more necessary to fight for the retention of paragraph
(B) when it became clear that proposals of the working group majority
in effect amounted to no more than the right to move a vote of no
confidence in an MP once in the life of a parliament.
Victor Schonfield accuses me of conniving with the establishment.
The truth of the matter is that the ‘establishment’, the party
officials concerned and the right wing of the NEC, having no
intention of introducing mandatory reselection, gleefully
accommodated CLPD’s obsession with deleting Paragraph (B).
Sixty-eight resolutions called for its deletion they assured me. The
Party ‘establishment’, for all my supposed ‘conniving’, came
down firmly on the side of Victor Schonfield in this matter. “Ray
Apps prevents a clear vote on the principle,” CLPD repeat ad
nauseam. If that is the case, why did Conference vote against the
reference back when Victor Schonfield himself moved it (with my
support) so that the so-called clear principle could be put? Where
was the massive majority there?
If CLPD had listened to our advice, given long before they framed
their model resolution, those 68 resolutions would have been taken.
CLPD, not us, effectively disenfranchised 68 CLPs. They should
explain that to their supporters.
Who really speaks for CLPD? Victor Schonfield accuses me of
lending credibility to squalid manoeuvres by producing a Minority Report.
Here, Victor Schonfield glosses over another important point. Once
the resolution was referred back to the NEC with an assurance from
the Chairman that new rules would be formulated, it was obvious that
the NEC would have to appoint a sub-committee or working group to put
forward proposals.
When, as CLP delegate who moved the resolution debated, I was
invited to sit on the working party, should I have refused this
opportunity of defending the views of the rank and file in the body
that was actually given the task of drafting new rules? Should Jo
Richardson and Bernard Kissen also have refused to participate? Why
does Comrade Schonfield not say explicitly what his view is on this?
While on the working group I did not for a moment cease to argue
for our position, either in the meetings or in the Party generally.
Let me repeat: the Minority Report was written in conjunction
with Bernard Kissen and Jo Richardson MP, EC member and
vice-chairperson of CLPD. Does Victor Schonfield now disown them? We
fought together tooth and nail for mandatory reselection and, as the
infamous compromise evolved, came to see the vital importance of
retaining Paragraph (B).
The Minority Report is a measured and practical alternative
to the two-stage procedure of the majority. We called for a mandatory
reselection conference not earlier than eighteen months after an MP
was elected to Parliament for the very good reason that an MP, after
selection by a meeting in the CLP, should be given the chance to show
his or her true colours or earn their spurs, whichever the case may
be, and secondly to stop careerists holding a selection conference in
the euphoria of an election victory. Paragraph (B), if retained,
would still be there as a safeguard.
Victor Schonfield accuses me of misrepresentation by quoting his
letter (see Militant, No. 411) in which he assured me that:
“The meeting [of conference delegates supporting the
CLPD’s resolution] endorsed your shrewd tactics in exploiting the
situation to get the best possible assurances out of the NEC and
confirmed wholehearted support of the composite.”
How can you misrepresent someone by quoting him in full is beyond
me. Now he says he didn’t mean what he said in the letter. How do
you answer someone who argues like this?
I was handed that letter on the morning of the debate, and went to
the rostrum believing what it said: that I had the wholehearted
support of the Campaign for the composite I was moving. I didn’t
ask for their wholehearted support but was glad to have it.
Yes I am, to use Victor Schonfield’s words, experienced enough
to know that sometimes you have to support a resolution you don’t
agree with. But you should always make clear your support is critical.
If you want to win the trust and confidence of the movement, total
honesty is essential. Even at this late stage I appeal to CLPD
supporters to put aside personalities, and in the interests of the
struggle on for reselection to support the Minority Report.
 




“Jim Callaghan last night won yet another battle against the Left in the Labour Party. The party’s organisation committee decided that in future Constituency Parties will not be allowed to throw out their MPs as was the case in Newham North East with Reg Prentice.”
Thus did the Express on May 9th sum up the effect of the amendments to rule proposed by the majority of the Working Party set up by the Labour Party NEC to examine the question of reselection of Members of Parliament.
 
Smokescreen
However, three of us on the Working Party have refused to allow ourselves to be used by the right wing as a smokescreen for their back stage manoeuvring. The right wanted a so-called “compromise” which will not only frustrate the clearly expressed demand of the ranks for greater democratic control over MPs, but will in actual fact lead to a less democratic situation than exists now.
Jo Richardson MP, Bernard Kissen and myself have produced a minority report. This report takes up the arguments of the majority and submits alternative amendments to rule in line with the pledge made to conference by the NEC.
The majority proposes that not earlier than eighteen months and not later than thirty-six months after an MP is elected to Parliament a special General Committee meeting would be held, the date to be determined in consultation with the sitting Member. He or she would be invited to address that meeting and a resolution would be put to appoint the MP as prospective Parliamentary candidate.
If the resolution is not carried then the meeting will consider a second resolution, to set in motion procedure for a normal selection meeting. This could not be held, however, until the NEC had considered any appeal the sitting Member may make if the first resolution is defeated.
This in no way can be described as providing automatic reselection. In trying to make out a case for this proposal – which would be a rally in support of the sitting MP giving him or her two bites at the cherry – the majority have argued along three main lines in support of a two-stage procedure.
They also claim that it isn’t a two-stage procedure! There is no answer to that!
“It will avid unfavourable publicity and lessen dissension in the local Parties.” Well this will manifestly not be the case.
The Tory-controlled press will always come down in support of so-called ‘moderates’, a euphemism for right wingers, and with the willing help of these moderates will use their resources to smear any opposition there may be, whatever the selection procedure.
The two-stage procedure, which would drag on for months, will give them a field day. Divisions in the Party would be fostered and played upon with charge and counter-charge being made almost daily.
Career MPs in safe seats will be determined to hang on even if they wreck the local Party in the process and appeal after appeal will be made. They are not interested in new affiliations and new members.
They particularly fear the youth joining the Party. They feel threatened by a growing, thriving Party. They prefer a little coterie of supporters. We believe automatic reselection, and therefore more accountability by an MP, would lead to a growing, active and healthy Party.
The second argument of the majority is that a Constituency ought not have to go through the full procedure if it does not wish to do so. Why should a Party be afraid of an extension of democracy?
If they have confidence in their MP and he has widespread support, then he will be reselected, and by beating off any challenges at a normal selection conference will have his position strengthened. No MP, or Constituency that has confidence in him or her, need feel afraid of automatic reselection.
The rule change proposed in our Minority Report makes it mandatory for every Constituency to hold a Selection Conference, the sitting MP to be placed on the short list unless he or she wishes to retire. If this became part of the normal democratic process of the Party, without the need to pass a vote of no confidence first [because that is what the proposal of the majority would mean in practice] the press would be given less opportunity to intervene and stir the pot, MPs would be more cognisant of Party policy as decided by Conference, and local parties would be reinvigorated, leading to growth in membership and activity.
 
Trade Unions
The third argument of the majority is that a sponsoring organisation should be given the opportunity, if a General Committee decides to go forward with the selection procedure (and therefore casting some doubt on the sitting MP), to put forward a nomination for an alternative sponsored candidate.
We believe that no trade union or affiliated organisation should have a prescriptive right to a seat. However, if we examine the arguments behind the majority’s blatant attempt to get the trade union vote behind their proposals by suggesting they would lose representation in Parliament, we find that this would not be the case at all. The two-stage procedure, rather than helping to maintain trade union representation in Parliament, could lead to the opposite, and at the same time cause considerable harm to the trade union movement.
With the two-stage procedure, consider a union’s dilemma if a Constituency decides to go for a full selection meeting. They would have to decide whether to withdraw their sponsorship from the sitting MP and put forward an alternative candidate. This alone would cause dissension in the local branches.
If they decided to sponsor a new candidate, bearing in mind the sitting MP they had previously sponsored would automatically be on the short list, this would have repercussions throughout the sponsoring union, with some branches of the union supporting the sitting MP and others the new candidate. It could tear the union apart throughout the area, and probably ensure that neither one would get selected.
The unions should oppose this attempt to use them against the Constituencies. After all, we are all trade unionists with the same common interests.
Unions have no need to fear that there representation and influence in Parliament would be lessened by supporting automatic reselection. It is a common practice for a union to sponsor one of its members as an MP only after he or she has been elected to Parliament.
If the union lost a sponsored MP it would be perfectly easy for it to adopt another of its MPs not sponsored before. In the case of ASTMS, for example, there are nearly forty MPs who are members of that union but only a small fraction of them are sponsored.
Similarly with the Co-operative Party, who have a special arrangement with the Labour Party about the number of sponsored MPs they have. If they lost a sponsored MP they would be able to maintain their strength from the large number of MPs who are members of the Co-operative Party by adopting one of them. Presumably they have some arrangement to do this anyway in the event of one of their sponsored MPs losing a seat in an election.
 
Reg Prentice
The principal points of the automatic procedure proposed by the majority are: there will be less likelihood of hostile and unnecessary press publicity if all MPs undergo the same process; and the wishes of Party members to ensure their MPs are accountable would be genuinely provided for.
We consider it vital that together with a procedure for automatic reselection, paragraph (B) of section 7 of the Party constitution should be retained as a final safeguard. The majority of the Working Party, using the argument that a large number of resolutions called for its deletion, have recommended that before a General Committee may consider a vote of no confidence in the sitting member, it must obtain the permission of the NEC.
This takes away an existing right and gives a new power of veto to the NEC.
On what basis will the NEC grant permission? “Changed circumstances” – whatever they will interpret that to mean. In practice it will mean for example that Prentice, the Tory, would still be subverting the Party from within, disguised as a Labour MP. It is possible that they would not have given permission in any one of the cases where paragraph (B) has been used to date.
My Constituency, Brighton Kemp Town, has been accused of placing too much emphasis on the rights given to us in paragraph (B). At last year’s Party Conference I moved composite 29, which as well as calling for automatic reselection, in the final paragraph called for Constituencies to have the right to call the sitting MP to account at any time.
This, said its opponents would mean a selection meeting every week. Well those who say that are in a different Party from me! It is absurd to believe that would be the case.
I made it clear from the rostrum that we wanted to retain paragraph (B). This gives a General Committee the right to move a vote of no confidence at any time, and so far it hasn’t been used every week, has it?
We were afraid that the Parliamentary Party, with their considerable influence, would use a heaven-sent opportunity to remove this sword of Damocles hanging over their heads all the time. The right wing have always been nervous that if they go too far to the right the sword may fall.
We were absolutely right! Our worst fears have been confirmed. They have taken away the sword offered to them and given us a hat pin in exchange.
In short, the right to move a vote of no confidence at any time of our choosing is to be exchanged for the paltry right to move a vote of no confidence just once at a time to be pre-arranged to suit the sitting MP. Having got through a procedure heavily weighted in his or her favour, the MP would be safe to do what he liked in Parliament for up to seven years without the membership being able to do anything about it.
This is the time for maximum possible unity in action of every Party member and trade unionist interested in Party democracy. All is not yet lost if we unite around the Minority Report.




No to a two-stage procedure!
 
Yes to mandatory automatic reselection!
 
Not to a new power of veto to the NEC!
 
Yes to the retention of paragraph (B)!
 
Support the Minority Report!





Note
Ray Apps was a member of Brighton Kemptown Labour Party and a member of the NEC Working Party on the reselection of MPs.
 




There are growing fears within the rank and file of the Labour Party, reflected in resolutions to this week’s Southern Region conference, that a majority of the working party set up by the NEC to formulate proposals for a new procedure on reselection are far from determined to implement the spirit and terms of last year’s Annual Conference resolutions.
 
Conference
There is certainly the danger, the way things are going that the sub-committee will come out with watered-down proposals for re-selection, and at the same time give up the cast-iron, ultimate safeguard that the constituency parties now have (in paragraph (B) rule 7 clause XIV of the Party rules).
The strength of feeling in the party on re-selection was clearly shown at last year’s conference. No less than 75 resolutions, the highest ever submitted on one subject, were sent in. When most of these were ruled out of order, a further 17 emergency resolutions were submitted to ensure debate on the issue.
Despite a well-supported reference back, the Conference Arrangements Committee successfully ruled that all constitutional amendments must go straight to the NEC. It was fortunate that a number of constituency parties were far-sighted enough to frame their resolutions in a way that ensured debate.
Without composite 29, which proposed automatic re-selection and included an ultimate right of recall in a clause similar to the present paragraph B, the question would never have been brought up. It was the debate on this composite that ensured that the NEC through the chairman, gave an undertaking that they would present proposals providing for automatic re-selection to the next conference.
After the conference, the NEC set up a working party to frame new proposals for the necessary amendments. There is no doubt, however, that there were those on the right wing of the party leadership who, once the immediate problem of placating conference delegates was behind them, saw the working party as a means of sliding out of the NEC’s promise to conference. This has been made all the easier by the working party’s terms of reference, which actually call into question issues on which conference was firmly agreed.
While the working party was beginning its discussions, Joe Ashton brought out his own proposals. These are rumoured to have the backing of Jim Callaghan. They have certainly been seized on by many grateful members of the Parliamentary Labour Party, and have received considerable – and very favourable! – publicity in the capitalist press.
 
Undermine
Joe Ashton’s proposals, however, which have had a considerable influence on most members of the working party, would if accepted, completely undermine the basic principle embodied in composite 29 – that of a CLP’s automatic right to re-select its parliamentary representative.
Under Ashton’s plans, there would be a special GMC within a specified period after an election. The MP would be invited to address the meeting and answer questions. There would then be a ballot to decide whether or not the MP should face a re-selection conference. If the vote went against the MP, he or she would have the right to appeal to the NEC. Then, if this hurdle is crossed, a re-selection meeting could take place. If this goes against the sitting MP, he or she can again appeal to the NEC.
It is obvious that such a complicated, and inevitably long-drawn-out process, would be heavily weighted in favour of the sitting MP. The emphasis would not at all be on the right of the CLP to call its MP to account and select a new parliamentary representative.
 
Tories
Past experience shows that such a complicated procedure gives an MP – or infiltrators like Lewis and McCormick – plenty of opportunity to find procedural discrepancies as the basis for appeal, and even resort to the courts. At the same time, a lengthy procedure gives an MP the maximum opportunity to exert pressure on the Party, especially when they have the fulsome support of the Tory press, as did Frank Tomney, Reg Prentice and others who have recently resisted democratic re-selection.
Studying Joe Ashton’s proposals, one might think that they were designed to produce a rally for the sitting member, rather than a democratic process for checking and control. In ‘Labour Weekly’ Joe recently stated that over 50 Labour MPs might cross the floor, like Prentice, and join the Tories if they were forced to retire by their CLP.
What an astounding admission! But surely the presence of such MPs, who will undoubtedly desert the Labour Party in the course of future political battles, is an argument for a thoroughly democratic re-selection procedure, not for a “moderate”, watered-down process to placate potential traitors!
The proposals now being formulated by the working party, if they are the ones it sends to the NEC, are in all essentials similar to Joe Ashton’s. They are not based on the principle of automatic re-selection embodied in composite 29, and do not include a clause similar to the existing paragraph (B), rule 7 clause XIV, which at least now provides an ultimate safeguard for CMPs who want to remove their MP.
Paragraph (B), referring to sitting MPs, states: “The general committee at a specially convened meeting intimates by resolution its desire that he or she must retire at the next general election.” In spite of all the difficulties, this is the clause which allowed Newham NE to remove Tory-in-disguise Reg Prentice. To lose this, without gaining cast-iron procedures for automatic re-selection would actually be a step backwards!
At this point, however, it is necessary to take up the Campaign for Labour Party Democracy. The organisers of the Campaign have put considerable effort into the fight to give organised expression to the aspirations of the rank and file to have democratic control over MPs and Party leadership.
 
Misleading
But the Campaign’s suggested amendment for last year’s conference had the effect of deleting paragraph (B). If this was intentional, it was seriously mistaken advice. Even if mandatory re-selection is achieved, the CLPs should nevertheless,retain the right of recall over their MP, not just once in the life of a parliament, but at any time. If, however, the right of mandatory re-selection is not achieved now, the “reserve powers” of paragraph (B) remain vital.
In a circular concerning the Southern Region LP Conferencem however, the Campaign says:
“Brighton Kemptown has put down an amendment to the Basingstoke resolution (supporting CLPD demands) calling for support of Composite 29 which Conference remitted to the NEC. The reason for remission at Conference was that the wording of Composite 29 included additional demands unacceptable to Conference. This prevented a clear decision being made simply on the principle of automatic reselection…”
This is entirely misleading! Composite 29 was the only motion on re-selection debated, as the others had been ruled out of order. How can it be said that it included demands “unacceptable to Conference”, when no vote was taken because it was remitted on the clear undertaking from the chairman that proposals for “automatic re-selection” would be introduced next year? Prior to the Conference, moreover, leading members of the Campaign informed movers that they agreed with Composite 29 and would support it. It was Composite 29 that ensured that the issue was debated, and also the reason, presumably, that I (as mover) was invited on to the NEC working party.
In the light of these points, we would ask the supporters of the Campaign for Labour Party Democracy to reconsider their position, and we urge delegates to the Southern Region conference to support the Brighton Kemptown amendment. It must be made clear to the working party and the NEC that nothing less than the proposals of composite 29 will be acceptable to the rank and file as far as Party democracy is concerned.
 




In his address to the Southern Region Labour Party Conference,
outlining the crisis of capitalism, and explaining the need for
socialist policies, Tony Benn said to loud cheers that “when the
young militants in my constituency speak on the ideas of socialism,
it is the old age pensioners that cheer the loudest!”. He added “if
we are returning to the old ideas of the movement, that is because
all the old problems are still with us.”
This provided the answer to those one or two delegates who chose
to attack the Militant rather than participate in the debate
on the important questions that were before Conference.
Perhaps the liveliest debate was on the question of racialism and
fascism. Conference decided to sponsor the Anti-Nazi League, although
every delegate that spoke in favour pointed out that this must not be
at the expense of the labour movement putting forward its own
socialist programme, and that the ANL was not an alternative to the
labour movement organising its own campaign – the only force that
can defeat racialists and fascists.
This view was reinforced when conference went on to pass
unanimously an emergency resolution that called on the labour
movement in the Region to initiate vigorous anti-racialist campaigns.
 
Against Cuts
Conference reaffirmed its opposition to cuts in public expenditure
and passed an emergency resolution supporting the occupation of the
nursery premises in Oxford. Criticising the executive for its failure
to pursue a campaign against the cuts as it was instructed to do by
last year’s conference. A composite was passed demanding that they
start a campaign now.
Conference also demanded a crash house-building programme in a
resolution moved by Wokingham CLP that called for the nationalisation
of the building and allied supply industries as well as the banks and
insurance companies.
The need for a campaign in support of Labour’s policy on the
nationalisation of the banks and insurance companies was spelt out in
a resolution from Reading South. This was carried despite the
opposition of the Regional Executive Committee.
The Militant meeting this year was well attended: after a
long session 43 turned up to take part in a debate around the
programme of the paper.
As one delegate attending one of our meetings for the first time
put it:
 
Minimum Wage
“You seem to be the only ones putting up a fight at
the moment. Your ideas are right. I work in the hotel industry and on
my wages I can’t make ends meet so demand for a £65 minimum wage
is essential. I was disillusioned by some of the things said at the
conference today, but attending this meeting and meeting people like
yourselves I shall go back refreshed and ready to continue the
struggle.”
£21 was collected for the Fighting Fund plus £15 from a raffle
organised by Bracknell supporters.
 




“If the National Executive Committee does not come
back to next year’s Conference with a proposed rule change that
would allow for automatic re-selection, then I would have to consider
whether I wish to remain a member of that body any longer.”
That was the answer Ian Mikardo gave in his reply on behalf of the
Executive to those of us at the Labour Party Conference last October
who, despite the vote in favour of the principle of automatic
re-selection, raised doubts about the intentions of the National
Executive Committee as a body extending democratic control over
Labour Members of Parliament.
Our fears that they would backtrack on this question, it seems,
are being confirmed. The NEC has passed the question over to the
Organisation Committee, which has a right wing majority. They are to
consider the formation of a working party that would include Members
of Parliament.
What does the NEC require a working party for? Not to draft a rule
change, you can bet your life! The purpose of a working party can
only be to delay, confuse and probably frustrate the wishes of the
rank and file. Will its aim not be to bring to this year’s
Conference the findings of the working party which – surprise,
surprise – will contain a series of options, all of them falling
short of what the rank and file of the Party are demanding? Such a
move would delay the required rule change for yet another year.
There has been too much delay already. Enough is enough! There
will be an explosion of anger from within the ranks of the Party when
they realise what is happening. Resolutions will flood into the NEC.
The composite resolution that I moved at Conference was clear
enough – automatic reselection once in the lifetime of a
Parliament, and the retention of a rule, such as the present
paragraph B, that allows the convening of a special General
Management Committee meeting in a constituency to discuss the motion
of no confidence in their Member of Parliament.
 
NEC Pledge
The NEC made a pledge to Conference that they would bring forward
a rule-change proposal based on this composite to this year’s
Conference. The NEC must be made to honour this pledge.
If the Executive Committee continues to allow itself to be leaned
on by Cabinet Ministers to frustrate the wishes of the Conference,
Labour’s highest body, then a campaign to intensify the struggle
for democratic control must be launched without delay. Such a
campaign should include all those members of the NEC who were genuine
in their pledge to Conference.
 




Delegates at this year’s Southern Regional Conference will
undoubtedly have on their minds the likelihood that this will be
election year.
The pressure will be on them to turn Conference into a display of
unity behind the policies of the government. Yet it is that very
policy that is bringing the danger of defeat in a general election,
as the report presented to the conference puts it.
 
Report
“The past year has been distinguished by a whole
series of set-backs for working people: declining public services,
wage restraint, and mass unemployment. Working people in making these
sacrifices have saved capitalism from total collapse.
“However this display of loyalty must not be taken
as a sign of support for the present economic order. The working
class expect and deserve a new society.
“The Labour Cabinet must not be lulled into a false
sense of security by a few encouraging opinion polls and council
by-election results.”
The Report goes on correctly, to state:
“Winning the next General Election can only be made
possible if the Government joins with the wider labour movement and
begins to campaign vigorously on the shop floor, in the streets, on
the doorstep, in the press and on the media for socialist policies
which meet the needs of working people.”
The basis for such a campaign can be found in the policies
demanded by the resolutions before conference.
On Housing Resolution 44 from Wokingham CLP calls
for a halt to the sale of council houses, the nationalisation of the
building and building supply industries as well as the banks and
financial institutions to make possible a crash house building programme.
On wage restraint and low pay, AUEW [TASS] 25 Divisional
Council rejects the theory that wage rises are a major
contributory factor towards inflation and condemns sanctions being
applied by the government in its attempt to impose wage restraint on workers.
 
EC Criticised
Portsmouth South resolution 48 calls for an end to wage
restraint and a minimum wage of £65 a week tied to the cost of living.
A number of resolutions on the agenda oppose the cuts in public
expenditure. ASTMS no. 7 Divisional Council and the Isle
of Wight CLP criticise the Executive Committee for not actively
pursuing a campaign against the cuts as they were required to do by
the last year’s conference.
On unemployment, numerous resolutions and amendments call for a
shorter working week and a comprehensive public works programme. The
TGWU No. 1 Region calls for the setting up of a public
loans board to provide finance for local authorities. But as the
amendment from the Isle of Wight points out, only when Labour’s
policy of nationalising the banks and insurance companies is achieved
can we guarantee cheap credit or interest free loans.
 
Take the Banks
Reading North CLP notes the campaign against
nationalisation being conducted by the banks, and calls for a counter
campaign. These demands are brought together in Resolution 17 from
Brighton Kemptown CLP. This states that the only way to provide
jobs, protect living standards, the Social Services and the welfare
of our people is to use all our material and human resources in a
plan of production.
To this end it calls for the nationalisation under workers control
and management of the 200 major monopolies, banks and insurance companies.
If the report of the Regional Council is really meant to be a
rallying call, then it is to be hoped that they will recommend
support for the alternative programme as outlined above and brought
to Conference by the rank and file as an alternative to the
disastrous policies of the Government.
By launching a campaign as outlined in their own report, in
support of such a socialist programme, they could win the support of
the other regions, and achieve real unity and ensure victory at the
General Election.
 




Ray Apps is Brighton Kemptown’s delegate and a signatory to
the Minority Report
A year ago, just after last year’s Party Conference, Reg
Prentice announced on television his open defection to the Tory
Party. The only surprise about this step that, unlike most of his
friends who still peddle Tory ideas in the Parliamentary Labour
Party, Prentice has the barefaced cheek to actually “cross the floor”.
Other right-wing Labour MPs were shocked and embarrassed, not
because of his reactionary statements, but because Prentice’s
action clearly revealed to the Party membership the logic of thinking
that they share.
Prentice’s treacherous step was a complete vindication of the
long campaign by Newham North East Labour Party to exercise its
democratic right to replace him as their parliamentary candidate in
the next general election.
Not only had they to contend with all the difficulties arising
from an attempt to activate section 7 (B) of Party rules, but
they had to fight expensive legal battles with right-wing
infiltrators evidently financed by the worst enemies of the Labour Party.
This whole bitter episode in the Party’s history was also a
vindication of the rank and file’s demand for rule changes that
would supplement the “last resort” right of recall embodied in
7 (B) with a thoroughly democratic procedure for automatic,
mandatory re-selection.
For a number of years Constituency Parties had been battling for
proposals for re-selection to be debated at Conference. Such was the
pressure that last year, despite 67 resolutions representing the
Campaign for Labour Party Democracy’s position being arbitrarily
excluded, there was a debate on Composite 29 moved by Brighton Kemptown.
At the end of the debate, delegates were persuaded to remit the
composite with a promise from the chairman, Ian Mikardo, that:
“We shall put down at next year’s Annual Conference
all the amendments to the constitution necessary to provide automatic
re-selection in the way and in the sense that the sponsors of those
60-odd resolutions want. I do not think there is the least chance
of the Executive reneging on that undertaking.”
Even before the Working Party set up to frame rule-change
proposals had started work, however, it was clear that prominent
members of the PLP, including James Callaghan himself, with the help
of a number of Transport House officials, had started a campaign to
dilute drastically any new re-selection procedure.
From the first meeting of the working party, it became clear that
a majority was, in reality, opposed to the idea of mandatory
re-selection which Conference had demanded and which delegates had
been promised. That is why it was necessary for Jo Richardson,
Bernard Kissen, and myself to produce a Minority Report.
Regrettably, the NEC accepted the Majority Report by 15 votes to 5
– with only Frank Allaun, Nick Bradley, Eric Heffer, Joan Maynard,
and Emlyn Williams opposing this retreat from the NEC’s previous commitment.
 
Majority Report
The Majority Report of the working party which appears in
Appendix 1 of the 1978 Report (page 172), can in no way be
described as providing for automatic re-selection.
The majority proposes that not earlier than 18 months and not
later than 36 months after an MP is elected a special General
Committee meeting would be held, the date to be determined in
consultation with the sitting Member. The MP would be invited to
address that meeting and a resolution would be put appointing him or
her as prospective Parliamentary candidate.
If the resolution were not carried then the meeting would consider
a second resolution, to set in motion procedure for a normal
selection meeting. This could not be held, however, until the NEC had
considered any appeal from the sitting Member is the first revolution
was defeated.
Whatever the majority claims, these proposals amount to a
two-stage procedure. Far from establishing the constituency party’s
right to re-select, the first meeting would have the character of a
rally in support of the sitting MP, with the onus for change placed
on the rank and file.
The two-stage procedure, which could drag on for months, will give
them a field day. Divisions in the Party would be fostered and played upon.
 
Careerists
Career MPs in safe seats will be determined to hang on even if
they wreck the party in the process. Prentice demonstrated this
clearly enough.
That is why automatic re-selection is an extension of party
democracy vital to the growth and success of the Party. The argument
that CLPs ought not to have to go through the selection procedure if
they do not wish to is fatuous. If an MP has the support of his or
her constituency, successful re-selection will simply reaffirm confidence.
 
Minority Report
The rule change proposed in the Minority Report (1978
Report, Appendix 1, page 177) makes it mandatory for every
Constituency to hold a Selection Conference, the sitting MP to be
placed on the short list unless he or she wishes to retire. If this
became part of the normal democratic process of the Party, without
the need to pass a vote of ‘no confidence’ first (because that is
what the proposal of the majority would mean in practice) the press
would be given less opportunity to intervene to stir the pot, MPs
would be more aware of Party policy as decided by Conference, and
local parties would be re-invigorated, leading to growth in
membership and activity.
One of the arguments – put forward by Ian Mikardo and others –
against automatic reselection as proposed in the Minority Report
is that it runs into trade union opposition over sponsored MPs. This
is fully answered in the minority report.
It is right that trade union should have a say in the selection of
MPs. But this should be exercised through the trade union delegates
to General Management Committees. No trade union – or other
affiliated bodies – has the prescriptive right to a parliamentary seat.
This is, in fact, recognised by the unions, and it is common
practice for candidates to be sponsored after selection, and
many unions sponsor candidates even if they are not members of that union.
 
Section 7 (B)
The proposals for re-selection proposed in the Minority Report
would ensure that all MPs had to go through the same process, as a
matter of course, the intervention by a hostile press would be minimised.
The minority report, however, also proposes the retention of
paragraph B of section 7. It is vital that in any new procedure
this clause, which is in effect a final right of recall, be retained
as a reserve power.
The call to retain Section 7 (B), incidentally, is also
supported by Eric Heffer MP (see letter, 1978 Report, page 178).
Composite 29 from Kemptown Labour Party, which I moved at last
year’s conference, included the call for Section 7 (B) to be
retained precisely because we feared the parliamentary party would
accept a new, milk-and-water re-selection process in return for the
abandonment of their parties’ real power of recall.
Our worst fears have been confirmed!
The right to move a vote of no confidence at any time of our
choosing is to be exchanged for a paltry opportunity to move a vote
of ‘no confidence’, if the majority proposals go through, just
once, at a time pre-arranged to suit the sitting MP. Having got
through a procedure heavily weighted in his or her favour, the MP
would be safe to do what he liked in Parliament for up to seven years
without the membership being able to do anything about it.
But when it became clear to the majority on the working party that
the majority’s proposals would not amount to genuine automatic
re-selection, it became even more necessary to insist on the
retention of (7) B.
The majority’s report includes the recommendation that before a
general committee may consider a vote of no confidence in a sitting
member, it must obtain the permission of the NEC. This takes away an
existing democratic right and gives the NEC a new power of veto.
If this had applied before, Prentice and other Tory entryists
removed under section 7 (B) – with all its limitations –
would quite likely still be masquerading as Labour MPs.
Even if the minority’s proposed re-selection procedure is
accepted, however, it would still be necessary for CLPs to have the
ultimate power to recall their MP other than at a once-and-for-all
re-selection meeting.
Conference is now faced with a clear choice: either accept the
diluted proposals of the Majority Report – which would leave
the Party worse off than before – or support the proposals of the
Minority, placed before conference in the constitutional amendments
from Brighton Kemptown and Chorley CLPs (Agenda, page 15).
 
Votes
Whether or not the genuine proposals for mandatory re-selection
carry the day, one thing is clear: the Party will not indefinitely
tolerate disguised Tories of the Gaitskell school within the ranks of
their parliamentary representatives.
In the coming period of sharpening political battles constituency
parties will not tolerate this situation – whatever the limitations
of the re-selection rules. Nevertheless, both to safeguard the
internal democracy of the Party and to minimise dissension and
outside interference by the press, it is vital that the mandatory
re-selection procedures demanded by the membership for so long are
carried through at this Conference.
Support the Minority Report! Vote for the Brighton
Kemptown Amendment!
 




The National Front candidate at a recent Brighton council by-election – despite bringing in helpers from all over Sussex – received a derisory 32 votes.
That night, after the announcement of the result – a Labour gain following a strong anti-fascist campaign – frustrated NF thugs in combat jackets toured the area looking for isolated Labour supporters to beat up.
In the days that followed, the local Labour Party headquarters was attacked several times and bricks were thrown through the windows. Leading Labour activists received abusive and threatening phone calls in the dead of night.
 
Volunteers
The Brighton and Hove Committee Against Racialism and Fascism, led by its convenor, Labour Party member and ‘Militant’ supporter Rod Fitch, swung into action. A defence group was formed with a communications system so that within minutes of any possible attack they would be on the spot. The surrounding area was leafleted, and there was no shortage of volunteers to keep an eye on Labour’s premises.
Rod Fitch has been a particular target for the NF in this area, the home of Tyndall and a centre from which their activities, including finance and publications are directed. Practically all of Rod’s street came forward and offered to keep his house under surveillance, and to be ready to respond to any call for assistance.
Rod has wielded together an effective Committee based solidly on the labour movement, well supported by minority groups and the local Jewish community.
Having failed to intimidate him by the usual methods, one of the NF members took out a private summons alleging that he had been assaulted by Rod.
However, even a policeman called by the NF who was on the spot where the alleged “assault” took place stated he saw no such assault. This was confirmed by other witnesses who, despite threats, were prepared to give evidence.
Rod was acquitted.
In the same Court the next day, however, Paul Trill, agent for the NF candidate, admitted he had followed two young anti-fascists onto a bus and punched and kicked them.
Trill, of course, strenuously denied that he was part of an NF pack on the look out for anti-fascists to beat up.
He was fined £100 with £40 costs.
It was interesting to note that while on the previous day the NF were very much in evidence in the public gallery – they included Regional Organiser “Parker”, Tyndall’s father-in-law – not one was present to support Trill. He had to face the music alone.
“We have learned a lot from these events,” Rod Fitch told Militant. “Our determination is stronger and our organisation has been reinforced. While our campaigning work and investigations continue, our self-defence will be kept on the alert in the event of any backlash by the fascists.”
 




There is growing anger through Constituency Labour Parties following the circulation of the Preliminary Agenda for this year’s Annual Conference [released 23 July]. From reports that we have received to date it appears that well over a hundred resolutions from CLPs and trade unions, have been excluded from the Agenda.
It is striking that, compared to last year’s Agenda, which included 436 resolutions, this year’s prints only 339. This is leaving aside between 30 and 40 amendments to party rules, many of them supported by the Campaign for Labour Party Democracy and excluded from last year’s agenda, which are being held over until the Final Agenda.
This is an attempted repetition, on an even bigger scale, of last year’s arbitrary use of Standing orders to chop up and politically censor resolutions more blatantly than at any time since the days of Gaitskell and right-wing supremacy in the Labour Party.
Again, as last year, party secretaries have been telephoned by Transport House in an attempt to pressurise them into dropping parts of their resolutions, decided on by Management Committee meetings, as the price of ensuring that they actually appear on the Agenda.
Resolutions calling for a 35-hour week, public works schemes, and other measures against unemployment have been excluded. So have resolutions opposing incomes policy and calling for a minimum wage.
Others calling for industrial democracy and the nationalisation of the monopolies have been ruled out of order.
Just a glance at the Agenda shows that the majority of the remaining resolutions could equally well be classed as “covering more than one subject” or liable to be ruled out of order under the “three-year rule” – the pretexts that have been used for removing particular political policies which CLPs want discussed at conference.
Who is responsible for this censorship of policies and demands by the rank and file? Is it the full-time officials? Has the Conference Arrangements Committee discussed all these resolutions? Does the NEC know what’s going on? Will they intervene on behalf of the disenfranchised Constituency parties and trade unions?
All constituency parties should demand that all resolutions submitted by affiliated organisations must be included in the Agenda. The compositing meetings and conference itself, after considering the Conference Arrangement’s Committee’s recommendations, must decide what is debated at our conference in October.
Meanwhile, we appeal to all CLPs and other affiliated bodies who may have had their resolutions dropped, cut or queried to inform us urgently, so that the rank and file of the party may be fully alerted to what is happening.
 




The Crossman diaries are supposed to be an insight into the workings of government and the process of decision making. What they in fact reveal is:

How the top civil servants and the Treasury official determine policy – whatever government is in power.
 
How Labour Ministers can become completely divorced from the labour movement itself.
 
How they enjoy the company of the wealthy and the junketing that goes with it.

The diaries describe the jostling for positions, the plotting and general lack of principle of some of the careerists and place-seekers who entered Labour Cabinets between 1964 and 1970.
The glaring insights into what right wing Labour leaders say in the privacy of 10 Downing Street as opposed to Labour Party Conferences provides a devastating exposure of their real attitudes and motivation. For instance Crossman wrote on Wednesday May 29, 1968:
“I stayed behind [after a Cabinet meeting] to discuss with the PM. Mr Callaghan’s notorious speech to the fireman’s union ... He had apparently told them without any qualification that there would be no more legislation on incomes and prices. Harold said ‘That fellow’s getting above himself. We much teach him a lesson. I will do so after Cabinet tomorrow.’”
It was a bit different from his “10% only” strictures to the firemen today! Well Crossman had no doubt about the reasons for Callaghan’s attitude to the firemen in 1968. He tells about a meeting he says he had with him over some drinks in the smoking room that same evening.
“I added, rather maliciously: ‘This is the electioneering season, of course, for the seats on the National Executive. Last year in order to get the trade union vote you knifed Michael Stewart in the back when he was trying to do the prices and incomes policy at the DEA. Now you seem to be knifing Barbara [Castle] in the back.’ ... At this point his temper began to rise: ‘How often did you or Barbara knife me in the back in those three years when I was Chancellor? I’ve never forgotten how, time after time, you went behind my back to the Prime Minister and tried to destroy me. You got your own way against me. Why shouldn’t I get my own back?’”
If Crossman’s account of this incredible outburst is true then the veil of solemn statesmanship is torn away to reveal the childish tantrums of a man who is now Prime Minister of Britain. If it is not true, then the fact that it was written at all would indicate the cynical Byzantine scheming of an equally experienced Government Minister. Either way, it is not exactly an attractive advertisement for a socialist movement.
The diaries are full of instances of this kind, involving many members of the Cabinet. Principle and policy, not to mention socialism, are pushed into the background. Like the courts of medieval Kings, they try to out-manoeuvre one another and curry favour with those they think can give them a leg up the ladder to power and privilege, or at least keep the rung they already hold.
At the time when the debate was raging throughout the labour movement over ‘In Place of Strife’, that infamous attempt by the right wing labour leaders to shackle the trade unions by restrictive and punitive legislation, while the living standards of the working class were being held back as a result of incomes policy, Crossman alleged that Barbara Castle and her husband, together with the Crossmans, were cruising in a luxury yacht provided by Sir Charles Forte. This prominent member of the ruling class owns a number of the hotels and restaurants that have been involved in union recognition disputes recently, where his management have tried to deny their workers democratic rights to join the labour movement. Crossman’s entries on April 14 and May 23, 1969, describe this trip.
“On Thursday we are off to Italy for our holiday. Barbara is tremendously keen to keep it a secret that we are going on Charles Forte’s yacht [I wonder why? – RA], so we are simply saying we are going to a villa near Rome ... When we got to Rome last night there were two cars waiting for us and a very sleek Café Royal waiter, Gino, waiting for us who had been specially flown out to look after us. Gorgeous vessel. We had wonderful food, wonderful drink, every comfort laid on.”
There are a number of revealing entries about the date and preparation for the 1970 General Election.
Wednesday April 29, 1970: “At Management Committee we talked about electoral prospects. He [Harold Wilson] began of course by saying that one had to consider all the practical possibilities and at inordinate length he discussed the timing of the South African cricket tour, the timing of the Wakes Weeks, the timing of the Coventry shutdown week, not forgetting the World Cup at the end of June. These were the major factors that were to decide the date and possibility of victory. Past failure and future policy are hardly featured at all.”
 
Depressing
Sunday June 14, 1970: “We have given them three years of hell and high taxes. They’ve seen the failure of devaluation and felt the soaring cost of living.”
Sunday June 7, 1970: “He [Harold Wilson] has dispensed with practically all policy and there is no manifesto because there are no serious commitments at all.”
Another example of the contempt some right wing ministers have for the party they claim to represent is revealed in a conversation that Crossman allegedly had with Roy Jenkins on March 23, 1970.
“Roy said he never finds Birmingham quite as depressing as I find Coventry. But I remember Jennifer [Roy Jenkin’s wife]. She said to him ‘You haven’t canvassed there for 24 years.’”
It must be awful for these jolly nice chaps to have to occasionally spend time in that depressing environment in which millions of workers have to spend their whole lives.
Never mind, it’s back to reality in an entry dated July 13:
“At a reception at Lancaster House I met two people from Nuneaton. They said to me: ‘We are just ordinary comrades, somebody slipped and asked us to come and we wondered what we were doing here. Isn’t this the kind of party the Tories hold?’ ‘Well yes,’ I said, ‘I should say that 98% of the guests would be here whatever party was in power. This is an establishment party, it’s true.’” And what was the advice Crossman gave to the two comrades? “’Let’s be grateful for it and have a drink together.’”
That last remark shows how many Labour Members of Parliament quickly adapt themselves socially – and politically – to the needs of the ruling class.
Once again the capitalists had succeeded in tearing up Labour’s Manifesto and foisting pro-capitalist policies on a pliable Labour government. The election was lost but, no matter as far as ex-Cabinet Ministers were concerned, their lifestyles went happily on. It was the mass of the working people who had to face the onslaught from Selsdon man.
Perhaps the clearest self-condemnation is Crossman’s description of his farewell to the Queen:
“I asked her whether she minded elections. She said ‘Yes, it means knowing a lot of new people.’ I suppose that’s it. She doesn’t notice that much difference between Conservative and Labour and for her all this simply means that just when he has begun to know us she had to meet another terrible lot of politicians.”
Conditions determine consciousness. Just as the plush lifestyle of the Labour leaders is a million miles removed from the reality of working class living conditions, so are their political aims entirely different from those of the labour movement. Workers join the Labour Party to fight for the socialist transformation of society, the right wing’s reforms remain firmly within the bounds of capitalism.
It is time the Labour Party put its own house in order. A thorough-going socialist programme must be adopted by the party – a programme that would sweep away the contrasts of opulent wealth and poverty, the privilege and corruption forever. And only those who are prepared to make sacrifices and struggle for a socialist society should be entrusted with leadership.
The party must safeguard its socialist aims and ideals by electing all officials and representatives, subject to the right of instant recall. These representatives should receive no more than the average wage of a skilled worker plus necessary expenses audited by the movement. They must give a written undertaking to carry out the party policy democratically decided by Party conference. Then we will have a fighting, socialist leadership we can be proud of.
 




As part of the 21st of April National Campaign and day of
action against fare increases and cuts in services, East Sussex
busmen lobbied County Hall, Lewes.
During the preceding week they had taken their case to the public
by leafleting in the main shopping areas. The response was
overwhelming. In two days in Brighton alone 2,300 leaflets had been
signed and returned, pledging support for the busmen’s case,
including one with a pound note from an old age pensioner.
They have also been given offers of support from shop stewards’
in the factories, pensioners’ organisations, tenants’
associations, Labour Parties, Coops, Trades Council, “Transport
2,000” and others. Some members of the taxi men’s branch have
raised the question of the local authority owning and operating their
taxis as part of a planned transport system.
Brighton busmen now have an elected rank and file campaign
committee whose job will be to bring to the attention of the general
public what further cutbacks will mean and to plan further action to
save and improve services. As a number of busmen on the lobby put it:
“This must not be seen as letting off steam, but the start of a
massive national campaign.”
The busmen were critical of the lack of a real lead by the
national and regional leadership of their union, the TGWU. Brian
Avey, the Chairman of 1/402 branch, said:
“Too much has been left to local initiative. We are
prepared to do that but it has its limitations. We are dealing with a
national transport undertaking and with a Labour government that is
ignoring the policies of its own Party. The principles of both can
only be changed by mass national action, properly planned and co-ordinated.”
Indeed the whole of the transportation industry needs planning and
co-ordinating. “Nationalisation, integration and planning, together
with democratic workers’ control and management, has long been the
policy of the movement. Its time it was implemented” said Len
Coombes, who is also Vice President of Brighton and Hove Trades Council.
Brian Avey explained the lunacy and shortsightedness of the
merry-go-round of fare increases, loss of passengers, more cut backs,
higher fares and a consequent further loss of passengers. Rural areas
are becoming isolated. Pensioners and mothers with young children are
becoming confined to their homes as they can’t afford to travel.
“The criteria for bus services must be a social one and not
the fare box” was how one driver put it. Another illustrated the
folly of continued fare increases with the example of the bus he
operates. In the three weeks before a fare increase he carried an
average of 325 passengers a shift and took Â£37.40, After the
increases the number of passengers dropped to 251 for Â£33.97. “Make
sense of that” he said.
Brian Avey told us of the busmen’s efforts to win the public
over to their side. “This is essential”, he said, “because if
strike action becomes necessary, owing to our pleas continuing to
fall on deaf ears, the public will be greatly inconvenienced. We have
to hammer home the message that whatever temporary hardship results
from any action we may be forced to take, it will be nothing compared
to the permanent damage that will be done to the economic and social
fabric of society if we allow cuts to continue.
“We are calling on all our branches to affiliate and
send their maximum delegations to Trades Councils and Labour Parties.
We want our members to become involved in Ward branches, to put
pressure on councillors and MPs. There is too much lip service paid
to our campaign, its time they started acting or be replaced.”
Our main demands are:




Stop the Cuts
No fare increases
Free travel for pensioners
No redundancies
A 35 hour week with no loss of pay<
Full co-operation between road and rail
For an integrated, publicly owned transport system run
under democratic workers’ control and management




 




There is no doubt that the Labour government’s continuing
failure to fully carry out its election pledges, let alone even begin
to implement the promised “fundamental and irreversible shift in
the balance of wealth and power in favour of working people and their
families,” has deeply angered Labour Party members.
The continual flouting of Party Conference decisions by the
Parliamentary Party has made 83 Constituency Parties and NOLS send in
motions demanding automatic re-selection of Labour MPs between each
election. York CLP further demands that MPs should hand over “any
remuneration from any source over and above the average wage of a
skilled worker together with legitimate expenses” to the Labour
Party in attempt to stop careerists using the Labour Party as a
ladder to fortune and riches.
But as we have reported before, much of the Party members’ anger
is not shown on the Final Agenda due to the right wing controlled
Conference Arrangements Committee ruling out of order 106 motions out
of the 524 originally submitted. It is not only Constituency Parties
which have suffered, unions like AUEW-Engineering Section, NUPE,
AUEW-TASS, and ACTT have had their resolutions chopped as the CAC has
tried to cut out the most critical resolutions.
This has resulted in a sharp drop in the number of resolutions in
some of the key areas, as this table shows:



 


 


1976


 


1977




Incomes Policy


15


3




Employment


11


7




Public Expenditure


18


1




Public Ownership


11


0




Racialism


21


2



They hope to remove the most severe criticisms of the government
and calls for socialist policies from the Conference floor.
But in spite of these manoeuvres (and an apparent effort by the
right wing ‘Campaign for a Labour Victory’ to get a few motions
in) the overwhelming majority of the agenda is hostile to the
government’s policy.
Paisley CLP calls upon the Conference to reject the “government’s
economic strategy which has led to: (a) a totally unacceptable record
level of unemployment; (b) an average reduction in real wages of 12%
since January 1975; (c) inflation still running at 17%; (d) cuts in
public spending which have seriously damaged working class living
standards.” Coventry South East CLP adds in an amendment that these
policies have made possible “the return of a Thatcher or equally
reactionary coalition government.”
This motion [no. 36] sees socialist policies “as
the only practical way out of the crisis” and calls for the
government to “implement Clause 4[IV] of the Party Constitution.”
The growing calls for the government to stop carrying out
Tory-style economic policies is echoed in all the resolutions on the
Lib-Lab deal. Not a single resolution or amendment supports this
rotten pact. Brighton Kemptown CLP demands that the “government
breaks the deal and ends all negotiations with pro-capitalist parties
and an end to pro-capitalist policies.”
All the motions in this section put forward the same call for the
Labour government to attempt to carry through Parliament socialist
policies. If, as is likely, such socialist measures are defeated in
the Commons then it would be necessary for the government to call an
election and clearly explain why it was essential to implement these
policies as the only way to fundamentally improve working people’s standards.
All the resolutions on unemployment reflect the labour movement’s
anger at the scandal of the ever-increasing number of unemployed.
Unfortunately the CAC has succeeded in cutting out most of the
resolutions putting forward a clear socialist, fighting programme
against unemployment, though the Manchester Central motion on Youth
Unemployment does put forward the demands of the Labour Party Young
Socialists and the Youth Campaign Against Unemployment.
There is no doubt that racialism will once again be a key issue at
the Conference, though the CAC has ruled out of order all the motions
supporting last year’s anti-fascist Conference policy, even the
Party Chairman’s own CLP has had its motion dropped! This has meant
that there is no comprehensive programme to fight the racists and
fascists in the motions. But Deptford CLP, which helped organise the
counter-demonstration against the National Front in Lewisham, has an
amendment down which calls on the labour movement to “organise
counter-demonstrations against provocative marches by fascists” and
for a Conference of Labour to be held to discuss how to defend
immigrants from attack.
The one section of the agenda where the CAC has done the least
damage is that on Northern Ireland, though it cut out a resolution
calling for the formation of a Trade Union Defence Force to defend
Catholic and Protestant workers. All the motions in this section call
on the Labour Party to help organise a conference of all labour
movement organisations “to establish a Labour Party” with a
“programme capable of uniting Protestant and Catholic workers in
common struggle under the banner of socialism.”
 
Principles
It is likely that the Labour leadership will attempt to mute the
Party’s criticism of the government’s performance by appealing
for party unity in the beginning of the run-up to the next election.
We are all in favour of unity, but unity around a programme that will
answer working people’s needs, not a programme which has meant a
million and a half unemployed, falling living standards and a
disastrous run of losses in the local and by-elections.
Party members will do well to remember the comment of Hugh Dalton
on the 1929–31 debacle of a Labour government that Labour members
“should have kicked up more row, been less loyal to leaders and
more loyal to principles.” No matter what tricks the CAC get up
to it is certain that this year’s Party Conference will see even
more demands from Labour’s ranks for socialist policies.
 




The most important Party issue at this year’s Conference as
far as Constituency Parties are concerned is control over their
parliamentary representatives.
This is reflected in over 80 resolutions on the final agenda. The
motivation that lies behind the move for more control over Members of
Parliament by the Party is, of course, the abandonment of the 1974
election Manifesto by the government, and the utter lack of respect
they have for Conference decisions. For instance, even before the
Conference had discussed the question down for debate last year
Callaghan and Healy were assuring the City that if the Conference
decided the banks should be nationalised they wouldn’t implement
such measures.
This demonstrates the blatant disregard for the rank and file
shown by many member of the Cabinet and Parliamentary Party, yet not
one of them would be where they are today without the
self-sacrificing work of thousands of unpaid activists of our Party.
There are far too many in top positions in the Party and in
Parliament who use the movement to advance their own careers. In
their lifestyle they are a million miles removed from the problems
that are faced by working class families, many of them spending more
on one meal than a pensioner has to live on for a week. This is why
this paper will continue to fight for the labour movement to have the
right of recall over all its representatives, who should be paid a
wage no higher than that of a skilled worker plus necessary expenses
vetted by the movement. In this way we will get a leadership prepared
to fight for socialism and the working class.
 
CLPD
We support the present moves for automatic reselection as being a
step in the right direction. The Campaign for Labour Party Democracy
have done a good job in highlighting and campaigning round this
issue. But unfortunately we don’t think they have given enough
thought to the rule changed they have recommended.
For instance, the amendment that is proposed doesn’t say who is
to decide when the selection conference is to take place. One would
have thought that this is too important to leave open to
interpretation. This must be a decision for the General Management
Committees to make.
Also, if we look at the way they propose to amend the present rule
(Clause XIV section 7) it is done in such a way that deletes
paragraph (B). This paragraph gives the General Committees the right
at any time at a specially convened meeting to intimate by resolution
its desire that their Member of Parliament must retire at the next
General Election.
No matter how difficult this may be in practice it can be done if
all the procedure is correctly followed and the necessary support is
there. Why delete this paragraph, so essential as a safeguard against
the misuse that will undoubtedly be made of the vagueness of the
automatic reselection procedure?
To give one example, let us assume in a given case it is decided
that a reselection conference takes place twelve months after a
General Election and the Member of Parliament is reselected. Then
shortly afterwards he votes against the wishes of Conference and for
the retention of the House of Lords, or comes into conflict with the
General Committee over some other issue. How is he or she then going
to be removed? We could, without paragraph (B), be saddled with them
for a further eight years if two Parliaments went the full term.
 
Wokingham
Therefore we urge support for the Wokingham rule amendment
which retains Paragraph [B] and includes the right for the General
Committees to decide when the automatic reselection conference takes place.
 




“We have done more from outside in a few short
months to reduce the influence of the left than the right wing of the
Labour Party has done in a decade.”
That was how Liberal leader David Steel summed up the results of
the Lib-Lab deal at the end of last week’s Liberal Conference.
Steel made no bones about which side of the class struggle he
stood on as he attacked the Labour Party Conference in advance for
what he called the Party’s “weak-kneed capitulation to the more
intolerant demands of trade unionism – imposed closed shops and the
extension of trade disputes by mass picketing.” For all the
sympathetic phrases these so-called Liberals use, Steel’s two
speeches at his Party’s Conference showed that when the chips were
down they stand for the maintenance of so-called ‘private
enterprise’ dominated by big business. The only difference between
the Tories and Liberals were secondary differences, of the tactics
and the career interests of their leaders.
Other Liberal leaders made clear their hatred of the labour
movement. Liberal President Gruffydd Evans described the Labour Party
as “nothing more than an instrument organised often along Stalinist
lines.” Liberal chairman Geoffrey Tordoff spoke of the Liberals
fighting the “evil, dictatorial doctrine of Trotskyism”. He went
on to call for classic Tory policies like the “shifting of the
balance of taxation from direct to indirect.”
 
Tail
Steel’s earlier speech spoke of the ‘successes’ that the
Lib-Lab pact have brought. He said:
“We can and have stopped nationalisation ... We can and
will oppose those cuts in defence spending which would take us below
our obligations to collective security in NATO.”
In spite of this deal, Steel showed his underlying hatred of the
labour movement’s aim of transforming society when he claimed that
the “onward march of bureaucratic takeover and control remain the
aim of Labour.”
Steel summed up the period of the Deal as the time when “the
Liberal tail wagged the dog”! Thus he blurted out the truth about
this deal: the Liberals will only support the government so long as
it carries out capitalist policies. The labour leaders argue that as
the government is in a minority it has no alternative but to drop it
more radical policies and attempt to hang on until it stands a chance
of winning an election, and that the Deal only formalises the situation.
This is nonsense. The central questions facing the Party are: why
did we lose the majority which the Party won in October 1974, and
what should the government do now?
It is the failure of the government to deliver the goods it
promised in the 1974 elections which has caused the party to lose
both parliamentary and council elections. If the government continues
with its present policy of trying to manage the present diseased
capitalist economy it will be incapable of solving the problems
facing the working class and make it very difficult for Labour to win
the next election.
But the Liberals will only support the Labour government as
long as it continues to carry out the suicidal policy of working
within the existing economic structure. If the Labour government
attempted to carry out radical measures, the Liberals would
immediately withdraw their support. This is precisely the Liberal
leaders’ role; to act as a guard dog for big business, ensuring
that the government does not make any attempt to edge towards
anything that could be interpreted as socialism.
 
Alternative
The policies which the Labour government has to carry out to
retain Liberal support are the direct opposite of those on which it
was elected. The way to ensure the survival of the government is not
for the Labour leaders to mortgage themselves to the Liberals, but to
adopt socialist policies capable of winning the mass support
necessary which alone can sustain a Labour government in office.
 




At every one of the Conferences this weekend, the rank and file
of the Movement will be pressing hard for the new Labour Government
to carry out bold working class policies. They will be shouting loud
and clear to the leaders of the Movement – No retreat! Carry out
your Manifesto! The whole working class is looking to you for a lead.
DON’T FAIL US THIS TIME!
Up to a thousand delegates from Unions, Constituency Parties,
Trades Councils and Young Socialist branches will be at the
Conference in London called by the Clay Cross Labour Party. At the
same time, two other vital Trade Union Conferences and the Annual
Conference of Labour Women will be taking place (see other pages for reports).
Since the election, not a day has passed without the Tories baring
their teeth in rage. These hypocritical parasites, these true and
faithful representatives of the rich and powerful, have foamed at the
mouth with anger at the slightest hint of measures designed to
benefit the workers.
Just the suggestion of measures however mild, designed to
interfere with their sacred rights to make profits out of the labour
of the working class has unleashed a furious onslaught on the Trade
Unions and the Labour Party through their press.
They have organised a veritable conspiracy to prevent the Labour
Government from carrying through its programme. Let alone the
sweeping socialist measures which are needed to solve the problems of
the workers!
Look at the issue which has provoked the Clay Cross Conference –
the surcharging and ban from office of the eleven councillors. They
stood out against the Tory Housing Finance Act. For their tremendous
service to the movement the new Labour Government has refused to lift
these fines!
Under the pressure of the Tories screaming about “the Law”,
Tony Crosland has retreated and disgracefully allowed the threat of
enforcement of these surcharges to hang over the Clay Cross
councillors. Some 400 other Labour councillors who for a period
resisted the Housing Finance Act, could be affected.
But not only on Clay Cross has there been a retreat by the
leaders: Shrewsbury pickets; wage restraint while prices still soar;
frigates for the Chilean butchers; education cuts; wealth tax ...
The message of the rank and file will be to tell Labour to ignore
the pressures of the rich and STICK TO YOUR GUNS! In that way they
will get mass support. It is no accident that the Labour Party in
Clay Cross has had record votes in local elections. If their policy
of refusing to be bludgeoned by the Tories or their state officials
were to be taken up nationally then Labour could command overwhelming support.
Labour must push ahead with its full programme whatever the
resistance of the Tories. The alternative road which the leaders have
already started down will lead to disillusion and despair among the
ranks of Labour’s working class support. Those millions who were
thoroughly discontented with the Tories but did not support Labour at
the election will be confirmed in their political prejudices.
If the Labour leaders argue that they are holding back in order to
avoid a defeat they are wrong. They are preparing the way for defeat!
The fact that they are a minority Government must not be used as
an excuse. The way to turn that into a massive majority is by putting
up a fight! Labour must press ahead with its programme of social
reforms and challenge the Tories to bring them down on that.
Labour has promised great improvements in health, education,
pensions, housing and other social services. Let the Tories be seen
to be the ones opposing these. Male it clear that they oppose them
because THEIR capitalist system cannot afford them.
Why should Labour have to get the odium for carrying through Tory
measures? Anyway, what is the point of staying in office if you
cannot carry through measures in the workers’ interests?
If they immediately push ahead with the programme the Tories
and Liberals might defeat them in Parliament. But then challenge them
to an election! On that basis, with a vigorous campaign, they could
win a landslide.
The Tories are “running scared”, in fear of an election
because of their lack of support. Labour should seize the opportunity
to hit them hard – kick them while they are down – we can be sure
that the Tories don’t obey any “gentleman’s rules”. For them
and so it must be for the Labour Movement, it is war to the end!
But even the programme of the Labour Party only tinkers with the
system, and even that is being put off because of the terrible crisis
of British capitalism. It is only through a socialist programme that
the resistance of the rich can be swept aside and the real problems
of the mass of the population really tackled.
Labour should call the Tories’ bluff. Defeat them in an
election. Carry through an Enabling Act to give them powers to
immediately take over the commanding heights of the economy. Mobilise
the trade unions and the whole of the movement to defend this.
 




The Labour Party Conference meets only six weeks after the
General Election. But already it has been six weeks of storm and
stress.
Every worker will be looking to the conference for a lead. Its
main purpose must be to sum up the experience of those weeks, of the
election itself, and indeed of the seven months prior of Minority
Government. It must draw a balance sheet of what has been
achieved: which commitments have been taken up, and which have been
shelved? On this basis the whole rank and file of the movement can
prepare themselves for the trials ahead.
Every delegate is conscious of the parlous state of the economy.
The rampant inflation, the beginnings of recession and lay-offs. The
crisis already being unloaded onto the backs of working people is
reaching frightening proportions.
The election resulted in a crushing defeat for the Tories –
35% of the poll, the lowest ever. Working people showed their hatred
for Heath and his backers – the gang of property swindlers,
speculators, monopolists and bankers.
The furore inside the Tory ranks since the election has led Walker
to warn them against further decline, pointing out that they have
been reduced to an “English Party”, only of the countryside and
the suburbs. Labour’s victory was solidly based on the industrial towns.
But the battering of the major party of the rich is small comfort
to the major party of the workers, when it could only get 40% of the
vote – less than in 1970 when they lost! The major
responsibility for this must lie with the Labour leadership.
Without an enthusiastic campaign, with policies which could hardly
be distinguished from those of the Tories and Liberals, with calls
for sacrifice in the ‘national interest’ was it so surprising
that millions of workers abstained, or voted for Nationalist or even
Liberal candidates?
Nevertheless, the conference meets under a Labour Government.
The attitude of the rank and file must be that “a majority of one
is enough”. The manifesto commits them to an “irreversible
shift in the balance of power and wealth”. It is on that sort of
commitment and all the other measures in the interests of working
people, that the rank and file are pressing for action.
On the other side, exactly as we warned, like a pack of wolves,
the capitalists are snapping at the heels of the Labour leaders,
houding them along their path. In advance of the election the CBI set
up a hue and cry about the imminent bankruptcy of hundreds of
companies unless the Government took action to “restore profitability”.
To back this up these gentlemen who hurl abuse at workers
struggling for a living wage, organised their own “strikes of
capital”. Pilkingtons and Hawker Siddely, to name the most obvious,
openly blackmailed the Government by declaring an end to investment projects.
There has been a virtual “general strike” of investment over
recent months. The carefully timed reports of the CBI delivered the
day before the budget, forecast “that unless there were major
changes in Government policy, manufacturing investment next year
might show a dramatic decline of 10%.
And they talk of democracy! These handful of unelected directors
who control the boards of the big monopolies are dictating to the
Labour Government. They have shown their snarling teeth, when they
threaten massive unemployment if they are not given what they want.
But it has to be said that the Government has given in to this
blackmail. What shop steward worth his salt would accept so
easily the “poverty pleading”, begging-bowl approach of the
management? That is what has happened in Healey’s budget!
Lever, Williams, Wilson, Healey and other have all promised the
wolves their goodies would be delivered. Yes, they agree,
“profitability” must be restored.
The Queen’s speech excluding important proposals such as the
nationalisation of ports and road haulage was an ill omen. It
opened the way for the entirely pro-capitalist budget.
Handouts of £1600m have been made to Big Business. They will flow
quickly, paid for directly or indirectly by the working class.
“Starving” capitalists will get their help immediately. The
crumbs left over for the working people in the form of family
allowances and pension increases will be delayed until the Spring.
Why? By then their value will have been much eroded. Isn’t the
“cash crisis” for pensioners and young families as important as
that of the bloated monopolists?
The real nature of this budget is shown by the hymns of praise to
Denis Healey in the pages of financial newspapers. “A budget to
keep business afloat” said the financial editor of the Times. “Long
Strides in the direction of tough orthodoxy ... the ordinary trade
union member and other worker is hit by almost every measure and
helped by virtually none” said Peter Jay, economics editor of the Times.
But the capitalists are not satisfied. They were bargaining for
£3,000 million. Half a loaf is better than none? Not for them,
already they have their eyes on the rest.
More, More, More, is their insistent theme. They have got
the price code “relaxed”. As if it hadn’t nearly nodded off
already. So relaxed is it now that it will have lost what energy it
ever had to stop an avalanche of price increase this winter.
Between September and October prices rose by 2.3%, triggering
the final three thresholds. That’s an annual rate of over 40%.
Quite rightly the left wing Tribune group in parliament have
objected strongly to this budget. But what else could be expected on
the basis of capitalism? Their alternative, a National Enterprise
Board, would in no way touch the problem which faces the Government
and the whole movement – the colossal power of the 250 major monopolies.
It is they who hold the reins of power. An NEB would merely
irritate the capitalists, who have stated clearly on dozens of
occasions that they would sabotage it. Their power to do this can be
glimpsed at by the actions of their advance guard at Pilkingtons.
The Tribune MP’s would be pushed into the same positions as the
right wing if they remained within the framework of capitalism. While
the millionaires control the economy they will dictate policy. It is
only by mobilising the might of the movement that Labours policies
can be implemented.
A diseased broken down economy such as the British capitalists
have saddled the people with, demands that the working class pay the
price for its survival. Cuts in living standards of ten to twenty per
cent are what are needed, on a capitalist basis, to “restore
profitability”.
Crosland made a joke in Parliament about keeping rate increases to
100%. But its no joke for local authorities facing bankruptcy.
Prentice said in relation to the “social contract”, that it
applies “unhappily” to “school children as well ...”!
It just so happens that Newham, the borough in which Prentice’s
constituency lies, has come top of the list to qualify for special
help to its schools. A young teacher there told the Times
about truants ...
“I often find that the child just has not got the will
power to wake up in the morning. There are families of eight, nine,
ten children living in terrible conditions, fathers in prison, broken
homes, crumbling damp, rat infested terrace houses ... I keep a
supply of shoes, coats and anoraks. One kid didn’t turn up at
school for four days and then turned up in his mothers’ boots.”
And Prentice would “suffer little children to make these
sacrifices” to prop up this rotten capitalist system! The budget
cuts spell disaster for the Newhams all over Britain.
 
Disaster
The road already taken by this Government leads to disaster.
They have capitulated to the pressure of Big Business. But they will
not keep the capitalist wolves from the door – their appetite is
amazing! They are already howling for more cuts.
Above all they are plotting to bring down the Government when
the time is right. All the weapons to stab it in the back are
being sharpened. The disarray of the Tories makes it necessary for
Big Business to wait a while. They intend to use the inactivity of
the Labour leaders and their carrying out of capitalism’s dirty
work to discredit them.
At a certain stagethey will start the well rehearsed campaign for
a “Government of National Unity”. Blaming the crisis on
“socialism” they will try to split the Labour Cabinet from top to
bottom and set up a National Government. Assisted by some of those
Labour leaders who feel more at home in a boardroom than a Labour
Party room, they would attempt to implement measures of austerity
which make the present budget look generous! It would be a savage
Tory Government in faint disguise!
There is only one way to avert the catastrophe! Mobilise
the enormous strength of the movement to force through the programme.
Bob Cryer, MP for Keighley said “that a crisis should be a reason
for imposing Labour’s policies not running away from them.” Quite
right! But mobilising the whole movement against the capitalists’
resistance to take over the 250 monopolies is the only way Labour’s
policies can be implemented.
How easy it would be! Those faint hearts who fear socialist
policies should learn from the election work conducted by the Labour
Party Young Socialists. If the Labour Leaders were to explain that a
clique of monopolists were holding the country to ransom, that they
stood in the way of decent wages, secure jobs, decent education and
hospitals, the solution of the housing nightmare, overwhelming
support would be there to change society.
An enabling act through Parliament to nationalise the major
monopolies, with the compensation paid out according to need, would
be defended by the ten million strong movement and millions of others.
Instead of pussyfooting with utopian “planning agreements” a
real socialist plan of production of production could be introduced.
That could be explained in concrete terms: 100,000 building workers
out of work; 750,000 million bricks stockpiled and 30% brick making
capacity shut down; plus a worsening housing crisis add up to
capitalist stupidity. On the basis of a planned economy these
resources could be used to build one million houses a year and more.
Contrary to all pessimists, Britain is a wealthy country. Its
total wealth adds up to a staggering £400,000 million! With the
skill of its people, organised in the interests of need not profit, a
20 hour week could be introduced with production leaping ahead! The
tragedy is that a Labour Government “rules” while a handful of
parasites utilises the wealth for their own ends.
If Labour were to raise these points as its battle cry, not a
Tory would be left! But the question of a socialist programme is
linked to the question of Party democracy. The clash between the NEC
and the cabinet is a small rumble compared to the explosions ahead if
present policies are continued. But already the Times, organ
of Big Business, has raised this as a “constitutional question”.
They have hinted at “dictatorship” over the “elected
Government” by the NEC.
But who is dictating to who? Hasn’t the Cabinet been under
pressure from the capitalists from the day it took office? The
unelected parasites in the boardrooms of the monopolies have
dictated, extorting £16,000 million!
The Labour Government was elected to serve the interests of
working people. Without rank and file working class support, not one
Labour MP would have a ‘cat in hell’s chance’.
That much must be clear from the fate of Taverne and Mayhew!
Without the sacrifice and struggle of millions over the years, not
one of the Labour MP’s would be where he or she is. They must be
accountable to the rank and file of the constituencies and the
conference, and subject to recall.
Too many have climbed to fame and fortune on the backs of the
working class. Shop stewards and many local councillors work for the
movement without reward. So it should be with MP’s. We need class
fighters willing to live on the wage of a skilled worker, not looking
for high salaries and perks.
This conference must go on record in demanding that the Government
sweep aside the Monopolies and get on with the job it was elected to
do! Carry out its programme!
 




There are some items in the budget which will relieve some of
the misery of the poorest. A raising of the tax threshold for the
lowest paid, a penny off the price of milk and the food subsidies of
Â£500 million along with an increase in pensions to Â£10 and Â£16 and
unemployment pay increases of $1.25 for a single person and Â£2 for a
married man will all be supported.
But the real question arising from the budget is, who will pay? If
those measures above were the only ones then it would mark a small
step forward, but they are not. It is largely a question of “Robbing
Peter to pay Paul”. Even more massive price increases are in the
pipeline as a result of Labour’s proposals.
Neither are they increases to tax the “well off” or even
“higher paid” workers alone, they will cut into the budgets of
every working class family in Britain, soaking up most, if not all of
the apparent benefit from other measures.
A brief list should make this point:




Electricity up 30% in August.
Rail fares up 12½% in June.
Post and telephone charges up soon.
Steel up 25% immediately.
Petrol up 5p a gallon next week.
Increased VAT on sweets etc.
5p on a packet of cigarettes.
p on a pint of beer.




Every one of these increases will directly or indirectly raise the
cost of living even further for the working class. Apart from the
penny off milk, not one further reduction in price is proposed, the
food subsidies will only slow down (and not by very much) the rise in
food prices.
The small sums which some workers will save from a raising of the
tax threshold and reduction in the weekly insurance stamp will be
offset many times over by the other increases, along with inflation
in general.
Age Concern, a voluntary organisation assisting old people, have
pointed out that the new pension levels are not worth anything like
the original offer made by Labour after inflation since then. Since
the 1972 Conference when the figure was adopted the Â£10 has been
eroded by Â£1.69 which will be Â£2 in the summer.
Compared with the Tory offer of six monthly reviews and
compensation for inflation, the new figures are hardly better than
they otherwise might have got, by the time they actually get them.
An increase of corporation tax from 42% to 52% has been announced;
but most significant is that the promised wealth tax has been dropped
until “further notice”. This is a disgraceful retreat from
Labour’s Programme. All this will do is give the capitalists time
to readjust their affairs so that the tax, if introduced, will have
only a small effect, and at the same time enable them to mount a
massive campaign to press Labour to drop or drastically modify even
the mild proposals they have. At the same time we should recognise
that a wealth tax can have two effects: either it can be weakened by
amendments to make it ineffective; or if it really hits the rich,
then they will launch an “investment strike” thus sabotaging
Labour’s plans.
The capitalist press may well have lauded the “fairness” of
the budget, how the rich have been stung and so on, but the truth is
just the opposite. On the surface the rich are to be taxed at a
higher rate, the massive concessions to the rich made by the Tories
have to some extent been reversed by the budget, but in reality the
benefactors will be the blossoming tax avoidance industry!
There are 1001 ways in which the rich and the high salaried bosses
can avoid paying tax. The tax tables published in all the newspapers
showing, for example, that the Â£100,000 a year will be taxed by
another Â£6,000 or Â£7,000 a year miss the point (deliberately of
course) that no capitalist in that position would be seen dead paying
tax at those rates. An army of accountants are at his disposal to
make sure his affairs are so arranged that he pays as little as
possible, and as long as the capitalist system exists and the wealth
is in the hands of these parasites, then attempts to tax them
severely will rebound.
Once again, beneath the gloss, it is the workers who are being
asked to pay for the bosses’ crisis. All the praise for its
fairness from the press is designed to persuade the worker to accept
a “voluntary” incomes policy, to accept a cut in living standards
on the pretext that the misery is being shared around equally.
The games of the Daily Mirror have begun already. Its
headline for the day after the budget was “Now it is up to Jack
(Jones) and Hugh (Scanlon)”. The Mirror then said:
“Now it is up to the Trade Unions ... will they honour
their side of the social contract? ... Now they must show they are
ready to make a voluntary incomes policy work, ready to throw their
weight into the fight against inflation”.
This argument must be fought tooth and nail. The rate of inflation
is now 18.8% a year. This means that a worker with a family take-home
pay of Â£30 a week would need by the end of the year, at this
inflation rate, an extra Â£5.64 just to stand still! And that is take
home pay. It means a gross increase of Â£7–8 a week will be demanded
just to keep the same standards as now.
But look at what Len Murray of the TUC had to say on BBC1 TV: “The
broad sweep of the budget has been very much what we are looking for.
We’ll respond in terms of wage claims, I’m sure.”
Perhaps such an attitude from Murray is expected but even Jack
Jones of the TGWU who had opposed incomes policies and is seen to
stand on a left wing position said “workers will be making
sacrifices as a result of the budget. I believe they will do so willingly.”
In no sense is this a budget favourable to the working class. It
stands on the basis of capitalism. There are hardly any proposals to
even clip the finger-nails of the big monopolies who control the economy.
If Labour were ready to bring in a socialist budget it would be on
the basis of sweeping measures against the rich which could only be
implemented as part of a bold socialist programme. Such measures
would have to base themselves first and foremost on the
nationalisation of the 250 monopolies and the banks thus in real
terms making the rebuilding of society on socialist lines a possibility.
 




Seething with fury at the defeat of their party in the election, the rich have already aimed a blow at the Labour Government.
Pilkington Glass Company have declared a “strike of capital” if the Labour Government doesn’t give way to the demands being presented to them by the bosses’ trade union – the CBI.
On the Monday after the election they announced that their £150 million investment programme would be shelved “until such time as essential changes in taxation and price control are made”. Yet a £29 million scheme in Sweden is to go ahead.
Almost immediately Hawker Siddeley and Metal Box bosses came out in solidarity!
What else is this but the most blatant blackmail? They are sending the CBI leader to 10 Downing Street, with a savage threat to the Labour Government: “capitulate to us or else!”
 
“Democracy”
Remember the screams from these “gentlemen” when it was the other way around! When the workers took direct action against the vicious Tory attacks between 1970 and 1974, they were denounced as “blackmailers”, “outside the law”, “wreckers” and so on.
Howls went up that the “sanctity of Parliament” was violated. The Government had a “mandate”.
 
But What Else Are They Now Doing?
The workers who fought the Tory laws were part of the ten million strong labour movement, which, with their families, represent the vast majority of working people. The Pilkingtons and their friends in the other boardrooms represent a tiny, unelected, handful of parasites who own and control the economy and society.
They have probably been sent into the front line because they “are not short of money – the company is financially immensely strong and we intend to stay that way”.
Within days of the election the insolent demands of the rich demonstrate who are the real wreckers of society, who are the real “enemies of democracy”. Labour has a majority. Labour must stand up to this and every such demand from the rich.
They must immediately break the strike of these companies by nationalising them, with compensation according to need.
Labour must carry through its full programme. If the rich resist, as this shows they will, then mobilise the Labour Movement to go much further and take power and control out of their hands, through an Enabling Act to take over the commanding heights of the economy.
Sir Alastair Pilkington said “our first responsibility is to guarantee the successful continuity of the company”. Labour’s first responsibility is to the working class.
NO RETREAT!
 

