

One year after the second H-Block Hunger Strike reached its bitter climax with the death of Bobby Sands, the memory of the 10 dead Hunger Strikers has cast a dark shadow over the Catholic ghettoes of Northern Ireland. The mass demonstrations lie in the past as does the belief of 12 months ago that surely Britain’s days in Ireland were now numbered.
The very way the Hunger Strike ended, with the prisoners being forced to come off under moral pressure from their families, carefully orchestrated by the Catholic Church, led to bitter recriminations and deflected the focus of anger away from the British government. At one level the campaign in support of the prisoners’ demands for political status failed: in isolation the anger within the Northern ghettoes has given way to despair. After 12 years of struggle, after all the mass marches, climaxing in the 100,000 turn out at Bobby Sands funeral, exhaustion set in; an exhaustion which turned to despair with the failure to prevent the deaths in H-Block. It was a vicious circle which could only be broken by the mobilisation of the southern working class, something the H-Block Campaign failed to achieve. A limit had been reached which the H-Block Campaign had to cross: ‘the limit of what could be achieved by mass mobilisation within the boundaries of the six counties’, as International Socialism put it 13 years ago. [1]
Here we present an interim set of notes about the state of the struggle in the North twelve months after the Campaign, to be supplemented in the next issue of International Socialism with a discussion about the impact in the South.
 
The significance of the H-Block campaign
When the then Labour government withdrew political status at the beginning of 1976 and Keiran Nugent launched the blanket protest by refusing to wear prison uniform, the struggle in the Six Counties was at a low ebb. In the North the rise of the Peace People had been coupled with the reintroduction of the hated RUC into Catholic areas while in the South a vicious anti-Republican Coalition government was in power. The support for the H-Block protestors was almost entirely limited to their families grouped in the Relatives Action Committees. But by 1978 as the numbers turning out on the protest marches grew it was clear that something more was at stake than simply another Republican call to ‘support the Prisoners’. H-Block lay at the heart of the British government’s strategy to smash resistance ‘legally’ through special laws, the sanctioning of torture in interrogation centres like Castlereagh, lengthy periods on remand in gaol and the non-jury Diplock Courts. Not only was it clear that if the prisoners were labelled as criminals it would also brand the independence struggle as criminal too, but more importantly the demand for political status became the focus for all those in the ghettoes facing daily British repression.
 
The attitude of the Provisionals
That was something the Provisionals never grasped. Initially they thought the matter could be settled by negotiations with the British government as part of the 1975 truce talks. When that failed they attempted to solve the matter by shooting a sufficient number of prison officers! By 1978 a broad-based conference of the forces from which the National H-Block Campaign would be formed was held at Bernadette McAliskey’s initiative in Coalisland, with the Provisionals demanding it vote its support for their military campaign as a condition for unity. But by the onset of the first Hunger Strike they swung to claiming that the issue was essentially humanitarian.
A month before Bobby Sands death the Provisionals spelt out their attitude: ‘Victory or defeat in the prison struggle would not determine the course of the armed struggle but would be of more importance to the nationalist people and those who support the prisoners.’ [2]
In simple terms what counts is the military struggle not the mass demonstrations. Such militarism lies at the heart of Republican belief, for after all the aim of the Republican movement is to ‘restore’ the 32 County Republic by military means. Even for those on the Provo ‘Left’ grouped on Belfast, that was their essential framework. They favoured ‘mass action’ but always subordinate to the armed struggle, while holding back from breaking with the essentially right wing leadership in the South because of the need for the ‘Army of the Republic’ to be united in the face of the enemy.
 
The limits of militarism
Unfortunately not only could political status not be won by military means but it became clear last summer that although the Provos could carry out isolated military actions successfully they could not defend the ghetto areas from the terror the British army was unleashing.
By placing the military struggle on such a pinnacle it also automatically sidelined the thousands who were marching on the Falls Road for political status.
On the night the second hunger striker Francis Hughes died the angry crowds in west Belfast were told to clear the streets so the IRA could have a go. Not only were the military actions carried out ineffectual but as the Volunteers withdrew the Army and RUC flooded into the Catholic areas.
The weeks following the deaths of Ray McCreesh and Patsy O’Hara An Phoblacht, the Provisional paper stated: ‘On top of frustration there is a feeling of outrage – which will find no satisfactory channel until its conversion to IRA support’. [3]
Both the Provisionals and the Irish National Liberation Army stepped up their recruitment, particularly amongst the youth – but at the cost of political organisation in the ghettoes. For after all if defence of the ghettoes was in the hands of the IRA there was no need to organise mass harassment of British patrols, or mass pickets of British forts, both of which were carried out very effectively during the Hunger Strikes.
 
The weaknesses of the H-Block Campaign
In the absence of any clear strategy what became stressed within the National H-Block Campaign was the need for broad support. Whilst Provisional spokespersons could claim the mass demonstrations were proof of mass support for the Provo military campaign, in reality the focus was put on Fianna Fail in the South and the SDLP in the North in this search for broad support. The message seemed to be that if you won enough Fianna Fail TDs or SDLP Councillors then Thatcher would concede. It obscured the fact that Fianna Fail was the major capitalist party in the South with leaders who were not Republicans who’d gone off the rails by accepting partition; and that in the North the SDLP was the prop for British rule within the Catholic community – a prop that had to be destroyed.
What transformed the Campaign during the second Hunger Strike was the election of Bobby Sands as MP for Fermanagh and South Tyrone; which demonstrated both the support for the prisoners and the depth of resistance to British repression. However the SDLP in a traditionally weak area had stood down rather than face humiliation. A month later in the local elections after the deaths of both Bobby Sands and Francis Hughes the SDLP emerged strengthened from the local elections. The Provisionals had blocked moves to stand H-Block candidates claiming they were bound in principle to boycott partitionist elections. In Belfast those candidates who did stand in support of the Prisoners succeeded in removing both Gerry Fitt and all four Republic Clubs councillors (’Official’ Republicans who viciously attacked the Hunger Strike) from Belfast City Council.
At the height of the Hunger Strike in April, May or June the SDLP was either quiet or expressing ‘concern’ about the H-Block situation. By September and October they were spearheading an attack on the Hunger Strike claiming Britain had offered sufficient concessions and that the Provo leadership simply wanted to keep it going to create martyrs.
But traditionally the Catholic population has swung between identifying with Republicanism at times of crisis (Internment and Bloody Sunday) but as the struggle ebbed: ‘electorally backing the main party committed to the reformist road, the SDLP’. [4] It was a pattern seen before. The Catholic middle class emerging as the smoke of rioting cleared to start negotiating with the British, the path cleared for them by the Republicans failure to organise politically when they were at the centre of events.
 
The weaknesses of the Hunger Strike itself
With all their heroism there was a limit to what the Hunger Strikers could achieve. The power to win political status lay outside Long Kesh. The peak of the campaign was always going to be around the first death in H-Block and that was the time limit within which a mass movement had to be built. Bernadette McAliskey spoke for many when she told 30,000 demonstrators in Belfast shortly before Bobby Sands’ death that one death in H-Block would unleash an explosion similar to that which followed the 1916 Easter Rising.
The truth, however, was that a movement unable to prevent deaths in H-Block was a movement unable to win.
Bobby Sands’ death did lead to an explosion of rioting on the streets of Northern Ireland but it was an explosion that the British state could isolate within the ghettoes until it burnt itself out. Such rioting quickly began to alienate many in the Catholic areas as damage mounted. The British army and the RUC then swamped areas like west Belfast, creating an atmosphere of terror with their indiscriminate use of plastic bullets. This very soon affected the level of street protest. While the pressure of the Hunger Strike meant there was opposition to attempts to organise against the use of plastic bullets or the right to demonstrate over H-Block.
In the end pressure could be put on the Hunger Strikers themselves – isolated as they were in the prison wing of Long Kesh and understandably open to the pleas of their families to end the Strike.
 
Trade union opposition to H-Block in the North
Within the H-Block Campaign the trade unions were always listed along with the Churches, cultural and sporting bodies; as areas in which to build support. For many Republicans and even socialists, the Catholic workers in the North were seen as economically peripheral and therefore having no economic power at all.
That was to ignore the fact that even with massive Catholic unemployment and the decline of traditional Catholic workplaces like Derry’s textile plants and Belfast’s deep sea docks, there were new concentrations of Catholic workers in places like the De Lorean car plant and the Royal Victoria Hospital on the Falls Road, where from being a tiny minority 15 years ago Catholics now fill most ancillary grades.
As support for the Hunger Strike declined, in Belfast at least trade union support grew with walk-outs spreading to civil servants, building workers and government trainees. At DeLorean the Hunger Strike Committee was set up only after Bobby Sands death and industrial action grew to involve most Catholic workers.
Whilst the H-Block Campaign saw all this as just another strand of support, the Trade Union Hunger Strike Committees in the North, realising the real limits of their power, attempted to organise delegations to major workplaces in the South. A cross-border march to Dublin modelled on the Right to Work Marches and Peoples March, was held in August, although the National H Block Campaign didn’t fully take it up.
 
The Protestant response during the Hunger Strike
During the weeks before Bobby Sands died the Provisionals focused attention on possible Loyalist attacks on the Catholic ghettoes. It was an attack which never came. Throughout the Hunger Strike the threat came not from the Loyalists but from the presence of the RUC and the British Army. It was not difficult to see why.
Firstly, the period of both Hunger Strikes saw the further splintering of the Loyalist organisations with Ian Paisley directing his ‘Carson Trail’ and Third Force more at his rivals in the Official Unionist Party than the Anglo-Irish talks between Haughey and Thatcher. The major Loyalist military grouping, the Ulster Defence Association, was also distancing itself from Paisley, whose Democratic Unionist Party they had helped hoist to electoral prominence. The savage infighting within the Loyalist organisations confused and divided the Protestant community.
Secondly, for the first time the Protestant working class is having to take the full force of an economic recession which stalks the Protestant heartlands of South Antrim and North Down; a recession which is eating away the marginal economic privileges they have traditionally had over Catholic workers in terms of job security. The old unity of Protestant employer and employee as enshrined in the Orange Order and the Orange State is being undermined.
The general feeling within Protestant areas was one of uncertainty and confusion. When the UD A threatened to unleash an assassination campaign they quickly had to withdraw and issue a statement calling for a need for calm.
 
Why was there no sectarian response?
If in Northern Ireland, as many socialists have claimed, ‘Two class interests have opened – the interests of the Protestant working class and the interests of the Catholic working class’ [5], the question must be asked, why, given economic uncertainty amongst Protestant workers coupled with a mass upsurge in Catholic areas in support of the Hunger Strike, there was no upsurge of sectarianism amongst Protestant workers?
One answer might be that there was no need to do so as the British army and the RUC were dealing well enough with Catholic resistance. But that is to ignore the growing belief in Protestant areas that not only was Britain economically disengaging from the North but that the Anglo-Irish talks did herald a United Ireland.
Alternatively one can say sectarianism is not the automatic response of Protestant workers. The years 1907, 1919 and 1944 saw massive strike waves by Protestant workers; 1932 the unemployed riots. True, those struggles were defeated by Loyalism, with Protestant workers being drawn back into the Orange Order. The problem there is that the reformist leaders of Northern Ireland’s trade unions consciously failed to challenge Loyalist beliefs, seeking solely to build up union membership. Thus you can have the phenomenon in Shorts Engineers in east Belfast of both the Communist Party and the UDA having an important base, or ‘Loyalist’ workers from Kilroot Power Station visiting a Dublin minister to discuss a cross border power link to guarantee their jobs (a link the IRA promised to destroy).
 
Can the Protestant working class be dismissed?
To say of Protestant workers: ‘No way the chains will be broken until the state itself is broken’ [6], is to substitute another stages theory for that of the Militant and the CP (’unity around bread and butter issues must come first’).
There is no guarantee that a deeply divided Loyalism will maintain its hegemony over the Protestant working class. The closures and redundancies affecting British Enkalon in Antrim, Courtaulds in Larne and Carrickfergus, the Kilroot power station and Shorts, Mackies and Harland and Wolff in Belfast, has created anger amongst Protestant workers, many of whom have crossed to Liverpool and Glasgow to join unemployment marches. But while workers in Britain and the South cannot stop the jobs slaughter, class politics offers little attraction for Protestant workers.
Naturally those trade union leaders who set up a ghettoised Northern Ireland Committee of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions and gave full backing to employers like John DeLorean, won’t win much backing on the Shankill Road. Neither will the attitude of uninterest adopted by the trade union leaders in Dublin and London towards their union members in the 6 Counties. Thus it is no surprise that there have also been moves to set up an Ulster TUC to fight Protestant unemployment.
But a lead can be given from those jobs fights that are taking place. For example by organising support for the occupation of Clondalkin paper mills in Dublin which has won some blacking in Northern docks (with the important exception of Larne which is notorious for scabbing, or the the Lee Jeans occupation in Scotland where work was being transferred to the VF Corporation’s two plants in the North). It means pointing out that it is the same multinational company that is sacking workers in British Enkalon in Antrim, which closed Ferenka in Shannon, where workers did launch a fight back.
To dismiss Protestant workers until the 6 County state is smashed is to turn one’s back on the possibility of Protestant workers organising a fight back in opposition to the policies of the British government. It is to turn one’s back on the historical lesson that during the 1907 general strike in Belfast and the 1932 riots, important sections of Protestant workers were won in action to class politics.
When redundancies hit DeLorean a section of the Shop Stewards Committee, both Protestant and Catholic, suggested an occupation. Not only were they attacked by the TGWU and AUEW officials but they were left to fight that battle alone. No section of the Republican Movement or any of those socialists in Belfast leafleted the plant (which is in west Belfast) or even offered support to those stewards.
 
Downturn in the North
With the failure of the Hunger Strike there is a deep demoralisation amongst the Catholic ghettoes. But despite the absence of mass mobilisations the Republican’s military struggle can continue, pinning down large numbers of the security forces, while in turn being contained by those very security forces themselves. The military struggle, organised conspiratorially as it is by a relatively small number, can continue in the absence of any mass movement for some time. The growing number of informants at the beginning of this year and the undeclared feud within the Irish Republican Socialist Party are evidence however of deep demoralisation within the Republican organisations.
In contrast confidence will only be restored by rather modest campaigns against, for instance, the use of plastic bullets, around which support can be re-grouped. In contrast the Provisionals have suggested directing the H-Block Campaign towards the organisation of commemorations for each Hunger Striker, a recipe for increasing demoralisation. Operations like the assassination of Robert Bradford helped the British government go on the offensive over security and merely increased nervousness in the Catholic ghettoes.
And whilst the military struggle remains dominant, even for many socialists, there is no possibility of addressing Protestant workers.
Within the Loyalist organisations the crisis deepens, as shown by the bitter infighting during the South Belfast by-election and the repercussions from the scandal around the Kincora Boys Home, which has badly dented the Calvinist morality of the Loyalist North.
But for the British government there can be little comfort yet. James Prior’s attempts to create a new Assembly in the North by playing off the different parties threatens to come to naught. The Unionist fragments are split between those who prize Union with Britain most and favour full integration and those who wish to try and piece an Orange State together again via a new Stormont. To even gain talks with the Unionists, Prior had to say there was no all-Ireland element in such an Assembly and then was forced to backtrack when the SDLP threatened to oppose his plans and his allies in Dublin put pressure on to gain the minimum concession they had to have to salve nationalist sentiment.
Obviously a situation of both political impasse in the North and of downturn in the anti-imperialist struggle cannot continue indefinitely. Yet without a class perspective it remains true that the impasse cannot be broken.

Notes
1. International Socialism (first series), No. 40, 1969.
2. IRIS, Vol. 1, No. 1: Interview with a member of IRA General Headquarters Staff.
3. An Phoblacht/Republican News, Saturday May 30th, 1981.
4. Chris Harman, Ireland After The Hunger Strike, Socialist Review, No. 1, 1981.
5. Geoff Bell, The Protestant Working Class – Still No Surrender, Irish Socialist Review, No. 7, Spring 1980.
6. Ibid.
 



In 1928 James P. Cannon attended the Sixth Congress of the Communist International as a delegate from the faction-ridden US Communist Party. The American delegation was given tasks according to the factional line-up. The controlling faction around Jay Lovestone were happy to put Cannon out of harm’s way as they saw it, on the commission to draw up the Comintern’s programme.
Far off in Alma Ata, from internal exile Leon Trotsky submitted his Criticism of the Draft Programme (now published as the Third International After Lenin). This critique slipped through the net, found its way into the hands of the translators at the Comintern Congress and a copy fell into Cannon’s lap.
Despite desperate urgings from key leaders in the faction Cannon headed in the American party, he had refused to mouth the obligatory anti-Trotsky statements – despite the ammunition handed to factional opponents who competed to prove their adherence to the Moscow line.
Now Cannon found many of the answers he’d been looking for in Trotsky’s document. Thirty-three years later he recalled:
When I read Trotsky’s Criticism of the Draft Programme at the Sixth Congress of the Comintern in 1928, I was convinced at once – and for good – that the theory of ‘Socialism in One Country’ was basically counter-revolutionary and that Trotsky and the Russian Opposition represented the true programme of the revolution – the original Marxist programme. What else could I do but support them? And what difference did it make that they were a small minority, defeated, expelled and exiled? It was a question of principle. This may be Greek to the philistine, but it is not an ‘accident’ for a communist to act on principle, once it becomes clear to him. It is a matter of course. (James P Cannon, First 10 Years of American Communism, p. 27)
The personal break involved was considerable. In Moscow it was clear Cannon was an approved candidate for the leadership of the American party. A new shift to the ultra-leftism of the Third Period was in the offing. Cannon was a worker, cast in the same mould as the likes of Maurice Thorez in France, Ernst Thaelmann in Germany, Harry Pollitt in Britain and other ‘proletarian’ figures Moscow were keen to promote.
In 1959 Cannon wrote:
And I knew something else that I never told anybody about, but which I had to tell myself for the first time in Moscow in the summer of 1928. The foot-loose Wobbly rebel that I used to be had imperceptibly begun to fit comfortably into a swivel chair, protecting himself in his seat by small manoeuvres and evasions, and even permitting himself a certain conceit about his adroit accommodation to this shabby game. I saw myself for the first time as another person, as a revolutionist who was on the road to becoming a bureaucrat. The image was hideous, and I turned away from it in disgust ... I never deceived myself for a moment about the most probable consequence of my decision to support Trotsky in the summer of 1928.1 knew it was going to cost me my head and also my swivel chair, but thought: What the hell – better men than I have risked their heads and their swivel chairs for truth and justice. (Op. cit., p. 225)
Cannon managed to smuggle out a copy of Trotsky’s document – hidden in a teddy bear belonging to the child of a returning British visitor. The GPU had already reported Cannon’s interest in Trotskyism to leaders of the American party.
Back in New York he began recruiting supporters by inviting them around to his apartment to read, in one sitting, a copy of this book-length, typed document. His first supporter was his companion, Rose Karsner – an ex-secretary of The Masses, a powerful radical magazine edited by Max Eastman, and at that date secretary of the International Labour Defence, the body Cannon founded and which spearheaded the defence of Sacco and Vanzetti.
The next two recruits were Max Shachtman, editor of the magazine Labour Defender which circulated to the defence fund’s 95,000 supporters, and Martin Abern, leader of the CP’s Young Workers League and a delegate to the Comintern’s fourth congress.
These three, Cannon, Max Shachtman, a talented journalist and immensely humorous speaker, and the able functionary Martin Abern were the central leadership of the American Trotskyists for 12 years. At the time they were ridiculed as ‘generals without an army’.
The process of individual recruitment continued but word got out to supporters of the faction around the talented trade union leader, William Z. Foster, with whom Cannon’s grouping were blocking against the leadership. Cannon refused to confirm or deny his views in an effort to play for time and win more support. Eventually the Lovestone leadership found out and Cannon, Shachtman and Abem were put on trial, a procedure chosen in order to embarrass their factional allies.
The threesome dragged the trial out until there were over 100 party members attending and it was receiving wide attention in the party. Then they broke cover and declared their adherence to Trotsky and the Left Opposition. Within 24 hours copies of their statements were circulating in the party. Within a week they had issued a new paper, The Militant, headlined ‘For The Russian Opposition’. [1] The money was borrowed from Cannon’s acquaintances and from Max Eastman, who had already helped Trotsky publicise his views.
All three were expelled along with their supporters. The Lovestone leadership helped by expelling even those querying the expulsions – including a key group of workers in Minneapolis which included the three Dunne brothers and Carl Skoglund.
Today the significance of all this may not seem obvious. But in 1928 for a leader of a Communist Party with Cannon’s experience to declare openly for Trotsky and to win a section of the party cadre was unparalleled.
Pravda reported the expulsions and word reached Trotsky isolated in Alma Ata at a time when many of his supporters were making their peace with Stalin. The effect of Cannon’s actions on Trotsky cannot be underestimated. American events also revitalised the tiny groups who had rallied to the Left Opposition.
James P. Cannon was the most important figure in the Communist movement to take this course. That alone speaks volumes for the man.
 
Cannon and the ‘Americanisation’ of Communism
Cannon’s life is virtually a record of the American left and the international Communist movement in the years following the Russian revolution. He knew personally Eugene V Debs, the great leader of the Socialist Party, worked with leaders of the Industrial Workers of the World, the revolutionary ‘one big union’, like Vincent St John, Big Bill Haywood, and Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, together with the great Irish revolutionary James Connolly and the founder of the Irish Transport Workers Union, Jim Larkin.
Within the American Communist Party he knew and worked with all the key personalities from John Reed, author of the eye-witness account of the October revolution, Ten Days That Shook the World, so highly recommended by Lenin, and Louis Fraina (later known as Lewis Corey), an Italian American whose Revolutionary Age popularised Lenin’s ideas during 1917 and 1918 with great effect.
From its inception to his expulsion Cannon was on the Central Committee of the American party. It was a party permanently split along factional lines from birth, a party which by the time it was founded faced a resurgent American capitalism coupled with a savage wave of repression which broke the IWW, saw the great steel strike of 1919 defeated, thousands of radicals arrested in the Palmer Raids, many of foreign origin being deported and others like the Italian anarchists Sacco and Vanzetti framed and hanged.
But despite that Cannon always stressed the crucial role the Communist Party played in establishing a revolutionary Marxist tradition, a tradition he claimed later for the American Trotskyists.
Throughout all of this Cannon understood that the task was to carry those ideas to American workers. During the early years of the party the crucial divide was between those like Cannon who saw the audience for Communism among American-born workers rather than the more seemingly radical immigrant communities from Europe. By the end of the 1920s the key task was combatting ‘American Exceptionalism’, the idea imported from Moscow that American capitalism would continue to grow and grow, that America was an exception in the capitalist world and more crucially, that ideologically the American working class had been bribed off and had become subject to ‘material bourgeoisification’.
These ideas would surface again and again. Today they act as justification for looking to the Democratic Party or some ‘rainbow Coalition’ as being the way forward. To all those who reject the capacity of the largest working class in the world to change their ideas Cannon again and again pointed to the inspiring history of the American working class. From the great wave of labour struggles which followed the completion of the bourgeois revolution in the American Civil War, culminating in the radical union federation the Knights of Labour, the great rail and steel strikes of the 1890s, the rise of the Industrial Workers of the World and then later the glorious years from 1934 till 1937 when rank-and-file workers led a strike wave which in its militancy probably remains unparalleled in the history of the world working class today.
Cannon was part of that history. Born in Rosedale, Kansas, of Irish parentage, his father had been in the Knights of Labour and distributed Appeal to Reason, the socialist paper whose main contributor was Eugene V. Debs. At the age of 12 Cannon was working in a meat packing plant. Two years later he was active in the campaign to defend Big Bill Haywood who was framed on a murder charge for his role in a miners’ strike. By the age of 18 Cannon was in Debs’ Socialist Party, then at its zenith – in 1912 Debs would poll a million votes for the presidency (mainly in Cannon’s mid-West); it had 100,000 members and its press a circulation of 600,000. But whilst Debs’ instincts were revolutionary – he backed the IWW and was jailed for opposing the First World War – the party apparatus was controlled by the right. Debs himself refused to attend congresses because he refused to take part in internal disputes.
Cannon rejected the Debs-style all-inclusive party uniting revolutionaries and reformists. Instead he was drawn to ideas which stressed the independent struggles of the working class, the syndicalist ideas of building one big union, the IWW, which could use its strength to gain control of the economy and therefore create socialism. In 1911 at the age of 21 Cannon was a ‘footloose’ organiser for the IWW, the ‘Wobblies’. Like other Wobblies he hitched rides on the bottom of railway carriages and was regularly jailed and beaten. Cannon led strikes of rubber workers in Akron, metal workers in Peoria and dockers on Lake Superior. But for all its heroism the IWW was unable to maintain lasting organisation even when it won recognition. Syndicalism denied the need to overthrow the state seeing this as happening automatically once the economic power of the workers was established. But the state did not ignore the Wobblies – during the war it was effectively broken by repression.
Now settled in Kansas City with a wife and two children. Cannon joined the Left Wing of the Socialist Party following the Russian revolution. This was an organised faction which had been radicalised by the Bolsheviks’ success. Cannon edited a paper in Kansas City popularising Communist ideas, helped by Earl Browder, another former Wobbly who would become leader of the American CP after Cannon’s expulsion.
Cannon had broken with syndicalism after reading John Reed’s The Liberator and Louis Fraina’s Revolutionary Age.
Until 1917 the Socialist Party Left Wing saw itself as an auxiliary to the revolutionary union, the IWW; politics should be kept out of the unions with a socialist party which limited itself to making general propaganda and contesting elections (ideas best expressed by James Connolly, the clearest exponent of syndicalism).
Reed and Fraina were arguing for a new-style party organised around clear revolutionary principles, organising a revolutionary minority of workers but intervening in the daily struggles of the class.
In June 1919 Cannon travelled to New York as delegate for Kansas City at the congress of the SP Left Wing. There he was appalled by the behaviour of the foreign language federation (groupings composed of immigrants largely from Russia and Eastern Europe which were affiliated to the SP but remained separate from the American movement). Claiming to represent the Bolsheviks through the accident of their birth the Russian federation leaders demanded an immediate split from the SP. Cannon backed John Reed who understood the need to win native American workers in the SP, and that communism could not be transplanted into America through the language federations. Reed’s grouping carried the fight to convention where they were expelled and formed the Communist Labour Party. Meanwhile the language federation leaders had set up their Communist Party. On paper it had a larger membership but few American workers.
Cannon was Kansas district organiser for the Communist Labour Party. The defeat of the 1919 steel strike and the Palmer Raids had forced the new party underground. Despite that Cannon organised among the miners of Kansas and South Illinois.
From 1920 until 1923 Cannon’s energies were devoted to achieving Communist unity but also to utilising growing opportunities for legal work to appeal to American-born workers. The foreign language federation, leaders now held that it was a Bolshevik principle to remain underground, whatever the conditions.
In 1920 Cannon negotiated a fusion between the Communist Labour Party and a grouping favouring legal work from the rival party led by Charles Ruthenberg. Cannon was editor of the new Communist Party’s first legal paper, moving first to Cleveland then to New York City. In 1921 he presided over the setting up with some Socialist Party dissidents of an open, legal party, the Workers Party. Ruthenberg was in prison and the leadership of the party centred on Cannon and Jay Lovestone.
But disputes about legal work continued; so too did the attitude to elections with the Communists boycotting the 1920 presidential election, refusing support for Debs. In addition large-scale recruitment from the IWW meant the majority view on trade union work favoured setting up breakaway unions in counter-position to the American Federation of Labour. In 1921 the party recruited William Z. Foster, leader of the 1919 steel strike. He had broken with the IWW and was advocating a policy of working from within the AFL, where the vast majority of trade unionists were. With him he brought the Trade Union Education League, a grouping linking militant workers within the AFL.
Like a generation of Communists, Cannon read Lenin’s Left Wing Communism – An Infantile Disorder and began campaigning against radical-sounding abstentionism within the American party, arguing for new tactics to start the process of winning influence among the working class.
In 1922 Cannon was a delegate to the Fourth and last Leninist Congress of the Communist International. It was in Moscow that the outstanding questions were settled. The American journalist, Max Eastman, fixed an interview between Cannon and Trotsky. Trotsky was convinced of the need for a Russian leadership to back those favouring a legal party.
The party after the Congress experienced a period of unity. In 1922 it had 8,000 members. By 1923 it had 11,000. The deportations of radicals had largely removed the foreign language federations. The largest federation, with some 15,000 members, were the Russians who dominated the original Communist Party formed in opposition to the Communist Labour Party. In the now united party the Russians accounted for just seven per cent.
Yet 45 per cent of the party membership were Finnish, many of them farmers. Just 10 per cent of the membership spoke English as their first language with another 45 per cent capable of using English as a second language.
Industrial penetration was poor except in certain areas like Minnesota. The one exception was the predominantly Jewish needle trades of New York. Some 15 per cent of the party’s membership was Jewish, concentrated heavily in New York. But proportionately they provided a high number of key cadres. The party’s Yiddish daily, Freiheit, sold 22,000 copies to the official Daily Worker’s 17,000.
The American party, however, was proud of its achievements in overcoming factional squabbles and the creation of a united party, following the patient tactical advice they had learned from the Communist International. But from 1923 onwards the Comintern was not what it was, passing under the control of first Zinoviev, then Bukharin in tandem with Stalin and then after 1928 complete Stalinist control. Those years were ones of sharp zig-zags from left to right, dictated not by the pace of the international struggle but the dictats of the internal struggle within the ruling layer in Russia.
In his History of American Trotskyism, Cannon later wrote that from 1923 on, ‘We went to the Comintern, seeking help, but the real source of the trouble was there’.
Cannon returned from a year in Russia at the beginning of 1923 to discover a new situation in the American party. Effective leadership was in the hands of one John Pepper, the pseudonym for a Hungarian exile, who had played a disastrous role as Commissar for war in the failed Hungarian revolution of 1919 and then was involved in organising the disastrous ‘March Action’ of 1921, when the German Communists initiated an ultra-left putsch.
A talented adventurer, Pepper had been attacked by Lenin and Trotsky for his policy in Germany and had managed to arrange to go to New York. His only task from the Comintern was to function in the American party’s Hungarian group. It was effectively a second exile.
But posing as Moscow’s representative, and citing familiarity with Lenin, Trotsky and Zinoviev, Pepper managed to gain control of the American party – no mean feat when he at first could not speak English.
Pepper’s key allies were the party’s secretary, Charles Ruthenberg, and Jay Lovestone.
Pepper now held up the creation of a US Labour Party as the means for capturing a mass audience for Communism. The arguments for the creation of a Labour Party originated with Lenin. For him it would represent a step towards greater working-class independence if workers looked to a labour party rather than backing either of the two openly pro-imperialist parties, the Republicans or Democrats. It was first raised to counter the abstentionism and ultra-leftism in the American party. But the creation of a Labour Party by the Communist Party was not envisaged.
At the beginning of 1923 the radical Chicago Federation of Labour called a conference to create a nationwide Farmers-Labour Party (state-wide parties existed in several places). The labour party idea was finding a wide audience among trade unionists.
But in the event the conference was a fiasco. Pepper orchestrated a takeover by the Communist Party which led to a split with the Chicago trade unionists – and which also effectively destroyed the Trade Union Education League as an effective force. The party under Pepper then declared a nationwide Farmers-Labour Party which was no more than a CP front.
Cannon was uneasy with the Pepper regime. On his return from Russia he had taken himself off on a coast-to-coast tour (a regular event if he was troubled about internal matters), concentrating on mass work. On tour he encountered William Z. Foster. Both agreed on a need to combat Pepper’s line round the Chicago conference. Both were concerned at the wrecking of the party’s trade union work.
Foster was the party’s chief trade union figure. But it was Cannon who took the lead in facing up to Pepper and organising an open faction.
Three permanent factions now emerged which would last till 1928. Two around Cannon and Foster blocked against the Pepper-Ruthenberg-Lovestone grouping.
Having spirited up a phantom Farmer-Labour Party, Pepper now turned his attention to the presidential campaign announced by Senator LaFollette of Wisconsin as third party candidate. LaFollette was somewhat radical; but Pepper declared America now faced a ‘third revolution’, neither led by the Communist or the Farmer- Labour Party, but instead one spearheaded by the middle class. Only after its success could the working class strike out on an independent path! LaFollette was the American ‘Kerensky’ and through backing him the CP could find the way to the masses.
Cannon pieced together a powerful opposition which held a majority. But Pepper still maintained control of the party apparatus. The dispute above all had to be settled in Moscow.
Events now took the form of farce. Trotsky had denounced the right-wing policies of the Zinoviev leadership of the Comintern. The American question was to be settled at an extended plenum discussion in Moscow. There the Comintern leadership executed a sharp left turn to undercut Trotsky. The whole Farmer-Labour Party project was denounced in principle, backing for LaFollette was thrown out. Instead the party had to stand its own candidate, Foster.
The instructions were carried out. Foster polled just 33,000 votes. The party was thoroughly isolated. Pepper remained in Moscow to ensure its support for his allies.
At the CP’s fourth convention in 1925 Foster and Cannon won a majority. But once again the Comintern line had changed. Bukharin was now heading things. The line had moved right, back to one of alliances – with the trade union leaders enshrined in the Anglo-Russian TUC committee and with Chiang Kai Shek and the bourgeois nationalists in China. Socialism in one country was now official doctrine, and the task of Communist Parties was to win allies for Russia. Pepper sensed the way the wind was blowing and switched allegiances. The Pepper-Ruthenberg-Lovestone tendency had Moscow’s seal of approval.
Foster and Cannon won control at the fourth congress. Having won the votes the Comintern representative revealed a telegram from Moscow which insisted control must go to the Pepper faction. Cannon and Foster loyally followed their instructions.
A policy of ‘Bolshevisation’ was also undertaken. In reality it meant ensuring support for the current Comintern line and weakening any independent discussion.
But the American party was too faction-ridden to become a monolith. Despite the outcome Foster’s group retained control of trade union work, and had its own allies in Moscow. Cannon’s faction secured control of one of American Communism’s success stories – International Labour Defence.
The ILD was born in Moscow in discussions between Big Bill Haywood, who had been forced into exile and whose idea it was, and Cannon. Over 100 assorted Wobblies, anarchists and union activists were languishing in jail, some on death row, their cases forgotten by the labour movement.
Haywood wanted to create a non-sectarian defence organisation for these victims of state repression. Cannon set the organisation rolling, helped by Rose Karsner as secretary, Max Shachtman as editor of the journal and Martin Abern supplying administrative skill. It was Cannon who ensured that the venture was genuinely non-sectarian, though politically dominated by Communists.
It was launched in June 1925. By the end of 1926 it claimed 156 branches, with 20,000 individual and 75,000 collective members. The ILD was a genuine united front.
Its first national committee contained among others Eugene V. Debs, ex-Wobblies, nine union leaders and pro-women suffragists. The ILD sent five dollars a month to 106 class war prisoners, mostly ex-Wobblies. It helped publicise these cases and rescue figures like the framed union organiser Tom Mooney.
But its most effective work was in campaigning against the execution of the Italian anarchists, Sacco and Vanzetti. This became a world-wide campaign promoted by the Communist movement. Some of Cannon’s best journalism can be found written around this case, in Notebook of an Agitator, a collection of articles which is a model for socialist journalists.
In 1927 Jay Lovestone clambered over his opponents to take control of the party on Ruthenberg’s death. With Comintern support he build up tighter control of the party. ‘American Exceptionalism’ was the official line, a right-wing line which dovetailed the policy of ‘socialism at a snail’s pace’ and an end to international ‘adventurism’ shared by Stalin and Bukharin. Lovestone became increasingly identified with the latter.
The factional antics of the American Communist Party in the 1920s are easily mocked. Naturally many criticisms can be drawn – notably the failure to orientate towards the black working class and sharecroppers. But for all the faults the American Communist Party achieved real gains. Not least the popularisation of Leninist ideas, the early Trade Union Education League and the activities of International Labour Defence.
Above all the idea of ‘Americanisation’ – of centring activity around the American working class with its fine record of struggle – as championed by Cannon, remains the model.
The Cannon faction sensed ‘American Exceptionalism’ was wrong, they had fought however unclearly against the wild swings induced by Moscow and had looked towards patiently winning workers’ support. It was a continuation of that fight in many ways which led them to accept Trotsky’s views.
 
The birth of American Trotskyism
The newly emergent Trotskyists hoped to win a large layer of the CP’s cadre from a position of criticising the Comintern and the American party’s leadership from the left. Rejection of ‘American Exceptionalism’ plus demands for a turn to the class centring on the need for consistent trade union work were expected to influence wide layers in the party.
But the Stalinist leadership still seemed to maintain the mantle of October for millions of the best workers internationally. In addition, while the American party had shrunk to just 7,277 members by 1928, that was substantially bigger than anything the Trotskyists could boast.
A fortnightly paper, Militant, was appearing. Cannon and his few supporters would sell it in Union Square, where the CP headquarters were located. Soon Stalinist goons were physically assaulting sellers. Cannon organised former Wobblies and other radicals to provide a guard. The first meetings were broken up. Again a guard was organised. Then Stalinists burgled Cannon’s apartment to discover how far Trotskyist roots went in the party. The correspondence stolen was later published by them.
Finally, in May 1929 a conference was held in Chicago to launch the Communist League of America, Left Opposition of the Communist Party. It was seen not as a rival party to the CP but as a faction fighting for its reform, in line with Trotsky’s view that the Comintern could still be won to revolutionary politics.
There were 48 delegates and alternates from 12 cities representing some 100 members. Financial worries harassed the new organisation, but worse was to follow. Within months of Cannon’s expulsion there was a sea-change in the Comintern. Stalin declared the Third Period had begun. Revolution was imminent. The main props of imperialism were the reformists and existing unions who were on a par with if not worse than the fascists and to be treated accordingly. The shift reflected the power struggle.
In Russia, Stalin and the bureaucratic machine had embarked on a ruthless drive to industrialise, with Russian workers and peasants paying the price. The fire was now turned on Bukharin and the so-called Right Opposition who favoured appeasing the rich peasants as a way to stimulate the economy. Bukharin was deposed as head of the Comintern. Among his main supporters internationally was Jay Lovestone, head of the American party.
Lovestone was brought to Moscow, stripped of his positions and sent back to New York where he and just a few hundred of his once powerful faction formed an organisation.
Now the party was placed in the hands of Earl Browder and elements of the Foster faction with which Cannon had been aligned (Foster himself being passed over now because he was distrusted in Moscow). ‘American Exceptionalism’ was swept away. The party passed over to the ultra-left, advocating breakaway unions and proclaiming the need for mass work. This new turn also marked the completion of Stalinist control over the parties within the Comintern.
The Trotskyists now found that from attacking Lovestone from the left in continuance of their old factional struggle in the CP, they were now attacking the Comintern line as ultra-left. Quickly they found themselves isolated from the audience they wished to attract. Individual recruitment dried up. American Trotskyism was now entering what Cannon termed its ‘dog days’.
For Cannon himself, giving up his party position (both he and Rose Karsner, Shachtman and Abern were immediately sacked without wages due) meant serious financial difficulties. He and Karsner were forced to move between a series of squalid apartments. Matters worsened when Cannon’s former wife died and his two children came to live with him.
Cannon began drinking (a problem which remained with him for the rest of his life). Tensions began developing internally, particularly in New York.
Shachtman believed Cannon was too orientated on ex-Wobblies and established militants like Bill Dunne. Cannon was now working on the shopfloor of a New York paper, something Shachtman and younger members saw as a sign that he was dropping out.
The tension had another side. In New York Cannon later wrote in The History of American Trotskyism:
‘Many people came to us who had revolted against the Communist Party; that is the discipline of the party, the subordination of the individual to the decisions of the party in current work’.
One recruit from the CP campaigned for ‘mass work’, arguing it was only the inertia of Cannon that prevented the Trotskyists initiating mass campaigns in a situation where the immediate effect of the Wall Street crash was to atomise and demoralise workers through mass unemployment. That provoked a nasty faction fight in New York, with the loss of 25 or so members.
Many of the CLA’s members, particularly in New York, were college graduates with no knowledge of the workers’ movement. They looked not to Cannon, who could be difficult and spoke with a mid-West accent, but instead to the witty and urbane Shachtman. The latter had the finance to visit Trotsky after his expulsion to Turkey, and he seemed to have more knowledge of international matters than Cannon.
Looking back Cannon wrote of Shachtman and his circle:
I think, you see, as we began to get the writings of Trotsky, it opened up a whole new world for us. And they discovered, this is my assumption, that while they had always taken what I said for gospel, they discovered that there was a lot of things I didn’t know. That I was just beginning to learn from Trotsky. What they didn’t know was that I was learning as well as they were. Shachtman, at least, I think, had the idea that he had outgrown me.
Commentating on his personal problems Cannon added:
They took that to be the sign that I was quitting the movement, I guess. And this stirred up a bitter anti-Cannon attitude with the new young people in the League, so that every branch meeting was a great hassle and argument about something or other of no great consequence. That’s what happens when a movement is in decline. Squabbles develop and people begin to look around for somebody to blame for the troubles of the movement.
By 1932 and 1933 personal relations between Cannon and Shachtman had broken down. At one point Shachtman simply walked out from editing The Militant, and a 21-year-old Cannonite had to be drafted in to replace him. Repeatedly Cannon had to appeal to his supporters in Minneapolis for financial support to maintain publication.
On the other side stood Cannon, Arne Swabeck, and an energetic organiser Hugo Oehler, together with the Minneapolis workers. On the other, Shachtman and Abern, the latter increasingly sided politically with those grumbling about the ‘Cannon regime’ whatever political issues were at stake.
On an international level, while in Europe, Shachtman had fallen out with Trotsky after he had backed Andreas Nin’s group and others who wished to break their isolation by uniting with supporters of Bukharin and other centrists. These people rejected Trotsky’s insistence on a Leninist party, were prepared to reject permanent revolution and accept ‘Socialism in One Country’, and looked for alliances with various left reformists.
Arne Swabeck met Trotsky to urge his formal support for a split. Despite Trotsky’s acceptance that essentially Cannon represented the proletarian elements in the League, and Shachtman the petty bourgeois, together with his criticism of Shachtman’s doings in Europe, Trotsky urged against a split. He explained the differences were not clear politically and there could be no organisational solutions.
Trotsky told Swabeck:
... every party is a melting point, but there has to be activity. The present situation in the League corresponds with the beginning of more energetic activity directed outward. The essential question is whether the League will become a melting pot. To a certain extent this is dependent on opportunities and successes. If you score successes, this will weld together the best elements. In case of failures and inch by inch development, the discontents can find its expression in a split. (Writings 1933–34)
He urged the Americans to turn outwards around the opportunities created by the crisis over Hitler’s coming to power in Germany, growing unemployment agitation and the action the League was involved in within the Illinois coalfield.
Cannon accepted Trotsky’s prescription and returned to full-time work, accepting the financial problems.
Previously the Trotskyists had been excluded from any labour movement events. That had already changed. In January 1933 Cannon addressed a New York unemployment conference at which the League had five delegates. Further opportunities arose in the coalfield and in the unemployed movement where the Trotskyists had some success in arguing against the Stalinists’ support for breakaway unions and in favour of united front work with left-wing trade unionists and reformists.
But the greatest opportunity came with Hitler’s taking of power constitutionally in Germany, despite the existence of both the largest Social Democratic and Communist Parties in the world.
At the beginning of 1933 the Communist League began a nation-wide tour with an audience of 500 mainly CP members in the Bronx. A successful tour followed. Membership grew for the first time to 150. The ‘dog days’ were over. Shachtman broke with Cannon’s opponents to construct a united leadership.
Looking back when writing History of American Trotskyism, Cannon wrote:
We had to go through the long drawn out period of stewing and discussing ... This little fragile nucleus of the future revolutionary party had to be held together. It had to go through this experience. It had to survive somehow. One had to be patient for the sake of the future.
The Communist League was now facing a turning point in the fortunes of American labour. In 1933 Roosevelt was elected with the promise of a ‘New Deal’. Part of that was the National Recovery Act which seemed to give legal support for union recognition. It provoked a rash of disputes despite the opposition of the union bureaucrats in the American Federation of Labour who refused to organise unskilled workers. The strikes were largely defeated but they were the first signs of a real shift.
At the beginning of 1934 the CLA was heavily involved in a bitter New York hotel strike, led by one of its members (who they publicly expelled in the middle of the strike for his refusal to accept the League’s decisions).
In May the Minneapolis branch found itself leading a strike of teamsters which achieved nationwide prominence. The story of that dispute – the most important Trotskyists have led even today – is well known. Every socialist should read Farrell Dobbs’ account, Teamster Rebellion. Not only is it a manual of how revolutionaries should operate in the unions, it is a wonderful account of how a revolutionary organisation can intervene and recruit the best leaders.
Cannon, Shachtman and Oehler threw themselves into the dispute. As a result the Communist League gained widespread publicity and credit in radical circles.
The teamsters dispute in Minneapolis together with the docks strike in San Francisco and the strike at Autolite in Toledo sparked a nationwide revival of militancy with their success. The dispute on the San Francisco waterfront was led by the CP, but the dispute in Toledo, where mass demonstrations of unemployed joined the strikers to battle the National Guard, was led by an organisation called the American Workers Party.
It was a loose grouping led by a radicalised ex-preacher, A.J. Muste. It contained Christian Socialists, disillusioned CPers moving right, together with young militants who were active round strikes and unemployed work.
In the wake of Toledo it was clearly moving left and being eyed by the CP for ‘fusion’. Instead the Trotskyists offered to discuss creating a joint organisation. By not concealing political differences but not pursuing a sectarian stand on organisational matters Cannon and Shachtman were able to win over Muste and create an organisation of several hundred militants, the Workers Party of the United States.
On May Day in 1934 the Trotskyists were able to help organise a powerful demonstration in New York, along with Lovestone’s group which included the textile unions and the Socialist Party.
The sectarianism of the Stalinists, coupled with the impact of Hitler’s victory, had created a radicalisation which was reflected in the Social Democratic parties, particularly their youth wings. In France the Trotskyists made contact with a crucial group of militants within the Socialist Party. In Spain the Socialist Youth discussed Trotsky’s position of building a new international and whether they should back it.
But in the wake of Hitler’s victory Moscow’s line had changed. Now they wanted an alliance with France and Britain to protect Russia from the Nazi threat. Communists were now told to build alliances, firstly with the reformists, and then a popular front with those sections of the middle and ruling class who opposed Hitler.
Inside the Social Democratic parties this line, coupled with the continuing prestige of the Comintern, was a powerful draw on those who saw the fascist threat spreading.
Trotsky, grasping what was happening, advocated that his supporters enter the Social Democratic organisations to win the best elements. The first group to do so were the French organisation, resulting in the entry manoeuvre being dubbed the ‘French turn’.
Trotsky was not advocating a long-term entry. His supporters were to declare their position openly, particularly the need for a new party opposed to Stalinism and social democracy, and a new international. He expected expulsions and insisted they be fought openly so his supporters could influence the widest layer and then set up an independent organisation.
In France the turn paid off initially with the Trotskyists breaking out of a faction-ridden ghetto for the first time and winning a wide range of support.
On a trip to visit Trotsky (at that time in France), Cannon was convinced that the newly-formed Workers Party should enter the US Socialist Party.
Cannon and Trotsky were convinced that beneath the right-wing leadership of Norman Thomas, the Socialist Party was attracting radicalised youth and activists in the unions repelled by Stalinism. They also believed – correctly – that the party would be torn apart by the new radicalisation, and if the Trotskyists did not intervene directly then the Communist Party would swallow up the left.
The entry tactic was raised around that immediate perspective – of the Trotskyists going in to win the best elements and then re-forming a stronger organisation.
On his return from visiting France, Cannon, supported by Shachtman, was opposed by Hugo Oehler. He argued that if there were elements worth winning in the Socialist Party then they should find their way to the Workers Party, and entry was ruled out as a matter of principle.
The faction around Oehler was joined by two other groups. One round Muste – the founder of one half of the newly-fused organisation – started from a position of pure pride in the new party and could not countenance entry. Another, around Martin Abern, had maintained their opposition to Cannon from two years earlier in the Communist League. Their position was not one of principled opposition but moans about ‘the way things are being done’ and Cannon’s undemocratic doings.
For nearly a year the debate raged. But Cannon and Shachtman, backed directly by Trotsky, won the clear majority. Their victory coincided with the culmination of the crisis in the Socialist Party. The left had secured a majority and the hard right broke away. Cannon was able to secure a negotiated entry with faction rights – though the Trotskyists were forced to give up their paper. He conceded later, however, that too much emphasis was put on these negotiations rather than discussing with the Socialist Party rank and file.
The entry period can be split into two periods – both of which tended to parallel the experience in France. The first period was one in which the Trotskyists operated openly, publishing two papers, Socialist Appeal in Chicago and Labour Action edited by Cannon from California. They were able to make gains.
But in March 1937 the Socialist Party leadership under Norman Thomas moved to ban factions, suppress the Trotskyist papers and limit discussion in branches. In his History of American Trotskyism, Cannon is open about the Trotskyists’ response:
Trotsky encouraged us and even incited us to go forward to meet their challenge and not permit them to push us any further for fear it might lead to disintegration of our own ranks, demoralisation of the people whom we had led that far along the road. We proceeded cautiously, “legally”, at first.
The similar thing had occurred in France. Entry met with initial success. The right attacked and Trotsky urged open defiance, coupled with preparing for setting up an open organisation. But the Trotskyists stayed in and suffered a loss of support and finally split.
In the American case the Trotskyists hung together. Trotsky was now in Mexico and was in close touch. Finally, their branches were kicked out. On New Years Day 1938 the expelled branches formed the Socialist Workers Party.
The period of entry coincided exactly with the explosion of working-class militancy following the 1934 victories at Toledo, San Francisco and Minneapolis.
In 1935 a strike in General Motors plant, in which the Workers Party was centrally involved, threw up a new union, the United Automobile Workers, because of the AFL’s refusal to organise the car workers. The new militancy spread like wildfire in unorganised industries such as rubber, steel and crucially auto production, the new industries of the post-war boom which were generally held to be unorganisable.
John L. Lewis of the United Mineworkers grasped which way the wind was blowing and broke from the AFL because of their refusal to organise the unskilled in these industries, forming the rival Congress of Industrial Organisations. The centrepiece of the new CIO soon became the UAW.
In order to recruit workers Lewis was prepared to ride the wave of militancy. In order to build the new unions of the CIO he recruited from the readiest available source of cadre – the Communist Party. The CP in turn were prepared to toe Lewis’s line. The CP were not using Lewis. He was using them. They helped consolidate the bureaucracy’s hold, but in the process they recruited many of the best workers.
The CIO’s ‘Gettysburg’ was the battle for recognition of the UAW at General Motors, centring on Flint. At the end of 1936 the Flint GM workers re-invented the sit-down. The tactic spread across the combine. At Flint itself the strikers fought off the police and eventually won by seizing the crucial engine plant in a military-style operation.
A month after the victory at GM there were 193,000 workers involved in occupations and 1937 would see an amazing total of one and a half million workers on strike.
Cannon asked:
Did we overlook some opportunities for the application of the new toward mass work? Undoubtedly we did. Except in a few localities, we let the great movement of the CIO pass over our heads. But we did grasp some of the main opportunities ... When the ferment in the Socialist Party offered favourable opportunities for our intervention, we steered a course directly toward it, smashed the resistance of the sectarians in our own ranks, entered the Socialist Party and effected a fusion with the left wing. We seized opportunities to penetrate the trade union movement in several localities and today have the firmest proletarian bases of the party there.
The entry did actually win a crucial layer of activists in the UAW: Kermit Johnson, Sol Dollinger and Genora Johnson in Flint – the first masterminded the tactics of the GM strike, and the latter organised the famous women’s auxiliary on the picket lines. In San Francisco the Trotskyists established themselves in the crucial waterfront unions during the 1937 strike there.
At a numerical level the new SWP was virtually double the size of the pre-fusion Workers Party, securing control of the SP youth organisation, the Young People Socialist League.
But the lost opportunities resulted from the Trotskyists’ own failings in carrying out the entry. An organisation of a thousand spread across the USA needed to grow. Without a conscious strategy for growth it could not dare compete with the CP or relate directly to hundreds of thousands of radicalised workers.
The entry negotiations, however, dragged on and were conducted in a formal manner. The emphasis was too much on discussions with the Socialist Party’s hierarchy. The second failing, one implicit in any entry operation, is a failing to break away when the time is right. The Trotskyists spent nearly a year, the crucial year of the CIO’s birth, buried in the SP under attack from the leadership.
Another factor has to be added. The Workers Party was not in itself a stable organisation. Muste’s American Workers Party had consisted of: ‘the Toledo people; the rank-and-file militants in the unemployed movement, and some rank-and-file trade unionists. In addition ... there were some YWCA girls, Bible students, assorted intellectuals, college professors, and some nondescripts who had just wandered in through the open door’.
Trotsky himself recognised that he had overestimated the possibilities:
I personally believed the Socialist Party was stronger than it was in reality: I believed it had 20,000 members, but it was weaker. I believe we committed some tactical mistakes during our sojourn: we made some unnecessary concessions, such as giving up the Socialist Appeal, and the practical mistake of giving up the printing press, possibly connected with a long-term perspective ... (Writings 1937–38, p. 393)
He also recognised the weakness of much of the membership:
At the moment there are not a few half-revolutionists, tired out by defeats, fearing difficulties, aged young men who have more doubts and pretensions than will to struggle. Instead of seriously analysing political questions in essence, such individuals seek panaceas, on every occasion complain about the “regime”, demand wonders from the leadership, or try to muffle their own inner scepticism by ultra-left prattling. I fear that revolutionists will not be made out of such elements, unless they take themselves in hand.
A crisis which would divide the new party up the middle was developing.
 
The flight of the intellectuals
Today it is possible to read an advert in the New York Times supporting the Nicaraguan Contras signed by such doyens of American intellectual life as the writer Saul Bellow and the philosopher, Sidney Hook. Today these people are crusaders against communism. What is swept under the carpet is their adherence to Trotskyism in the 1930s.
The list of intellectuals attracted to American Trotskyism then forms the virtual intellectual elite of the period. The wealth of talent attracted to Trotskyism cannot be exaggerated.
The Wall Street crash had radicalised a generation of US intellectuals, largely living in New York and many of them Jewish. The threat of fascism had attracted them towards the Communist Party and Russia.
Alan Wald’s recent book, The New York Intellectuals, details the process through which this layer was first attracted to Stalinism, then repelled by it after the Communist Party’s criminal part in allowing Hitler to take power emerged.
By 1935 the heroic figure of Trotsky with his incisive writings on culture was a powerful draw to these intellectuals. Many of them had formed in 1932 a CP front organisation, the League of Professionals. But when its leading figures began attacking the ‘third period’ they were jeered by CP members. Sidney Hook’s philosophical views were roundly denounced and a manifesto written by Lewis Corey (Louis Fraina) was suppressed.
By April 1933 two of the key figures involved, Herbert Solow and George Novack, were Trotskyists. They managed to split away a large chunk of the CP’s intellectual sympathisers in support of Trotsky’s call for a united front against fascism. When in February 1934 the CP broke up a Socialist Party rally in solidarity with the Viennese workers’ resistance to the Dolfuss coup, Solow drafted an open letter in protest signed by the leading novelist John Dos Passos, Edmund Wilson (later author of To the Finland Station), and two young intellectuals who would soon become Trotskyists, Felix Morrow and John McDonald.
Many of those that signed broke with the CP and joined Muste’s American Workers Party – they included one New York professor, James Burnham, whose Catholicism had foundered in the Wall Street crash. The majority of these backed the fusion with the Communist League.
In 1936 Herbert Solow (who had quit the CLA along with John McDonald over the entry into the Socialist Party) helped set up the American Committee for the Defence of Leon Trotsky – in answer to the slanders of the Moscow Trials. In turn he helped organise the Dewey Commission of Inquiry which met in Mexico City to examine Stalin’s charges against Trotsky. Presiding over it was the great pragmatist philosopher John Dewey.
The importance of this inquiry and the American Committee is not so striking today. But in 1936 Trotsky faced alone the weight of Stalinism denouncing him as a fascist terrorist in the pay of Hitler or whichever Western ruler fitted Moscow’s needs. In Britain individuals like George Bernard Shaw refused to defend Trotsky. In France the Communist Party scared off support. The American Trotskyists alone were able to organise a weighty response and organise the hearings in Mexico which received widespread publicity.
The novelist James T. Farrell was present in Mexico City. He wrote of the hearings:
It is a spectacle to see, a spectacle rare in history. Imagine Robespierre or Cromwell under such circumstances. Well, this is more, because neither Cromwell or Robespierre had the intellectual breadth that Trotsky has.
Trotsky’s summation in his defence ended with spontaneous applause.
But the downturn in the class struggle both at home and internationally, coupled with the horrors of the Moscow Trials had a demoralising effect on the intellectuals. On a philosophical level the bulk of them never accepted historical materialism, and the dialectic in particular, instead holding to ideas which reflected the dominance of pragmatism in American academic life.
Individuals like Sidney Hook who broke with Trotskyism in 1936 established a pattern which this generation of intellectuals would follow. It was characterised very well in an article in the New International at the beginning of 1939 [2] by, ironically, Max Shachtman and James Burnham, titled Intellectuals in Retreat. The drift rightwards began with a criticism of Marxist philosophy and the dialectic in particular as being ‘fatalistic’. It went on to make an equation between Stalinism and Leninism, with Leninism being presented as favouring a one-party, totalitarian dictatorship. Finally it ended with the conclusion that Trotskyism equalled Stalinism and an emphasis on the need to maintain ‘freedom’ and ‘democracy’: ‘The main intellectual disease from which these intellectuals suffer may be called Stalinophobia, or vulgar anti-Stalinism’. This was an illness caused: ‘by the universal revulsion against Stalin’s macabre system of frame-ups and purges. And the result has been less a product of cold social analysis, it is moral rather than scientific and political’.
The article explained that intellectuals represented a petty bourgeois social layer who were pulled between the two great classes, the proletariat and bourgeoisie, with the balance of class forces influencing their sympathies. Now a new form of that pressure had emerged:
The foulness of Stalinism and imperialism can today breed only maggots; in particular it is impossible for intellectuals to avoid degeneration not merely of their characters as human beings but also of their minds if for any length of time they give their allegiance to these allied monsters of the lie.
Burnham was part of the SWP’s secretariat together with Cannon and Shachtman. A product of Princeton and Oxford, and a philosophy professor at New York University, he had read Marx after the Wall Street crash and, influenced by Sidney Hook, had become a leader of the American Workers Party and by that route became a Trotskyist. Together with Shachtman he edited New International.
But Burnham appears somewhat an unlikely leader of a revolutionary organisation. Alan Wald writes that he would: ‘occasionally attend political committee meetings in a tuxedo because he had just come or was en route to cocktails at the Rockefellers ...’
Burnham refused to go full time, refused to visit Trotsky to discuss his positions and refused to shorten his vacation in Connecticut to conduct an educational series in Minneapolis.
In December 1937 Burnham rejected the idea that Russia was a workers’ state. In part this reflected the influence of the ideas of Bruno R in The Bureaucratisation of the World that new, non-capitalist societies were emerging in Stalin’s Russia, Hitler’s Germany and Roosevelt’s America. Societies administered by a bureaucratic elite of technician/managers.
Burnham’s views were still couched in orthodox terms. Accordingly: ‘the economic structure as established by the October Revolution remains basically unchanged’. The bureaucracy did not constitute an independent class but it had ‘entered the road of destruction of the planned and nationalised economy,’ was being brought ‘into ever increasing and deepening conflict with the needs and interests of the nationalised economy’ and accordingly ‘the actions of the bureaucracy are actively sabotaging the plan and disintegrating the state monopoly’.
Trotsky replied:
This degeneration as the present orgy of bonapartist terror shows, has approached a crucial point. That which was a “bureaucratic deformation” is at the present moment preparing to devour the workers’ state, without leaving any remains, and, on the ruins of nationalised property to spawn a new propertied class.
Trotsky invited Burnham to Mexico, an invite Cannon urged him to accept but to no avail.
That the ‘Russian Question’ should now be raised amidst the horrors of the Moscow Trials was not surprising. Trotsky’s own views were in flux and his designation of it as a ‘degenerated workers’ state’ was one which stressed its transitional nature, as we have already seen.
At the same time Burnham, backed by Hal Draper, the national secretary of the YPSL, criticised the organisational principles of the new SWP from a position critical of democratic centralism.
The differences Burnham had were never argued out within the SWP at the time. Cannon would write:
I personally never had any sympathy with Burnham’s ideas and conceptions in this respect. But along with others, as long as Burnham remained an isolated factor unable to assert any decisive influence on the course of the party, I saw no reason to draw our differences with him out to the end. (Struggle For The Proletarian Party, p. 120)
The SWP faced with a downturn was thrown into confusion by the turn in fortunes. In particular they now faced a growing CP.
In March 1938, during discussions with Trotsky and the SWP leadership in Mexico, Cannon said of the CP:
Do you think that the Stalinist movement has any prospect for further growth in the US – for further expansion? During the past few years they have grown tremendously not only in membership but in ramifications. I’m inclined to think that they have reached their apex in the US ... in general the terrible reception the Moscow trials have received and the collapse of the Peoples Front policy and their foreign policy in general have dealt serious blows to the Stalinist movement in the US. There is a much broader attack against Stalinism now. Then also in many trade unions where they have had control a powerful opposition has developed. Now our comrades tell us that the hatred against the Stalinists, in the painters union for example, where they combine with the worst gangster elements, is growing.
But this perspective took no account of the growing war threat. Nor the fact that a radicalised anti-Stalinist current was not likely to emerge with the struggle now in decline. Instead the dominant ideas in the CIO were those of Roosevelt, ideas reinforced by the bureaucracy and, until August 1939, the CP.
The blocs that Cannon was describing were now with elements who were moving right. In addition many good militants during the sit-downs were now caught up in the CIO bureaucracy.
The effect was to pull the Trotskyists towards seeing the CP as the main enemy. In the UAW the president, Homer Martin, had allied with the right and the supporters of Jay Lovestone against the CP and the left. Martin unleashed a red Scare. In Cannon’s absence Burnham and Shachtman took a position of backing Martin. It took a rebellion by the auto fraction of the party, round Bert Cochran and Kermit Johnson, to overturn this line.
While the CP were backing Roosevelt, and by implication war with Germany, in pursuit of the Popular Front, the SWP could hope for gains. But in line with the Hitler-Stalin pact the CP switched positions in the Autumn of 1939.
The pact threw the SWP into a faction fight. Burnham re-raised the ‘Russian Question’.
The internal state of the SWP was confused. Cannon himself described the leadership as ‘an unstable coalition’. Within the party apparatus Martin Abern was still leading opposition to the way the party regime functioned. The newly-won YPSU was not really integrated. In particular the New York membership was overwhelmingly petty bourgeois and greatly infected by the intellectual milieu it was drawn from.
Trotsky, writing in May 1939, said of the paper. Socialist Appeal:
The paper is too wise, too scholarly, too aristocratic, for the American workers and tends to reflect the party more as it is than to prepare for the future ... Of course it is not only a question of the paper, but of the whole course of policy. I continue to be of the opinion that you have too many petty bourgeois boys and girls who are very good and devoted to the party, but who do not fully realise that their duty is not to discuss among themselves, but to penetrate into the fresh milieu of workers. (Writings 1938–39)
One of his suggestions was that all petty bourgeois comrades should be placed on probation until they recruited a worker.
Burnham now accented Bruno R’s conclusions, arguing a position that Russia was a non-capitalist class society, defined as bureaucratic collectivism, not a workers’ state but representing a new historic form. Shachtman too accepted Burnham’s overall position – but maintained a position of defending Russia in war. And while Abern maintained Trotsky’s position, he blocked with the others against the ‘bureaucratic conservatism’ of the Cannon leadership.
Cannon would correctly describe this bloc in these words:
There has never yet been an opposition in our movement so heterogeneous, so far removed from Marxism and the spirit of proletarian revolution, so weak in proletarian composition and so lacking in leaders with the necessary political firmness, devotion, singleness of purpose and capacity to sacrifice.
The faction fight is documented in Trotsky’s In Defence of Marxism and Cannon’s The Struggle For The Proletarian Party. Trotsky correctly labelled them the ‘Petty Bourgeois Opposition’, a title not just reflecting their social roots but the forces influencing their stance.
He and Cannon cooperated closely. When it became clear that Burnham in particular was being dragged into a position of viewing Russia as a new barbarism, worse than Western imperialism, Trotsky described the process at work, quoting Burnham and Shachtman’s own Intellectuals in Retreat to describe what was happening.
In particular he took issue over Burnham’s rejection of dialectics. This was something he had previously hoped to convince Burnham on privately. But now, though not until the factional lines were fully drawn, Trotsky took up the cudgel. Burnham’s reply, Science and Style, makes pathetic reading.
The faction fight split the party down the middle. In accordance with Trotsky, Cannon was prepared to let the discussion continue after the 1940 convention, the publication of the minority’s documents in New International, the creation of a special internal publication by them and the maintenance of minority comrades in the leadership.
Burnham-Shachtman-Abern replied by demanding the right to publish their own paper. When that was refused they left, setting up the Workers Party.
 
Balance sheet of a faction fight
Cannon formally won the 1940 faction by a vote of 55 to 31 at the convention. In reality it was a 50/50 split if the YPSL was taken into account. The minority took the majority in New York.
Today Trotsky’s In Defence of Marxism is held up as proof for the Orthodox Trotskyist position that Russia remains a ‘degenerated workers’ state’. Rather it shows Trotsky believed it to be a ‘Bonapartist regime’, balanced between the two great classes, which faced imminent destruction.
Above all the fate of Stalin’s Russia would be settled by the war:
This war provokes, as we firmly believe, a proletarian revolution, it must inevitably lead to the overthrow of the bureaucracy in the USSR and regeneration of Soviet democracy on a far higher economic and cultural basis than in 1918. In that case the question as to whether the Stalinist bureaucracy was a ‘class’ or a growth on the workers’ state will be automatically solved. To every single person it will become clear that in the process of the development of the world revolution the Soviet bureaucracy was only an episodic relapse.
Again: ‘Degeneration must inescapably end at a certain stage in downfall.’
Hardly grounds for maintaining Trotsky’s conditional description of Russia as a ‘degenerated workers’ state’ nearly 50 years on!
What then was wrong with the Burnham-Shachtman position? After all in stressing the development of ‘statism’ – the growth of state control of the economy, the totalitarianism of Stalinist rule and Russia’s imperialist role in the war it identified new factors.
The bureaucratic collectivist (or new class society theories it spawned like those of Tictin or Furedi) are deeply fatalistic. The stress is on the power of the state, the barbarism, of Russia. Above all if new societies of this type can be created the choice is no longer socialism or capitalism. There is a third choice, even worse than capitalism.
Burnham drew the conclusion from this rather quickly. He resigned from the party. Within a year he had published The Managerial Revolution which echoed Bruno R in describing Russia, Germany and America as ‘managerial societies’ and that a ‘managerial revolution’ awaited the world. Russia represented a new ‘Asiatic despotism’. Increasingly it was the threat. The choice was between US-style ‘democracy’ and Stalinism, and Burnham knew which side he was on there.
By 1947 he was calling for a ‘preventative’ atomic war against Russia. During the McCarthyite witchhunt when the Workers Party he had helped found (now the Independent Socialist League) took proceedings against its presence on the subversive list Burnham was the key witness against them.
Burnham died in July 1987. By then he was an established figure on the fringes of the US right – championing the racist regimes of Southern Africa and the Contras in Nicaragua.
Shachtman did not follow that path, nor was his rightwards shift so sudden. In April 1940 he took a ‘Third Camp’ position, supporting: ‘the submerged, smouldering working masses of the world’, and ‘for the defeat and overthrow of both imperialist camps’. The position of defending Russia had now been dropped.
In September 1948 amidst the growing witchhunt he concluded: ‘Stalinism is a reactionary, totalitarian, anti-bourgeois and anti-proletarian current in the labour movement but not of the labour movement.’ He concluded that:
... it would be absurd for the militants to proclaim ‘their neutrality’ and fatal for them to support the Stalinists. Without any hesitation, they should follow the general line, inside the labour movement, of supporting the reformist officialdom against the Stalinist officialdom. In other words, where it is not yet possible to win the unions for the leadership of revolutionary militants, we forthrightly prefer the leadership of reformists who aim in their own way to maintain a labour movement, to the leadership of the Stalinist totalitarians who aim to exterminate it.
The Workers Party stagnated and split. In 1949 it became the Independent Socialist League. Ten years later it joined the Socialist Party which a year later joined the Democrats.
Shachtman himself moved sharply to the right – supporting the Bay of Pigs invasion (claiming the ‘third camp’, represented by the remnants of the Social Democrats and the union bureaucracy, were taking part). Over Vietnam, opposition to Stalinist barbarism led to his support for the bombing of Hanoi. In 1972 at the end of his life Shachtman opposed McGovern for the Democratic nomination and advised support for Nixon in the presidential poll.
A minority of the old Workers Party, mainly around Hal Draper, retained a revolutionary position. But increasingly they were isolated. In the 1960s while they opposed the Vietnam War they refused support for the NLF as a break from the third camp position. Their failure to relate to Students for a Democratic Society ensured their isolation from that radicalisation.
If the history of the Shachtmanites justified Trotsky and Cannon’s position, the SWP too had been subject to pressure from the milieu they had recruited from at the beginning of the war.
Immediately after the faction fight ended the SWP leadership met with Trotsky. Pointing out that the CP opposed the war now, Trotsky quizzed them on their failure to back the CP’s 1940 presidential campaign. In response Cannon replied that a position of supporting a vote for the CP would cause problems because:
The Stalinists are hated by the militants. It is not the psychological attitude of our members but the broad anti-Stalinist movement. If we started to play this kind of politics we would run into this indignation of these militants. For example the food workers of New York. Our comrades succeeded in creating a strong progressive faction. They may possibly be elected to posts. We built our strength on opposition to Stalinist control of the union. Such a line would disrupt our work. (all the following quotes from SWP Internal Bulletin, Vol. 15 No. 10, April 1953)
Trotsky replied correctly concerning these ‘progressives’ the SWP was blocking with that: ‘The support of the progressives is not stable. It is found at the top of the union rather than as a rank-and-file current. Now with the war we will have these progressives against us.’
Trotsky correctly cited the SWP’s failure to build a rank-and-file current as opposed to blocs with sections of the bureaucracy. He also pinpointed the party’s Stalinophobia and its refusal to accept opposition to the war coloured everything. A CP vote was a clear anti-war vote in 1940 and the only one for an independent working-class-based party.
Turning his attention to the North West Organiser, the Minnesota Teamsters paper edited by the Trotskyists in Minneapolis, he declared:
Our policy is too much for pro-Rooseveltian trade unionists. I notice that in the North West Organiser this is true. We discussed it before, but not a word was changed; not a single word. The danger – a terrible danger is adaptation to the pro-Rooseveltian trade unionists. You don’t give any answers to the elections, not even the beginning of an answer.
Cannon did not accept the argument. The SWP did not support the CP’s election campaign. Later, in September 1940, he said:
It has been our general practice to combine in day-to-day trade union work with the progressives and even the conservative labour fakers against the Stalinists. We have been correct from this point of view, that while the conservatives and traditional labour skates are no better than the Stalinists, are no less betrayers in the long run, they have different bases of existence. The Stalinist base is the bureaucracy of the Soviet Union. They are perfectly willing to disrupt a trade union in defence of the foreign policy of Stalin. The traditional labour fakers have no roots in Russia nor any support in its powerful bureaucracy. Their only base of existence is the trade union: if the union is not preserved they have no further existence as trade union leaders. That tends to make them, from self-interest, a little more loyal to the unions than the Stalinists. That is why we have been correct in most cases in combining with them as against the Stalinists in purely trade union affairs. (The Socialist Workers Party in the Second World War)
This view parallels that of the Shachtmanites, though other pressure was later to push them in the opposite direction. The method of looking for alliances with the bureaucracy would however remain and become a hallmark of Orthodox Trotskyism.
Before leaving the 1940 split one final point must be made. Cannon’s conduct of this factional struggle, as enshrined in The Struggle for the Proletarian Party, together with his conduct in such future internal fights, was held up as the way to proceed for a generation of Trotskyists that followed.
On grounds of success it is not a strikingly good model. Not only did Cannon only just secure a majority in 1940, owing much to Trotsky’s help, but he came near to a premature split in 1933 on simple organisational issues. And his allies in each faction fight would invariably end up as the protagonists in the next one.
Thus Hugo Oehler was the key to the fight with Shachtman-Abern in 1933 but then led the opposition to the Socialist Party entry and quit with his faction. In the 1940 fight the Cannonite faction used a young auto worker, Bert Cochran, and a New York intellectual, George Clarke, in the van of the fight. Both would split with 20 per cent of the membership in 1953. That is the product invariably of what happens when you have to push hard in a certain direction. When it comes to correcting the emphasis people are often loathe to shift. It takes discussion and education.
Cannon’s method was fundamentally formalistic. It meant not discussing out differences when they arose in embryo but rather once they emerged openly insisting discussion must fall along formal factional lines. Invariably that leads to splits.
The second problem which flows from Trotsky’s scientifically correct definition of the minority as being ‘petty bourgeois’, is a tendency, clearly evident in The Struggle For The Proletarian Party, to define internal division along lines of class composition:
The crisis is the direct reflection of alien class pressures upon the party. Under this pressure the bulk of the petty bourgeois elements and the petty bourgeois leaders, lost their heads completely, while the proletarian sections of the party stood firm ... (p. 9)
Trotsky, however, did not come to the conclusion that the minority were a petty bourgeois tendency on a sociological basis. In reality the majority were not overwhelmingly proletarian. The definition rested on their political positions and was only adopted with great care after discussion had ensured clarity of the differences.
To conclude that ‘alien class forces’ operate directly in this way within a revolutionary organisation creates a logic which has been all too clear in the way Orthodox Trotskyist organisations have duplicated a Stalinist-style internal regime (generally among those who quote the Cannon model).
 
Cannon and the crisis of Orthodox Trotskyism
The SWP emerged from the split weakened and facing America’s entry into the war. In August 1940 Stalin’s assassin murdered Trotsky. The Fourth International’s ‘leadership’ was transferred to New York. In reality it consisted of Trotsky’s ex-secretaries.
Trotsky had however left his followers a firm forecast of events. That of war, continuing slump, the break-up of Stalinism and social democracy leading to revolution. He also left The Transitional Programme which sought to provide a strategy for this scenario. As Cannon repeatedly pointed out The Transitional Programme was written with America very much in mind.
Trotsky was firm on the imminence of revolution:
What is clear is that in countries involved in the war the collapse will come not in four to six years but in six to twelve months ... And the revolution will come not in four years but much earlier, after some months.
It was a heady perspective for a few hundred Trotskyists who were assured their ranks would swell accordingly.
The Transitional Programme was to become central to the SWP’s work, as it was for all other Orthodox Trotskyists (orthodox in the sense of their allegiance to the Transitional Programme and not their faithfulness to Trotsky’s revolutionary beliefs).
In The History of American Trotskyism, Cannon made clear the centrality of having the ‘correct’ programme:
We always believed that the programme overrides everything. A group which is assured of the adoption of the Marxist programme does not need to fight too hard over every organisational detail ...
Transitional demands – acting in Trotsky’s words as a bridge between the struggle for reformist or economic demands and the struggle for power – only have meaning within a particular revolutionary context. The problem occurs when such demands are laid down in advance. Bread, land and peace were transitional demands in 1917, unrealisable without destroying capitalism. That was feasible because of the mass struggle of Russian workers, the existence of Soviets and, above all, of the Bolsheviks under Lenin.
As Trotsky pointed out, when the same demands were raised by the Popular Front in France in 1936, not only did they have no revolutionary content but they acted as a brake on the struggle, limiting the goal to reformist measures.
Above all having a ‘correct’ programme means nothing unless the class is in struggle and a strong revolutionary organisation exists.
Fetishising the demands listed in The Transitional Programme as laid out in 1938 can lead to all sorts of problems. For instance, during the post-war confrontation between the United Automobile Workers under Walter Reuther (then adopting a left face) and Fords, Reuther adopted the ‘correct’ demand of open the books. He did so not out of concern for creating workers’ control, as Trotsky envisaged the slogan as meaning, but because he knew Fords were making good profits and it would make a good PR exercise.
Again faced with post-war inflation and the greatest strike wave America has yet seen, the SWP raised Trotsky’s demand for a sliding scale of wages, to rise in line with inflation. Reuther in contrast called for ‘Wage Rises Without Price Increases’. Reuther’s slogan fitted the mood better. But above all the sliding scale of wages did not offer a clear way forward and was in no sense transitional as it did not challenge capitalism, which could meet the demand (as indeed it did in Italy).
But the situation of imminent revolution and the creation of mass Trotskyist parties that The Transitional Programme was based upon was not to occur. In the immediate term the SWP faced popular support for America’s entry into the war. Cannon responded to America’s entry into the war with the ‘Proletarian Military Policy’ which was originally formulated by Trotsky. Cannon argued:
We are willing to fight Hitler. No worker wants to see that gang of fascist barbarians overrun the country or any country. But we want to fight fascism under a leadership we trust ... We will fight all the time for the idea that the workers should have officers of their own choosing. That the great sum of money that is being appropriated out of the public treasury should be allocated in part to the trade unions for the setting up of their own military training camps under officers of their own selection.
The perspective was one in which Trotskyists could work to create dual power, directly controlling military units.
But this was not the reality between 1941 and 1945. The truth was that the SWP was confined largely to making propaganda. And in that situation a position for workers’ control of the war effort was sailing dangerously close to the edge of acceptance of the war. For instance, writing in The Militant in March 1941 Albert Goldman stated that the SWP did not advocate defeat of the USA, adding that Hitler was the ‘greatest enemy of the working class’ and that ‘all those we influence must go to war and do what they are told by the capitalists’.
However the SWP, following Trotsky, was clear that the Second World War was not a war against fascism but an imperialist conflict.
In contrast, the Workers Party took a clear revolutionary defeatist line. Writing in their paper Labour Action in May 1942, Irving Howe declared:
We are in favour of the defeat of fascism. We believe, however, that an indispensable prerequisite for that defeat is the establishment of workers’ and farmers’ governments in the allied countries, which, by freeing the colonial people now enslaved by the Allied imperialist powers and extending the hand of brotherhood to the German workers oppressed by Hitler, can alone effectively fight a revolutionary war to smash all forms of fascism.
The Shachtmanites took a position of supporting the ‘third camp’, that of the working class, against fascism, Stalin and the imperialist allies. In the beginning of the war that meant they took a position to the left of the SWP. But the SWP came through the war without capitulating to imperialism. On the day America declared war Cannon and 17 leaders of the SWP and Minneapolis teamsters were jailed for 16 months for their opposition to the war.
Cannon’s testimony to the court, reprinted as Socialism on Trial, is an excellent revolutionary defence. SWP members agitated against he no-strike pledge agreed by the trade union chiefs and Roosevelt. They supported back demands for civil rights. Trotskyists who entered the merchant navy (thereby avoiding the draft) volunteered for the deadly Russian convoys in order to carry Trotskyist propaganda to Murmansk.
Within the Trotskyists’ ranks new pressures were developing. In October 1941 the exiled International Communists of Germany, based in New York, produced Three Theses on the European Revolution. In essence they argued Nazism was a new, more repressive form of capitalism which had destroyed the organisations of all classes in occupied Europe. What was involved was a struggle for national liberation, involving all classes which would create a ‘democratic’ revolution. This meant that socialism was off the agenda until democracy and national freedom were restored.
The SWP correctly denounced this as accenting popular frontism and a stages theory of revolution. But by 1944 the Shachtmanites were supporting this position along with the exiled ‘leadership’ of the Fourth International.
In 1942 Felix Morrow, a central SWP leader, supported the Three Theses. By the time Cannon and the SWP leadership served their jail sentence in 1944 clear political difference were emerging between Cannon, and Morrow backed by Albert Goldman.
By now the Shachtmanites were raising the slogan ‘Through National Freedom to Socialist Freedom’. For them the emphasis was now on reforms, on recreating democratic ‘freedoms’. It was an emphasis which flowed from the bureaucratic collectivist position, and one which pulled Shachtman and the vast bulk of his supporters to the right.
The SWP emerged strengthened from the war. In July 1944 The Militant’s editorial carried the headline ‘7,614 New Readers’. Membership had doubled from just after the split, when it stood at 500, by the summer of 1944. The Militant had expanded and now had a black columnist – a reflection of the fact that for the first time the SWP was recruiting black workers. Pioneer publishers had begun in earnest to publish books – starting with Struggle for a Proletarian Party by Cannon and Trotsky’s In Defence of Marxism.
The No-Strike Pledge by union leaders could not stop an explosion of labour militancy. In 1943 John L. Lewis’ United Mineworkers broke with the CIO to strike successfully. The end of the war saw the strike wave mushroom. In 1945 there were 4,750 strikes involving 3,470,000 workers (compared to a figure of 4,740 strikes in 1937 which involved just 1,861,000 workers). In 1946 the figure increased to 4,985 strikes involving 4,600,000 workers.
The centre of the militancy was the United Automobile Workers where there was a struggle for control between Reuther and a CP-backed faction which supported preserving the no-strike pledge.
A wave of demonstrations swept the armed forces with 4,000 GIs demonstrating in Kerrila, 3,500 taking part in a hunger strike on Guam and then in January 1946 a mass demonstration down the Champs Elysees in Paris.
The National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People, the main black organisation, grew from just 85,000 in 1940 to 530,000 in 1946. When 26 blacks were killed by racists in 1943 in Detroit it sparked the first black ghetto uprising in Harlem.
The SWP grew to 1,500 members in 1946, mainly among industrial workers. For the first time it had an impressive black cadre.
By September 1945 The Militant was selling 31,000 copies and reached the capacity of its printshop’s production. On one day, designated ‘Red Sunday’, SWP members nationwide signed up 1,526 new subscribers.
But despite the strike wave the militancy remained under the control of the union bureaucrats, unlike in the sit-down strikes of 1936 and 1937. Nowhere was there a repeat of Minneapolis, Toledo or San Francisco.
In particular Roosevelt had consolidated working-class support for the Democrats. There can be no doubt that his main ally in this was the CP. American Stalinism was never that big but it was decisive in providing the organisational backbone of the CIO. And it was the CP which put the brakes on the struggle.
But the SWP’s perspective, clinging firmly as it did to Trotsky’s predictions, were increasingly at odds with reality. Despite the post-war radicalisation there had been no revolutionary outbreaks in Europe. Russia, far from being weakened or witnessing the overthrow of the bureaucracy, emerged strengthened.
For eight years the SWP continued to cling to each one of Trotsky’s predictions. If reality proved them wrong in turn, reality must be wrong. The SWP’s theoretical magazine, Fourth International, greeted Victory in Europe Day with the headline ‘There Is No Peace’. [3] Five months after the war in Europe ended, Cannon told a New York audience on the anniversary of the Russian Revolution:
Trotsky predicted that the fate of the Soviet Union could be decided in the war. That remains our firm conviction. Only we disagree with some people who carelessly think that the war is over. The war has only passed through one stage and is now in the process of regroupment and reorganisation for the second. The war is not over, and the revolution which we said would issue from the war in Europe is not taken off the agenda. It has only been delayed and postponed, primarily for lack of leadership, for lack of a sufficiently strong revolutionary party. (The American Century, p. 200)
Felix Morrow correctly pointed out that ‘the Trotskyist movement would become a madhouse if it followed Cannon’s line’.
Worse was to follow. In November 1943 the SWP leadership passed a resolution on the European Revolution that included a firm rejection of bourgeois democracy being restored:
The decay of capitalism and the acuteness of class conflicts, forbids another extended period of bourgeois democracy for war-torn Europe. While interim bourgeois democratic regimes may be set up here and there as by-products of uncompleted revolutionary movements, they must, by their very nature, prove unstable and short lived... the economic preconditions for an extended period of bourgeois democracy have disappeared ...
The Trotskyist parties everywhere have the basic duty to expose and fight against the illusion that stable bourgeois democratic regimes, which have lost their material foundation, can be restored in Europe ...
Roosevelt and Churchill understand that it is not in the cards to establish stable ‘democratic’ capitalist governments in Europe today ... The choice, from the Roosevelt-Churchill point of view, is a Franco-type government or the spectre of Socialist Revolution.
In conclusion it was spelt out that bourgeois democracy was ‘incompatible with the continued existence of capitalism in Europe’.
On the economy it was baldly stated, ‘In all the “liberated” countries the bourgeoisie is incapable of restoring economic life’. Similarly, Russia was held to be in a terminal crisis:
The Soviet Union will emerge from the war a devastated country. Millions of the lower of manhood are dead, wounded or missing. A great section of its industry is destroyed, and innumerable cities as well as great sections of the countryside lie in ruins. Far from having increased its independent strength, under Stalin the Soviet Union has been debilitated and today is weaker than ever in relation to the capitalist world.
The Second World Conference [4] of the Fourth International declared that ‘only the intervention of the proletarian revolution can save the Soviet Union from an early and fatal end’.
But what was to be done about Russian-occupied Eastern Europe? These societies were duplicating the system inside Russia itself. Yet Trotsky had said Russia was ‘only a temporary transitional regime’ which would not survive the war. The spread of that regime into Eastern Europe raised a crucial problem.
Once again the answer was provided by denying reality. The ‘Buffer Zone’ as they were termed remained capitalist according to the Fourth International’s Second Congress. ‘The capitalist nature of the economy of the “buffer zone” is apparent’. As to the political structure, ‘the state of the “buffer countries” represents at the same time an extreme form of Bonapartism’ (Fourth International, June 1948).
Russia remained a bureaucratic degenerated workers’ state. China and Eastern Europe were qualitatively different.
Inside the SWP Felix Morrow and Albert Goldman challenged the economic catastrophism of the Cannon leadership and in Britain the majority of the Revolutionary Communist Party around Jock Haston, Ted Grant and Tony Cliff had also moved independently to similar positions.
A discussion also began on a re-evaluation of the Russian question. One of the key contributors was Tony Cliff who recognised that Russia and Eastern Europe were reflections of each other and therefore to say that Russia was in any way a workers’ state meant that socialism was possible without the working class’s own self activity. As a result he developed his analysis that what existed in Russia was state capitalism.
But by that time Cannon, aided by the ‘International Secretariat’ in Paris (Michel Pablo, Ernest Mandel and Pierre Frank), had moved to overturn the elected majority and split the organisation. Gerry Healy became the SWP’s effective voice in Britain organising a minority faction in support. The International Secretariat intervened directly to split the organisation, throwing their mandate – and that of Cannon – behind Healy.
Within the SWP Morrow and Goldman were pressing for unity with the Shachtmanites. Increasingly in counter-position they adopted positions for more modest perspectives which increasingly became closer to reformism. Goldman quit the SWP to join the Shachtmanites and then broke with them quickly. Morrow was expelled by the SWP and dropped away.
The bulk of Trotskyists in Europe opposed the International Secretariat but an elaborately devised system of voting guaranteed Cannon-Pablo-Mandel control at the Second World Conference.
Within the United States the post-war upsurge coupled with the perspective outlined above meant Cannon was arguing that the American revolution was imminent. Cannon’s Theses On The American Revolution started from the view that:
US imperialism which proved incapable of recovering from its crisis and stabilising itself in the 10-year period preceding the outbreak of the Second World War is heading for an even more catastrophic explosion in the current post-war era ... What is really in store is not unbounded prosperity but a shortlived boom. In the wake of the boom must come another crisis and depression which will make the 1929–32 conditions look prosperous by comparison. (The American Century, p. 256)
But America and the world was entering into the world’s greatest capitalist boom. The world economy grew twice as fast between 1950 and 1964 as it did between 1913 and 1950.
The post-war labour upsurge came to an abrupt end. By the Spring of 1947 the strike figure had slumped to the lowest since the formation of the CIO.
The UAW had been central to the upsurge, and in turn was central to the SWP’s industrial work. But within the UAW the Trotskyists had become trapped within the factional war engulfing the leadership.
On the one side was the ex-Socialist, Walter Reuther. On the other the Addes-Thomas faction backed by the CP. In 1944 all had united to defend the war-time no strike pledge against the militants who had combined into the Rank and File Caucus in opposition to both wings of the bureaucracy and the no-strike pledge. At the 1944 UAW convention the Rank and File Caucus (some of whose leaders were close to the Workers Party) gained 36 per cent of the vote. Support for the no-strike pledge was only maintained through Reuther’s manoeuvring.
But with the end of the war Reuther moved left and the Rank and File Caucus collapsed into Reuther’s faction – a position shared by the SWP and the Workers Party. In March 1946 Reuther secured election to the UAW presidency – it wasn’t delegates who secured his success. Both the SWP and the Shachtmanites started from a position that Reuther had to be supported against the Stalinists who were the real threat inside the UAW. Reuther, it was held, had the support of militant anti-Stalinist workers.
In 1947 Reuther turned on the Addes-Thomas-CP faction with a vicious red-baiting campaign. He helped sabotage effective opposition to the crippling anti-trade union Taft-Hartley Act. The SWP switched sides realising the witchhunt had to be opposed (the Shachtmanites remained supporting Reuther). But the reality was that the Thomas-Addes-CP faction was largely discredited among the best militants and was set to fall apart as result of the anti-Communist witchhunt.
The SWP’s militants were left isolated to face the growing McCarthyite witchhunt from Reuther, the state and the employers.
What this reflected was a view of the trade unions which did not see the central divide as between the rank and file and the bureaucracy. Instead Cannon argued it was crucial to exploit divisions within the bureaucracy, blocking with whoever took a more progressive position. Instead of organising the rank and file the key was organising a ‘class struggle left wing’ including elements of the bureaucracy. Members of the SWP including Farrell Dobbs could become trade union officials. Supporters of a rank-and-file position are denounced by Orthodox Trotskyists for having a ‘sociological’ view of the unions and not understanding the difference between left- and right-wing union chiefs.
From their 1946 position of expecting an imminent third American revolution the SWP now faced an offensive from all sides. In 1946 membership reached 1,470. Then it dropped to 1,277 in 1948, 825 in 1950 and 758 in 1952.
In 1946 Cannon stated:
It might be argued that a big wave of persecution would alter this perspective [of a revolutionary show-down] ... our perspective is not based on the contemporary policy of the ruling class but upon more fundamental considerations of the weaknesses of the system economically and that it cannot be changed by persecutions – as a matter of fact, it might even be accelerated by them. (The American Century, p. 281)
Today McCarthyism is seen as something which mainly befell Hollywood. In reality the main victim of the witchhunt was the working class. The red scare, intensified with the Chinese revolution and the Korean war, was aimed at systematically isolating militants on the shopfloor and eradicating any tradition of rank-and-file organisation stemming from the upsurges of the 1930s and 1940s. It guaranteed the dominance of the trade union bureaucracy and the close collaboration which has held between the unions and the employers since the late 1940s.
In 1952 for instance the House of Un-American Activities visited Detroit at Reuther’s behest to investigate Local 600 of the UAW in Fords. It was the biggest union branch in the world, with 50,000 members and a bastion of opposition to the Reuther leadership. The HUAC investigations and the witchhunt it unleashed helped remove the branch’s left-wing leadership and wreck the nucleus of shop stewards’ organisation it had created.
For SWP members the collapse of the post-war upsurge and the euphoria associated with the perspective of imminent revolution threw the organisation into crisis.
The SWP was unable to adjust to a situation of isolation where it was confined to propaganda. Instead it continued to hope for growth through election campaigns, subscription drives and even an agitational anti-witchhunt campaign which never got beyond the drawing board.
In this situation a new opposition developed. The central figure was Bert Cochran, the leader of the SWP’s work in the UAW. The grouping around him in Detroit argued for a propaganda perspective and opposed the growing stress on elections as the one remaining area of ‘mass work’. In particular Cochran pointed out that Cannon was wrong to stress the ‘progressive anti-Stalinism’ of the American working class. Any validity that might have had during the war when the CP opposed strikes or during the post-war strikes when it was to the right of the likes of Reuther had now been swept aside. Cochran won the support of the majority of the SWP’s auto fraction, the party’s jewel in the crown.
But into this crisis a new element emerged. In June 1948 Stalin turned on Tito’s Yugoslavia, expelling it from the Eastern bloc and threatening invasion. The world congress of the Fourth International had decided in case of war ‘the strictest revolutionary defeatism’ applied to the Bonapartist dictatorships in Eastern Europe. In contrast the Russian ‘workers’ state’ had to be defended at all costs.
The Militant responded initially by stating workers ‘will surely reject this trap of choosing between the type of gold braid worn in Belgrade, as against the type Stalin prefers in the Kremlin’ (19 July 1948).
The International Secretariat in Paris responded by sending an Open Letter to the Communist Party of Yugoslavia which announced: ‘You hold in your hands a mighty power if only you persevere on the road of socialist revolution ... Keep up the fight!’ It concluded:
We wish rather to take note of the promise in your resistance – the promise of victorious resistance by a revolutionary workers’ party against the Kremlin machine ... Long Live the Yugoslav Socialist Revolution.
Strangely no mention was made of the Fourth International’s position that Tito led a counter-revolutionary Bonapartist clique, responsible for destroying the socialist movement in Yugoslavia!
But by 1952 Pablo’s line that a socialist revolution had occurred in Eastern Europe without the working class, on the bayonets of the Red Army, was adopted by the SWP. It was now also decided China was a workers’ state – though the SWP argued the real change came not with the revolution’s triumph in 1949 but later, during the Korean war when Mao was forced to nationalise the economy faced with internal opposition.
Pablo was now arguing the decisive form the class struggle took was between the two blocs which had emerged in the cold war. A new war was imminent. In that situation:
In countries where the CPs are a majority of the working class they can, under exceptional conditions (advanced disintegration of the propertied classes) and under the pressure of very powerful uprisings of the masses be led to project a revolutionary orientation counter to the Kremlin directives.
In July 1952 at an SWP leadership meeting a supporter of the state capitalist position, Art Fox, called attention to Pablo’s positions and the fact they junked everything Trotskyism had stood for in its rejection of Stalinism and that class struggle had been transcended by the struggle between states.
Cannon replied to the last point, ‘not entirely, but partly’. After applauding Fox’s ‘thoughtful speech’ he denounced it as a ‘personalised attack’ on Pablo, who was an ‘orthodox Trotskyist’ and represented the collective view of the International. In particular Cannon stressed the unanimity between himself and Pablo over the positions of the Third World Congress.
But Pablo was now moving to secure the International Secretariat control and force the implementation of his new perspective.
By bureaucratic fiat the Majority of the French section were overturned by Pablo and a new leadership around Pierre Frank installed which had an entry perspective into the Communist Party – which followed logically from the view that it would be forced by events to lead a revolution.
But Cannon drew back from this conclusion and he carried the SWP into a split with Pablo and Frank, announcing: ‘We are finished and done with Pablo and Pabloism for ever, not only here but on the international field.’
Cannon himself was set for effective retirement. But the SWP and its allies were not ‘finished’ or ‘done with’ Pabloism. Both were pulled in towards political alignment with Stalinism by their acceptance that the working class was no longer central to the revolution, that socialism equated with state ownership of production and Stalinist or pro-Stalinist outfits could carry out the overthrow of capitalism.
In 1959 both sides hurried to claim that Castro’s revolution in Cuba was socialist. Joe Hansen eulogised that:
In the final analysis, the overturn in property relations in Cuba is an echo of the October 1917 revolution in Russia’, adding that, ‘Cuba entered the transitional phase of a workers’ state, although one lacking as yet the forms of democratic proletarian rule. (Joe Hansen, Dynamics of the Cuban Revolution, p. 74)
A socialist revolution without the working class and a workers’ state without workers’ power!
The SWP adopted Castro’s Cuba, with its leaders making much-trumpeted visits and members joining work battalions there.
Both sides were able to re-unite in the ‘Fourth International’. But despite the whole apparatus which duplicated the Comintern, this was an organisation of few real forces. It was a sham international. And unlike the Comintern in Lenin’s day it had no political cohesion. The ‘American’ and ‘European’ blocs remained, disagreeing on more than what they agreed upon, and creating rival ‘sections’ in countries as far apart as Portugal and Iran.
The caution of the Dobbs-Hansen leadership ensured an intellectual stagnation and a drift rightwards, reinforced by their Orthodox Trotskyism.
Increasingly they became preoccupied with ‘ultra-leftism’ and preserving their legality, in reality their considerable electoral intervention. In 1963 Farrell Dobbs rushed off a telegram of condolence to Jacqueline Kennedy, fearing the SWP might be branded by the president’s assassination.
Having praised guerrillaism in Cuba the SWP now shifted to denouncing groups like the Provisional IRA when it first formed as being terrorist (in contrast the ‘Europeans’ under Ernest Mandel were prepared to recruit guerrilla groups like the Argentinian ERP which took to the countryside spurning the working class and proclaimed the need for a new international uniting the Trotskyists, Cuba, North Vietnam and North Korea).
Inside the United States the SWP abstained largely from the civil rights struggle in the Southern states, adopting an orientation exclusively on black nationalists like Malcolm X.
Internally opposition groups were thrown up repeatedly. Many of these were moving to become openly pro-Stalinist. A faction around a full-time organiser, Sam Marcy, split away after it supported the Russian suppression of the Hungarian revolution. In the early 1960s long-time SWP leader Arne Swabeck, a founder of American Trotskyism, became a Maoist and left (the SWP’s position on the Cultural Revolution was to support Mao’s opponent Liu Sho Chi because he stood for developing industry along Russian lines).
The SWP’s youth wing, the Young Socialist Alliance, became a factional battleground where only bureaucratic measures and the insane positions of the different factions (mainly grouped round the Healyites and the extremely bizarre Spartacists) allowed the leadership to retain control.
As various long-standing Cannonites began to grumble, they were removed. The Dobbs-Hansen leadership, in the absence of anyone else, handed over the reins to a group of ex-college graduates (no crime in itself) in the mid-’60s. All were relatively inexperienced, except in the factional battles of the YSA, and all were products of the growth from the pro-Cuba period.
Under them the shift rightwards continued.
The SWP itself had fallen to just 399 members by 1959 but it retained a position as yet unequalled on the American left and seemed set to make hay from the radicalisation of the 1960s. Indeed it quickly emerged as central to the movement against the Vietnam war.
But its position was for a ‘broad based campaign’, one which would include all sorts of religious and pacifist elements. Therefore it insisted the movement must simply demand an end to the war and could not take a position in support of the Vietnamese or raise wider issues in case it repel support. The SWP’s position was one of ‘Bring Our Boys Home’.
While the SWP blocked with Stalinists and Democrats in running the official campaign bodies the mass of people on the streets swept past them to the left.
The SWP also took, in line with the Shachtmanite remnants, a sectarian position towards Students for a Democratic Society. SDS was the body which reflected the campus radicalisation. The Trotskyists’ abstention from it, together with their right-wing positions on the war, meant that the Maoists reaped the benefits of the 1960s’ radicalisation. That had no small significance for the US left. Trotskyism was in many ways largely discredited by the positions of the SWP and the Shachtmanite groupings.
Cannon died finally in 1974. The organisation he had created was already dead. In 1974 the SWP backed the Portuguese Socialist Party against the growing forces of revolution. Denouncing the working class for seizing the its anti-revolutionary newspaper (and the Catholic church’s radio station – though on all of this they agreed with Mandel).
By 1978 they openly backed calls for an Islamic Republic in Iran. But above all it was the Nicaraguan revolution which ensured they formally renounced Trotskyism and permanent revolution. Trotsky was now just part of a ‘leadership team’ under Lenin, on a par with Zinoviev, Radek and presumably Stalin.
The remaining ‘Cannonites’ – many founders and long-term leaders of the SWP – were simply thrown out.
Following this logic their Australian group has gone further and openly declared its adherence to Gorbachev.
 
Summary
James P. Cannon died in 1974. Socialist Worker wrote:
The international revolutionary movement in general and the American movement in particular is immeasurably the richer from his life and work. Frequently wrong, sometimes wrong-headed, his great strength was in mass agitation, popular exposition of revolutionary politics, of making and enthusing revolutionary socialists.
He had retired from an active part in the SWP’s leadership following the Cochran split.
Cannon was one of the best of a generation of militants who grasped the lessons of the Russian revolution – militants who included Alfred Rosmer, Andreas Nin and Bill Haywood. But he went beyond them, firstly in building and leading a Communist Party, and then by rejecting Stalinism and creating the only substantial Trotskyist organisation prior to the radicalisation of the 1960s.
He took the best of the IWW and the syndicalists but broke from them to understand how politics and economics could not be separated. He took the best of Eugene Debs but broke from his concept a party to accept Lenin’s. And he left his swivel chair to follow Trotsky.
Above all Cannon represents the best leader that the American working class has yet produced.
But Socialist Worker was also correct in its choice of headline – ‘Magnificent Disciple Who Lost His Way’. Because lose his way he did, amidst the disintegration of the Trotskyist movement in the 1940s. And his responsibility for what happened then remains.
Today’s American SWP can, however, in no way claim Cannon. He belongs to the revolutionary tradition and that is how he should be remembered.

Notes by ETOL
1. In the printed version of this article the headline is given as “For the Russian Revolution”, however the actual headline was “For the Russian Opposition”. The article which is signed by Cannon, Abern and Shachtman, can be found here.
2. In the printed version the date is given as 1938, but it was actually 1939.
3. This headline actually appeared in the August 1945 issue of Fourth International.
4. The printed version says “Second World Congress”, which took place in 1948, whereas this resolution was adopted at the Second World Conference, which took place in 1946.
 






The rise of fascism, economic and social
crisis all raise the possibility of building a political
alternative both to the far right and to Labour. Chris Bambery
looks at how the Communist Party grew in the 1930s and the lessons
for us today



As we look out across a world gripped by recession, ravaged by a
series of bloody wars and scarred by the rise of fascism and
xenophobic nationalism, the 1990s seem to echo the 1930s. The
economic instability sweeping the world is creating a polarisation in
society unseen since then.
This takes place in a situation where the left is gripped by a
deep pessimism. Far too many socialists see themselves as a
permanently beleaguered minority which cannot connect with the
concerns of working class people. The Socialist Workers Party
provides a welcome contrast. With 8500 members we find ourselves a
vital force in any industrial dispute or in the fight against racism.
In this we are beginning to enter new territory. No longer are we
operating as just another group on the extreme margins of the working
class. There is an urgency here. The Nazis’ election victory on the
Isle of Dogs shows the bitterness which exists at the base of society
can be misdirected unless the left turns it full square against the
Tories. Here the one example we can draw on is the work of the
Communist Party in the 1930s.
In discussing the Communist Party we are faced with a paradox.
Here was a party which was totally under the control of Stalin’s
regime in Moscow. Yet this was a party too which contained within it
the very best working class militants. It was overwhelmingly working
class, and manual working class at that. In 1930 party members were
jailed for leafletting troops urging them not to go to India to
suppress the independence movement. Two years later 400 party members
were jailed for their leading role in agitating against unemployment.
The CP had from its birth in 1921 been small but it had real
roots, particularly in mining communities in the Rhondda and West
Fife, and in militant ‘Little Moscows’ like the Vale of Leven in
Scotland. It contained some of the best known working class leaders
like Tom Mann, J.T. Murphy, Willie Gallacher, Tom Bell and Tommy
Jackson. Its members had played a crucial role in the General Strike.
Afterwards they were both victimised by the employers and
witch-hunted by the leaderships of the Labour Party and the TUC. By
1929 its membership was down to a third of its 1926 figure, with just
3200 members, a third of whom were unemployed.
The ‘Third Period’ policy of focusing fire on Labour and
denouncing them as being on a par with the fascists had a certain
logic for Communist militants who had suffered in the wake of the
General Strike. The isolation forced on them by unemployment was
reinforced by their sectarian refusal to work with Labour supporters
and for a time a refusal to work in the trade unions. This led to a
further fall in membership.
Yet even while burdened with this crazy position the party’s
activists were able to distinguish themselves. The National
Unemployed Workers’ Movement was led by Wal Hannington and Harry
McShane who operated with an eye to creating mass support. Between
1929 and 1936 they organised five hunger marches, opposed from their
inception by the Labour Party and the TUC who told their members to
boycott the NUWM. Despite this by 1930 the organisation had 30,000
dues paying members – Hannington insisted on a minimum financial
contribution to ensure a stable membership. By 1932 the NUWM had
50,000 members in 386 branches.
Individual benefits were decided by means test assessors drawn
from local councillors. The NUWM targeted them with protests. One
such protest sparked huge riots in Birkenhead after police raided
homes of NUWM ‘agitators’. That year saw 17 contingents made up
of two thousand unemployed marching on London where they clashed with
police. Newsreel of the hand to hand fighting in central London
helped build a wider confidence among the unemployed to fight.
When in January 1935 the National Government (grouping together
the Tories and Ramsay MacDonald’s renegades from Labour) imposed
centralised means tests on claimants – to stop local councils
giving the maximum available – the NUWM organised huge protests
with a total of 300,000 taking to the streets of South Wales and
40,000 in Sheffield. The government quickly caved in.
By 1936 half a million people welcomed hunger marchers to Hyde
Park. Despite the Labour Party’s lack of support for the march, its
leader, Clement Attlee, was pressurised into addressing the rally.
In industry a number of party members ignored the party’s
support for break away unions and were able to lay the basis for
effective rank and file organisations within the trade unions.
In 1931 a Members’ Rights Movement was formed to oppose the
right wing leadership of the engineering union. It was backed by 120
union branches and four AEU district committees while its paper,
Monkey Wrench, sold 5,000 copies.
At the beginning of 1932 the CP had just 12 bus workers on London
Transport. When the company announced wage cuts, union officials were
ready to accept them. Rank and file committees were formed in
opposition grouping representatives from 32 garages and issued a
bulletin, Busman’s Punch. The transport union’s bus
committee was forced to call a strike ballot which produced a four to
one vote for action. The company backed off. By the end of 1932 the
party’s membership on the buses had risen to 40 and by 1935 stood
at 98. Busman’s Punch (edited by a CP fulltimer) sold 10,000
copies a month.
Another achievement was the publication from 1930 onwards of the
Daily Worker. In its first year, despite a distributors’
boycott, it sold 11,000 copies a day. In every area members had to
pick up the latest edition each morning from the rail station (or in
London from the paper’s offices) and distribute it themselves. By
1932 the paper sold 20,000 copies on a weekday and 46,000 of the
special weekend edition.
All of this would lay the basis for a transformation of the
party’s fortunes from 1933 onwards. Hitler’s victory in January
1933 created a militant response across Europe as workers determined
that the lack of resistance in Germany should not be repeated. In
Britain the emergence of Mosley’s British Union of Fascists gave
that added edge.
From 1934 onwards there was also a limited recovery in the economy
centred particularly on the ‘new industries’ like car and
aircraft production.
During 1933 and 1934 Communists led a series of fights in
previously unorganised aerospace and car plants at Firestone Tyres in
Brentford, Ford Dagenham and Pressed Steel Cowley. At the latter the
workforce, made up of recently recruited women from the surrounding
area and South Wales, walked out demanding union recognition. They
went straight to the local CP for advice. A Communist veteran of the
Firestone strike, Abe Lazarus, became chair of the strike committee.
The strike was a resounding victory.
In 1935 a national strike across the Hawker aircraft firm was led
by the CP dominated stewards’ combine. It secured recognition of
strong stewards’ organisation. Following it an Aircraft Shop
Stewards’ National Council was formed which printed the New
Propeller. This was edited by the CP’s London organiser and was
strongly anti-fascist.
In 1937 young Communists were to the fore in two waves of
apprentices’ strikes in engineering against low pay – one
beginning in Clydeside, the other in Manchester. Both were spread by
mass picketing and by sending out delegations of strikers. Elsewhere
Communists had led the unofficial ‘stay down’ strikes in South
Wales in 1935 which won after miners occupied the pits despite the
union officials demanding a return to work. A Communist led strike at
Harworth pit in Nottinghamshire led to the breaking of the scab union
formed in that coalfield during the 1926 miners strike.
Hitler’s victory in 1933 led to a shift in the line from Moscow.
Stalin began to see Germany as Russia’s main threat. Anti fascist
unity was now the order of the day – unity with firstly the
previously hated Labour Parties and then an extension of that to any
duchess, Tory MP or clergyman who could be found.
The British Union of Fascists had been founded in 1932 by an
ex-Labour minister, Sir Oswald Mosley. The BUF claimed 40,000 members
within two years, organised on military lines with members donning blackshirts.
On 7 June 1934 Mosley planned a monster rally at London’s
Olympia. The London District of the CP invited the London Trades
Council, Labour Party and Independent Labour Party to cooperate in
calling a counter-demonstration. Both of the first two refused to
discuss it. On the day 7,000 marched on Olympia only to be repeatedly
attacked by the police. Inside the hall Mosley addressed an audience
of 12,000 (mostly curious onlookers). Two thousand blackshirts
repeatedly pounced on Communist hecklers and beat them mercilessly in
the glare of spotlights. There was widespread outrage.
Mosley followed this up with a rally in Hyde Park in September. A
counter-demonstration was organised by a united front of the CP,
dissident Labour MPs and trade union leaders. The Labour Party and
the TUC both instructed their members not to attend the protest. On
the day 2,500 blackshirts gathered surrounded by 6,000 police while
around them gathered anywhere from 100,000 to 150,000 anti-fascists.
It was a massive blow for Mosley.
All of this led up to the huge confrontations at Cable Street in
1936 and in Bermondsey in the following year. At both, crowds of over
100,000 defied Labour Party and TUC instructions not to attend. On
both occasions Communists ensured that the blackshirts would not
march into working class areas.
The blackshirts had been routed but the Communist Party decided
that as well as mass mobilisations to confront them the CP needed a
different approach to undermine the working class support Mosley had
attracted in London’s East End. The Communists organised rent
strikes and blocked evictions, winning over Mosley supporters in the
process. The Tenants Defence League organised major rent strikes in
Bethnal Green and Stepney.
By 1937 membership of the Communist Party had climbed to 12,250
and would reach 17,750 on the eve of war.
How were the Communists organised in order to carry out such
effective work? Every member was part of either a factory group or a
street group. Their work was coordinated by a local branch. The
cutting edge of their work was the regular workplace and door to door
street sales in working class areas. In addition the party produced
regular penny pamphlets. Between 1937 and 1938, 300,000 copies of 17
different pamphlets were sold, with 40,000 sold in Lancashire.
Communist historian Noreen Branson reports:
‘Branch meetings of all members living or working in an area
began to be held regularly with reports on work being done in
various spheres, exchange of experience and, usually a speaker to
open a discussion on some topical issue. The meetings were now
“open” ones to which non-party sympathisers got drawn into
whatever campaign was in progress; reception for a Hunger March, Aid
For Spain, a peace meeting, a tenant/landlord confrontation, an
anti-Mosley demonstration, a demand for a better bus service, a
local strike, and so on.’
These branches of around 15 to 20 members concentrated on specific
working class areas. That size permitted them to maintain regular
sales and the follow up involved. They allowed the Communist Party to
penetrate working class areas and workplaces even where they had no
presence initially. In addition there were regular district wide
rallies which brought members and supporters in a town or borough together.
The CP’s experience demonstrates how the successful fight
against fascism can breed wider confidence in the class. Socialists
can learn how regular sales of the Daily Worker could
establish a presence in workplaces or in working class areas, how
that could be followed up with pamphlet sales which would in turn
provide the launchpad for the sort of work described earlier. The
Isle of Dogs and the tremendous turn out in Welling gives that a
vital urgency.
 



We are witnessing the beginning of a great fear, the fear that fascism is once again a political force in Europe. The fire bombings and racist murders that have accompanied the rise of Le Pen’s National Front in France and of the Republican Party in Germany and their counterparts throughout Europe have fuelled the forebodings of millions. But concerned newspaper articles and TV exposes, however welcome, have not stemmed the tide. More worrying still, even the protests of hundreds of thousands of anti-Nazis across Europe have not brought the growth of the Nazis to a halt.
In such circumstances fear can turn to paralysis. The feeling that history, the history of Nazi triumph in the 1930s, is repeating itself can begin to numb the sinews of resistance. But history need not repeat itself – so long as we learn from the past. However, to learn from the past requires precision about what fascism is and what causes it, about which strategies have failed and why, and about how to avoid repeating past mistakes. Being precise about the use of the term fascism is important, not for pedantic reasons, but because in the 1920s and 1930s a lack of clarity over the nature of the fascist menace helped pave the way for the success of Hitler and his Italian counterpart, Mussolini.
The greatest source of such confusion today is the establishment politicians of the major powers. The Gulf War of 1990–1 resounded to rhetoric stemming from the 1930s. The Western powers had to wage war on Iraq otherwise they would be guilty of ‘appeasement’, the term used to describe the policy of collaboration employed by the Western powers towards Hitler immediately before the Second World War. The Iraqi dictator, Saddam Hussein, was presented as the ‘new Hitler’. Again, when it came to the war in former Yugoslavia the supporters of Western intervention described the horrors of ethnic cleansing as a new Holocaust and were quick to label Serbia a fascist state.
All this debases the memory of the victims of Hitler’s Nazi dictatorship. Whatever the horrors inflicted by Saddam Hussein or by the war in former Yugoslavia they pale before the fate of the six million Jews, 2.5 million Poles, half a million Gypsies, over 400,000 Russian prisoners, 100,000 ‘inferior’ people condemned because of mental or physical illness plus tens of thousands of socialists, communists, gays and other ‘unhealthy’ elements who were systematically murdered by Hitler. Neither do such comparisons come to terms with the fact that this scientific murder programme was unleashed by one of the world’s most developed, industrialised states.
Such casual references to the Holocaust only help those who seek to diminish the horror inflicted by the Nazis. But, worse than this, such abuse of the term fascist blurs the distinction between a Nazi social movement and other authoritarian regimes. It blinds us to the unique nature of fascism and hinders us in adopting a response which can counter this particular threat.
But establishment politicians with their own contemporary projects in mind are not the only ones who misuse the term fascism. Academics with a historical axe to grind can be just as cavalier. One British academic blames fascism on an ‘activist tradition’ stemming from the Enlightenment of the 18th century and from the French Revolution of 1789. This tradition stretches from the French revolutionaries Robespierre and St Just, to the champions of Italian re-unification Garibaldi and Mazzini, down to Lenin and the Bolsheviks and on to Rudolph Hess, the commandant of Auschwitz, who admitted responsibility for the gassing of 2 million prisoners! Thus:
For Robespierre, the enemies of freedom were priests and aristocrats; for Lenin, they were ‘bourgeois’ groups like the Kulaks; for the Nazis, they happened to be the Jews. In each case freedom was to be achieved only by the appropriate extermination campaign. [1]
Again one exile from Nazi Germany talks of ‘the fusion of Bolshevism with fascism in the fully developed Stalinist system around 1940’. [2] Once more, the horror of the Stalinist system notwithstanding, the effect of this collapse of a number of very different historical circumstances into one mould is to make it more difficult to see the specific features of fascism and, therefore, to diagnose a specific cure.
Even the left have not been immune to this kind of error. The Communist Parties of the 1920s and early 1930s often saw fascism as merely another form of capitalist rule not qualitatively different from other authoritarian regimes or even from parliamentary government. The Communist Parties even went so far as to argue, in Stalin’s words:
Fascism is the bourgeoisie’s fighting organisation that relies on the active support of Social Democracy. Social Democracy is objectively the moderate wing of fascism ... These organisations do not negate but supplement each other. They are not antipodes, they are twins. [3]
This policy helped to divide the working class movement in the face of the Nazi challenge.
When the scales eventually dropped from the Stalinists’ eyes, the Communist Parties somersaulted from outright hostility to any form of accommodation with reformist workers to believing that alliance with ‘progressive capitalists’ would somehow stave off the fascist threat. From sectarian refusal to ally with reformist workers in the fight against fascism they moved to uncritical worship of sections of the very class in whose interests the fascists acted. This policy led to the Communist Parties restraining the direct struggle against the Nazis and their capitalist backers in the name of ‘unity’.
Today the left across Europe can be found repeating elements of both mistakes. The autonomists of Berlin directly and physically confront the Nazis without ever concerning themselves with the question of building a united front with reformist workers. SOS Racisme in France and some anti-racists in Britain confuse the fight against the Nazis with the wider struggle against racism and then, in confronting the Nazis, tie themselves to the kind of activities which their backers among the liberal sections of the bourgeoisie are willing to tolerate.
An effective strategy to beat the Nazis needs to be clear that: i) fascism is the product of capitalism in crisis, ii) it differs from other forms of pro-capitalist government in that it has at its core a petty bourgeoisie mass movement, iii) it aims to destroy working class organisation by dividing it against itself. This is the clear pattern which emerges from the history of the fight against fascism in the 1920s and 1930s in Italy, Germany and France.
 
On the road to the new Rome
Fascism first came to power in Italy in the 1920s, indeed fascism is an Italian word. But to understand Italian fascism we have to understand the realities of Italian society at the beginning of this century. Italy underwent its industrial revolution in the period prior to the First World War. Industrial production almost doubled between 1896 and 1914. National income grew by approximately 50 percent and industrial investment trebled. [4] This enormous and speedy industrialisation was concentrated on the ‘industrial triangle’ of the northern cities of Genoa, Milan and Turin.
Yet even at the end of this period Italy still remained more an agricultural than an industrial society. All the classic problems of under-development existed in central and in particular southern Italy, with its chronic unemployment or under-employment. The south, although it was home to 40 percent of the population, was relatively unaffected by industrialisation. The changes of these years meant that the disparities between north and south were more pronounced than at the time of unification half a century before. These disparities were reflected in Italian politics. The Italian Marxist Gramsci wrote, ‘The intrinsic weakness of capitalism, however, compelled it to base the economic disposition of the bourgeois state upon a unity obtained by compromises between non-homogenous groups’. [5]
In the period before and after the First World War a system of patronage and manipulation evolved, dominated by the figure of Giovanni Giolitti, who was premier five times and minister of the interior twice. Basing himself on the northern industrial core Giolitti incorporated the swollen bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie of the centre and south into the state by providing sinecures and subsidies. He balanced between the industrialists of the north, who identified with the Liberal Party, and the Catholic political bloc which represented the older, more agricultural sections of the ruling class. He was also relatively successful at incorporating the leadership of the Socialist Party, the PSI, and the main trade union federation, the CGL.
This system provoked a backlash. Following Italy’s defeat by Ethiopia at Adowa in 1896 the Italian ruling class pulled back from a policy of imperialist expansion. A new romantic nationalist literature sprang up, best represented by the poet D’Annunzio, which rebelled against this retreat from imperialism and demanded Italy embark on its historic mission of overseas expansion – particularly into the Adriatic region. A section of Italian capital around steel and shipbuilding were increasingly drawn towards such nationalist rhetoric. Against Giolitti they supported a policy of imperialist expansion for which they hoped to win support from France and Britain in the coming war.
Within the PSI there was also a reaction to its leadership’s accommodation to Giolitti. This was articulated by Benito Mussolini – the son of a socialist blacksmith and a schoolteacher from the radical Romagna region. Mussolini was formed, above all, by Italy’s years of deep crisis, 1911–12. In 1911 Giolitti began the conquest of Libya, provoking an outburst of imperialist frenzy. In response the CGL called a general strike which met with widespread support. Mussolini was arrested for ripping up railway tracks and shared a cell with a future Socialist leader, Nenni, then a Republican.
Over the next few years there were huge struggles – particularly in Turin, home of the rising car giant FIAT. The leadership of the PSI and CGL only maintained control with difficulty. As editor of the Milan paper Avanti, Mussolini became the representative of the left. Avanti doubled its circulation to 60,000 by 1914. Mussolini’s politics centred on an ‘act of faith’ by a minority elite. For him the Italian working class had to ‘live a heroic and historic day’. Already in contact with nationalist circles Mussolini shocked his comrades in October 1914 when he wrote an article advocating Italy’s entry into the war on the side of France ‘so that socialism committing itself to the “nation” and its problems, might achieve their “revolutionary” solution’. [6]
The PSI was opposed to the war and Mussolini was expelled. He then launched Popolo d’Italia with subsidies from the Perrone brothers of the shipbuilding giant, Ansaldo. In the new paper he developed the fascist ideology. The fascists began as an association of war veterans. Mussolini took over and developed the movement for his own ends, renaming it the Fasci di azione rivolzionaria.
The First World War was a disaster for Italy, one of the weak links of European capitalism. The experience of war only heightened deep seated tensions. ‘Some 5,750,000 men were drafted; 600,000 were killed, 700,000 permanently disabled.’ [7] In October 1917 the Italian army was routed at Caporetto and the area around Venice was occupied, leaving the Italian High Command complaining that officers were openly insulted and abused on the streets.
In the aftermath of Caporetto a breakneck policy of industrial development began. Italy would end the war with more artillery than Britain and as an exporter of trucks and aircraft to its allies. Steel production increased by 50 percent. Output of electricity doubled. Giant concerns like FIAT, Ansaldo, Ilva and Pirelli dominated Italian industry. By the end of the war there were half a million workers in engineering. The workforce of FIAT increased from 7,000 to 30,000. The trade unions swelled in size to 3 million. Yet inflation undermined working class living standards and matters were made worse by serious food shortages as Italian agriculture could not feed the new industrial centres. In contrast the industrialists’ profits grew and grew. This was accompanied by a number of scandals. Pirelli was under suspicion of selling tyres to the Austrians. Three industrialists were arrested in 1918 for selling silk to Germany through Switzerland. Merging into this cocktail was great unrest on the land. In August 1917 bread riots erupted in Turin.
The end of the war saw two developments – a huge explosion of working class militancy and a shattering of the established political order. Far from benefiting at the hands of its victorious allies, Italy was denied the territory it desired – in particular Dalmatia which was incorporated into the new Yugoslav state, part of a cordon of states created to police Germany’s borders. Italy was as much a victim of the Treaty of Versailles as defeated Germany. Nationalist ideas which had been on the fringe of Italian politics now began to find a mass audience, particularly among the demobilised officers and NCOs of the army and the remaining officer corps.
In September 1919 the Italian garrison began withdrawing from the Adriatic city of Fiume in line with the Treaty of Versailles. The nationalist poet D’Annunzio, by now a war hero, occupied the town with 2,000 mutinous troops. The Italian government was only able to gain his withdrawal after direct negotiations in which the army high command clearly sided with D’Annunzio. This action gave a tremendous boost to the nationalists and the emerging fascists. It showed them that the government was weak and that they had friends in the army. At this stage Mussolini’s fascists were able to gain a degree of support: ‘The appeal of fascism was...to the elite among the ex-servicemen, to the arditi [shock troops] above all, to the volunteers and to the officers in general’. [8] In April 1919 such elements carried out the first attack by an organised squad of fascists, burning down the Milan office of Avanti. But as 1919 progressed the far right were sidelined by events.
The two red years of 1919 and 1920 – the Biennio Rosso – saw a real revolutionary upsurge of the masses unmatched in Western Europe outside Germany. Industrial workers won better wages, the eight hour day, general recognition of collective contracts and a voice in production through ‘factory committees’. There were 1,663 strikes in 1919, rising to 1,881 in 1920. In Genoa and other northern ports the dockers’ strike beat the powerful ship owners. In September 1920, when the engineering employers responded to a strike with a lockout, half a million workers simply took over the factories, declaring workers’ control. The owner of FIAT, Agnelli, offered to turn his factories over to the workers! In the national elections the PSI emerged as the largest single party with 156 seats.
That revolution was a possibility is demonstrated by this exchange over the telephone between Albertini, the editor of the Milan paper Il Corriere della Sera, the main bourgeois paper, and his political ally in Rome, Amendola:
Rome [Amendola]: “But what can be done in this situation?”
Milan [Albertini]: “Give power to the CGL.”
Rome: “But that’s the end!”
Milan: “No, no its much better than what’s happening now. It is not possible to go on like this, my dear fellow.”
Rome: “But what you’re saying is – let’s make the revolution and goodbye! And it’s finished! But isn’t there anything we can do not to make the revolution?”
Milan: “Precisely, the only way to avoid the revolution is to give power to the CGL.” [9]
In Turin the factory occupations took on elements of ‘dual power’, as working class power opposed that of the official government. Armed workers defended the factories and the elected factory councils took on the nature of Soviets in the city. Revolutionaries were central to events in Turin. A young Sardinian intellectual, Antonio Gramsci, editor of the newspaper L’Ordine Nuovo, argued that the factory councils could become the basis for genuine soviet power. From the beginning these ideas, which captured a majority of the Turin section of the PSI, met with ‘fierce resistance from trade union officials, the leadership of the socialist party and Avanti’. In a report to the Communist International written in July 1920, Gramsci argued that the aim of the councils was ‘to win the trade unions to the cause of communism, to shift trade union struggle from the narrowly co-operative and reformist field to the terrain of revolutionary struggle, the control of production and the dictatorship of the proletariat’. [10] Looking back in 1924, Gramsci wrote:
During 1919–1920, we committed very serious errors which we are now paying for in full. For fear of being called arrivistes and careerists, we did not form a fraction [i.e. a separate revolutionary party] and try to organise it throughout Italy. We did not want to make the Turin factory councils into an independent directive centre which could have exercised an immense influence on the whole country, for fear of splitting the trade unions and of being prematurely expelled from the Socialist Party. [11]
The CGL and PSI leaders, on the other hand, played for the highest stakes. At a joint conference in Milan in September the CGL leaders offered to hand over their power to the PSI leadership if the latter agreed to make the revolution. The PSI directorate refused the offer. The issue was then put to the conference with the CGL leaders proposing that the movement be aimed at securing union control of industry and the PSI leaders moving a motion in favour of revolution! The CGL motion was carried. But while the movement’s leaders debated revolution in Turin the factory council leadership refused to move towards an insurrection.
This vacillation allowed the ‘old fox’, Giolitti, who had been recalled to the premiership amid this crisis, to make a deal with the CGL which promised a joint commission of the unions and employers to establish union control over industry. The engineering union confederation took the deal to a referendum which it won easily, despite widespread abstentions. The factory occupations were over by the end of September.
Meanwhile the peasants showed no less Fighting spirit. Returning from the trenches they demanded the division of the land. Land reform had been promised by the government but, when it was not forthcoming, the peasants seized the land. In September 1919 the government was forced to accept this situation, on condition the peasants organised themselves into co-operatives. The agricultural day labourers formed strong unions, the ‘red leagues’, which won recognition and other important concessions from the landowners. During the two red years strikes swept the Po Valley, Veneto, Umbria and Tuscany. Such was their strength that even the Catholic trade unions took part. The landowners complained of lack of government protection and began to look to other forces for aid.
Whilst the struggle was at its height Mussolini was forced to bend with the prevailing wind. In Milan he personally called on the head of the engineering union at the height of the crisis to tell him, ‘It mattered little to him if the factories were in the hands of the workers rather than the industrialists and that if the occupation developed into a constructive revolutionary movement, he would be on the side of the revolutionaries.’ As the chief Italian historian of the factory occupations comments:
However personal the opportunism which drove him to tail along behind the movement, it shows how powerful the thrust of workers’ attack was in the early days and how total the paralysis in conservative circles. A squadrista [the fascist squads] reaction in the great cities of the triangle was still utterly unthinkable. [12]
And Carocci, the historian of Italian fascism, points out, ‘So long as the wealthy remained on the defensive, fascism was not even modestly successful’. [13]
But with the threat of expropriation now lifted the Italian industrialists – notably the ship owners of Genoa – were ready to go to any lengths to escape the spectre of ‘workers’ control’. They were reinforced by the landed proprietors who wanted to smash the rural labourers’ unions. In March 1920 the first conference of industrialists was held at Milan and from it was launched a much stronger General Federation of Industry – the Confindustria. With the immediate crisis of the occupations past, the industrialists now wanted to move beyond Giolitti’s policy of co-option and take the offensive. But they themselves could not undertake the fight against a highly organised and militant working class. The army had proved unequal to the task. It had encircled Turin during the occupations, but the high command dared not attack when they were confronted with determined workers’ resistance and the uncertain loyalty of the ranks.
For this job the employers now called in the armed gangs of Mussolini’s fascists. As soon as the trade union and PSI leaders had moved to end the occupations Mussolini’s tone had changed. He came out roaring, ‘At this moment – we repeat at the top of our voice – we will resist a Bolshevik experiment with all the means at our disposal’. [14] Looking back in July 1923 he pointed out that the Italian left had not known how ‘to profit from a revolutionary situation such as history does not repeat’. [15]
Money had already come his way from the Milan business world as early as 1919 but, ‘It was above all in the fall of 1920, after the workers’ occupation of the factories, that the subsidies of the industrialists and the landowners rained into his coffers.’ [16] Heavy industry – particularly steel, armaments and the ship owners – provided the finance but it was the landowners who first turned the blackshirts loose:
The winter and spring of 1920–21 was the decisive period of fascist expansion. The fascist squadristi conducted a systematic campaign of terror 11 against the socialists and their local institutions (communal councils, party branches, trade unions, co-operatives and even cultural circles). The reaction spread through the whole of the Po Valley, and with even greater ferocity throughout most of Tuscany, Umbria and Apulia.’ [17]
The fascists could not have won so many victories without the support of the military. An army colonel toured the country as an expert on civil war. He produced a detailed plan for an ‘anti-socialist offensive’. He now advised:
There must be added an idealistic militia organised by the most expert, courageous, strong and aggressive among us. This militia must be capable both of military resistance and political action. [18]
Already the military wanted to recruit 25,000 mercenaries to impose order. General Badoglio, the chief of staff, sent out a circular to commandants of all military districts instructing that all officers then being demobilised (there were 60,000 in total) should be sent to the most important centres and required to join the fascist squads. The chosen place for this offensive to begin was the ‘red’ centre of Emilia, Bologna. The city’s bourgeoisie had been shaken by a general strike in April 1920 following the shooting of eight workers by the police. The local black-shirt leader, Arpinati (an ex-anarchist) wrote:
It is certainly true that these Bolognese bourgeois (and to say Bolognese is to say apathetic and cowardly) never made a move until, with the last strike, they felt themselves menaced in their own security and their own pockets; but should we, for this reason, not accept the money arm which is so necessary for our battle, and which these bourgeois (granted from fear alone) are offering us at this moment. [19]
During 1921–2 a major slump in the economy provided the opportunity for the employers to go on the offensive. The fascists decided to test the PSI leaders when they marched that May Day. Arpinati describes how ‘our patrols made various sorties, crossing the city by the principal streets to the sound of the Giovinezza [the fascist youth song], but without ever meeting resistance ... I am convinced they [the socialists] will never make a revolution’. [20] One Bolognese fascist recollected, ‘A few bands of youths ... had been able to check the revolutionary movement; they were now joined by the best sections of the citizens, the rich, the agrarians, and the traders ... little by little the movement of defence became a movement of offensive, and while formerly the red domination had to be suffered, now the fascio rules.’ [21]
In November the Blackshirts attacked the Municipal Council which had a Socialist majority. By the spring of 1921 the blackshirts had a membership estimated at between 5,000 and 8,000 in the city. Having met no serious resistance from the PSI or the unions and having effective control of the city, their action squads moved out into the surrounding countryside to break the Socialist agricultural union. In the first six months of that year the fascist squads: ‘...destroyed 59 case del popolo [houses of the people], 119 camere [meeting rooms], 107 co-operatives, 83 peasant leagues, 141 socialist centres; they killed over a hundred, wounded thousands and terrorised whole communities, forcing socialist municipalities out of office’. [22]
The economic crisis deepened. By January 1921 there were 600,000 unemployed. Giants like the steel and engineering firm Ansaldo, the mining and ship owning concern Ilva and their bank, the Banca di Sconto, crashed. These were some of the chief backers of fascism. Increasingly, big industry demanded the government rescue them by granting tax exemptions and subsidies, tariff controls, armament orders and, above all, help with breaking working class organisation and in cutting wages. Mussolini adopted all the main demands of the industrialists. In particular this meant focusing on the growing dissatisfaction with Giolitti’s policy of co-opting the PSI and CGL leadership. The recession allowed the employers to develop an alternative policy:
During 1921 and 1922, the situation changed. The slump enabled the employers to recapture the initiative. Strikes were ineffective in a period when unemployment was growing and leading militants could be victimised. [23]
Giolitti attempted to co-opt the fascists, believing they could be tamed by parliamentary politics. In the spring of 1921 he called an election and stood in a ‘national bloc’ which included Mussolini. Thirty fascist deputies were elected, providing them with a national platform.
In the beginning of 1922 fascist columns – sometimes numbered in thousands – were terrorising the countryside. In August 1922 they felt strong enough to seize the city halls of Milan and Leghorn (both had socialist councils) to occupy Genoa’s docks in order to break the power of the union, and to burn down the premises of scores of left wing newspapers.
Giolitti was no longer in control of events – there was no real government. The Liberal Party was split with its industrial core tilting towards fascism. The Popular Party which had a rural Catholic base was the second largest party next to the PSI, but the polarisation on the land had led to an effective split, its petty bourgeois support sliding away to the fascists. It was clear that fascism was now an independent force that could be checked only by force of arms. Sections of the Italian ruling class – including in all likelihood the King – did not like Mussolini but the general interest of the ruling class prevented the ‘national’ forces from tearing each other apart.
This was the background to the March on Rome, Mussolini’s seizure of power. The magnates of the Confindustria and the Banca Commerciale (newly formed from the remnants of the Banca di Sconto) came together in early October to guarantee the money for Mussolini’s move. On 28 October:
Some very lively conferences took place between Mussolini ... and the heads of the General Federation of Industry, Sig. Benni and Olivetti. The chiefs of the Banking Association, who had paid out 20 million to finance the March on Rome, the leaders of the Federation of Industry and of the Federation of Agriculture, telegraphed Rome that in their opinion the only possible solution was a Mussolini government. [24]
The Pope made his support for Mussolini clear with the Vatican paper Observatore Romano announcing, ‘We observe, with the greatest satisfaction, how the intentions of the supreme authorities, the will of the parties, and he who is now called to form the government have up till now conformed to the pious exhortation of Pius XI.’ [25]
At this stage the political balance was so fine that the slightest push was decisive. Mussolini’s March on Rome was designed to provide that push. The plan was for Mussolini’s blackshirts to assemble – by train – at four points around the capital. Lyttelton describes the mobilisation by Mussolini’s fascists thus:
In reality, the March on Rome, in the strictest sense, was a colossal bluff. The city was defended by 12,000 regular army, under the loyal General Pugliese, who would have been able to disperse the fascist bands without difficulty. Many of the fascists failed to arrive at their point of concentration; they were travelling by train and were stopped by the simple expedient of taking up a few yards of track. Those who did arrive were poorly armed and they were short of food. They could do nothing except hang around miserably in the torrential autumn rain. The grandiose ‘pincer movement’ on Rome could never have been carried out with any chance of success. [26]
Mussolini arrived in Rome on the morning of 30 October 1922 by sleeping car. He was driven, wearing his black shirt, to be presented to the King. He is said to have announced, ‘Majesty I come from the battlefield – fortunately bloodless’. [27] The March on Rome was political theatre, but at this stage it was enough to secure power.
 
Who were the Blackshirts ?
Two cities, Arezzo and Genoa, provide a good illustration of the fascists’ support. The composition of the fascist squads in Arezzo shows that ‘roughly 50 percent came from the lower middle class of shopkeepers, traders and employers, and another 25 percent was made up by the professional classes and students ...’ In Genoa: ‘The fascio of the city of Genoa ... was a relatively homogenous organisation; it did not really recruit much from the working class, but had a good base among the white collar workers and the petty bourgeoisie, and the less prosperous professional classes, especially among the newcomers to the city who coveted and resented the superior position held by the respectable “native” bourgeoisie’. [28]
The fascists also recruited among the unemployed, from those who had been most demoralised and degraded, and were most cut off from the working class movement. Often the squadrons of action they formed adopted names reflecting their situation – ‘The Savages’, ‘The Desperate’ and ‘The Damned’. One fascist wrote that ‘Mussolini and fascism had called upon the dregs of society’. [29] In terms of working class support fascism made little inroad, even after it came to power:
In 1921–22 about a third of the total membership [of the Fascist Party] were listed as workers and peasants, although many of these had undoubtedly joined out of fear or to avoid unemployment. The results published by Silone show that by 1927 the numbers of workers and peasants combined seldom exceeded 20 percent of the membership. My own samples of the membership in two big cities, Rome and Milan, at the beginning of 1926 show a working class membership of only 10–12 percent. [30]
The fascists created unions, but:
The mass of the membership came from the agricultural labourers of the regions under fascist control; next in numerical importance were the workers in the docks where the fierce competition for employment induced many of the casual labourers to join the unions and even the party; the fascist unions also enrolled a considerable number of workers in the transport, municipal and service sectors; but among workers in large scale industry they had little success ... The labour aristocracy [sic] of printers, engineers, metallurgical workers, builders etc. remained obstinately faithful to the CGL. [31]
In 1923, in the shopfloor elections to the commissioni interne, the factory commissions, the fascists’ share of the vote nowhere exceeded 10 to 15 percent, while two years later the Communists were able to win a clear majority on the FIAT committee.
So on what basis did Mussolini recruit his shock troops? The starting point was his image as the man of destiny, a semi-mystical cult of the personality around the figure of the leader, Il Duce. In Milan a ‘School of Fascist Mysticism’ was founded which reflected Mussolini’s own statement that ‘fascism is a religious conception’. [32] The symbols of fascism, the military image, the ‘comradeship of the trenches’ developed among war veterans and at the huge rallies and parades which were all vital to creating an image of a strong movement in which the small man could lose himself in pursuit of dignity. Above all fascism presented itself as the ‘religion of the fatherland’. On the eve of the March on Rome, Mussolini declared, ‘Our myth is the nation. Our myth is the greatness of the nation’, adding, ‘Imperialism is the eternal and immutable law of life.’
Italy was projected as the ‘proletarian nation’ – the one nation which had lost out in the imperialist division of the world. This drive towards the creation of a new Roman Empire was an important part of fascist ideology. It had a particular appeal,
... the slogans of fascist imperialism had greater efficacy among the impoverished middle classes (the morti di fame), the rural population and the lumpen proletariat of the Southern cities. Italian imperialism, it has been observed, was an ‘imperialism of poverty’, which shared with National Socialism a central concern with the problem of overpopulation.
This nationalism naturally had an immensely racist nature in relation to Slavs, Greeks and Africans – the victims of Italian expansionism – but it could not take on the extreme racial characteristics of German National Socialism with its glorification of the Aryan ‘race’. In a country where only a minority of the population spoke the ‘national’ language, where there were intense regional differences and there were significant minorities within the country’s border who spoke German, Greek, Albanian and French, the glorification of a ‘pure’ Italian race had limited mileage. [33]
 
What resistance was there from the left?
Throughout the rise of Mussolini the Socialist and trade union leaders obstinately refused to mobilise against the fascist threat. In March 1921 the Socialist leader Matteotti advised:
Stay home: do not respond to provocations. Even silence, even cowardice, are sometimes heroic. [34]
In the absence of any lead from the Socialist Party or CGL unions various left wingers and ex-servicemen formed an anti-fascist militia, the Arditi del Popolo, which included many PSI members and supporters. [35] Lenin reported to the Comintern’s Third Congress that in July 1921:
A meeting was held in Rome to organise the struggle against the fascists in which 50,000 workers took part, representing all parties – Communists, socialists and also republicans. Five thousand ex-servicemen came to the meeting in their uniforms and not a single fascist dared to appear on the street. [36]
On the rare occasions when the anti-fascists offered an organised resistance to fascism they won the upper hand, as in Parma in August 1922 when the Arditi del Popolo organised a mass response which drove the Blackshirts back. But just as this movement was being thrown up the PSI signed a ‘peace pact’ with Mussolini in which both sides promised to disarm. Needless to say, this pact remained a dead letter on the side of the blackshirts. In the localities the authorities used it as a pretext to raid workers’ organisations for the few arms which had been accumulated.
The CGL and the engineering union leaders were more concerned with crushing the factory councils which had been created round the factory occupations. In April 1921 FIAT declared 1,500 redundancies in Turin, which included the leaders of the councils. In negotiations the company owner, Agnelli, demanded the workers implement the national agreement with the engineering union which involved the dismantling of the councils. The workforce struck. But faced with opposition from the trade union leaders and with virtual civil war waging around the city, the militants were extremely isolated. By 26 April half the workforce had returned to work, accepting the company’s abject terms. On that day a fascist column entered the city and burnt down the people’s house, the strike centre. By the beginning of May the strike was called off. Well might Gramsci ask in February 1921, ‘Does the CGL exist?’ [37]
In February 1922 the CGL formed an alliance of various trade unions in defence of democracy. On 31 July it suddenly called a general strike at a day’s notice. Not surprisingly the response was weak and the strike was called off almost immediately. The strike’s collapse merely intensified the fascist assault on the working class. The CGL now entered into negotiations with Mussolini and by the time of the March on Rome it was prepared to consider Mussolini’s offer of a cabinet seat!
Opposition to the PSI and CGL leadership was, from January 1921, centred on the Communist Party. The Italian Communist Party (PCI) was born from a split from the PSI. At its birth it had 40,000 members. That figure fell to 25,000 by late 1922. [38] The Socialists retained 80,000 members. The PCI was:
overwhelmingly working class ... It was concentrated in the north and dense in Piedmont-Liguria. Its great stronghold was Turin. At least 98 percent of its membership was working class. [39]
The dominant figure in the new party was Amadeo Bordiga who, on principle, opposed any collaboration with the socialists, arguing against Lenin and Trotsky’s policy of the united front. At this stage Gramsci and others were staunch supporters of Bordiga’s position. At the party’s 1922 congress Bordiga ‘rejected the hypothesis of fascism’s taking power and believed a compromise among all the bourgeois parties was inevitable’. This flowed from his denial that fascism represented a particular danger, being simply another form of bourgeois domination:
The attitude of the whole PCI leadership at the time tended to be that the destruction of the liberal bourgeois state was hardly a matter of concern for communists; that the advance of fascism would lead to the exposure of the reformists and maximalists of the PSI; and that these would be eliminated as direct rivals to the Communist Party. [40]
As the blackshirts were mobilising on 28 October 1922, Bordiga sent out a circular to PCI branches stating that ‘the March on Rome will never take place’. The historian Gwyn Williams writes that the Italian Communist Party ‘believed that fascism would prove a temporary phase of re-integration in a capitalist system which, in order to survive, would assume social democratic form’. [41]
For much of the left in Italy during the early 1920s it was all too easy to see fascism as simply another form of capitalist reaction. On this view fascism was no different in essence from liberal democracy or, indeed, from the rule of reformist socialism, Social Democracy. This was reflected in numerous contributions made within the discussions of the Communist International at that time. So it was that Gramsci, after Mussolini took power in October 1922, stated:
Fascism, by shattering the working class, has restored to ‘democracy’ the possibility of existing. In the intentions of the bourgeoisie, the division of labour should operate perfectly: the alternation of fascism and democracy should serve to exclude for ever any possibility of working class resurgence. [42]
In this situation revolutionaries should simply shout, ‘A plague on all their houses’, and concentrate on achieving the socialist revolution. Just three months before Mussolini’s March on Rome, with the Socialists and the trade unions threatening a general strike in defence of parliamentary democracy, the PCI’s central figure, Bordiga, wrote:
Do the fascists want to demolish the parliamentary side-show? Well we would be only too delighted. Do the collaborationists [the PSI and the trade union leaders] want a general strike – which they have always opposed and sabotaged when it was for effective defence of the workers – if it is necessary to help their manoeuvres in the crisis? Excellent. The greatest danger is that they will all get together and agree not to rock the boat, in the interests of a legal and parliamentary solution. [43]
Yet before long Gramsci at last realised:
Out of the small number of working class papers, however, the destruction has already taken place of Il Lavoratore from Trieste, of Il Proletario from Pula, of La Difesa from Florence, of La Giustizia from Reggio Emilia, and of Avanti in both its Milanese and Roman editions ... the premises of the working class, the Chambers of Labour and the Socialist and Communist sections, have been burned down in their tens and hundreds. Even the streets are denied to the popular masses ... A hundred armed individuals – guaranteed impunity for any violent act they may commit and the unconditional assistance of the forces of public order in case of need ... is sufficient to hold the proletariat in check and deprive it of its freedom to come and go, its freedom to meet and discuss. [44]
And others also challenged this line of argument. A Hungarian Communist, Gyula Sas, who was in Italy during the period of Mussolini’s rise to power, wrote:
There is no reason either to try and cover up the error of the PCI. Its error consisted in not having attributed any particular importance to fascism at an early stage, and in having subsequently seen it merely as an extra-legal military force of the bourgeoisie, which the young Communist Party could not yet confront with its own military force, it failed to confront it physically, although the fascist victory even in Italy was not merely a victory of arms, but a political victory as well ... a political victory that alone made possible a military one. The political victory of fascism was the necessary condition for the victory of fascism’s arms. [45]
And another PCI leader, Togliatti, later admitted:
Right up to the eve of the March on Rome, and even while it was taking place, the Communist Party was denying the possibility and the actuality of the coup d’état. Immediately after the march on Rome the party’s theoretical journal published an article which maintained that the advent of Mussolini to power would not substantially change the country’s political situation. [46]
Underneath it all Bordiga and until too late Gramsci, and the other PCI leaders stood for a ‘pure’ Communist Party, a committed minority, which could not compromise its principles by collaborating with non-revolutionaries. So the PCI refused to work within the Arditi del Popolo counterposing a demand for Communist led defence squads. Looking back in 1926 Gramsci would write that Lenin had told the communists:
‘Separate yourself from Turati [the PSI leader], and then make an alliance with him’. This formula should have been adopted by us to the split ... In other words, we should – as our indispensable and historically necessary task – have separated ourselves ... But after that, though continuing the ideological and organisational struggle against them, we should have sought to make an alliance against reaction. [47]
The veteran socialist Clara Zetkin, a close comrade of Rosa Luxemburg and a founder of the German Communist Party (KPD), obviously had Italian events in the forefront of her mind when she delivered this speech to the Executive of the Communist International in June 1923:
Self-defence of the proletariat is the demand of the hour. Fascism is not to be fought in the manner of the Italian reformists: ‘Don’t touch me and I won’t touch you’. No. Force against force. Not force in the form of individual terror – but force as the power of the organised revolutionary class struggle of the proletariat ... But proletarian struggle and self-defence must mean a proletarian united front. Fascism does not enquire whether the factory worker owes his allegiance to the white and blue of [far-right dominated] Bavaria, to the black, red and gold of the bourgeois Republic, or to the red flag with the hammer and sickle. It does not ask whether he supports the return of the Wittelsbachs [the Bavarian royal family overthrown in 1918], is enthusiastic about Ebert [the Social Democratic president of Germany], or would rather see our comrade Brandler [a leader of the German CP] as president of the German Soviet Republic. It is enough that fascism sees a class conscious proletarian in front of it. The workers must therefore make common cause in the struggle, without distinction of party or trade union organisation. The self-defence of the proletariat against fascism is one of the strongest factors making for the organisation and consolidation of the proletarian united front. Without the united front it is impossible for the proletariat to accomplish its own defence successfully. [48]
Zetkin’s speech represented a continuation of Lenin and Trotsky’s policy, adopted in 1921, after they realised that capitalism had stabilised itself and that the Western working class had been thrown onto the defensive. Such defensive struggles required a degree of unity with the Social Democratic parties from which the Communists had recently broken. Had the PCI adopted the approach Zetkin outlined there would still have been time, even after the March on Rome, to stop Mussolini.
 
The consolidation of fascist power
Mussolini, unlike Hitler, was faced with ruling class institutions much less deeply rooted than those in comparatively advanced Germany. Hitler had to remould much of the state machinery and create his own special detachments loyal to the regime, the SS for instance. Mussolini could more easily integrate fascist rule with the existing institutions. Consequently the fascist militia in Italy never corresponded to the SS.
The police remained the chief instrument of repression:
The state police, however, were the central and dominant instrument of control under the regime ... In Germany the police administration fell into the hands of an ideologically inspired elite, originating in the ranks of the party. In Italy, it remained under the control of trained bureaucrats, and this was a fact of decisive importance. [49]
The German ruling class, unlike its Italian counterpart, was relatively homogeneous. Mussolini had to operate in a situation where the old divisions within the ruling class could reappear. Another difference was that in the beginning Mussolini had a parliamentary minority – just 35 seats. In order to establish the dictatorship he had to undermine his allies in his first government, the Liberals and the Popular Party in particular. Mussolini demanded and got from his allies full control of taxation, the ability to reorganise all state organs, except the legislature, including the magistracy, the army and the schools. The Liberals accepted this – as did the CGL!
In December 1922 Mussolini ordered the arrest of the PCI leadership. Hundreds of party members were also imprisoned. The Blackshirts ‘devastated working class Turin ... they finally destroyed the office of L’Ordine Nuovo’. [50] The following month the fascist squads were reorganised into the state run fascist militia. In July 1923 the Liberals accepted a piece of ballot rigging which guaranteed that in future elections two thirds of all seats would go to the biggest party. In July 1924 Mussolini felt able to call elections having created a powerful list of candidates on the fascist ticket:
For the elections the Government was able to obtain a massive official contribution from the Confindustria and the Associazione fra le Societa per Azioni; they formed a central election fund financed by a regular levy on the capital of their members ... The captains of industry were present in force in the Government list, led by the President and Secretary of the Confindustria, Benni and Gino Olivetti. They included Motta and Donegani, respectively from the Edison and the Montecatini, the most powerful enterprises in the hydro-electrical and chemical sectors; another great electoral magnate, Ponti of the SIP; Marzotto of the famous dynasty of textile industrialists from the Veneto; the President of the Lega Industriale from Turin; Mazzini; and the Ligurian shipowner Biancardi. [51]
The fascist squads were once again turned loose and the election ‘took place in an atmosphere of violence and terror’. [52] Owing to the new electoral system the fascist list took 286 seats, an absolute majority. The CGL said its members were free to vote how they liked, ditching their links to the Socialists in a desperate move to curry favour with Mussolini. The PSI leader Turrati even had a debate with a fascist in Turin. Blackshirts guarded the entrance. Despite all this:
In none of the other large cities, except Rome, did the national list obtain an absolute majority: in Milan it had 34.4 percent of the vote (16,000 less than the combined vote of the working class parties), in Turin 36.6 percent, in Genoa 47.2 percent, in Venice 36.5 percent, in Naples 49.6 percent and in Palermo 30.4 percent. [53]
In spite of the fascists’ success, there still remained a strong opposition in parliament. More important, the trade unions still existed and the PCI, while driven underground, was able to win seats and their deputies operate with parliamentary immunity. Within the fascists’ ranks there was also considerable disquiet as the party became more bureaucratised and more integrated with the state. The promised ‘national revolution’ seemed not to have occurred. The local party in Bologna demanded that Mussolini shut down parliament.
Mussolini ordered a special squad operating from the interior ministry to beat up some of his opponents in parliament. After a stinging speech by the socialist deputy Matteotti, denouncing the election frauds, this squad picked him up on a Rome street on 10 June 1924. Matters seemed to have gone further than intended and Matteotti was murdered. The reaction took Mussolini by surprise, ‘Spontaneous demonstrations in favour of the Opposition broke out in the streets, which was something that had not been seen for a long time.’ [54] Another source writes:
The murder aroused great anger in Rome and other cities. The widespread sympathy which fascism had aroused diminished or melted away, and in the week that followed the crime the government might easily have been toppled. Mussolini was frightened. Luckily for him, none of his opponents was up to the situation. All they did was walk out of the Chamber as a protest ... [55]
In Rome Mussolini’s initial response was to call out the fascist militia. Gramsci wrote, ‘The first attempt to mobilise the national minority failed utterly, with only 20 percent answering the call; in Rome only 800 militiamen presented themselves at the barracks’. [56] This failure meant ‘that between 14 June and 16 June the anti-fascists had a chance to control the piazza’. [57]
This was the crucial turning point. But the PSI tied themselves completely to the dissident Liberals and other bourgeois politicians:
‘At the unique moment’, Nenni [a PSI leader] writes, ‘for calling the workers into the streets for insurrection, the tactic prevailed of a legal struggle on the judicial and parliamentary plane’ ... ‘What are our opponents doing?’ Mussolini mocked in the Chamber. ‘Are they calling general strikes or even partial strikes? Are they organising demonstrations in the streets? Are they trying to provoke revolts in the army? Nothing of the sort. They restrict themselves to press campaigns’. The Socialists launched the triple slogan: Resignation of the government, dissolution of the militia, new elections. They continued to display confidence in the King, whom they begged to break with Mussolini; they pushed for his enlightenment, petition after petition. But the King disappointed them a second time. [58]
The King had already granted Mussolini an audience a week after the murder to demonstrate his support for Il Duce. Giolitti backed him. The philosopher Croce voted for him saying fascism had ‘done much good’. The Pope blocked the Popular Party from allying with the PSI over the affair. The Communists refused in principle to mobilise over the affair or to approach the PSI locally or nationally for joint action.
The opposition boycott of parliament was as far as matters went, ‘The idea that a dignified but essentially passive protest would bring about the fall of fascism was a dangerous illusion.’ [59] Soon after the murder Mussolini was able to mobilise 1,600 fascist militiamen in Florence and 1,200 in Milan. In the absence of any demonstrations he was then able to concentrate the provincial militiamen in the capital.
By December the fascist squads went on the rampage in Florence, Pisa and Bologna against the Liberal opposition smashing the printing presses of their papers, their Masonic lodges and their lawyers’ offices. The next month the King gave Mussolini a free hand to dissolve parliament. The industrialists and the Liberals voted in favour of dissolving it. A wave of repression followed: ‘Circles and clubs were closed; branches of opposition parties were dissolved; the Italia Libera organisation of ex-combatants was suppressed altogether; and even wine shops suspected of serving as the meeting place of “subversives” were closed down ...’ In October 1925 Matteotti’s own party was banned and then all other opposition parties. The PCI deputies, including Gramsci, were arrested. The PCI was subject to severe repression. The Matteotti affair then ended with the consolidation of the dictatorship.
Having delivered a knockout blow to the opposition, Mussolini was now able to turn on his own supporters. Those who had dreamt that the fascist revolution would see the triumph of the ‘little man’ were rudely awoken. The blackshirts were brought to heel. After October 1925 the majority of the squads were dissolved. In January 1927 Mussolini sent a circular to all prefects confirming state authority as supreme, saying, ‘The suppression of all opposition parties and of local elections made it possible drastically to reduce the functions of the fascist party.’ [60] Lyttelton concludes:
There was a ‘crisis of silence’; the fascist movement became increasingly absorbed in the performance of routine bureaucratic tasks, and the indoctrination both of party members and of the neutral mass of the population was neglected ... These cliques of leaders became in most cases intertwined with the local business establishment. They might indeed be directly dependent upon it: great companies like the Terni could dominate a whole federation. More usual, perhaps, was a kind of mafia situation, in which party and business were equal partners. The party leaders exercised control and got rich by means of their business contacts; but business in turn needed them to get things fixed, to get favours from the administration and to discourage competitors ... after 1926 pure careerism of a pedestrian kind predominated over a more adventurous and aggressive spirit; fascism developed a middle aged spread. Rank and file membership in the party came to signify less and less. This was a predictable evolution, observable even in totalitarian regimes where the party or movement obtained recognition over the organs of state as in Nazi Germany. [61]
 
The German disaster
The scale of the economic and political crisis which swept Germany between 1929 and 1933 was greater than that in Italy. The Great Slump ushered in by the Wall Street Crash of 1929 hit Germany hard and sharpened divisions in a country which was already polarised on class lines. Between 1929 and 1932 industrial production collapsed by 42 percent. Unemployment rose to 5.5 million – 30 percent of the total workforce and 45 percent of trade union members. In order to solve that crisis a ‘cure’ was needed by the ruling class which was even more extreme than Mussolini’s fascists. Arno Meyer writes, ‘Germany occupied a decidedly more crucial position in the international system and the ideology of German fascism – of National Socialism – was more universalising and creed-bound, in addition to being impregnated with anti-semitism’. [62] Hitler styled himself ‘a revolutionary against the revolution’. It is a fitting description.
In the early 1930s the German Social Democratic Party (SPD) was the largest working class party in the world. The German Communist Party (KPD) was the largest outside Soviet Union, this in a society which had already gone through two revolutionary upheavals – at the end of the war in 1918–19 and again in 1923 when only the procrastination of the Communist Party prevented the working class taking power. In order to defeat the first revolutionary wave a weakened German capitalist class had to create ‘volunteer corps’ and ‘combat leagues’ composed of demobilised soldiers. The most important were the Freikorps – a shadow army organised by the High Command. In Munich one such gang took the name ‘National Socialist Party’.
German capitalists had another use for these gangs. The Treaty of Versailles had stripped them of raw materials and vital industrial areas in Lorraine, Silesia, the Saar and elsewhere. In 1919 big business bankrolled the 50,000 ‘Baltikum’ corps which entered Lithuania to crush Soviet power and to ensure the newly created Baltic states remained within the German orbit. In 1923 the Black Reichswehr, as these different divisions were called, resisted the French occupation of the Ruhr, stiffening the official ‘passive resistance’ of German business and authorities. In the wake of the Wall Street crash, big business began to look back at the methods it had employed successfully in the past.
The recession had an enormous effect on the middle classes in Germany. They had already suffered from the concentration of production and retailing in the hands of fewer and fewer major concerns:
With the crisis of 1930, the third station of the cross began for the middle classes. They suffered more severely from it than did the proletariat, which was protected to a certain extent by union contracts and unemployment allowances. The situation of small commerce and industry became desperate. Office workers and technicians often saw their salaries sink lower than those of skilled workers. They were thrown into the street like authentic proletarians. [63]
But the middle classes’ support for the Nazis was not inevitable. In 1919 large numbers of the middle classes had voted for the Social Democrats for the first time. Many office workers and functionaries joined trade unions. In 1923, at the time of the occupation of the Ruhr and with hyper-inflation wiping out their investments and dividends, many a ruined, desperate, petty bourgeois came over to Communism. But in 1919 the Social Democratic Party were in government and used the Freikorps to break the revolution. In 1923 the Communist Party failed to seize the revolutionary opportunity. The two working class parties had disappointed their new supporters. In 1929 the government was presided over by a Socialist, Richard Müller, with the SPD’s economic expert, Rudolf Hilferding, as finance minister. The middle classes blamed it, along with the parties of the centre, for what befell them. They became resentful of the working class and were terrified of losing their status in society.
The ‘genius’ of Hitler was to understand the fears of these people. In Mein Kampf he had written that ‘for people of modest situation who have once risen above that social level, it is unendurable to fall back into it even momentarily’. From 1929 he seemed to voice their inner thoughts and to offer them dignity. Trotsky would write, ‘Not every exasperated petty bourgeois could have become Hitler, but a particle of Hitler is lodged in every exasperated petty bourgeois’. [64]
Who was Hitler? Born in 1889 in Linz, Austria, where his father was a customs official, he gained from his teachers a grounding in anti-semitism and pan-German nationalism, becoming a reader of the anti-semitic paper, the Linzer Fliegende Blätter, while still at school. Having moved to Vienna he was refused admission to the city’s Academy of Art in both 1907 and 1908. Hitler lived on the verge of Viennese society, finding jobs on building sites. In Mein Kampf he confesses his workmates inspired in him only disgust and that he was threatened with being dumped off a scaffold for not complying with union discipline. He found solace in the ideas and methods of the city’s mayor, Karl Lueger. This demagogue had built a powerful political machine among the city’s middle classes, presenting his party as that of the ‘little man’. In order to achieve this he had to undermine the existing Liberal and Clerical Parties. Anti-semitism was the means he used. In Mein Kampf Hitler would write of Lueger:
He saw only too clearly that, in our epoch, the political fighting power of the upper classes is quite insignificant ... Thus he devoted the greatest part of his political activity to the task of winning over those sections of the population whose existence was in danger and fostering the militant spirit in them rather than attempting to paralyse it.
Hitler left Vienna for Munich in 1913 as, in his own words, ‘an absolute anti-semite, a sworn enemy of the whole Marxist world outlook and pan-German in sentiment’. Writing in 1940 Trotsky said:
Hitler exhibits traits of monomania and messianism. Personal hurt played a tremendous role in his development. He was a declassed petty bourgeois who refused to be a workingman. Normal workers accepted their position as normal. But Hitler was a pretentious misfit with a sick psyche. He achieved a vicarious social elevation by execrating Jews and Social Democrats. He was desperately determined to rise higher. Along his way he created for himself a ‘theory’ full of countless contradictions and mental reservations – a hodgepodge of German imperial ambitions and the resentful day dreams of a declassed petty bourgeois. [65]
In 1914 Hitler was among the jubilant crowds who filled the city’s main square to greet Germany’s declaration of war. Hitler volunteered and won five awards for valour, including the Iron Cross, First Class. He would end the war in hospital after being gassed. For a frontline fighter like Hitler, one versed in the new shock troop tactics which almost carried Germany to victory in 1918, there was a keen sense that Germany had not been militarily defeated but had been ‘betrayed’ by collapse on the home front, by the outbreak of revolution.
After the war Hitler was engaged as a military spy in Bavaria and it was in that role that he joined the German Workers Party in 1919, a small far right party of 50 members. By the following year he had taken it over and renamed it the National Socialist German Workers Party – the Nazi party.
In 1920 the state of Bavaria became the bastion of the most right wing elements within federal Germany, after the Freikorps crushed the Soviet Republic in Munich. The Interior minister formed a ‘home guard’ and co-operated with Hitler’s Nazi party. By January 1923 Hitler could deploy 6,000 storm troopers, members of the SA, the Sturm Abteilung.
As Germany moved towards revolution Hitler threw himself into the nationalist agitation over the occupation of the Ruhr and against the effects of the hyper-inflation. By October he could review 100,000 supporters in Munich. Joining him on the platform were General Ludendorff, second in command of Germany’s army during the war, and Admiral Scheer, the country’s top naval officer.
In emulation of Mussolini, Hitler believed that the local military commanders would join him in taking power in Bavaria. He could then carry out a March on Berlin. But with the collapse of the revolutionary threat from the working class this scenario failed to materialise. Hitler led 2,000 or so of his supporters out of a beer hall only to be dispersed by a volley from the state police. He fled the scene and was later jailed for some months, though in remarkably liberal conditions. The defeat in Munich was important for Hitler’s subsequent strategy:
Hitler was no slavish imitator; he learnt in 1923 the danger of sticking too closely to Mussolini’s prescription. Hitler had to adopt the ‘legality tactic’ and rely on mass propaganda rather than the violent conquest of local power to extend the influence of his movement. This in turn made it necessary to build up apolitical machine which was vastly superior to that of the Fascist Party. With the aid of this machine, Hitler was able to carry through his ‘revolution from above’ with far greater speed and thoroughness than had proved possible for Mussolini. [66]
Despite the collapse of the beer hall putsch, the Nazis were able to take over the remnants of other far right groups elsewhere in Germany. The core of the party’s leadership was already in place; Hermann Goering, the son of a former governor of German run Namibia (South West Africa) and a fighter ace in the war, the poultry farmer Heinrich Himmler, the former officer and merchant’s son Rudolph Hess, the architect Alfred Rosenberg, the lawyer Wilhelm Frick and the party’s Berlin chief, Josef Goebbels. Nevertheless, the popular appeal of the Nazi party was limited during much of the 1920s. In February 1925 Ludendorff ran in the presidential elections on the far right ticket but only polled 285,793 votes (1.1 percent). In September of that year one party member complained that ‘Hitler’s activities are currently restricted to work on the second volume of his book Mein Kampf’. [67] In May 1928 elections for the national parliament, the Reichstag, the Nazi party won 810,000 votes, 2.6 percent of the poll.
The crisis which broke in the following year saw a drastic change in the Nazis’ fortunes. During 1929 the party’s membership rose to 175,000. By the end of 1931 it stood at 800,000 with the SA deploying 225,000 storm troopers. The shift in Hitler’s electoral fortunes was even more dramatic. In the Reichstag elections of September 1930 (caused by the resignation of the coalition led by Müller of the SPD) the Nazis took 6,409,000 votes, 18.3 percent of the poll, mainly from the centre parties whose middle class voters were deserting them. But this was only one side of an extreme social polarisation. Less dramatic, but nevertheless substantial, was the increase in support for the Communists whose vote increased by 40 percent to 4,592,000. The KPD would grow: ‘From a fairly steady total of 125,000 in the late 1920s its membership rose to 170,000 in 1930, to 240,000 in 1931 and to 360,000 on the eve of the catastrophe’. [68]
However, only the SPD vote – which still fell by over half a million – was bigger than that of the Nazis. The SPD, despite its lost electoral support, was still a powerful organisation. Some 3,500,000 workers were affiliated to the Reichsbanner, its paramilitary wing committed to the defence of the republican constitution. More importantly, its base was in the organised working class. In September 1930, 89.9 percent of elected factory committee members stood as SPD supporters.
In contrast a survey of the KPD’s membership in Die Kommunistche Internationale reported, ‘In Berlin itself it was even worse: only 1.5 percent of the members worked in factories employing over 5,000 people ... The big factories are dominated above all by the SPD’. [69] As one eyewitness recalls: ‘... the KPD drew its support from the growing number of unemployed or petty bourgeois who had fallen on hard times, while Social Democracy mostly influenced factory workers and the majority of trade unionists’. [70] This was a disparity that any serious revolutionary party would have had to address.
The key to attracting the SPD’s base in the factories was to relate to the growing dissatisfaction of the SPD’s membership with the policy of the party leadership. But, rather than exploiting the passivity and shortsightedness of the SPD’s leaders, the Communists acted in the most sectarian way, alienating the bigger party’s members and supporters. This sectarianism had a real appeal in the KPD’s ranks. After all, in 1929 the Social Democratic government in Prussia banned the KPD’s May Day demonstration in Berlin and, when the Communists took to the streets, the SPD head of police, Zorgiebel, ordered his men to fire. Twenty eight workers were left dead. Whole districts of the capital were placed under martial law, the KPD daily and the party’s provincial press were banned for several weeks and the party’s paramilitary wing, the Leagues of Red Front Fighters, was banned.
Nevertheless, the evidence suggests that, where a united lead was given, workers fought back successfully against the Nazis. In the town of Brunswick in the Autumn of 1931 the working class mobilised to drive out the SA who were holding a convention there. Significantly Brunswick was an engineering centre with a strong tradition of workers taking action independently of either the SPD or KPD leaders. There had to be mass expulsions from the KPD in the town to enforce the line that the reformists were ‘social fascists’, little better than the Nazis themselves.
In April 1932 the KPD launched Antifa (Anti-Fascist Action). Initially it met with some success. An interior ministry report told of ‘the formation of a united front on the local level, sometimes on the basis of decisions of local trade union federations, the formation of anti-fascist unity committees and of anti-fascist defence staffs, joint mass demonstrations etc.’ [71] The SPD responded by issuing a circular instructing its organisations to avoid ‘local negotiations’ which produced ‘only disunity and confusion’. The KPD leaders followed suit. The historian E H Carr reports:
Some time in June instructions were sent to the KPD [from Moscow] ... branding as ‘opportunist errors’ the ‘open letters’ sent to social democratic organisations with proposals for common action and other forms of fraternisation; and the central committee of the KPD, in obedience to this protest, sent a circular letter to its branches and organisations, explaining that the social-democratic workers were not yet ripe for common demonstrations with the KPD. [72]
This meant that, although ‘the setting up of Antifa (Anti Fascist Action) groups corresponded to a real need to defend working class organisations and areas against the increasingly bold intervention of the Nazi storm troops,’ the party’s ‘insistence that non-communists could only participate as individuals, under communist leadership, and that there could be no “return to the Weimar Republic” even in case of successful defence meant that it turned into a purely communist operation’. [73] Thus the CP’s sectarianism cut them off from reformist workers just at the moment when the SPD leaders were making it easy for the CP to influence SPD members.
There followed two crucial tests of strength which paved the way for Hitler taking power. In July 1932 the Hamburg working class area, Altona, rose to stop the Nazis marching through their streets. Nineteen people died and 285 were injured but the Nazis were routed despite the support they got from the police. The government under von Papen decided to test the resolve of the SPD and trade union leaders in the wake of this victory. The central government announced the dismissal of the SPD government in Prussia, arguing it had not been able to maintain law and order in Altona.
The SDP prime minister of Prussia, Severing, told von Papen that he would ‘yield only to force ... a republican minister does not quit his post like a deserter’. Later the new commissioner arrived to take his place accompanied by the newly selected police chief and an army officer. They invited Severing to leave but he refused. He was then told that the authorities would resort to force. Severing replied that he did not want to give the signal for bloodshed in Germany and that in ‘the interests of Germany and Prussia he would yield to force’. That afternoon an armoured car with a captain, two lieutenants, and 123 soldiers drove up to the police headquarters. The three ousted police chiefs – all SPD members – surrendered meekly. As they were being led away the armed police stood to attention!
The SPD leaders had proclaimed the Prussian government with its 50,000 police, many of them party members, as a key obstacle to fascism. Now they allowed it to fall without a whimper. Many SPD members were not so sanguine. One eyewitness recounted the contrasting response of the SPD leadership and membership:
On the evening of 19 July, great mass rallies took place in Berlin and other cities. The newspaper Vorwärts [the SPD daily] reported that when the speakers claimed ‘the German working class’s determination to wage a united struggle against the fascist danger, the cry “Freedom! Freedom!” came from the lips of thousands as they raised their fists as if taking an oath’. As soon as the government’s provocations became known, the members of the Iron Front [the Reichsbanner allied with trade union sports clubs] and SPD membership rushed to their rallying points to await the call of battle. The Iron Front and SPD leadership put out a leaflet in which they warned against provocations and advised waiting for the decisions of the responsible leaders. The ‘responsible leaders’ decided to do nothing. There was not one hour of general strike, not a protest. Thus, the fortress of democracy’ was surrendered without resistance. This was the dress rehearsal for the seizure of power by the Nazis six months later’. [74]
The trade union leaders declared ‘the situation not sufficiently grave to justify the workers preparing for a struggle to defend their rights’. [75] The KPD refused to mobilise against this attack as it would have meant defending ‘social fascists’.
The second crucial test came when President Hindenburg appointed Hitler as Chancellor, just as support for the Nazis seemed to be waning. In the Reichstag elections in November 1932 the Nazi party’s vote fell from 13.7 million to 11.7 million, less than the combined SPD-KPD vote. One eyewitness reports that the news of Hitler’s appointment:
brought out what were in fact the most impressive demonstrations of the German workers’ will to resist. In the afternoon and evening of 30 January spontaneous and violent mass demonstrations took place in German cities. Delegations from the factories ... from all parts of the country arrived on the same day in Berlin in expectation of battle orders.
The official history of the German union IG Metall reports that in this situation ‘the working class waited in vain for a signal to act’. The SPD paper, Vorwärts, printed a special edition saying, ‘In the face of a government that threatens a coup d’etat, the Social Democracy stands firm on the grounds of the Constitution and legality’. [76] The official line of the KPD was that Hitler would not remain in office long, his appointment heralding the final revolutionary crisis. The Nazis would collapse and then, in the words of one KPD leader, ‘After Hitler, our turn!’ [77] The Communist Party’s leadership kept up its barrage of attacks on the SPD but now issued a call for a general strike. But the party’s lack of roots in the factories became all too apparent:
On 31 January, the day after Hitler’s seizure of power, the German CP called a meeting of the plant councils. Despite heavy attendance, no decision could be made to launch a mass political strike against Hitler ... The CP was isolated from the unions, and on this occasion also the union bureaucracy was able to sabotage the struggle. [78]
On 7 February 1933 the head of the SPD in Berlin gave this instruction:
Above all, do not let yourselves be provoked. The life and health of the Berlin workers are too dear to be jeopardised lightly; they must be preserved for the day of struggle. [79]
The workers of Berlin would wait in vain for such a day.
In order to consolidate his position Hitler was determined to secure an electoral victory amidst a climate of fear and repression. The KPD’s meetings were banned, and their press closed, while a police auxiliary of 50,000 recruited from the SA carried a campaign of terror into Berlin’s working class areas. In the run up to the elections on 5 March the Nazis put a plan into operation. On 24 February there was a huge raid on the KPD’s headquarters. Hitler’s deputy, Goering, announced the discovery of a blueprint for an imminent Communist revolution. Then on 27 February the Nazis started a fire in the Reichstag claiming it was the signal for a Communist uprising. The next day President Hindenburg signed a decree suspending the sections of the constitution guaranteeing freedom of expression, press, assembly, association and other civil liberties. Thousands of KPD and SPD officials were rounded up. Only the Nazis and the right wing parties were permitted to campaign in the last week before the election. Despite all of this the Nazis still failed to win an overall majority, gaining just 43.9 percent of the vote. The SPD still polled 7,182,000 votes while the illegal KPD received 4,848,000 votes. On 24 March the new deputies – minus the Communists who were in jail or exile – voted Hitler the power to legislate ‘without following the procedure established by the Constitution’. The SPD voted against but made clear they would play the role of a ‘responsible opposition’ and would do nothing ‘illegal’. Two months later the SPD were banned and the trade unions dissolved.
The trade union officials had tried everything to keep their positions intact. The German General Labour Federation sent a protest to Hindenburg after the Reichstag fire, pleading:
The unions have always opposed terrorism in all its forms. They have educated their members to struggle for a new social order without using violence. [80]
After the elections they formally severed their links with the SPD and issued a manifesto stating, ‘The social task of the unions must be carried out, whatever the nature of the state regime’. [81] On May Day they told their members to join the Nazi organised ‘National Day of Labour’ parade. But in the end it did them no good. The cream of the German working class were put behind wire. ‘By the end of 1933, 130,000 Communists had been thrown into concentration camps and 2,500 murdered’. [82]
Hitler used a twin track approach of parliamentary legal means along with street terror. While Mussolini took three years to consolidate his dictatorship, Hitler achieved his goal within a few weeks of his appointment.
 
Who were the Nazis?
The German working class remained relatively immune to penetration by fascism. In 1931 the Nazi ‘trade union’, the NSBO, ran a vigorous campaign round the factory committee elections. Despite that it only received 5 percent of the vote against 83.6 percent for the independent unions which were linked to the SPD. ‘Again in March 1933, with Hitler in power, despite all its efforts, in the partial elections for factory committees it received only 3 percent of the votes.’ [83]
Erich Fromm surveyed 1,100 activists from all parties (these are the forms he was able to collect and process before being exiled). He broke them down as follows: [84]



 


NSDAP


KPD


SDP




Unskilled manual


  0


  6


  9




Skilled manual


17


52


52




White collar


36


22


31




Unemployed


17


18


  6




Other


30


  2


  5



The Nazis were able to win some support among the most backward and least organised workers. But often these were people on the divide between the working class and the petty bourgeoisie. A survey of Communists and Nazis arrested in Berlin in November 1932 found that:
... of workers in the food trades: a dairy hand, a sweetboiler, a dairyman, a brewer, three butchers and fully 12 bakers ... 11 of them were Nazi party and only three Communists. Whether we choose to see in this the mobilisation of the declining small tradesmen conventionally attributed to the National Socialist movement or of a section of the labour force which was traditionally under-organised ... it is clear that this group represents the epitome of right wing radicalism among the manual trades. [85]
Fromm reports:
These workers who sympathised with, or belonged to the Nazi party, expressed through their negative attitude towards rationalisation measures [redundancies], a basic hostility towards capitalists. In the political sphere this hatred was deflected and diverted by Nazi propaganda onto specific groups such as rapacious capitalists, owners of department stores, or the Jews. [86]
The most important group of workers among whom the Nazis were able to win a following were the unemployed:
... in 1932, 26 percent of the unemployed were less than 24 years old. Large numbers of young proletarians had to abandon the family roof and wander through the streets and the highways, without hope of finding work again, or without having ever worked. Uprooted, declassed, often delinquent, these young vagabonds no longer expected their salvation from the action and triumph of their class. They joined the army of unemployed young intellectuals. [87]
The Nazis sought ways of recruiting them:
In some areas the National Socialists were able to establish their own ‘labour exchanges’, to promise jobs to their members as a result of their good relations with businessmen. More common was the provision of on-the-spot relief in the form of food and shelter – in its canteens and soup kitchens and above all in the SA taverns that doubled as dormitories. [88]
The unemployed were divided between those who looked to a united fightback and those who were cast down into despair:
There seemed to be two groups among the unemployed: some viewed unemployment and social deprivation as alterable, and believed that improvement could only be expected by a transformation of the existing economic system. Others had come to the conclusion that they were incapable, worthless and responsible for their own critical situation ... Thus the majority, 59 percent, of National Socialists believed in significant contrast to the left wing parties, in the self-responsibility of the individual. [89]
But the core of the Nazi party came from amongst the urban and rural petty bourgeoisie. As we have seen, Hitler played on the insecurity of these people. He was also able to articulate their fears and to offer hope:
The petty bourgeois is hostile to the ideas of development for development goes immutably against him; progress has brought him nothing except irredeemable debts. National Socialism rejects not only Marxism but Darwinism. The Nazis curse materialism because the victories of technology over nature have signified the triumph of large capital over small ... The petty bourgeoisie needs a higher authority, which stands above matter and above history, and which is safeguarded from competition, inflation, crisis and the auction block. To evolution, materialist thought and rationalism – of the 20th, 19th and 18th centuries – is counterposed in his mind national idealism as the source of heroic inspiration. Hitler’s nation is the mythological shadow of the petty bourgeoisie itself, apathetic delirium of a thousand year Reich. In order to raise it above history, the nation is given the support of race. History is viewed as the emanation of the race. The qualities of the race are construed without relation to changing social conditions. Rejecting ‘economic thought’ as base, National Socialism descends a state lower: from economic materialism it appeals to zoological materialism. [90]
Hitler could attack big capital, but he did so because it did not ‘serve the nation’. ‘The nationalisation of the masses’ was, in Mayer’s words, ‘the highest aim of the Nazis’. This creed of the blood depended on racism. Anti-semitism allowed Hitler to create a scapegoat onto which the resentment of the small man towards the trusts, the big banks and cartels could be diverted. To quote the German socialist August Bebel, anti-semitism was ‘the socialism of fools’ [91], while Mayer argues that ‘part of a great leader’s genius is to make even widely separated adversaries appear as if they belonged to one category’. The Jew was presented as: ‘the antithesis of German Aryan, prime mover of parasitic capitalism, the agent of Marxist subversion, and the master of Bolshevik Russia’.
Hitler’s programme also had an appeal for the ruling class. The German ruling class were terrified that when an economic recovery arrived working class organisation would remain intact. Lebensraum, the living space Hitler wanted to carve out in the east for the German nation, fitted with the imperialist ambitions of the ruling class. They were at one with the Nazis in their hostility to Communism, socialism, the trade unions and Versailles. Hitler told them ‘no internal peace until Marxism is finished off’. Internal peace was necessary to wage war. And by Marxism Hitler meant all working class organisation.
Hitler’s new Nazi state was from 1935 one based on ‘the preparedness economy’. Lebensraum would, Hitler promised, ‘command a secure supply of raw materials and foodstuffs for our people’. Major capitals would remain intact but their individual interests were to be subordinated to the central war drive. This territorial policy meant reducing the export sector in favour of heavy industry essential to modern warfare. When Hitler’s old paymaster, Fritz Thyssen, opposed this his factories were expropriated. Yet action against individual capitalists, no matter how wealthy, did not make this an ‘anti-capitalist revolution’. German capitalism as a whole made enormous profits from National Socialism.
 
Stalin’s Comintern and the rise of the Nazis
The rise of the Nazis is, as we have seen, incomprehensible without an understanding of the role of the KPD. But the role of the KPD was greatly shaped by Stalin’s Comintern.
The Fifth Congress of the Communist International in 1924 was the first to be held after Lenin’s death. Trotsky was already marginalised. The Congress’s theses stated that:
As bourgeois society continues to decay, all bourgeois parties, particularly Social Democracy, take on a more or less fascist character ... Fascism and Social Democracy are the two sides of the same instrument of capitalist dictatorship. [92]
Stalin started to develop this formulation with a vengeance in 1928 and 1929. The idea that fascism and social democracy were ‘twins’ and, indeed, that social democracy was the principle enemy of the working class, was reflected in the practice of the KPD through to the terrible conclusion of Hitler’s coming to power in January 1933. Why was this?
The answer lies in the foreign policy of Stalin’s Russia. At the beginning of 1928:
Stalin was observing with anxiety the policies of Britain and France ... He thought that a new anti-Soviet intervention was being planned ... that determined the ultra-left direction then taken ... This was no time for liquidating the Comintern, but on the contrary ... for hurling it into a furious offensive against the Social Democrats and the Catholic Centre Party in Germany, against the Socialists and the Radicals in France, and against the Labour Party in Britain – all of these being seen as the most dangerous potential accomplices in an Anglo-French war of intervention? [93]
E.H. Carr reports that the Kremlin saw the German Grand Coalition government of 1929, presided over by the Social Democrat Richard Müller, as being particularly dangerous. In 1930, Carr says:
Fear of war, obsessive in Moscow since the late 1920s, now assumed, more immediate and menacing dimensions. The deepening of the crisis brought nearer the dreaded danger that the imperialist powers would seek to reconcile their mutual animosities by a combined assault on the USSR, and that Germany, crippled and desperate, would be forced or cajoled into this combination. [94]
Stalin’s concern was not with stopping the Nazis, but with the economic development of Russia. In November 1931 he is said to have asked one KPD leader, if the Nazis came to power in Germany, would they ‘concern themselves so exclusively with the West that we can build socialism in peace?’ [95]
Sectarianism towards German Social Democracy was carried to lunatic conclusions. Speaking in 1932, on the eve of disaster, the German Communist leader Ernst Thaelmann argued:
Nothing could be more disastrous than an opportunistic overestimation of ‘Hitler-fascism’ ... Social Democracy, now as previously ... represents the most important mass base in the working class for the fascist development of bourgeois policy ... the main thrust must be directed against Social Democracy ... There must be no joint meetings held between the KPD, the SPD, the SAP or the Brandler Group. [96]
Such conclusions could only prevent the Communist Party and its supporters from adopting the correct tactics towards the SPD, a precondition of stopping Hitler coming to power.
 
The tactics of Stalinism
It is often argued that physical confrontation is the key to successfully fighting the fascists. There is an element of truth in this assertion, but physical confrontation must be combined with the correct political strategy, as the experience of the KPD shows. In 1931:
the party returned to the slogan, ‘Smite the fascists wherever you meet them’; heard first in 1924. There were battles in the streets between the RFB and SA. The main thrust of the party’s verbal attacks was against Social Democracy, but the physical conflict was with the fascists? [97]
Just the two months of October and November of that year:
saw 21 reported killed and 1,138 wounded in all of Germany; of the dead 14 were Nazis, six Communists, one a Reichsbanner member ... Between January and September 1932, the Prussian territories alone reported 70 Nazi, 54 Communist, ten Social Democratic and 21 ‘other dead’. [98]
The problem was not a lack of street fighting. It was the KPD’s dead end political strategy. Eve Rosenhaft has produced a study of the KPD’s resistance to the Nazis in Berlin. With 30,000 members in the capital and a third of the popular vote the KPD should have been able to mount an effective resistance. But it ran into problems. It refused to unite with non-Communist workers. Instead it looked to the efforts of its own members and supporters. Also it saw the key as street confrontations pure and simple:
The ‘battle for the streets’ with the SA, defined by both parties as a fight for and about the neighbourhoods, fitted directly into the ‘street politics’ of the KPD. Indeed the ‘ street politics’, [was] itself a direct response to the way that conditions of mass unemployment affected the possibilities of working class action. [99]
Forty five percent of manual workers in Berlin were unemployed. Of the Berlin-Brandenburg district of the KPD, Rosenhaft reports:
Of the roughly 30,000 KPD members there at the end of 1930, about 40 percent were working in factories, while another 51 percent were unemployed ... In Berlin, 396 of 621 new members in one local were under 30, 237 under 25. The majority of these new recruits were unemployed ... The end of 1931 left the Berlin-Brandenburg Party with 451 factory cells for the whole district, as against 605 street cells. [100]
Under these circumstances the KPD’s members in the factories could not pull strike action and because of the party’s ‘social fascist’ line they were unable to link up with those SPD workers who wanted to fight but were not yet ready to break with reformist politics.
The Nazi onslaught began in August 1929 after a 60,000 strong rally in Nuremberg. SA storm troopers under the leadership of Horst Wessel ‘cleaned up’ two KPD taverns in the Kreuzberg area. [101] The Berlin Nazi leader, Goebbels, boasted of having ‘sought the enemy in its own fortress’. The police chief, Grezesinski, reported that ‘ordinary brawls had given way to murderous attacks’; he dates the beginning of a spiralling series of political murders from the killing of the Communist Heimansburg in May 1930. [102]
It was now that the KPD daily raised the slogan, ‘Hit the fascists wherever you meet them’. The Red Front fighters carried the battle into the streets. But this raised political problems:
Insofar as the RFB had an attraction after 1929 [when it was banned], it lay precisely in the romance of conspiracy which could be maintained only at the price of mass appeal ... As early as May 1930 the leadership in Berlin had to censure the RFB locals for ‘left sectarian tendencies’ – reluctance to recruit new members and failure to involve the masses in their own actions (especially against the Nazis) – and the complaint that in spite of all directives the RFB was still mobilising only its own members became routine. [103]
The leadership of the KPD complained of a militarist mentality which prevented mobilisations in response to the storm troopers since ‘all too often ... because of a Nazi attack, for days, even in some cases for weeks, no revolutionary work was done except practising ‘civil war’ in miniature’. [104] There were complaints that RFB fighters played ‘wild west’ with their guns, shooting them off in bars and so on (the KPD had access to weapons collected for the aborted insurrection of 1923). After the mass resistance by Braunschweig [Brunswick] workers against the SA convention in their city during October 1930 the KPD leadership tried to draw a line between ‘mass terror’ and ‘individual terror’:
But each attempt to introduce a modification in the wehrhafter kampf [physical fight] met with resistance, and by the end of 1931 sections of the movement were in open revolt over the leadership’s attempt to suppress ‘individual terror’ once and for all. Those who revolted were the groups most deeply involved in the wehrhafter kampf, the Party’s youth and the antifascist defence organisations ...
But the young workers who bore the brunt of the street fighting, while they may have yearned for a revolution as the only solution to intolerable circumstances, appear to have seen the fight against fascism almost entirely in terms of answering the threat the SA posed to their freedom of movement and way of life [105]
The fight against fascism was now reduced not just simply to the minority of workers grouped around the Communist Party but to the young ‘hardmen’. There were constant problems with these ‘squaddists’ who glorified a ‘laddish’ life style. There were reports of bullying within the RFB. In one instance, Rosenhaft describes RFB fighters inviting SA men into their tavern to join them for beers at Christmas time. Some ‘squaddists’ even went over to the SA when the KPD tried to modify its line. These attempts to modify the line were half hearted. Even the Stalinist leadership were eventually forced to admit their failure:
Viewed on the national scale, the trend towards individual terror appears as a reflex response to accumulating evidence of the futility of mass action ... It was clear by the end of 1932 that the policy of mass self-defence was not being carried as intended ... Political strikes were no easier to organise than economic ones ... What Die Rote Fahne headlined as a ‘strike movement’ in Berlin after the Felsenech shootings [of KPD supporters] in January 1932 amounted to no more than a half hour protest strike on the part of 180 workers, the entire workforce of a manufacturing plant, and a series of protest meetings and resolutions in other factories ... an Inprekor [the magazine of the Comintern] correspondent reported: ‘although there were nearly 100 political strikes in July this year, this fight [against the Nazis] took place largely on the streets. The factories and mines were only slightly involved’. In December the Political Secretary for Berlin, a specialist in strike tactics, was heard to admit that the KPD was in no position to carry out a general strike on its own. In the view of the leadership, individual terror was the easy way out: it arose not from disappointment with methods tried and found wanting, but from despair of the possibility of success. [106]
 
Trotsky’s analysis of the Nazis
Trotsky’s analysis of fascism was diametrically opposed to that developed by Stalin’s Comintern and it resulted in very different tactical recommendations. For Trotsky fascism was not just another form of capitalist rule or reaction. Rather he warned in November 1931:
The coming to power of the National Socialists would mean first of all the extermination of the flower of the German proletariat, the destruction of its organisations, the eradication of its belief in itself and in its future. Considering the far greater maturity and acuteness of the social contradictions in Germany, the hellish work of Italian fascism would probably appear as a pale and almost humane experiment in comparison with the work of the German National Socialists. [107]
Trotsky was correct about the ferocity of German fascism in relation to its Italian counterpart. He went on to draw a distinction between fascism and other forms of dictatorship:
Fascism is not merely a system of reprisals, of brutal force, and of police terror. Fascism is a peculiar governmental system based on the uprooting of all elements of proletarian democracy with bourgeois society ... To this end the physical annihilation of the most revolutionary sections of the workers does not suffice. It is also necessary to smash independent and voluntary organisations, to demolish all the defensive bulwarks of the proletariat, and to uproot whatever has been achieved during three quarters of a century by Social Democracy and the trade unions. [108]
The Nazis did indeed burn not just the works of Marx but also those of Darwin; they outlawed not just left wing parties and the trade unions but all organisations independent of the state, including the boy scouts and the YMCA. Hitler’s aim was to reduce society to the level of an army barracks.
This was repression qualitatively different from a military or police dictatorship. Take, for example, the Spanish dictator, Primo di Rivera who ruled Spain from 1923 till 1929. During this period, in alliance with the industrialists of Barcelona, he waged all out war against the anarcho-syndicalist union, the CNT. Di Rivera was appointed by King Alfonso XIII and ruled through the police, the state bureaucracy and the officer corps topped by a thin veneer of parliamentarianism. This dictatorship of ‘order’ attempted to present itself as being raised above the different classes and parties in Spanish society – though in reality it was summoned forth in order to preserve the status quo. But in a situation of heightened class tension this provided too narrow a basis of support for the regime. Di Rivera attempted to find some independent support by brokering a deal with the Socialist trade union leader, Largo Caballero. This eventually proved unsuccessful. All that was required to topple the government was a series of powerful street demonstrations.
Fascism may be an extreme solution, even for the ruling class, but less extreme solutions, like military coups, also entail great risks. In Germany in March 1920, for instance, the German army, the Reichswehr, marched into central Berlin and announced that the government was toppled. An obscure civil servant, Kapp, was appointed Chancellor. The president, Ebert, and the war minister, Noske, the two SPD leaders who had allied with the same officers now leading the coup to crush the 1919 revolution, fled Berlin offering no resistance. Not a shot had been fired. Yet despite its military success the coup failed because there was one force it could not beat – united working class resistance.
Not all of the reformist leaders were as happy to relinquish office as Ebert and Noske. It was one thing to ally with the military against revolutionaries like Rosa Luxemburg, it was another to bow down before them when a coup threatened the very existence of the SPD and its associated trade unions. A right wing trade union leader, Legien – a vicious opponent of the left – initiated a general strike call which was taken up immediately. Across the industrial areas of Germany the Communists took up that call and went further in seizing control of their towns and arming the workers. They were able to carry tens of thousands of SPD supporters with them.
Such a bold reaction had another effect. Many of the more conservative white collar workers and sections of the middle class who had been moving to the right in the months after the defeat of the initial revolutionary uprising a year before, backed the opposition to the coup. As the Communist Party Congress was told a month later:
The middle ranking railway, post, prison and judicial employees are not Communist and will not quickly become so. But for the first time they fought on the side of the working class. [109]
Despite its military success even the whole army could not cope with a united, determined general strike. The coup attempt collapsed. The whole experience acted as a spark which re-ignited working class militancy.
This experience was still very fresh in the minds of the German ruling class in 1933. As Trotsky wrote in September 1932, ‘A hundred thousand soldiers, no matter how cohesive and steeled they may be (which is still to be tested), are incapable of commanding a nation of 65 million torn by the most profound social antagonisms’. [110]
This is where fascism enters the scene. It was able to provide much wider forces than those of the army and the police – fighters who were more politically and ideologically committed than the ordinary squaddie or cop. These core fighters, Trotsky argues, are drawn from the petty bourgeoisie – in the classical Marxist definition, the professional classes, the peasantry, supervisory workers and so on. Fascism:
raises to their feet those classes that are immediately above the proletariat and that are ever in dread of being forced down into its ranks; it organises and militarises them at the expense of finance capital, under the cover of the official government, and it directs them to the extirpation of proletarian organisations, from the most revolutionary to the most conservative. [111]
Trotsky added:
Fascism unites and arms the scattered masses. Out of human dust it organises combat detachments. It thus gives the petty bourgeoisie the illusion of being an independent force. It begins to imagine that it will really command the state. It is not surprising that these illusions and hopes turn the head of the petty bourgeoisie. [112]
That the petty bourgeoisie could be won in large numbers to fascism was not a foregone conclusion. After all in 1918 the German middle classes had enthusiastically supported the overthrow of the emperor and voted for the parties of the left (the SPD primarily). In 1920, as we have seen, decisive action by the working class against the Kapp coup had drawn the petty bourgeoisie behind it in support. But to make such gains secure the strategy followed by the major working class parties needed to be able to raise the prospect of further success. The SPD’s and the KPD’s failure in this respect was tragic.
Finally, it is important to see this balance of class forces in its broad context. Trotsky argues:
... fascism is each time the final link of a specific political cycle composed of the following: the gravest crisis of capitalist society; the growth of the radicalisation of the working class; the growth of sympathy towards the working class and a yearning for change on the part of the rural and urban petty bourgeoisie; the extreme confusion of the big bourgeoisie; its cowardly and treacherous manoeuvres aimed at avoiding the revolutionary climax; the exhaustion of the proletariat; growing confusion and indifference; the aggravation of the social crisis; the despair of the petty bourgeoisie, its yearning for change; the collective neurosis of the petty bourgeoisie; its readiness to believe in miracles; its readiness for violent measures; the growth of hostility towards the proletariat which has deceived its expectations. These are the premises for a swift transformation of a fascist party and its victory. [113]
 
Trotsky argues for the United Front
Mass working class action was the key to stopping the rise of the Nazis. This alone could break the cycle which Trotsky described as the mechanism by which Nazis came to power. In November 1931 Trotsky wrote that:
On the scales of election statistics, a thousand fascist votes weigh as much as a thousand Communist votes. But on the scale of revolutionary struggle, a thousand workers in one big factory represent a force a hundred times greater than a thousand petty officials, clerks, their wives and their mother in laws. The great bulk of the fascists consists of human dust. [114]
The KPD could not win such mass action on its own. It required the involvement of the majority of employed workers, organised by the Social Democratic Party and its unions. Half the Berlin working class continued to follow the lead of the SPD leadership – the percentage was even higher outside the capital. A way had to be found to get their support in the fight against the Nazis. This involved confronting their line of ‘do nothing’ when faced with the Nazi menace. There was only one way to do this – to apply the tactic of the united front as worked out in the early years of the Communist International.
In 1921, after the initial post-war revolutionary wave had receded and the working class across Europe was on the defensive, Lenin and Trotsky had argued that the young Communist Parties who had just broken from the Social Democrats had, nevertheless, to address themselves to the reformist workers and look for joint action with them. Trotsky had drafted the Comintern’s theses which explained:
... the working masses sense the need of unity of action, of unity in resisting the onslaught of capitalism, of unity in taking the offensive against it. Any party which mechanically counterposes itself to this need of the working class for unity in action will unfailingly be condemned in the minds of the workers ... we are, apart from all other considerations, interested in dragging the reformists from their asylums and placing them alongside ourselves before the eyes of the struggling masses. With a correct tactic we stand only to gain from this ... In the event that the reformists begin putting brakes on the struggle to the obvious detriment of the movement and act counter to the situation and the moods of the masses, we as an independent organisation always reserve the right to lead the struggle to the end, and this without our temporary semi-allies ... For this reason any sort of organisational agreement which restricts our freedom of criticism and agitation is absolutely unacceptable to us. [115]
Again and again the Communist Party should have been inviting the Social Democrat leaders to engage in united action against the fascists. Let the Social Democrats and the Communists together defend Social Democrat premises from Nazi attack and then go on to defend Communist premises from the same attacks. The Social Democratic leaders would try to avoid such united actions by any means at their disposal. But such was the Nazi threat to their organisation that they could not always say no without the risk of driving many of their members to united action with the Communists in any case. If the appeal was made to the Social Democratic leaders for united action, then united action would eventually result – whether with or without these leaders.
The German Communists refused to make that appeal. Instead of teaching workers to oppose reformism while at the same time fighting alongside reformist workers against the Nazis, the KPD committed a historic crime. The people who benefited most from this were the leaders of the SPD. They could always excuse their disastrous passivity by blaming the Communists for dividing the class. Squadism reinforced the blind alley politics of the KPD. It substituted the action of a dedicated minority for that of the masses. Rosenhaft, drawing on the success of the mass action in Braunschweig [Brunswick], writes:
If we consider the incidents that the KPD itself held up as models of mass terror at a certain period, those in Braunschweig [Brunswick] and Nowawes in the autumn of 1931, it is clear that their principal basis was the ad hoc cooperation of sections of the working class – which usually meant the realisation of a local ‘united front’ between Social Democrats and the Communist Party ... it is clear that the voluntaristic conviction of the KPD leadership, that if only all Communists did exactly as they were told the Party could transform the situation single handed, was a dangerous illusion. [116]
 
Fascism stalled: France 1934–36
The victory of fascism in Germany had a radicalising effect on European workers. An anti-fascist reflex was accompanied by a growing hostility to capitalism in response to the Great Slump. The reformist line of ‘do nothing’ in the face of fascism was discredited among wide sections of workers and left wing tendencies sprang up in the Social Democratic parties and in the unions. In February 1934 the socialist militia in Vienna fought bravely but unsuccessfully against the dictatorship of Dollfuss, and in October Spanish workers in Asturias rose in rebellion against a right wing government which seemed to be paving the way for fascism.
Fascism seemed to be either triumphant or at least gaining ground everywhere. Looking at Europe Trotsky argued:
Mussolini is not an Italian but a world phenomenon. The gangrene of barbaric reaction is spreading over one land and another. France is next in order. [117]
France was plagued by political instability and scandal: ‘In the 18 months preceding 1934 there had been five different governments, but with virtually the same forces in each’. [118] In 1928 the former finance minister, Kloetz, was arrested for issuing dud cheques. In 1930 there was the ‘Oustric scandal’ involving a bogus banking empire built on loans gained from the Bank of France. The government fell.
Then in January 1934 came the biggest scandal. A Ukrainian Jewish speculator, Stavisky, was found shot dead in an Alpine resort. Officially it was described as suicide, but there was a widespread belief that he was shot by the police to stop him revealing his connection with top politicians. Stavisky had a seemingly unlimited number of contacts in politics, in the press and the judiciary. A case outstanding against him had been postponed 19 times. The public prosecutor involved was the prime minister’s brother in law. On 30 December 1932 there had been a major scandal involving the issue of millions of francs based on the assets of Bayonne’s municipal pawnshop. It was quickly pinned on Stavisky. The Mayor of Bayonne, a Radical Party deputy, was arrested and there were indications that bigger fish were involved.
The Stavisky scandal brought angry crowds to the doors of the National Assembly shouting, ‘Down with the criminals’. The government resigned. In this situation the forces of French fascism took the offensive. On 6 February Action Française, edited by the vicious anti-semite Charles Maurras [119] (executed in 1945 as a Nazi collaborator) declared:
The thieves are barricading themselves in their cave. Against this abject regime, everyone is in front of the Chambre des Deputes this evening.
Twice the Camelots du Roi, the shock troops of Action Française, smashed their way through to the Assembly. In the event ‘out of 40,000 demonstrators, 16 had been killed and at least 655 known to be wounded; well over 1,000 policemen received injuries’. [120] The next day Colonel de la Rocque, leader of the Croix de Feu (a far right association of ex-officers) declared from his secret ‘battle headquarters’ that ‘the Croix de Feu has surrounded the Chamber and forced the Deputies to flee’. [121] The acting premier, the Radical Daladier, resigned and ex-president Gaston Doumerge took over, promising a strong government of order. Seventy-seven year old Marshal Petain was appointed minister of defence as a sop to the leagues, as the Croix de Feu, Action Française and other outfits were termed. After the war Petain would be presented as a befuddled old man. The truth was that already in 1934 he had ambitions to become dictator of France and that he was up to his neck in political intrigue.
All of this took place while the recession raged and alienation from official politics grew. ‘Although the slump hit France later than the rest of the world it lasted much longer.’ [122] It created a class polarisation which affected the Radical Party in particular:
The Radical Socialists (or Radicals as they were more commonly known) were in fact neither radical nor socialist. In the early 20th century they had been the party most committed to the defence of the Republic. This made them stridently anti-clerical and situated them on the left. But their electoral support came especially from what the French call the classes moyennes – peasants, shopkeepers, small businessmen and so on. Since the war the social conservatism of this electorate had conflicted increasingly with the party’s attempts to remain faithful to its origins on the left ... In effect, therefore, the Radicals had become a centrist party of government indispensable to the formation of almost any coalition of left or right. [123]
The Radicals were the party most implicated in the various scandals and were renowned for cynically trading government offices themselves.
The recession hit the classes moyennes particularly badly. Peasant incomes fell by 30 percent in the five years after 1930 and those of small businessman by 18 percent over the same period. All of this seemed to presage the inevitable rise of fascism in France:
After 6 February, the fascist menace lingered. The leagues continued their agitation, and their violence against workers, of whom a mounting number fell victim to the paramilitaries. The Croix de Feu held a continual series of motorcades and their leader took every opportunity to announce that the ‘Day of Reckoning’ was at hand. [124]
What altered matters was the dramatic entry of the working class onto the centre stage. The leader of the CGT, the main trade union federation, Jouhaux, understood the need for some form of action after the 6 February manifestation. He called a strike for 12 February. The Socialist Party reluctantly backed the strike call and called a demonstration through central Paris on the day.
The French Communist Party (PCF) had 30,000 members in 1933. It was still suffering in the wake of the German defeat. And it was still committed to the ‘social fascist’ line. That meant that on 6 February it had refused an offer for joint action from the left-led Seine Federation of the Socialists. Instead L’Humanité, the CP paper, called a demonstration at the same time and place as the fascist leagues, declaring, ‘At one and the same time against the fascist bands, against the Government and against Social Democracy’. In the resulting confusion Communist members became involved alongside the fascists in fighting the police. Two Communist leaders bemoaned ‘painful scenes ... of fraternisation between workers ... and Camelots du Roi ... of workers “mixed in with fascists”’. [125] Now faced with the joint CGT and Socialist call for a strike and demonstrations on 12 February the PCF initially denounced the call, explaining in L’Humanité:
But how can we have unity of action with people who vote for governments who cut wages? With people who break strikes? With people who abandon the class struggle to collaborate in the defence of the capitalist system, and who, in France as in Germany, prepare the ground for fascism? [126]
Instead they counterposed their own demonstration in Paris on 9 February, and called on the slogans:
Immediate arrest of Chiappe [right wing security minister] and the leaders of the fascist gangs! Down with the butchers Daladier and Frot [Radical leaders] Disband the fascist gangs! Defence of wages and salaries! Down with the reactionary and fascist National Government prepared by the Radical and Socialist Parties! Long live the workers’ and peasants’ governments! [127]
If these slogans were to be taken seriously they would have amounted to a call to insurrection. Instead only Communist Party members and supporters gathered in east Paris. Seizing on their isolation the police went on the rampage killing six workers. As late as 11 February L’Humanité kept up its onslaught on the CGT-Socialist mobilisation denouncing them as ‘social fascists’ and predicting that ‘the workers will repulse the Socialist leaders in disgust’. But during the night of 11 and 12 February the party leadership could not hold this line among the rank and file. Support grew for a united front with the CGT and the Socialists.
On the day two columns met in central Paris, one led by the Communists, the bigger one by Jouhaux and the Socialist leader, Leon Blum. The two spontaneously joined together amidst constant chants of ‘Unity, unity’ and ‘They shall not pass’. The CGT estimated one million workers in the Paris region struck, in total four and a half million workers stopped work across France and in Marseilles 100,000 demonstrated. [128] Elsewhere in towns across France there were 346 demonstrations (19 of which contained more than 5,000 participants and 161 of which involved both Socialists and Communists). [129]
In the immediate aftermath the PCF did not change its line. But the left was growing in influence within the Socialists. Two conflicting pressures came into play. The first was again spontaneous. A young civil servant and some of his intellectual friends formed a Vigilance Committee against fascism immediately after 12 February. Across France similar organisations sprouted up: ‘In Languedoc alone 47 were formed between 12 February and 15 July; by May 1934 there were 74 in the single department of Lot and Garonne.’ One PCF leader reported the membership were ‘voting with their feet’ to join the united organisations. [130]
The successful mobilisations in response to the fascists fed into a renewal of wider working class resistance. In August 1935 the government announced a ten percent pay cut for all state employees. In the naval dockyards of Brest and Toulon there were strikes and, in what amounted to uprisings, troops killed five workers. The CGT leader, Jouhaux, would write later that:
The movement began without anyone knowing how or where. We were faced with an explosion of discontent by masses who had been humiliated and repressed for years. [131]
This groundswell of working class anger followed 15 years of little struggle and weak trade union organisation in which the Socialist Party had allied with the Radicals in what was termed the ‘Left Bloc’.
The second pressure came from Moscow and the PCF. In Moscow the complacency with which Stalin had viewed Hitler’s rise had changed to alarm, as he himself admitted:
Of course we are far from being enthusiastic about the fascist regime in Germany. But it is not a question of fascism here, if only for the reason that fascism in Italy, for example, has not prevented the USSR from establishing the best relations with that country. But it’s a different matter if Hitler took a ‘new’ policy, which in the main recalls the policy of the former German Kaisers, who at one time occupied the Ukraine and marched against Leningrad ... this ‘new’ policy is obviously gaining the upper hand. [132]
Stalin now looked for a pact with Britain and France to offset the new Nazi menace. On 23 May 1934 Pravda signalled that agreements between Communist and Social Democratic parties were now permissible. On 25 June the PCF leader, Thorez, wrote an article in L’Humanité appealing to the Socialists for:
Unity at any price ... Neither from the mouth of any of our propagandists, nor from the pen of any of our writers, in L’Humanité or even in Cahiers du Bolchevisme as in our entire press, will there be the slightest attack against those organisations or the leaders of the Socialist Party.
On this basis a common pact was signed between the two parties. In May 1935 Stalin and the Radical leader Laval – who was moving rightwards to become deputy to Petain in Vichy France – signed a mutual assistance pact. The official communiqué stated: ‘M. Stalin understands and fully approves the French national defence policy which requires a level of armed force sufficient to meet the needs of her security’. [133] This totally contradicted the PCF policy of opposing France’s defence spending. Performing a rapid U-turn the party printed posters overnight declaring, ‘Stalin is right’.
The PCF now proposed to extend its pact with the Socialists to include the Radicals. The ‘theoretical’ argument used to justify this alliance was that it would signify an alliance between the working class, as represented by the Socialists and Communists, and the middle class, as represented by the Radicals – an alliance which would block the growth of fascism among the classes moyennes. The new Popular Front was signed and celebrated with a monster demonstration in Paris on Bastille Day. Its programme was limited to the positions of the Radicals. The slogan now raised was, ‘Peace, Bread, Freedom’. The Communist leader Thorez boasted that they had rescued the tricolour, the French national flag, and the Marseilleise, the French national anthem, from the right.
In 1934 Trotsky had already warned that:
Yesterday the greatest danger was the sabotage of the united front. Today the greatest danger lies in the illusions of the united front, very closely related to the parliamentary illusions: the diplomatic notes, the pathetic speeches, the handshaking, the bloc without revolutionary content – and the betrayal of the masses. [134]
Later, in 1936, Trotsky would add:
The job of the cartel [i.e. the Popular Front agreement] always consisted in putting a brake upon the mass movement, directing it into the channels of class collaboration. This is precisely the job of the People’s Front as well ... Joint meetings, parade processions, oaths, mixing the banner of the Commune and Versailles, noise, bedlam, demagogy – all these serve a single aim: to curb and demoralise the mass movement ... a classic definition of the People’s Front: a safety valve for the mass movement.
The Radicals themselves were a party torn apart by contradictions as their middle class support was pulled towards the left and the right. The fascists reviled the corruption of the Radicals and the Third Republic which the Popular Front was committed to defend. So Trotsky warned:
The political essence of the crisis lies in the fact that the people are nauseated by the Radicals and their Third Republic. The fascists seek to profit from this. But what have the Socialists and Communists done? They have become the guarantors of the Radicals before the people. They have portrayed the Radicals as slandered innocents. They have assured the workers and peasants that complete salvation lies – in the ministry of Daladier. [135]
Thorez put matters more bluntly, saying, ‘The Communists have become in literal truth the trustees of bankrupt capitalist culture.’
Class polarisation increased between 1934 and the fall of France in 1940 until the French bourgeoisie and sections of the middle classes accepted the slogan, ‘Better Hitler than Blum’. Under such circumstances the working class wanted unity because it grasped it as the key to beating back the fascists and defending living standards. But between February 1934 and March 1937 ‘unity’ could mean taking the working class struggle from the defensive to the offensive, or ‘unity’ could mean, as the Popular Front meant, ensuring that struggle was contained and defused.
The elections of May 1936 demonstrated the shift away from the Radicals as the Popular Front achieved victory:
The Radical vote fell in 66 departments. The Radicals lost electors on both the left, owing to their identification with conservative governments between February 1934 and February 1936, and on the right, owing to their new identification with the Popular Front. Centrist politics became increasingly untenable. [136]
The main winners were the PCF whose share of the seats rose from ten to 72! The first Popular Front government was to have been led by the Radical leader Daladier. Now the Socialist leader Blum had to take the premiership. The left’s victory was the signal for an explosion of working class militancy as the greatest strike wave the world had yet seen swept France through May and June:
Over three quarters of the June strikes (8,941) consisted of factory occupations. Alexander Werth described the extraordinary sight of the Paris suburbs during June 1936: ‘building after building – small factories, even comparatively small workshops – were flying red, or red and tricolour flags – with pickets in front of the closed gates’. [137]
One Radical, a supporter of the Popular Front, would complain to his party members:
The occupation of the factories, shops and farms was not in the programme of the Popular Front ... It is not only illegal, it is something worse: a humiliation for the patron [the employer]. The occupations must cease. [138]
Amidst all this the working class was continuing to resist the growing threat of the fascist leagues who were gaining from the Radicals and the traditional right. The Croix de Feu’s membership grew from 50,060 in February 1934 to 450,000 in June 1936. In that month Blum banned it under popular pressure. But de la Rocque simply reformed it as the French Social Party, which, by the beginning of 1938, had grown from 700,000 to 1.2 million members. Its ‘defence squads’ were replaced by ‘flying propaganda units’. The French People’s Party, launched in June 1936 with money from Mussolini and sections of business, claimed 100,000 members in October of that year. By the beginning of 1938 that figure had risen to 295,000. One right wing Catholic intellectual caught the mood of the rich when he wrote, ‘If we ever take power, this is what will happen: at six o’clock, the Socialist press is suppressed; at seven o’clock freemasonry is forbidden; at eight o’clock, Blum is shot.’ [139]
But it was the workers who were now carrying the fight to the fascists:
The leagues still managed a big demonstration in front of the statue of Joan of Arc on 17 May [1936]. but in the continuous guerrilla warfare between sellers of the workers and fascist press, the latter rarely commanded the field. They were usually isolated, while the worker militants received the support of the local people. [140]
In June the Socialist interior minister told deputies, ‘In the Lille suburbs the workers armed themselves with their tools, or improvised weapons in order to defend themselves against a supposed fascist threat. [141] All through the months after June 1936 de la Rocque’s PSF kept up their agitation:
Fights with worker militants went on unabated. The PSF tried to prevent a Communist rally in the Parc des Princes in Paris by a forcible occupation of the stadium, but the attempt was unsuccessful. [142]
In this situation of rising working class confidence and social division Trotsky declared that June, ‘The French Revolution has begun’. [143] There was only one party with the strength in the working class to contain this upsurge – the Communist Party. The Communists rallied the best worker militants with the most confidence and ability. Their membership had swollen to 288,000 in June 1936 with a further 100,000 in the Young Communist Leagues. But the French Communists were determined to preserve the bloc with the Radicals and, with it, Franco-Soviet co-operation. The Russian foreign minister, Litvinov, had already said after the May elections:
What is essential is that France should not allow her military strength to be weakened. We hope no internal troubles will favour Germany’s designs. [144]
In June Thorez, echoing this argument, made the following statement:
Given the development of campaigns by the right, which are a source of worry and doubt amongst ordinary people, it is better not to employ this form of struggle [occupations]; given the development of reactionary campaigns that sow trouble and uncertainty among the common people ... We must know how to end a strike. [145]
On 14 June L’Humanité declared that, ‘The Communist Party means order’. The PCF used all its strength to end the strikes through an agreement with the frightened bosses which guaranteed paid holidays and a 40 hour week.
In July a new crisis broke over the Popular Front with the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War. The Spanish republican government asked for planes and arms in accordance with past agreements. Blum initially agreed but backed down under pressure from his Radical colleagues and the military. As one defender of Blum, Colette Audry, wrote:
The Socialist leader of the government of the French People’s Front held in his hands the fate of two proletariats, and it would have been enough for him to allow a bourgeois commercial treaty signed by his predecessors to be honoured, and advantage taken of a common frontier, in order to save the one proletariat and strengthen the other. Such an opportunity does not come twice in a lifetime. [146]
At this crucial moment the PCF downplayed agitation for aid for Spain:
When the Spanish Civil War broke out the Communists immediately spoke out for intervention but in fairly restrained tones. In August they launched the idea of a ‘French Front’, an extension of the Popular Front coalition to include sections of the right. [147]
Thorez even extended ‘a hand’ in a radio speech to members of the Croix de Feu. All through that autumn the PCF was successful in dampening down workers’ struggles. The price would not be long in being paid. In March 1937 the PSF was due to hold a meeting in Clichy in Paris. The Popular Front parties led 10,000 protesters away from the hall but workers broke away to go there. The police opened fire and five workers were killed. At their funeral 80,000 marched behind the coffins. Despite the efforts of the CGT and PCF there were a number of protest strikes. The Blum government fell during the subsequent bitter clashes.
In November 1938 a Radical-led government of the right rescinded the 40 hour week won in June 1936. The CGT – now strongly influenced by the PCF – called a general strike but insisted on no demonstrations or shows of strength. The strike was patchy and the CGT called it off. At Renault, ‘The defeated workers were forced by the police to march out of the factory making the fascist salutes to cries of “Long live the police”, while a policeman banged an iron bar, shouting “One for Blum, One for Timbaud [the Communist engineering union leader], One for Jouhaux”.’ [148] Thorez had warned:
We must think what would become of our country if the fascist gangs in the service of capital were to succeed in provoking, here as well, disorder and civil war, especially at a moment when besides the internal reasons that dictate calm and tranquillity there are also imperative necessities of an external order. Everyone realises that a France wounded by civil war would soon fall a prey to Hitler. [149]
Yet by following Thorez’s advice this is what exactly befell France in June 1940. As one of the founders of the Vigilance Committees back in 1934 wrote, ‘We had wanted to fight fascism and war, and we had both – with defeat as a bonus’. [150] The parliamentarians – minus the outlawed Communists – voted to hand over power to Petain in June 1940. Indigenous fascism had been too weak in the face of massive working class resistance to follow the lead of Mussolini and Hitler. The French ruling class had to find a saviour from outside their borders.
 
Trotsky on France
In late 1934 Trotsky had written that fascism in France:
is still too weak for the direct struggle for power but it is strong enough to attempt to beat down the working class organisations bit by bit, to temper its bands in its attacks, and to spread disarray and lack of confidence in their forces in the ranks of the workers ... Fascism finds unconscious helpers in all those who say that the ‘physical struggle’ is impermissible or hopeless. [151]
The Popular Front parties argued for state bans to stop the fascists. Trotsky argued for the working class to set up its own militia to defend itself. In a situation of mass strikes, factory occupations and mass battles with the fascists this was an argument which fitted the situation. The possibility existed of organising tens of thousands of working class fighters in a mass democratic fashion which united all shades of working class opinion. As he explained:
‘We are for active self defence – including armed self-defence. This active self-defence can be successful when it is supported and covered by the understanding and sympathy of the great mass of workers, and the Social Democratic workers first of all. [152]
But Trotsky saw that such struggles must be mass struggles, as is shown by his comments on an earlier fascist rally in the Parisian area of Menilmontat. The PCF called their own demonstration denouncing the Socialist ‘social fascists’. On the day 60 fascists turned up in a café. Ignoring them the Communists attacked the police, building barricades in a revolutionary ‘show of strength’. A construction worker was shot dead in the ensuing battle. Trotsky commented:
The task is to involve the workers in increasing numbers in the fight against fascism. The Menilmontat adventure can only isolate a small, militant minority. After such an experience, a hundred, a thousand workers who would have been ready to teach the young bourgeois bullies a few lessons will say, ‘No thanks, I don’t want to get my head broken for nothing’. [153]
Among the left wing of the Socialist Party, Trotsky’s arguments found an echo, but raised fresh issues:
In the ranks of the Socialist Party sometimes this objection is heard: ‘A militia must be formed but there is no need of shouting about it’. One can only congratulate comrades who wish to protect the practical side of the business from inquisitive eyes and ears. But it would be much too naive to think that a militia could be created unseen and secretly within four walls. We need tens and later hundreds of thousands of fighters. They will come only if millions of men and women workers...understand the necessity for the militia and create around the volunteers an atmosphere of ardent sympathy and active support. Conspiratorial care can and must envelope only the technical aspect of the matter. The political campaign must be openly developed, in meetings, in factories, in the streets and on public squares. [154]
Trotsky’s supporters inside the Socialist Party succeeded in setting up defence guards, the Toujours Prets Pour Servir (TPPS) in 1935. One of them remembers:
It was not simply a military organisation, but a grouping of activists, ready for any task at any time organised in tens, thirties and hundreds, with their leaders elected by the rank and file. The TPPS went out at night to fly-post, paint slogans in red lead, and throw leaflets into factories. The TPPS were likewise mobilised to steward meetings, and where necessary were sent as reinforcements when a fight was expected. They went to defend Working class paper sellers, and sometimes stopped the fascists selling their papers. There’s no need to add that they were very badly armed (usually one revolver among six, the rest having truncheons or improvised weapons). Sometimes they were routed... Usually the fascists were dealt with. Everywhere they were driven out of working class quarters. [155]
This sounds excellent but a year later Trotsky noted, ‘The TPPS disappeared in its time almost without a trace because its leadership was a technical and not a political leadership ... the political factor dominates and determines the physical struggle. [156]
The politics of fighting fascism, of the experience of Mussolini’s Italy, Hitler’s Germany and France in the 1930s, are that fascism aims at: the total destruction of all independent working class organisation, the permanent mobilisation of a mass political base in its initial stages at least, the suppression of all forms of independent political organisation including those of the ruling class itself, the defence and rationalisation of capitalism tied together with a militarist and expansionist ideology. These, in brief, are the conclusions reached by Leon Trotsky in a series of writings in the 1930s. Such an understanding is vital if we are to successfully confront the Nazis of the late 20th century.
 
Fascism towards 2000
In 1989, as the Berlin Wall fell, there was widespread optimism about the future of capitalism and the prospects for the ‘new’ unified Europe. Yet today we live in a world dominated by the third recession since 1973, a recession that has spread to include ‘motor force’ economies like Germany. Across western Europe ‘one in every four young persons aged between 18 and 25 is jobless’. [157] Only a few hours drive from Venice war is being waged on the European continent for the first time since 1945. The ideas that dominated the 1980s – those of Thatcher, Reagan and ‘monetarism’ – have fallen from favour. Deepening political instability has eroded support for Italy’s main ruling class party, the Christian Democrats, created a crisis in the German and French Socialist parties and fed the rise of racism and fascism.
Of course the level of economic crisis does not match that of the 1930s. Nowhere is unemployment running at 40 or 50 percent as it was in Germany prior to 1933. Nor have we seen political instability reach the point where the very structures of parliamentary democracy have been undermined as in Weimar Germany. But whilst the crisis is not as deep, it carries with it in embryo all the elements of the cycle in which Trotsky saw fascism as the final link – confusion among the bourgeoisie, radicalisation of the working class, dissatisfaction amongst the petty bourgeoisie, a deepening alienation from ‘official’ politics and the weakening of established political structures.
In Italy, even before the Tangentopoli crisis – the great bribery and corruption scandal which shattered the political establishment in 1993 – one commentator noted how deep alienation from the system ran:
In reply to the question: ‘Are you satisfied with the way democracy works in your country?’, an average 75 percent of Italians in the decade 1978–87 replied that they were ‘not at all satisfied’ or ‘not very satisfied.’ These levels were far higher than in any other of the major European nations. Comparative figures for France were 45 percent, for Britain 38 percent and for West Germany 22 percent. [158]
Now Tangentopoli has seen the former Christian Democrat and Socialist premiers, Andreotti and Craxi, under investigation for corruption and links with the Mafia.
In Germany one influential commentator admits the country ‘is slithering into an economic crisis and no one knows how to pull it out’. [159] Despite this the Kohl government sought to deny reality claiming in a diplomatic statement:
‘I am certain we will be able to resolve our economic problems – not overnight to be sure, but within a reasonable period of time.’ This assessment, given by Chancellor Kohl on 2 October 1990, the eve of German unification, continues to be correct two years after that historical date. [160]
By the beginning of 1993 there were 3.5 million unemployed in Germany, 2.5 million in the west and one million in the east, with another 1.5 million on government work schemes. [161]
This crisis has coincided with a decline in the traditional working class parties, be they Social Democratic or Communist. There is, for instance, atrophy at the roots of the SPD in Germany. [162] The percentage of manual workers joining the SPD has slumped from 55 percent in 1958 to 21 percent in 1982. The proportion of students joining the party fell from nearly 16 percent in 1972 to 12.8 percent in 1982. [163] The party’s decision in 1992 to back limiting the asylum provision in the German constitution helped intensify a crisis within the party’s ranks with 30,000 members leaving the party in 1992. [164] Members of the Young Socialists, the Jusos, took part in anti-racist activity and opened up a debate on the future of the party.
A similar crisis in France under a Socialist presidency created the conditions for the FN’s growth, the defeat of the Socialist government in March 1993 and an internal party crisis which saw the former Socialist prime minister, Pierre Beregovoy, commit suicide after leaving his local May Day rally.
There is a real ‘vacuum on the left’ caused by the withering of Social Democracy’s roots and the collapse of the Communist Parties in the wake of the USSR’s disintegration and the East European revolutions. All of this has been accompanied by the demise of much of the far left thrown up in the wake of 1968.
The longer the economic crisis lasts without either the ruling class or the working class being able to offer a solution, the more the attraction of racism and indeed fascism is likely to increase. In France we have seen that Le Pen has been able to establish himself in a respectable niche.
He gained only 0.3 percent of the poll in the 1979 European elections, but in 1984 his Front National took 10.9 percent, winning ten seats. In the 1983 elections for the National Assembly the FN garnered 2.7 million votes, taking 35 seats. In 1988 in the first round of the presidential elections Le Pen won 4,367,926 votes, or 14.4 percent. After the March 1992 regional elections the FN had 239 councillors. In the national elections in the following March the FN were squeezed out of winning seats but held their vote at 13 percent, coming within five percent of the Socialists, the defeated government party.
Le Pen aims to create an aura of democratic legitimacy around the FN and act in concert with sections of the established right. His hopes must be of forming a bloc with these organisations in order to establish an even bigger milieu for his ideas.
But Le Pen is anything but ‘respectable’. Jean Marie Le Pen was a former paratrooper involved in torture during the Algerian war, a member of the OAS (the terrorist group which fought Algerian independence), a veteran member of various far right and fascist groups, a peddler of Nazi records who has been convicted at least three times for racialism. One of his best known remarks was that the Holocaust was ‘only a detail in the history of the Second World War’ accompanied by the claim that ‘a Jewish International operates against the French national interest’. [165] One of his Front National’s most used posters reads, ‘Two million immigrants equals two million unemployed’. Le Pen’s overall vote is already greater than Hitler’s in 1928 prior to the Great Slump. The FN claims 100,000 members – though NonnA. Mayer claims the figure is in reality 50,000. Its daily paper, Present, sells 100,000 and its weekly, National Hebdo, 200,000. The cadre at the core of the movement has clearly developed in size. It clearly also has the potential to grow further.
But none of this means that the FN’s growth is inevitable. The FN’s 50,000 membership is smaller than that of the Hitler’s Nazi party in the 1920s and Le Pen does not command tens of thousands of battle hardened storm troops. Neither can the FN or any other of the new fascist groupings hope to achieve what Mussolini could, in what was still a relatively underdeveloped country, taking control of whole areas of the countryside from which to launch his bid for power. The overall proportion of the classic petty bourgeois is far smaller today than either in Germany in 1933 or in Italy in 1922. So the prospects for anti-fascists, providing they adopt the correct strategy, are good.
In Germany in January 1989 the Republikaner Partei (REP) with just 300 members in the city, polled 90,000 votes in West Berlin. Two months later the REP’s rival, the Nationaldemokratische Partei Deutschlands (NDP) gained seven seats in Frankfurt. In June 1989 the Republikaner took 2 million votes in the European Community elections, winning six seats and European Parliament funding. The leader of the Republikaner Partei is Franz Schönhuber, an ex-member of the Waffen SS, who has said that ‘the history of Germany should not be reduced to Auschwitz’, whose ‘divine mission’ is the creation of a ‘Greater Germany’ and whose response to being questioned about an increase in anti-semitism was, ‘It is the Jews who have asked for it’. The party stands for the subordination of trade unions, compulsory training of girls for the role of wife and mother, censorship and withholding social security and political rights for foreigners.
An SPD MEP stated that, ‘The rise in the REP’s political significance has been paralleled by a rise in the number of violent attacks on foreigners in the FRG [Federal Republic of Germany]’. [166] The French paper Le Monde reported that following the Republikaner’s initial breakthrough in West Berlin such slogans as ‘Liquidate the Turks’ and ‘Turn the Jews into smoke’ appeared across the city. [167]
Meanwhile in Italy a new right wing force has emerged which is more ambiguous than the Front National or the Republikaner. The Northern Leagues are not fascist but they are xenophobic, populist and reactionary. The Guardian’s Ed Vulliamy talked of the Leagues in Milan as ‘the new brash alliance of the lower middle class, business interests, the Roman Catholic Church’s boot boys from the soccer terraces and half of the town’s poor’. [168] The racism it advocates is aimed at blacks, Arabs and southerners.
When journalists confronted the League youth leaders, accusing them of supporting ethnic cleansing, they did not deny they supported repatriation for foreigners and southern Italians.
In 1987 the Northern Leagues only gained 0.5 percent of the vote nationally. By 1992 they won 8.7 percent of the vote, emerging as Italy’s fourth largest party. In the regional elections of June 1993 the Leagues took 40.8 percent of the vote in Milan with their candidate, Formetini, taking the mayor’s office, 23.4 percent in Turin and 44 percent in Pavia.
The Leagues have profited from the Tangentopoli crisis, the resulting collapse of the Christian Democrats, the splitting up of the Communist Party and the failure of its main successor, the PDS (Democratic Party of the Left) and the main trade union federation, the CGIL, to reflect the mounting anger among Italian workers.
This ambiguity of the Leagues’ politics means their anti-government rhetoric has allowed them to build some degree of support in the working class and to attempt to build their own ‘trade union’, the Autonomist Lombard Union (SAL). In reality the SAL stands for a cross-class ‘alliance of Lombard producers’. According to the Leagues’ leader, Umberto Bossi:
The SAL must not fight so much through strikes, an instrument now outmoded: it must act in a differentiated way towards its counterpart, the employers; hard struggle against big capital but a benevolent approach to the small and medium entrepreneur. We are an expression of the middle classes and we will not betray them as fascism did.
That attitude has helped limit the SAL’s success and prevent the Leagues turning their electoral appeal into something more tangible in the workplaces.
Bossi’s ambitions could carry him in a fascist direction, but he and the Leagues can also shift in a very different direction:
The year between the April 1992 general election and the April 1993 referendum [scrapping Italy’s system of proportional representation] has seen Bossi increasingly willing to abandon his separatist dream of a Republic of the North in favour of devolution, as he saw the seductive possibility of becoming Italian prime minister in a coalition government after new elections that inflicted further defeats on Old Corruption. [169]
The evolution of the Leagues will depend on how Italy’s crisis develops and, above all, on the scale of opposition to racism and the ruling elite. They can either evolve into a classic party of the ‘centre right’ or move in an openly fascist direction.
Italy’s main fascist organisation, the Movimento Sociale Italiano, was led, until his death in 1988, by a former minister in Mussolini’s government, Giorgio Almirante. Founded in the 1950s it was able at different points to win large numbers of votes: 5.8 percent in the 1953 elections, 5.1 percent in 1963 and its highest ever vote in 1972 with 8.7 percent. But the MSI’s main base was in the south: ‘Their votes came mainly from the southern cities ... among the southern students, urban poor and lower middle classes.’ [170]
At the time of writing, despite the fact that its membership seems to be declining in the face of the rise of the Leagues, the MSI retains 35,000 members and frightening potential, as the success of Mussolini’s granddaughter in the Naples election shows. [171]
Elsewhere the FPO, the Austrian Freedom Party, won 780,000 votes in the 1990 elections, and in January of the following year it took 22.6 percent of the vote in Vienna. The party is led along dictatorial lines by Jörg Haider. In October 1992 he unveiled a 12 point plan for dealing with Austria’s ‘immigrant problem’: ‘Among other things Haider wants a total ban on immigration, immediate deportation of all foreigners with criminal records, draconian border controls staffed by special forces and drastic limits on the number of foreign children allowed in any school class.’ [172]
In Belgium the far right Flemish party, the Vlaams Blok, emerged into a society where during the ten years between 1982 and 1992 wages fell by 13 percent and the incomes of the rich increased by 37.7 percent. [173] The Vlaams Blok won 79,223 votes in Antwerp in November 1991, making it the biggest party in the city with 25.5 percent of the vote. Its main slogan was ‘Eigen volk eerst’ (‘Our own people first’). The party has links with the Vlaamse Militaren Order (VMO) formed by former Nazi collaborators in the wake of the Second World War. The VMO was banned in the early 1980s after its members were involved in a series of violent attacks. One of the Vlaams Blok’s five MP’s is Xavier Buisseret, a former member of the VMO and the publisher of a Holocaust denial magazine. The party’s one MEP joined Le Pen’s group in the European Parliament.
 
What can we do?
i) Be clear about the class base of fascism. For many on the left the class nature of fascism has shifted from the 1930s, arguing that the fascists today are overwhelmingly working class in composition. This is unquestionably true of the ‘shock troops’ involved in events like the pogrom against refugees in the east German city of Rostock in August 1992. For five nights in a working class area 1,000 thugs supported by significant numbers of onlookers attacked the central refuge for asylum seekers in the state of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania. [174] But to understand the complete picture we need to look at how German unification has devastated east Germany, creating one million unemployed and many more on short time working. Whole communities were destroyed. It was a sour end to the dreams and hopes stirred by unification. This situation fuels the politics of despair on which the Nazis rely. Nevertheless the popular appeal of the new Nazis is still largely located among the middle class. In Germany:
Detailed studies of extreme right wing parties indicate that while the REP draws the bulk of its support from disenchanted Christian Democrat (CDU) supporters ... other surveys, one by the SPD aligned police trade union, suggest that support for the REP among policemen is especially strong. In Bavaria, for example, more than 60 percent of officers expressed similar loyalties. In addition the REP now has serious backing in the Federal Republic’s armed forces with more than 1,000 serving soldiers in party membership. [175]
In France Le Monde’s survey of Front National voters in April 1988 found that, 31 percent of small business owners voted along with 21 percent of professional people (doctors, lawyers etc.), 21 percent of shop workers, 19 percent of unemployed people, 8 percent of farmers and agricultural workers, and 16 percent of factory workers. In Paris Mayer points out that, ‘Contrary to the received wisdom, its electorate came rather from the classic right, but there was also a strong minority of voters from the left or previously abstentionist voters.’ Of the average FN voter she says, ‘If one takes the average characteristics of these electors, they even have a higher income than the average French person, they have more inherited wealth, are more often owners of their enterprises: they are more likely to have an educational qualification of some kind, and their rate of unemployment is not higher than the national average.’
The same pattern emerges in Britain. In August 1978 Colin Sparks gathered reports on 40 local National Front branches, the results of which were contained in an article he wrote for this journal. [176] The National Front was always regarded as overwhelmingly working class in composition, something Sparks had ‘assumed’ to be the case. But of the 40 branches surveyed:
The membership of the fascists was reported to contain manual workers in 34 cases; to contain white collar workers in 23 cases and to contain the classic petty bourgeois in 26 cases. In terms of the local leadership, there are ten cases of it containing manual workers, nine of it containing white-collar workers, and 13 of it containing the classic petty bourgeois (in only two cases are ‘capitalists’ reported as members).
Sparks concluded, given that the middle classes are a small percentage of the total population, ‘their involvement in the fascists is quite out of proportion’. The current leaders of the British National Party, John Tyndall and his deputy Richard Edmonds, reflect a similar class composition, whatever the origins of their foot soldiers.
Across the Atlantic the Louisiana senator, David Duke, the Klu Klux Klan leader, was elected to the state house of representatives, not from a working class ‘white flight’ suburb but from a prosperous middle class area. This is not to say that the fascists cannot gain support among the working class or the unemployed. Nonna Mayer notes of the Front National:
Starting from 1986, it has begun to win over layers which were less right wing and more popular, in the wake of disappointment with the Socialist government. Its electorate diversified. The case of Paris is very significant in this respect: in the 1984 European elections, the FN vote was above all in the wealthier neighbourhoods in the west; starting from 1986, it was the opposite, and the FN bastions moved towards the popular neighbourhoods in the east of the city.
This challenge even extends into St Denis, the historic Communist controlled ‘red belt’ of the city. Yet two facts from Mayer’s survey also show the basis for opposition to Le Pen:
The people who live close to the estates and blocks with a strong immigrant concentration are more likely to vote for the FN than those who live with immigrants.. .It was among the youth that the FN lists registered their worst scores. There is for the most part an inverse relation between youth and voting for the FN.
The argument about the base of fascism is important. The social base of fascism is the middle layers in society. This does not mean all members of Nazi organisations are exclusively drawn from the petty bourgeoisie. But the political programme and ideology of the Nazis express their experiences and grievances. Rejecting both organised labour and capital – which is usually equated with a particular section like the big banks or the multinationals – they blame social problems on a particular scapegoat such as Jews, blacks or migrant workers. On this basis they can mobilise people who are worst hit by recession and are left hopeless by the lack of any response by the working class. This is particularly true of the unemployed.
It also means that where there is a powerful mobilisation against the ruling class these same people can be pulled behind it. That was true in the public sector strikes of 1992 and the engineering disputes of 1993 in Germany and with the student struggles in France in December 1986 and the rail strike in January 1987, when the fascists were simply eclipsed by events. [177]
 
ii) Call things by their right names. To use the term ‘fascist’ to describe the European Nazis is controversial. Richard Stoss, author of Politics Against Democracy: Right Wing Extremism in West Germany, [178] prefers to use the term ‘right wing extremist’. The German Office for the Protection of the Constitution does not even regard them as ‘extreme right’! [179] In France the main revolutionary organisation, Lutte Ouvrière, describes the Front National merely as ‘an electoral far right organisation’. [180]
Such arguments claim that the terms ‘fascist’ or ‘Nazi’ can only be applied to the smaller groups of thugs and skinheads who openly claim that affiliation, pointing to the absence of any paramilitary wing in organisations like the Republikaner or the Front National. Others on the left argue in similar vein that fascism today centres exclusively on terror rather than the attempt to build the sort of mass movements seen in the 1930s. But whilst the Republikaner or the Front National wish to distance themselves for the moment from attacks like that in Solingen in 1993 which killed six members of a Turkish family or the attack on the Jewish graveyard in Carpentras, southern France, in May 1990, this should not blind us to their true nature. As Rick Kuhn argues:
Currently the most successful fascist organisations in Germany concentrate on electoral tactics, which were also employed by the fascist organisations of the 1920s and 1930s, though not to the exclusion of public mobilisations. They play down, if in ambiguous terms, associations with pre- or World War Two fascism. Emphasis on electoral or violent methods is, however, a matter of tactics rather than strategy. The same political outlook, social base and orientation often underlie both uncouth skinhead political thuggery and the suit wearing respectability of much of the electoralist extreme right ... The organisations which constitute the two tactical faces of contemporary fascism also share members. [181]
Glyn Ford’s examination of the German Nazis argues:
Between the REP, the Deutsche Allianz, the Deutsche Volksunion and violent groups like the Freiheitliche Arbeiter Partei (FAP) and the Nationalistische Front (NF) there are proven connections. Frequently, these ‘militant’ organisations provide security for meetings of the other parties. [182]
In France many of these more ‘militant’ groups have been marginalised by the FN’s rise. Yet clear links emerge from the various cases of racial attacks on North Africans, black people and Jews which have come before the French courts. The small, openly Nazi, Parti Nationalist Français et Europeen (PNFE), which has links with the British National Party and stands for ‘a strong and hierarchical New Order, based on the nationalist ideal, social justice and racial awareness’, [183] calls for a vote for the FN.
Le Pen has gone furthest in cultivating an image of respectability. But at FN rallies speeches of Petain, anti-semitic tracts and Hitlerite literature and records are on sale while the SOFRES polling agency found in a 1984 survey of the FN’s membership that ‘a quarter of them were in favour of a coup to gain power’. [184]
Part of the need for this discretion is the legacy left by the Holocaust which Le Pen, the Republikaner and all the Nazi groups are determined to deny occurred. Again these links are there to be discovered as in this incident reported by the New Statesman:
An ex-Gestapo agent, whose life has been spent in the service of the extreme right, is poised to emerge as head of a key French regional government after the regional elections on 22 March. His name is Paul Malaguti and he heads the ticket of the neo-Nazi National Front party in the region round Bourges in the centre of France. As a 17 year old, Malaguti enrolled as a Gestapo agent in 1944 in Cannes and stood guard while the Gestapo shot resistance fighters. [185]
This refusal to clearly label the respectable face of fascism by its true name rests on a confusion between the political mask they choose to wear in public and their fundamental objectives, which remain partly hidden. To win votes and to get the traditional parties of the right to accept them as legitimate partners they stress ‘traditional Christian values’ – of fatherland, security, law and order. That is why it is important to link them clearly with their ideological, thuggish outriders.
It is also important to understand that fascism will not correspond to its German or Italian pre-war equivalents. Today’s fascists have to be circumspect about adopting the imagery associated with Hitler and Mussolini. Above all, as nationalists they have to adopt the appropriate symbolism. In this there is continuity with the fascists of the 1930s. Like de la Rocque, Le Pen marches on May Day to the statue of Joan of Arc. French fascism in the 1930s was rooted in the Dreyfussard, Catholic, anti-republican tradition from which it recruited its support.
The important point to focus on is the relationship between the openly Nazi groups, the ‘respectable fascists’, the traditional conservative parties and the state. Firstly there is a mutually reinforcing relationship between the openly Nazi groups and the ‘respectable fascists’. The attacks of the Nazi thugs create a political atmosphere in which the ‘respectable fascists’ appear as the lesser evil, while the racism of the ‘respectable Nazis’ provides a cover for acts of violence.
Meanwhile, the existence of Nazi organisations, ‘respectable’ or otherwise, can shift the whole political spectrum to the right, allowing racism and parts of the far right political programme to emerge in the mainstream of political argument. Of course, this process can also proceed from the opposite starting point – mainstream conservative politicians can make right wing populist speeches – like Enoch Powell’s ‘rivers of blood’ speech, Thatcher’s ‘swamping’ comments or more recently, Winston Churchill’s outburst on immigration – and so, without becoming fascists themselves, make Nazi ideas more acceptable.
Finally, all this can produce a climate where the state itself enters into the chain of events. Immigration controls, deportations and the whole structure of state racism give credibility to the Nazis’ propaganda.
The way to break this chain is to break its first link. Nazi politicians should be ruthlessly exposed as such. The links between the ‘respectable Nazis’ and the thugs should be highlighted. The thugs themselves should be driven off the streets. The conservative politicians who are willing to come out with racist policies, while not Nazis, should be branded as people who are willing to encourage a political climate in which the Nazis can grow. By this means we can sever a chain which will otherwise pull the whole political structure to the right and increase the chance of the Nazis themselves taking power.
 
iii) Physically confront the Nazis. Behind the rise of Le Pen lies the French left’s consistent refusal to confront the Front National. During the 1980s the main anti-racist organisation was content to simply hold anti-racist concerts and festivals. That is no bad thing in itself, but in the absence of action being taken to wipe out FN slogans, to counter racist attacks and marches, it is not enough. Confrontation works. In 1992 the Front National thought it would emerge from the regional elections as the biggest party in Le Pen’s adopted base of Provence-Alpes-Cote d’Azur. This failed to materialise:
What happened? In the course of the two months preceding the elections, there was an active campaign against the FN. Systematically, its meetings were harassed, prevented, numerous meetings were forbidden because of public order difficulties, and often there were violent confrontations between militants of the FN and anti-fascist militants. [186]
The violent fascist core of the FN became all too apparent when Le Pen was opposed directly. But the Front National has been allowed to grow largely free from such a challenge. That has allowed it to consolidate its support. In 1986 and 1987 Le Pen had to select candidates who were loosely in agreement with him. Many subsequently defected. Today Le Pen has succeeded in building a coherent party.
The example of Germany between 1966 and 1969 and again between 1977 and 1979 is also instructive. In 1966 the Nationaldemokratische Partei Deutschlands (NPD) entered parliament in several states with between 5.8 and 9.8 percent of the vote. Militant anti-fascist mobilisations confronted NPD rallies, meetings and marches throughout 1968. In the 1969 Federal elections the NPD were forced as a result to call off all large public meetings. Their vote fell to 4.3 percent, under the five percent quota which would have given them seats in parliament. [187]
Seeking to profit from a recession, the NPD attempted to establish a base particularly in Frankfurt with a series of marches and rallies. At this stage the NPD was prevented from making an electoral breakthrough. Militant demonstrations, notably those of 7,000 people on 17 June 1977 and of 50,000 on 17 June 1979, prevented the NPD from marching. [188]
In Britain in the second half of the 1970s the National Front attempted to build on a recession, disillusionment with a Labour government and Labour’s pandering to racism, by presenting the NF as a respectable alternative. In 1976 the NF won 16.2 percent of the vote in the West Bromwich by-election, while in the following year’s elections for the Greater London Council it took 119,000 votes and pushed the Liberals into fourth place overall.
The NF embarked on a series of marches, its veteran Nazi leader, John Tyndall, explaining, believe that our great marches, with drums and flags and banner, have a hypnotic effect on the public and an immense effect in solidifying the allegiance of our followers.’ [189]
The Labour Party, the Jewish Board of Deputies, the Communist Party and others all argued against confrontation. There was a reluctance to pin the Nazi label on the NF. Events culminated in August 1977 in Lewisham where the Nazis planned to march. The local Labour Party and the Communist Party called a march in the opposite direction from the Nazis. The Socialist Workers Party organised a counter- demonstration of 5,000, including large numbers of local black youth, which dispersed the NF march. The effect was electrifying, encouraging larger and larger numbers to take a clear stand, swelling anti-racist protests and allowing the SWP to play a central role in launching the mass membership Anti Nazi League.
A number of people have argued that the NF was not undercut by the ANL, but rather by Margaret Thatcher’s ability to attract its racist support with her speech claiming British people ‘might be swamped by people with a different culture’. [190] But chronology is against this view. Thatcher’s speech was made in 1978. Yet that was the year which saw not just the two massive ANL carnivals but also, in east London’s Brick Lane, major mobilisations in defence of the Bangladeshi community which would peak with 8,000 striking locally against the racists. During the 1979 election 5,000 anti-Nazis prevented an NF march in Leicester and a massive protest against an NF rally in Southall saw SWP member Blair Peach killed by the police. In Southall 15,000 marched in his honour and 13 national trade union banners plus his own teachers’ union banner attended his funeral. The NF vote held up in east London.
In November 1980 the ANL had to mobilise 4,000 people against the British Movement – the NF’s hardline rival – in Paddington. In April 1980 it mobilised against Nazis on the terraces of West Ham football club, mobilised 2,000 in July against the Nazis in Oxford, and organised a campaign in Harrogate to remove an NF leader, Andrew Brons, from his lecturing post. In August the ANL distributed 50,000 leaflets in one day after a racist murder in Coventry and finally that same month organised the 40,000 strong Northern Carnival Against Racism in Leeds, the ‘youngest and most working class’ according to Socialist Worker. Thus it was after Thatcher’s speech that the Nazis’ activity peaked and later still that the ANL finally drove them underground. Thatcher herself felt restrained about following that speech up with further such statements because of the popular anti-racist mood.
Finally, let us examine the idea that the election of Margaret Thatcher was a barrier to the growth of the Nazis. This kind of argument has ancestors. The German SPD argued that electing Field Marshal Hindenburg would block Hitler’s rise to power. Yet it was Hindenburg who handed power to Hitler. More recently, France’s President Mitterrand persuaded the Socialist Party to withdraw in Marseilles in favour of the millionaire Bernard Tapie, arguing he would tap into Le Pen’s support. He didn’t. The truth is that Nazis are not appeased when establishment politicians accommodate to racist and fascist ideas. On the contrary, they become more confident. The only thing that stops the Nazis is outright opposition – and it was the outright opposition of the ANL which broke the Nazis in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Another criticism of the ANL is that its demonstrations did not involve the self organisation of the black communities. Yet the effect of powerful ANL and anti-racist mobilisations was to throw up Asian Youth Movements in Lancashire, Bradford and Southall, and led to the development of widespread Bengali organisation in Brick Lane, the effects of which continue.
 
iv) Don’t rely on establishment politicians or labour leaders. The attempts by centre right and Social Democratic parties to curb the growth of racism and the new Nazis by limiting asylum rights and accepting the idea that their respective country is overcrowded can only stoke the fires of racism and fascism. Yet there are still those, like historian Martin Kitchen, who argue in defence of 1930s style People’s Fronts with ‘the anti-fascist wing of the national bourgeoisie’. [191] This is a conclusion which flies in the face of all the contemporary evidence.
In 1991 the ruling Christian Democratic government in Germany was performing badly at the polls and faced protests by western miners and eastern workers in defence of jobs and conditions. In the run up to the local elections in Bremen the Christian Democrats launched a major campaign seeking to stop refugees entering the city. The ruling SPD on the city council capitulated to the argument that Bremen was being overrun with asylum seekers. In the subsequent election they lost control. The Deutsche Volksunion increased its representation from one seat to six.
In France the rise of the Front National has led to a shift rightwards in political attitudes. At local level the traditional conservative parties, the Rassemblement pour la Republique and the Union pour la Democratie Française have made informal pacts with the FN, helping their electoral advance. On a wider level a survey in Le Monde found in October that one in three French people agreed with the FN’s ideas.
In March 1993 the right returned to office after 12 years of Socialist government (with one brief period of right wing rule in 1986–7). One report summed up the first few months of their government:
The most significant event has been the introduction of anti-immigration laws and the restriction of citizenship, part of the process, last attempted by the Vichy government, to dismantle the Revolutionary concept of a generous land of refuge.. The anti-immigration laws, however, are an unscrupulous attempt to persuade the electorate that much of the National Front’s France for the French’ philosophy is not only good for the country but for the presidential ambitions of the interior minister, Charles Pasqua. [192]
In France the Socialist Party, which had won the presidential elections in 1981 on a wave of enthusiasm, found that the unpopularity of their policies was eroding their support and reacted by blaming immigrants. In 1989 President Mitterrand stated that a ‘threshold of tolerance’ had been reached in the 1970s over immigration. [193] Following inner city riots in 1991 his prime minister talked of chartering special planes to deport asylum seekers and illegal immigrants. None of this undercut Le Pen’s support. Instead he was right when he retorted to Cresson that ‘people always prefer the original to the copy’.
A similar thing has been happening across Europe with governments hurrying through laws restricting asylum rights, thereby encouraging the racist argument that refugees are to blame for unemployment, bad housing and lack of services.
Bourgeois politicians can be forced to distance themselves from the Nazis, and even intimidated from playing the racist card, by mass working class mobilisation. But they cannot be relied on to oppose the Nazis. Attempts to do so will only undermine effective anti-Nazi movements.
 
v) For the united front, against both ultra-leftism and popular fronts. Many looking at developments in Europe must sense a terrible inevitability about the nationalism and racism which have emerged in the early 1990s. But the bitterness at the base of society does not always flow in one direction.
Rostock, the scene of the Nazi pogrom, was also the scene of a shipyard occupation. Germany has seen significant disputes uniting German and migrant workers. Across Italy, Spain and Britain we have seen huge upheavals in response to the austerity measures introduced in the autumn of 1992 after the first collapse in the European Monetary System. In Italy there has been something of a rebirth of left wing ideas and organisation. [194] In September a series of regional strikes brought a total of ten million workers onto the streets whilst a renewed bombing campaign widely believed to be connected to the secret services brought spontaneous demonstrations. In Milan the left led demonstration in response to the bombing dwarfed the Leagues’ protest which attempted to divert that anger.
The rise of the Nazis has also provoked huge demonstrations across Europe. In 1991 in March 120,000 demonstrated in Brussels against racism and the rise of the Vlaams Blok. At the turn of 1992–3, 500,000 marched in Munich against Nazi terror, 100,000 in Hanover and 200,000 in Berlin. The demonstrations in Germany spilled over into Austria, fuelling opposition to Haider’s FPO.
But, paradoxically, this rebirth of struggle has been accompanied by a continual pessimism on the organised left. Much of the left is scarred by the experience of defeat in the 1980s and believes that it must always remain an isolated minority. Thus the German Autonomists believe that the mass of the German population are incapable of confronting fascism because they are compromised by racism. For them the task of confronting the Nazis is one which can only involve the committed minority in actions which carry echoes of the KPD’s ‘squadism’ of the 1930s. In Britain, which thus far has not seen a similar growth of Nazi organisation, many on the left believe that white working class communities are ‘no go areas’ for anti-racists for similar reasons.
But pessimism need not have ultra-left results. It can also lead to accommodation with reformist leaders reminiscent of the popular front politics of the 1930s. In France the main anti-racist organisation, SOS Racisme, was run during the 1980s under the leadership of Harlem Desir who was linked to President Mitterrand and the ruling Socialist Party. It argued against physically confronting the fascists. Instead it organised a series of festivals which were seen as a means of educating people about racism. In Germany the ‘chain of light’ protests at the close of 1992 and in Rome the ‘hands across the city’ protest are symbolic actions organised by those who do not see the need to combine such mass actions with physical confrontation of the Nazis. In Britain the Anti Racist Alliance has gone out of its way to court Tory MPs, winning the sponsorship of one and forming warm relations with another, ex-minister Peter Bottomley.
Such strategies have consequences. After the murder of a young black school student, Stephen Lawrence, in the vicinity of the British National Party’s headquarters mainly black demonstrators vented their anger on the Nazis’ lair. Some figures on the left attacked the demonstration for ‘cynically exploiting local feeling about racist murders...with a flagrant disregard for people’s safety’. They went on to attack ‘violence’ in general, failing to distinguish between a brutal racist murder and the use of force to prevent the murderers continuing to organise in the area.
This is to dismiss many of the lessons of the 1930s – of the need for mass united action involving working people who do not agree on every issue of general politics.
 
vi) The struggle against fascism is also the struggle for socialism. Although it is wrong to insist that people must become revolutionaries, or even socialists, before they can fight the Nazis, it is also equally wrong not to see the connection between the struggle against capitalism and the struggle against the Nazis. Stopping the Nazis from organising is a crucial task, but it is only the tip of the iceberg.
No matter how many Nazi marches or meetings we prevent, the Nazis will find an echo in a society which continually produces recessions and wars, unemployment, poor housing and ill health for large sections of the population. Socialists must therefore avoid seeing the battle against fascism too narrowly. To unite workers in defence of a local hospital, against poor housing, in the fight for jobs and for better education is, apart from anything else, to show that working class self activity can, provide a better solution than the Nazis to the most pressing problems of people’s lives.
But to play a part in such struggles requires politics that go beyond simple anti-fascism. It requires socialist politics. The socialist struggle against capitalism is therefore the only struggle that can finally rid us of the nightmare of fascism.
We should not underestimate how acute the need for such politics has already become. Few could have predicted events thus far into the 1990s: the rise of fascism, war in former Yugoslavia and the re-emergence of nationalism across eastern and central Europe. The film of events is running more slowly than in the 1930s. That gives us more time to correct our mistakes than the left had in Germany between 1929 and 1933. But the film is running.
The possibilities exist for events to occur similar to those in France in the 1930s, where the fascist threat drew forth a response from the working class which grew over into an offensive against capital itself. The scale of the anti-racist protests, the mass strikes which shook Germany, Greece and Italy in 1992 and 1993, and the disintegration of Britain’s Tory government show the potential. As that process develops we would do well to remember the words of French socialist historian Daniel Guerin, ‘Fascism will be our punishment if we let the hour of socialism pass.’

Notes
1. N.I. O’Sullivan, Fascism (J.M. Dent & Sons, 1983), p. 68.
2. G. Lichtheim, A Short History Of Socialism (Fontana Collins, 1975), p. 326.
3. J. Stalin, Works, pp. 295–296.
4. G. Williams, Proletarian Order (Pluto Press, 1975), pp. 12–22.
5. A. Gramsci, Writings 1921–1926 (Lawrence and Wishart, 1978), p. 346.
6. G. Williams, op. cit., p. 49.
7. Ibid., p. 55.
8. A. Lyttelton, The Seizure of Power: Fascism in Italy 1919–1929 (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1983), p. 48 – the other group this author draws attention to as providing recruits at this stage for the blackshirts were students.
9. P. Spriano, The Occupation of the Factories (Pluto Press, 1975), p. 188.
10. G. Williams, op. cit., p. 137.
11. Ibid., p. 145.
12. P. Spriano, op. cit., p. 69.
13. G. Carocci, Italian Fascism (Penguin, 1975), p. 19.
14. P. Spriano, op. cit., p. 111.
15. D. Guerin, Fascism and Big Business (Pathfinder, 1973), p. 49.
16. Ibid., p. 29.
17. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., p. 38.
18. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 103.
19. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., p. 59.
20. Ibid., p. 59.
21. Ibid., p. 60.
22. G. Williams, op. cit., p. 292.
23. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., p. 209.
24. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 33.
25. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., p. 97.
26. Ibid., p. 86.
27. Ibid., p. 95.
28. Ibid., pp. 68–69.
29. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 61.
30. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., p. 304.
31. Ibid., p. 219.
32. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 65 – Mussolini was a long standing atheist.
33. Guardian, 11 August 1993, carried an article that Mussolini himself was of Arab descent!
34. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 109.
35. A. Gramsci, op. cit., p. 466.
36. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol 42 (Lawrence and Wishart, 1977), p. 326.
37. G. Williams, op. cit., p. 295.
38. Figures from Q. Hoare’s introduction to A. Gramsci, op. cit., p. x.
39. G. Williams, op. cit., p. 298.
40. Q. Hoare, op. cit.
41. G. Williams, op. cit., p. 300.
42. A. Gramsci, op. cit., p. 269–270.
43. A. Bordiga, L’Ordine Nuovo, 22 July 1922, cited by Q. Hoare, op. cit.
44. A. Gramsci, op. cit., p. 35.
45. Quoted in D. Beetham, Marxists in the Face of Fascism (Manchester University Press, 1983), p. 118.
46. Ibid., p. 133.
47. A. Gramsci, op. cit., p. 380.
48. D. Beetham, op. cit., p. 112.
49. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., p. 297.
50. G. Williams, op. cit., p. 301.
51. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., p. 142.
52. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 123.
53. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., pl46.
54. Ibid., p. 241.
55. G. Carocci, op. cit., pp. 32–33.
56. A. Gramsci, op. cit., p. 259.
57. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., p. 248.
58. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 126.
59. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., 242.
60. Ibid., p. 294.
61. Ibid.,p. 302.
62. A. Mayer, Why Did the Heavens Not Darken (Verso, 1990), p. 19.
63. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 45.
64. L. Trotsky, The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (Pathfinder, 1972), p. 399.
65. L. Trotsky, Stalin, Vol. 2 (Panther History, 1969), p. 244.
66. A. Lyttelton, op. cit., p. 433.
67. E.B. Wheaton, The Nazi Revolution 1933–1935 (Anchor, 1969), p. 93.
68. E.H. Carr, Twilight of the Comintern (Pantheon, 1982), p. 51.
69. B. Fowkes, Communism in Germany Under the Weimar Republic (Macmillan, 1984), p. 174.
70. O. Hippe, And Red Is the Colour of Our Flag (Index Books, 1991), p. 112.
71. E.H. Carr, op. cit., p. 58.
72. Ibid., p. 59.
73. B. Fowkes, op. cit., p. 168.
74. G. Jungclas, The Tragedy Of the German Proletariat, in Fifty Years of World Revolution (Pathfinder Press, 1971), pp. 123–124.
75. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 112.
76. Ibid., p. 122.
77. F. Claudin, The Communist Movement from Comintern to Cominform (Monthly Review Press, 1975), p. 165.
78. G. Jungclas, op. cit., p. 125.
79. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 127.
80. Ibid., p. 127.
81. Ibid., p. 129.
82. B. Fowkes, op. cit., p. 174.
83. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 184.
84. E. Fromm, The Working Class in Weimar Germany: A Psychological and Sociological Study (Berg Publishers, 1984), p. 77.
85. E. Rosenhaft, Beating the Fascists? The German Communists and Political Violence 1929–1933 (Cambridge Press, 1983), p. 178.
86. E. Fromm, op. cit., p. 103.
87. D. Guerin, op. cit., p. 59.
88. E. Rosenhaft, op. cit., p. 52.
89. E. Fromm, op. cit., p. 110.
90. L. Trotsky, op. cit., p. 125.
91. A. Mayer, op. cit., p. 100.
92. Degras, The Communist International (1919–1943): Documents (OUP, London 1956–1965), vol. 2, p. 139.
93. F. Claudin, op. cit., p. 89.
94. E.H. Carr, op. cit., pp. 7 and 45.
95. Ibid., p. 51.
96. D. Beetham, op. cit., p. 162 – the SAP, the Sozialistische Arbeiter Partei, was a left wing breakaway from the SPD in 1931 which wanted a united fight against the Nazis. The Brandler group had been expelled earlier from the KPD.
97. B. Fowkes, op. cit., p. 162.
98. E. Rosenhaft, op. cit., p. 7.
99. Ibid., p. 26.
100. Ibid., p. 45.
101. Horst Wessel was a pimp who was murdered by gangsters. The Nazis then enshrined him as a party martyr.
102. E. Rosenhaft, op. cit., p. 21.
103. Ibid., p. 1Ol.
104. Ibid., p. 108.
105. Ibid., p. 26–27.
106. Ibid., pp. 111–112, my emphasis.
107. L. Trotsky, op. cit., p. 125.
108. Ibid., p. 144.
109. C. Harman, The Lost Revolution – Germany 1918 to 1923 (Bookmarks, 1982).
110. L. Trotsky, op. cit., p. 279.
111. Ibid., p. 144.
112. L. Trotsky, Whither France (Merit Publishers, 1968).
113. L. Trotsky, Writings 1939–1940 (Pathfinder Press, 1977), p. 412.
114. L. Trotsky, The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (Pathfinder, 1987), p. 128.
115. L. Trotsky, The First Five Years of the Communist International, Vol. 2 (New Park Publications, 1953), pp. 92 and 95–96.
116. E. Rosenhaft, op. cit., p. 209–210.
117. L. Trotsky, Writings 1933–34, p. 238.
118. A. Home, To Lose a Battle: France 1940 (Penguin, 1979), p. 89.
119. ‘Marraus expressed an endless series of hates including the Revolution, the Republic, democracy, Parliament, the proletariat, free education and all forms of social justice.’ P. Webster, Pétain’s Crime (Papermac, 1992), p. 20.
120. A Home, op. cit., p. 93. In reality de la Rocque had refused to collaborate with Action Française and had led his men away from the Assembly but his organisation would reap the greatest gains from this failed putsch.
121. Ibid., p. 93. In reality he had refused to collaborate with the other rightists and had marched his men away from the Assembly, but the Croix de Feu benefited most from the failed putsch.
122. J. Jackson, The Popular Front In France, Defending Democracy 1934–1938 (Cambridge University Press, 1988), p. 20.
123. Ibid., p. 3.
124. J. Danos and M. Gibelin, June ’36 (Bookmarks, 1986), p. 35.
125. J. Jackson, op. cit., p. 22.
126. J. Danos and M. Gibelin, op. cit., p. 32.
127. Ibid., p. 33.
128. Ibid., p. 35.
129. J. Jackson, op. cit., p. 29.
130. Ibid., p. 31.
131. F. Claudin, op. cit., 202.
132. J. Stalin, Works, Vol. 13, (Lawrence and Wishart, 1953–55) p. 298–312.
133. J. Danos and M. Gibelin, p. 39.
134. L. Trotsky, Writings 1934–1935, p. 35.(Pathfinder, 1979).
135. L. Trotsky, Whither France.
136. J. Jackson, op. cit., p. 50.
137. Ibid., p. 85.
138. Ibid., p. 231.
139. Ibid., p. 252.
140. J. Danos and M. Gibelin, op. cit., p. 49.
141. J. Jackson, op. cit., p. 141.
142. J. Danos and M. Gibelin, op. cit., p. 202.
143. L. Trotsky, Whither France, p. 149.
144. F. Claudin, op. cit., p. 201.
145. J. Jackson, op. cit., p. 152.
146. F. Claudin, op. cit., p. 208.
147. J. Jackson, op. cit., 225.
148. Ibid., p. 111.
149. F. Claudin, op. cit., p. 208.
150. J. Jackson, op. cit., p. 225.
151. L. Trotsky, op. cit., pp. 17–18.
152. L. Trotsky, Writings Supplement, 1929–1933, (Pathfinder, 1979), p. 208.
153. L. Trotsky, Writings Supplement 1934–1940, (Pathfinder, 1979), p. 458.
154. L. Trotsky, Whither France, p. 31.
155. Y. Craipeau, quoted I. Birchall, Too Much, Too Little, Too Late: Left Social Democracy in the French Popular Front, International Socialism 13, Summer 1981.
156. L. Trotsky, The Crisis of the French Section 1935–36 (Pathfinder Press, 1977), p. 214.
157. G. Ford, Fascist Europe (Pluto Press, 1992), p. xxi.
158. P. Ginsborg, A History of Contemporary Italy (Penguin, 1990), p. 421.
159. W. Herz, Die Zeit, 14 August 1992.
160. Quoted by R. Kuhn from the Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany Information Service, Canberra, 24 September 1992.
161. Interview with Volkhard Mosler, Socialist Review, April 1993.
162. S. Padgett and W. Paterson, The Rise & Fall of the West German Left, New Left Review 186, March-April 1991.
163. Interview with Volkhard Mosler, op. cit.
164. Ibid.
165. G. Ford, op. cit., p. xiii.
166. Ibid., p. 19.
167. Le Monde, 10 February 1990.
168. Guardian, 19 June 1993.
169. L. Abse, New Left Review 199.
170. P. Ginsborg, op. cit., p. 144.
171. G. Ford, op. cit., p. 27.
172. Searchlight, no. 211, January 1993.
173. National Bank Report 1992.
174. Just days earlier on 4 August the interior minister told the Federal parliament that Germany’s ‘capacity to absorb newcomers ... had been strained to the limit by the misuse of the asylum law’. Later in August, after Rostock, the SPD national leadership dropped its opposition to revisal of the asylum law. This was approved by a special SPD conference in November.
175. G. Ford, op. cit., pl4.
176. C. Sparks, Fascism And The Working Class – The National Front Today, International Socialism 3, Winter 1978–79.
177. The French student struggles were marked by a high degree of unity between whites, North Africans and blacks, reinforced by the police murder of 20 year old Abdel Oussekine.
178. R. Stoss, Politics against Democracy: Right Wing Extremism in West Germany, (Berg, 1991).
179. G. Ford, op. cit., p. xvii.
180. 1991 Conference Resolution, The Situation in France – the Political Situation, Lutte De Classe, January 1992. Later that month an editorial in the newspaper, Lutte Ouvriere, compared the FN to the Islamic fundamentalists in Algeria, with the headline, Whether It Is in the Name of the FIS or of Le Pen It Is the Same Evil. Lutte Ouvriere had earlier in late 1989 refused to defend two Muslim women in Criel, northern France, who were refused entry to their school because they wore headscarves. This became a cause celebre with Le Pen waging a massive campaign claiming France was on the verge of becoming an ‘Islamic nation’.
181. R. Kuhn, Fascism In Germany Today, discussion paper, Department of Political Science, Australian National University, Canberra, April 1993.
182. G. Ford, op. cit., p. xvi.
183. Ibid., p. 23.
184. Interview with Nonna Mayer, Director of Research at the National Centre of Scientific Research (CNRS) in the Centre for the Study of French Political Life, International Viewpoint, 8 June 1992.
185. D. McShane, New Statesman, 13 March 1992.
186. Interview with Nonna Mayer.
187. W. Halbauer and V. Mosler, Stoppt die Nazis, Sozialistische Arbeitergruppe (Hanover 1991), pp. 41–43.
188. Ibid., pp. 43–44.
189. Spearhead 87, September 1975. Tyndall is now leader of the British National Party.
190. For instance see P. Gilroy, There Ain’t No Black in the Union Jack (Routledge, 1992), p. 135.
191. M. Kitchen, Fascism (London 1992), p. 78.
192. P. Webster, Guardian, 12 August 1993.
193. Le Monde, 24 November 1989.
194. See J. Foot, Letter From Italy, Socialist Review, July/August 1993.
 



A Stomach for Dissent
John and Mary Postgate
Keele University Press £18
Few readers of Socialist Review will be familiar with the name Raymond Postgate. If you’ve heard of him it will either be as the joint author of the excellent history of England, The Common People, or as the founder of The Good Food Guide. This biography by Raymond’s son and his wife helps throw light on a chapter of British socialism which has long since passed by.
Born into the privileged world of Cambridge at the close of the last century, his father was a professor of Latin and Greek at the university. Raymond Postgate was won to socialism after the family moved to Liverpool where he experienced the realities of industrial capitalism and the strikes which swept the city prior to the First World War. Nothing in his upper middle class life and education could explain what he was witnessing. Postgate joined the Independent Labour Party, but his socialism was a mishmash of different ideas.
In 1915 Postgate went to Oxford University. Among his friends was a young Anglo-Indian socialist intellectual, Rajani Palme Dutt, who became a strong supporter of the Bolsheviks and the key power broker in the British Communist Party. Along with many of his friends, Postgate refused to be conscripted and was jailed as a conscientious objector.
Released from jail, Postgate responded enthusiastically to the Russian Revolution in 1917, publishing a booklet, The International During the War, which Lenin praised to H.G. Wells. The period from his release until the failure of the General Strike in 1926 is the most interesting part of this book.
Postgate had fallen in love and married the left Labour MP George Lansbury’s daughter, Daisy. Born and brought up in London’s East End, Daisy had been involved with her father and Sylvia Pankhurst in their daily agitation amongst the people of this poverty stricken area. The newlyweds came from very different backgrounds. Raymond found a job on Lansbury’s Daily Herald. When in May 1918 the Daily Herald printed documents liberated by the Bolsheviks from the Tsar’s archives, sales reached 250,000.
Yet this was still a world in which all sorts of divergent views mixed. The ‘1917 Club’ brought Labour leader Ramsay MacDonald and Communist supporters together in London’s Soho. Postgate became a founder member of the newly formed Communist Party in 1920, becoming assistant editor and then editor of its first publication, The Communist.
Reflecting the socialist world from which it was spawned, The Communist was itself a mixture of different ideas. Postgate himself remained a pacifist and could not accept the discipline of the Communist Party as it was brought more and more into line with the demands of Bolshevik organisation, so in 1922 he quit the party.
The sections of Postgate’s diary covering the General Strike are excellent. You get a feeling for the spirit of the rank and file and the militancy which dominated the East End.
Yet the failure of the General Strike marked a turning point for Postgate. Until then he had looked to a mixture of direct action and parliament to achieve change. From the General Strike onwards his sights were on parliamentary politics. The Second World War and the implementation of tight state controls strengthened Postgate’s increasingly Fabian (right-wing Labour) politics of parliamentary and municipal reform.
His founding of The Good Food Guide was centred on educating people about food – perfectly laudable but it fitted neatly with Fabian ideas.
This book is part biography and part memoir. As such it often does not throw much light on Postgate’s politics and understates his own radicalism. Throughout the book the working class features side stage.
Postgate himself recognised his own lack of contact with workers, feeling he’d only managed to build relationships with ordinary people while serving in the Home Guard during the Second World War.
Today it would be difficult to find people familiar with his writings or those of his friends like G.D.H. Cole, John Strachey, Harold Laski and H.N. Brailsford. The book is a useful introduction to a socialist world inhabited by Postgate which has been lost.
 






The divisions inside the Tory Party threaten to bring the government down. Chris Bambery looks at how the party’s fortunes follow those of British capitalism and how shallow the Thatcher revolution really was



Who are the Tories? The simple answer is that they are the party of the British ruling class. But it is the party of the British ruling class in decline. At the last election a Financial Times survey showed that 93 percent of Britain’s bosses wanted the Tories to win, despite the massive effort put in by Labour to court the City of London and big business.
The Tories have governed Britain for the bulk of this century. Yet as the political expression of the ruling class the party has shown great adaptability. It adapted to the extension of the vote to the working class. After the Second World War it accepted a new ruling class consensus based on Keynesian economics, the welfare state and incorporation of the trade union leaders into the lower echelons of the political system. When that consensus broke down Thatcher was able to develop policies begun by Jim Callaghan’s Labour government into a new strategy for the ruling class.
The National Union of Conservative and Constitutional Associations was formed in 1867 (in 1885 it was renamed the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations). The vote had just been extended to limited numbers of working class men following mass protests. The Tories had rallied the more backward sections of the landowners in support of the monarchy and the Church of England. Their other mainstay was the brewers and publicans (the Tories’ opponents disapproved of the drinks trade). They were marginalised and split.
The dominant party of British capitalism until the 1870s was the Liberal Party, which backed free trade and low levels of state spending. This corresponded to Britain’s position as the dominant world manufacturing economy. Between 1848 and 1874 the Liberals held office with just two brief interruptions. From 1841 until 1874 the Tories never won a general election. Britain’s trade unions loyally backed the Liberals.
Yet from 1875 until 1906 the Tories were in office for all but eight years. What happened to bring about this sea change in the fortunes of the two parties?
In 1870 Britain still produced a third of all the world’s manufacturing goods. Over the next 40 years it was outstripped by both the US and Germany in a period of technological change which centred on steel, electricity and machine tools. By 1915 Britain produced just 15 percent of the world’s manufactured goods. From the 1880s on there was also a revival of working class unrest which began to break workers from the Liberals.
At the same time there was a flight of wealth and property from the liberals to the Tories. Labour historian James Hinton notes:
‘Satisfied by the administrative reforms of [Liberal prime minister] Gladstone’s first ministry (1868–74); alarmed by the spectre of socialism, by industrial depression, by the rise of competing imperialisms; aware that they now had more to lose than gain by continuing the campaign against aristocratic privilege, large numbers of middle class voters turned to the Conservatives as the party of order, stability and national greatness.’
Until 1865 three quarters of Tory seats were in the English county shires. Over the next 30 years they won Lancashire, Scotland (taking a majority of seats including Glasgow by 1900) and London (where the Tories went from no seats in 1865 to taking 51 out of 59 seats in 1895 with 86 percent of the vote). The chief weapon in the Tories’ hands was support for imperialism and in particular British rule in Ireland. Their bogeymen were Irish nationalists and socialists.
In 1886 the Liberals broke apart over the issue of home rule for Ireland. A significant section led by the Birmingham manufacturer Joseph Chamberlain saw any concessions in Ireland as undermining Britain’s empire. The Tories played on support for the union with Ireland, for Queen Victoria and the empire to build a popular base. In areas like Lancashire and the west of Scotland that meant building a close alliance with the anti-Catholic Orange Order.
When Lord Salisbury (the last of the Cecil family dynasty to head the party) entered Downing Street in 1886 he was spurred on by his former Liberal allies to unleash a major employers’ offensive. Salisbury himself always referred to socialists as ‘looters’. The Tories were prepared to use new strike breaking methods imported from the US to break working class discontent and to force up productivity and profits to equal their overseas competitors.
The change in the Tory Party was reflected in the composition of its MPs. In 1868 46 percent were great landowners and 31 percent were associated with trade and industry. By 1900 42 percent were from industry or commerce and just 29 percent from the landed elite. By 1918 two thirds of Tory MPs were businessmen or professionals. In the 1860s the bookseller W.H. Smith deserted the Liberals to win Westminster for the Tories. In 1861 the shipbuilder John Laird was elected Tory MP for Birkenhead while in the 1880s the shipbuilder Sir William Pearce was returned as Tory MP in Glasgow Govan with Orange support. By the turn of the century the Chamberlain family, Birmingham manufacturers, rose to prominence in the party. Stanley Baldwin, party leader for many of the interwar years, was the son of a West Midlands ironmaster.
The party was closely tied to industrial capital. Its Scottish secretaries up to the 1960s included steel, shipping and engineering magnates. This is still true today. The party’s board of treasurers is chaired by Charles Hambro, the merchant banker, and includes David Sieff of Marks and Spencer, Sir Philip Harris, chair of Carpetright, David Davis of metals group Johnson Matthey and Sir Nigel Mobbs of property group Slough Estates.
In the postwar years the Conservatives went along with the creation of the welfare state. They rightly perceived that such a compromise was necessary to prevent their electoral annihilation. The Tories agreed to support welfare schemes and full employment in return for Labour acceptance of the dominance of free enterprise. The Tory chancellor ‘Rab’ Butler wrote in the early 1950s that ‘modern conservatism would maintain strong central guidance on the operations of the economy’.
This deal could hold while economic growth allowed the poor to raise themselves up a bit and the wealthy to grow richer. But major economic difficulties reappeared in the 1960s and 1970s. Lack of investment was reflected in lower productivity rates than Britain’s overseas competitors. The weakness of British manufacturing meant any increase in domestic demand led to a surge in imports, creating a severe balance of payments deficit accompanied by a run on the pound.
The attempts of Harold Wilson’s 1964 Labour government to introduce a ‘technological revolution’ based on state restructuring of the economy foundered, as did the all out assault on the trade unions by his Tory successor, Ted Heath.
The Heath government collapsed in the face of trade union opposition. In August 1974 Margaret Thatcher and Sir Keith Joseph set up the Centre for Policy Studies in order to formulate a clear right wing alternative.
 
Thatcher articulated what was a new consensus in ruling class circles. As the Financial Times journalist Samuel Brittan pointed out, ‘The postwar consensus had already been fractured before the Thatcher government came to office’. The Labour government had accepted much of what would be termed ‘monetarism’ in 1976. In a letter of intent to the International Monetary Fund, the Labour chancellor, Denis Healey, had promised to reduce public spending and set targets for the reduction of public borrowing. Labour succeeded in reducing real welfare expenditure and average living standards – something which Thatcher never did.
Thatcher expressed this break with the old consensus when she said, ‘It was only in April 1974 that I was converted to Conservatism, (I had thought that I was a Conservative but now I see that I was not really one at all)’. A programme based on free market economics, minimum state intervention and the reduction of public expenditure was washed down with pure class hatred.
A report on the nationalised industries was drawn up by Nicholas Ridley. He argued that the government could choose the time and place of battle. It should build up maximum coal stocks, organise supplies of coal imports, encourage road haulage suppliers to recruit non-union drivers, introduce oil firing in all coal powered stations, ‘cut off the money supply to the strikers and make the union finance them’, and use large, mobile squads of police against pickets.
This plan was implemented in the miners’ strike of 1984–85. It flowed out of Tory thinking as articulated by Thatcher. The Chicago based economist Milton Friedman said, ‘The thing that people do not recognise is that Margaret Thatcher is not in terms of belief a Tory. She is a 19th century Liberal’. But 19th century Liberalism represented freedom in terms of trade, the market economy and a denial of the vote or many basic civil liberties to the majority of the British people.
Individual freedom had little to do with the economic freedom as preached by the Thatcherites. One of those closest to Thatcher was Sir Keith Joseph who wrote in 1979:
‘A person who cannot afford to buy food may well have a justifiable grievance ... but it would be misleading to describe his grievance as lack of freedom... liberty is liberty, not something else. And a slave is a slave, you do not set him free by feeding him.’
These ideas were developed by others on the new right. Maurice Cowling wrote in 1979, ‘If there is a class war – and there is – it is important that it should be handled with subtlety and skill’. Cowling also argues:
‘Conservatives, if they talk about freedom long enough, begin to believe that that is what they want. But it is not freedom that Conservatives want; what they want is the sort of freedom that will maintain existing inequalities or restore lost ones.’
In 1984 Roger Scruton argued, ‘Conservatism regards no citizen as possessed of a natural right that transcends his obligation to be ruled’. He added, ‘The concept of freedom cannot occupy a central place in Conservative thinking’.
Throughout the 1980s such ideas were the fashion. They were accompanied by much hype about the revolution Thatcherism had accomplished. Britain’s relative economic decline had not been halted. In 1986 Britain became for the first time since the Industrial Revolution a net importer of manufactured goods.
Trade unions were still managing to negotiate wage rises above inflation – often without conceding real productivity gains. Thatcher boasted that from 1982 onwards Britain had enjoyed the highest growth rates in Europe and big increases in productivity to match. But the growth rates only looked good if the years 1979–81 were excluded (the worst years of the first Thatcher recession). Productivity increases were largely a result of the steep increases in unemployment in those years which meant remaining workers had to maintain production levels.
Even at the supposed height of Thatcherism in 1983 the survey How Britain Votes concluded:
‘The working class has been relatively immune to the blandishments of free enterprise with an increase of only 14 percent in favour. The petty bourgeoisie and the salariat have responded more enthusiastically with increases of 31 and 32 points. The shift to the right could perhaps be described as a successful attempt by the Conservatives to articulate the latent interests of their natural supporters.’
Indeed throughout the last 15 years of Tory rule a large majority of the population preferred more public spending to lower taxes, and lower unemployment to lower inflation.
The crisis in the Tory Party today reflects the failure to arrest the decline of British capitalism. This underlies the splits and tensions within the present government. The division over Europe reflects a widespread debate within the post-1945 ruling class over whether Britain should look to integration within a European trade zone or towards its historical trading area across the Atlantic and further afield.
History has come full circle in the last 15 years. Then Thatcher seemed to offer an alternative to the U-turning governments of Heath and Callaghan which disintegrated from within. Today, watching Major’s government fall apart is like a repeat of those years – minus the flares and the kipper ties.
 
Despite claims to be the party of democracy and freedom, the Tory Party is run in a way which would make Stalin feel at home.
In strict terms there is no Conservative Party. The National Union of Conservative Associations is responsible for the 634 constituencies. A separate body, Central Office, employs the full time staff and runs the national and regional offices while the Conservative parliamentary party is separate again. The only link between these three bodies is the party leader!
Individuals join a local constituency association but are not members of the National Union. There is no democracy whatsoever in the running of the Tory Party. The annual seaside gathering has no constitutional powers over anyone. One Tory leader, Lord Balfour, said he would ‘rather consult his valet than the National Union’.
The party’s membership, as a recent study – True Blues by Paul Whiteley, Patrick Seyd and Jeremy Richardson – reveals, is overwhelmingly middle class.
There has been much talk about the popular support Thatcher built among workers. But there has been no real change. In 1983 the Tories got 35 percent of all manual working class votes. In 1951 the figure was 34 percent. Large numbers of workers have always voted Tory. Pollsters Robert McKenzie and Alan Silver described these as forming two sorts, ‘deferential voters inspired by “traditional emotions”’ and ‘secular, self-seeking voters’. In less polite words: arse lickers and greedy bastards!
For much of the last 15 years the Tory Party has seemed a well oiled machine capable of sweeping all before it. Reality is somewhat different. The Tory vote has been in decline since 1931. Thatcher’s highest share of the poll was 42.4 percent in 1983. Yet only Bonar Law in 1922 and Harold Wilson in October 1974 had polled less this century. As late as 1955, the Tories won 49.7 percent of the vote. In the big cities the Tory share of the vote has been in constant decline since 1959.
In the 1950s the Tories claimed 2,750,000 members. By 1990 they claimed 1 million, while the figure now stands at 750,000. The party is losing 60,000 members a year. In the 1950s the Young Conservatives boasted 100,000 members. In 1994 the YCs were abolished.
The average age of a Tory Party member is 62. Half are over 65, just 5 percent are under 35, and 68 percent have not attended a ward or constituency meeting in the last year. Nearly a quarter have had no contact with party activists in the last year. Some 41 percent believe that the party leadership does not pay a lot of attention to the views of ordinary party members while 51 percent would like the party leader to be elected by ballot.
This ageing band is not as stable in support of the government as one might suppose. Four out of five support more spending on the NHS with just 11 percent opposing more health expenditure. Surprisingly, 69 percent oppose the death sentence, though this must be balanced against 70 percent support for repatriation of immigrants. Just 33 percent want access to abortion to be made more difficult.
The once well oiled machine is also showing signs of rust. In 1966 there were 421 full time constituency agents but this has fallen to 234 as ‘a result of a declining party membership’ according to True Blues. The authors of the survey challenge the perceived notion of how elections are won:
‘Local association campaigning has a significant impact on election results ... contrary to what many academic psephologists tell us, general elections are not won or lost solely in television studios and advertising offices.’
To influence people you need a network of individuals who can explain and carry those ideas in everyday language. Most Tory members – rather than reacting to events – are watching them snuggled up in an armchair clutching a gin and tonic.
This then is the good news. In the event of a serious crisis like that round the introduction of the poll tax in England and Wales or over Heseltine’s pit closure programme in 1992, local Tories can be thrown into confusion and disarray. The Tories may be a nasty bunch but this ageing band are hardly likely to form the shock troops of the counter-revolution.
* * *

The old boys’ club
The party’s top ten backers between 1979 and 1993 were United Biscuits, British and Commonwealth Holdings, Hanson Trust, George Weston Holdings (a subsidiary of Associated British Foods, Britain’s biggest baker), Taylor Woodrow, P&O, Forte, Trafalgar House, Western United Investments and Glaxo.
The Tory party is tied to Britain’s ruling class by a myriad of golden threads. Brewing has long been associated with the party so it is no surprise to discover that Samuel Whitbread, chair of the family brewing giant, is chair of the Bedfordshire Conservative Association as well as the county’s High Sheriff and Deputy Lord Lieutenant.
Tim Sainsbury owns shares in the family supermarket giant worth £115 million. Michael Heseltine is worth £108 million. This makes them two of the top five wealthiest Tory MPs. Sainsbury went to Eton and oxford and is, according to Who’s Who, ‘a whizz at bridge’, and Heseltine owns Haymarket Publishers, a £2.5 million country house with 550 acres in Oxfordshire and another home in Belgravia worth £1.5 million.
Joining them are Paul Channon of the Guinness brewing dynasty, whose seat – Southend West is regarded as a family hand me down. Educated at Eton and Oxford, his homes include an Essex mansion, a £2 million London house and a winter home in Mustique. His wealth is totalled at £190 million. Mark Lennox Boyd is also part of the Guinness mafia and attended Eton and Oxford, with wealth totalled at £138 million. Lord James Douglas Hamilton, who sacrificed becoming Earl of Selkirk to save Major a by-election defeat, was educated at Eton and Oxford (you may have spotted a pattern here).
Before the last election 62 Tory MPs, including seven ministers, were Lloyd’s underwriters. This helped ensure that debates on state intervention to bail out the huge losses incurred by investors in Lloyd’s were very well attended. The minister presiding over this matter, Michael Howard, had a stake in Lloyd’s but this, naturally, did not affect his judgement.
Another disinterested public servant is Sir Marcus Fox, chair of the powerful 1922 Committee which groups backbench Tory MPs. By 1989 he had acquired six directorships and four consultancies. He formed his own lobbying outfit, Westminster Communications, after his sacking as a minister. This now represents 50 companies within the corridors of Westminster, including the Pools Promotion Association and Suzuki.
At the close of 1993 the cabinet joined together to be photographed. Out of 23 ministers, 18 had been at Cambridge University. Of Thatcher’s first cabinet back in 1979, 86 percent had gone to public school, 71 percent were company directors and 14 percent large landowners.
In contrast the last three Conservative leaders, Edward Heath, Margaret Thatcher and John Major, did not come from wealthy backgrounds. All three went to state schools. But Thatcher married into wealth. After she ceased to be prime minister she was given use of a house in Westminster by the Britain’s top property magnate, the Duke of Westminster (as was Norman Tebbit when he quit as Tory chairman).
Top Tories can look forward to being well rewarded for their services. In 1987 Geoffrey Rippon retired from the Commons to take the usual peerage plus 48 different directorships, which included pocketing £60,000 as chair of Britannia Arrow.
A shuffle through the directors of the top British companies reveals that former ministers taking seats on the board include George Younger, who chairs the Royal Bank of Scotland, Nigel Lawson at Barclays Bank, Peter Walker at British Gas, Dalgety and Tate & Lyle, Norman Tebbit at British Telecoms, while former chair of the Tory Party, Sir Norman Fowler, sits on the board of National Freight.
The party’s treasurer for the first half of Thatcher’s reign, the builder Lord McAlpine, kept the only list of party donors locked at home in his own desk. One Tory official was quoted as saying, ‘The secrecy involved ... gives the opportunity for fraud to exist on a grand scale.’
Between 1987 and 1992 the Tories spent a total of £73 million, leaving an overdraft of £16.5 million Strangely the banks have not called in the receivers.
 

 Bambery: The making of an agitator (Summer 2007)



Chris Bambery Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Chris Bambery
The making of an agitator
(Summer 2007)

First published in International Socialism 2 : 115, Summer 2007.
Copyright © International Socialism.
Copied with thanks from the International Socialism Website.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Bryan D. Palmer
James P. Cannon and the Origins of the American Revolutionary Left 1890–1928
University of Illinois, 2007, £29
For me the decisive moment in James P. Cannon’s life was when he
gave up his swivel chair.
In 1928 Cannon turned his back on a career as a Communist Party
leader in the United States, facing inevitable expulsion by coming
out in support of Leon Trotsky and the left opposition to Stalinism.
As Joseph Stalin began to exert complete control over both Russia and
the Communist International, Cannon must have been a prime candidate
to be installed as leader of the US party. Stalin liked his general
secretaries to be staunchly proletarian and devotedly loyal. Maurice
Thorez in France, Ernest ThÃ¤lmann in Germany and, on a smaller
stage, Harry Pollitt in Britain all fitted that mould.
Cannon was a “native” radical, born and brought up in harsh
industrial conditions in Kansas and with a track record as a
frontline organiser for the Industrial Workers of the World (known as
the Wobblies) and a key figure in the creation of the US Communist
Party. By 1928 Stalin was moving to axe Jay Lovestone as general
secretary because he was aligned with the Russian leader’s rival
Nikolai Bukharin. Stalin was also distrustful of another contender
for the post, the trade union leader William Z Foster.
Looking back Cannon explained why he chose to surrender the
relative comfort of party office – a decision made all the more
honourable because he knew he was heading into obscurity (though he
could not possibly be aware just how isolated he would be over the
following six years):
“The footloose Wobbly rebel that I used to be had
imperceptibly begun to fit comfortably into a swivel chair,
protecting himself in his seat by small manoeuvres and evasions, and
even permitting himself a certain conceit about his adroit
accommodation to this shabby game. I saw myself for the first time
then as another person, as a revolutionist who was on the road to
becoming a bureaucrat. The image was hideous, and I turned away from
it in disgust.
“I never deceived myself for a moment about the most
probable consequences of my decision to support Trotsky in the summer
of 1928. I knew it was going to cost me my head and also my swivel
chair, but I thought: What the hell – better men than I have risked
their heads and their swivel chairs for truth and justice.”
This does not quite do justice to his growing unease with the
degeneration of the Russian Revolution and the Communist
International. That probably dates from Moscow’s directive to
British Communists to uncritically tail the trade union leaders
during the 1926 general strike.
At the sixth congress of the Communist International, held in
1928, Cannon went to Moscow representing the faction he led within
the US party. As the lesser force to Lovestone and Foster’s
groupings he was sidelined by being sent to the commission
considering a new programme to be adopted by the International.
Cannon was unexpectedly handed an English translation of The
Draft Programme of the Communist International: A Criticism of
Fundamentals (now available as The Third International After Lenin), by the Bolshevik leader
Leon Trotsky, who had been expelled from the Soviet Communist Party
and was in exile in Alma Ata. The document was a searing attack on
Stalin’s notion of “socialism in one country” and an appeal for
the International’s policy to be based on the primacy of
international revolution over Soviet diplomatic interests. Trotsky’s
document was smuggled out, apparently stuffed into a teddy bear
belonging to an offspring of one of Cannon’s pals.
On his return to the US Cannon won over his partner, Rose Krasner,
his young factional supporters, Max Shachtman and Martin Abern in New
York City, Albert Glotzer and Arne Swabeck in Chicago, and then a
group of worker militants in Minneapolis. They formed the nucleus of
the most stable international grouping that rallied to Trotsky.
Cannon and his allies spun out the disciplinary proceedings
against them, increasing their audience, before dramatically
declaring their support for Trotsky. Within 24 hours of their
expulsion, copies of their declaration were circulating in the party.
Within a week they had launched a new paper, The Militant, its
first edition headlined: For The Russian Revolution.
Bryan D. Palmer’s book pays tribute to Cannon’s courage, but
it does much more than that. It is a serious study of the US left in
the decade before and after the First World War.
James Patrick Cannon was born in 1890 to parents of Irish origin
who had immigrated to the US and pitched up in Rosedale, Kansas, just
as the town’s good times ended. By the age of 12 he was working in
a meat packing plant, having been denied a secondary education. When
a high school was opened in Rosedale he went back to secure an
education.
Cannon’s political involvement began at the age of 14 when he
got involved in the defence of Big Bill Haywood, who was being framed
on murder charges for his role in a miners’ strike. At 18 Cannon
joined the Socialist Party, attracted by its presidential candidate,
Eugene Debs. The party had 100,000 members and Debs polled just short
of a million votes in 1912. But Debs refused to get involved in inner
party matters, allowing cautious reformists to dominate the party.
Cannon reacted to this by joining the Industrial Workers of the World
in 1910. Palmer’s account of this period is the most gripping part
of the book.
Starting in Kansas City, Cannon and his comrades would go into
working class areas, particularly where itinerant workers, “hoboes”,
teemed. Competing against Christians, the sellers of fake medicinal
cures and so on, the Wobblies had to draw a crowd and hold them.
Cannon was a great soapbox agitator. Later he recalled, “You are
either a soapboxer or you are not. You are tested by whether you hold
the crowd, by the literature sold, and the money given to the collection.”
At the 1912 congress of the Wobblies, Cannon caught the eye of the
union’s general secretary, Vincent St John. In February 1913 “The
Saint” pitched Cannon into a labour uprising in Akron, Ohio, where
23,000 workers were employed in the tyre industry.
A strike at the Firestone plant sparked a walkout across the
city’s plants. The Wobblies threw every organiser and agitator at
the uprising. Eclipsed by the silk weavers’ uprising in Paterson,
New Jersey – which attracted the help of John Reed, Elizabeth
Gurley Flynn and Big Bill Haywood – Akron was a dispute uniting
American and foreign born workers, men and women. In a sense it was
more representative of the US proletariat at the time.
The Wobblies held meetings and issued leaflets in English,
Serbian, German, Slovak, Italian and Hungarian, holding mass pickets,
parades, street corner meetings and strike rallies. At the beginning
the dispute had a carnival atmosphere, but this was not to last.
Armed police and specially recruited “deputies” – in reality
anti-strike vigilantes – were unleashed on strikers. Street
fighting lasted a week but the forces of “order” emerged on top.
The official American Federation of Labour (AFL) chipped in,
denouncing the strike. The numbers attending strike mobilisations
fell away and a drift back to work began before the AFL brokered a
return to work. The Wobblies had little permanent organisation on the
ground. Their itinerant organisers and agitators were brilliant when
a strike was on the up, but found it difficult to hold the line when
things went into reverse, and far more so to build anything from defeat.
By the time the First World War broke out in Europe, Cannon was
back in Kansas City, married with two children and attempting to earn
a living. But in 1917 two events brought him back into the struggle –
US entry into the war and the Russian Revolution. Reading John Reed’s
The Liberator and other pro-Bolshevik journals, Cannon was won
to the idea of a new combat party, firm on principles but rooted in
the class.
Like Reed he rallied to the pro-Bolshevik left wing of the
Socialist Party, travelling to that party’s 1919 congress in New
York City. The events there are portrayed well in Warren Beatty’s
film Reds. The leadership used every procedural trick to
defeat the left, eventually calling the police to evict them. In the
process the left split, with one grouping based on the foreign
language sections of the party leaving to proclaim itself the
Communist Party, while Reed’s supporters wanted to fight to the
last in the Socialist Party to try to secure the largest possible
support. Eventually two Communist Parties formed.
A post-war strike wave and the fear of revolution led to a
ferocious witch-hunt with strikes suppressed, mass arrests and
deportation of leftists. The revolutionary left was forced
underground (and the Wobblies were effectively destroyed).
The largely foreign language Communist Party argued that
clandestine organisation was a matter of Bolshevik principle. Cannon,
by contrast, realised revolutionaries had to seize any opportunity
for open, legal work in order to get mass support.
From 1920–3 Cannon campaigned for Communist unity and for open
work. The matter was settled at the Communist International’s
fourth congress where the Russians Gregory Zinoviev and Nikolai
Bukharin supported those championing clandestinity. In Moscow Cannon
secured an interview with Trotsky who, together with Lenin, ridiculed
the “champions of the underground”.
On paper Cannon should have become party leader. He cheered
Zinoviev’s campaign to “Bolshevise” the Communist Parties,
though this amounted to greater bureaucratic control from Moscow.
Then disaster struck when a Comintern emissary Joseph Pepper
succeeded in installing himself as effective party leader, promoting
Jay Lovestone within the party leadership.
Whatever his doubts about the growing demonisation of Trotsky,
Cannon was formally a loyal supporter of the Communist International
until his final trip to Moscow, agreeing to suppress references to
Trotsky and Zinoviev (after he became an opponent of Stalin) in the
party press. This is important because some on the left, echoing Max
Shachtman after his break with Cannon, have tried to rubbish him as a
bureaucrat, while others have tried to paint him as an immaculate Trotskyist.
The former charge does not stand up to Cannon’s commitment to
revolution, which lasted until his death in 1974. The latter charge
ignores the fact that Trotsky made tactical mistakes in his fight
with Stalin in the 1920s, and few in the international movement were
in a position to understand the importance of that fight.
Palmer ends this volume with Cannon’s expulsion and the creation
of the grouping that would subsequently become the Communist League
of America and then the US Socialist Workers Party. A further volume
is planned on Cannon’s subsequent role in the Trotskyist movement.
On the basis of this volume’s conclusion I somehow feel this will
not be as satisfactory.
For a generation of Trotskyists Cannon’s book detailing the
1939–40 faction fight with Shachtman, Abern, Glotzer and James
Burnham, The
Struggle for the Proletarian Party, became a sort of manual
on how to conduct an internal faction fight. Unfortunately, it was a
fairly disastrous manual. The dispute centred on matters of deep
substance such as the class nature of Stalin’s Russia and Burnham’s
rejection of historical materialism. But factional quarrels had been
almost continuous throughout the 1930s, meaning that from start to
finish the fight was between two camps rigid in their loyalties.
Trotsky urged Cannon on, but was also critical of his refusal to
try to generalise the discussion. By taking the discussion to a
higher plane, educating all concerned and creating space for a change
of views, Cannon could have avoided the retreat into two armed camps.
The other problem with The Struggle for the Proletarian Party
was that it labelled the Shachtman-Abern faction a “petty bourgeois
opposition”. Cannon would subsequently portray all faction fights
within the party as a clash between a proletarian centre and alien
class forces. That implies matters can only be resolved by a split.
Cannon’s problems were compounded after the Second World War.
Trotsky had predicted that the Soviet Union, which he still saw as a
degenerated workers’ state, would not survive the war, which would
end with recession and revolution. Cannon clung to this perspective
even as Western capitalism entered its greatest ever economic boom,
and Stalinism expanded into Eastern Europe and China. Arguing that
the Eastern European regimes were somehow workers’ states led to
the notion that capitalism could be overthrown by Russian tanks,
rather than the self-emancipation of the working class.
On the domestic front Cannon and his allies tended to retreat into
a more propagandist approach following the Second World War,
stressing the centrality of “the programme” in an increasingly
sterile and lifeless manner. He finally ceased to direct the day to
day running of the US Socialist Workers Party in 1953, at the height
of the McCarthyite witch-hunts.
But whatever criticisms are made of Cannon, he remained a link to
the glory days of the US left – the days of John Reed, Vincent St
John, Big Bill Haywood, Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, Eugene Debs and the
Wobblies. He represented an authentic, “native” leftism – the
idea, which goes against the grain of much of the left, that US
workers can be won to socialism and revolution. This book is a
fitting tribute to Cannon – soapboxer, Wobbly and American Bolshevik.
 

 Bambery: Hegemony and revolutionary strategy (Spring 2007)



Chris Bambery Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Chris Bambery
Hegemony and revolutionary strategy
(Spring 2007)

First published in International Socialism 2 : 114, Spring 2007.
Copyright © International Socialism.
Copied with thanks from the International Socialism Website.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Lenin, Leon Trotsky, the young Soviet Republic and the Communist
International saw Russia’s October Revolution as the prelude to a
European revolution. Their hope and attention were focused primarily
on Germany, but also on Italy. In April 1920 Giacinto Serrati, the
dominant figure in the Italian Socialist Party (PSI), told the French
revolutionary Alfred Rosmer:
The towns and countryside are with us; the workers follow
our calls. The peasants are no less keen: in many rural communes, the
mayors have replaced the portraits of the king in the town halls with
pictures of Lenin. We have the strength; we have it so absolutely
that no one, friend or foe, would think of disputing it. The only
problem for us is how to use that strength. [1]
The PSI was the only social democratic party in Western Europe to
oppose the First World War and played a key role in organising the
Zimmerwald Conference, held in September 1915 to rally the European
anti-war left. It was the first mass party to join the Communist
International – the international grouping of parties, usually
known as the Comintern, which supported the October Revolution. The
impact of the October Revolution was so great that every component of
the left and the trade unions felt it necessary to identify with it.
In the summer of 1920 they all journeyed to Moscow for the second
congress of the Comintern.
The Comintern was prepared to accept the PSI’s affiliation only
if it expelled its reformist wing. But Serrati, leader of the
dominant group in the party, sought to maintain the party’s unity
even though it was cracking open as the revolutionary crisis in Italy
developed. The other brooding presence in Moscow was the energetic
Neapolitan, Amadeo Bordiga. He wanted to create a ‘pure’
Communist Party, free of any hint of compromise. There was one
tendency not represented in Moscow – the grouping around the Turin
journal L’Ordine Nuovo, edited by Antonio Gramsci. To the
astonishment of the Italian delegates, Lenin delivered a speech that
berated Serrati for failing to drive out the party’s reformist wing
and creating a genuine Communist Party:
We must simply tell the Italian comrades that it is the
line of L’Ordine Nuovo members that corresponds to the line
of the Communist International, and not that of the present majority
of the Socialist Party’s leaders and their parliamentary group. [2]
So little was known about Gramsci and his comrades that the
Comintern’s leaders had to ask Bordiga to explain their position –
which he did in an honest way after stating his disagreements with
them. Lenin’s praise for L’Ordine Nuovo was based on an
article setting out the need for a party capable of addressing the
revolutionary crisis engulfing Italy. Gramsci wrote it after the PSI
and the CGL union federation refused to act in support of a crucial
general strike in Turin. It carried an awesome warning for the future:
The present phase of the class struggle in Italy is the
phase that precedes either the conquest of political power on the
part of the revolutionary proletariat ... or a tremendous reaction on
the part of the propertied classes.
It castigated the PSI for its failure to act as a national force,
saying it operated simply as a ‘spectator’ and ‘... continued
to be merely a parliamentary party, immobilising itself within the
narrow limits of bourgeois democracy’. The cure centred on creating
a party of a new type:
A cohesive and highly disciplined Communist Party with
factory, trade union and cooperative cells, that can coordinate and
centralise in its central executive committee the whole of the
proletariat’s revolutionary action, is the fundamental and
indispensable condition for attempting any experiment with soviets. [3]
Gramsci was calling on the vanguard of the Italian working class,
the workers’ delegates to the factory councils – in Turin in
particular – to form the basis for the leadership of a renewed PSI
or, if that could not be achieved, a new Communist Party. Gramsci
came late to this position – even as the second congress of the
Comintern was coming to a close, the Italian working class was
entering on its decisive confrontation, the occupation of the
factories in September 1920.
The great strength of L’Ordine Nuovo was that it focused
on building the factory councils as the basis of a new workers’
state. Despite their differences Serrati and Bordiga were united in
opposing the factory councils. For them the party laid the basis for
the new order, not factory councils. Throughout September 1920
Bordiga’s paper, Il Soviet, never mentioned the factory
occupations in its editorials. In the following month it published an
attack on Gramsci and other ‘heterodox’ Communists who had
championed the councils.
Gramsci won Turin’s factory councils to the necessity of
revolution, but in Milan and elsewhere the leadership of the PSI and
the CGL dominated. A revolutionary party organised on a national
basis was needed. However, Gramsci only began organising to create
such a party after the revolutionary moment had passed.
Prior to that Gramsci identified with Lenin because he recognised
a common concern with the centrality of the Soviets or factory
councils. Alastair Davidson has argued that at the end of 1920
accounts of Lenin’s theory of the party were not clear or prevalent
enough to make Gramsci reconsider his belief that the Russian’s
main contribution was a theory of factory councils. But ‘Gramsci’s
own activity during that year’ led him to favour ‘a renewal of
the PSI’ and then ‘a split from the PSI and the formation of a
Communist Party’. It was when the traditional union and PSI leaders
in Turin attacked him, and not before, ‘that he was compelled to
embark on a critique, first of the unions, and then of the party’. [4]
Hindsight is no comfort to revolutionaries. The end of the factory
occupations was followed by rising unemployment, victimisations and a
fascist counter-offensive. Gramsci was haunted by a sense of failure.
Looking back in 1924 he wrote:
In 1919-20, we made extremely serious mistakes which
ultimately we are paying for today. For fear of being called upstarts
and careerists, we did not form a faction and organise this
throughout Italy. We were not ready to give the Turin factory
councils an autonomous directive centre, which could have exercised
an immense influence throughout the country, for fear of a split in
the unions and of being expelled prematurely from the Socialist Party
... The problem is ... that of relations between the central
leadership and the mass of the party, and between the party and the
classes of the working population. [5]
This became a recurrent theme, which echoes strongly throughout
Gramsci’s Prison Notebooks.
 
The botched birth of Italian Communism
Gramsci’s warning of a ‘terrible reaction’ if the
revolutionary moment was missed was almost immediately fulfilled.
From November 1920 fascism went on the offensive, initially targeting
the agricultural labourers’ unions of north east and central Italy.
During local elections held a month earlier, Socialists won
majorities in 2,162 out of 8,059 communes, and in 25 of 69 provinces.
They broke the control exercised by the landowners in central Italy,
who, in their rage, switched in ever greater numbers to the fascists.
The fascist offensive began in Bologna where they attacked the
Socialist council, beginning a series of such attacks on Socialist
local authorities. The lack of any coordinated resistance encouraged
them. By the close of 1921 the strength of the fascist squads
approached 300,000. In the preceding 12 months they had destroyed 59
case del popolo Socialist centres, 119 camere del lavoro
union halls, 107 cooperatives, 83 peasant trade unions and 141 social
centres. They had left over 100 dead and thousands wounded, forcing
councillors out of office and leftists and trade unionists to flee
for safety. The attacks were not just on the left, but even on the
most moderate Socialists and on rural cooperatives run by Catholics.
Any independent organisations which threatened the dominance of the
landowning elite were legitimate targets.
Meanwhile, the overall success of the PSI in the local elections
meant that they now ran important local authorities, which had
control of public works and could enforce a closed shop for the
agricultural labour unions. This strengthened the hand of those who
wanted to keep the party united, avoiding a break with the
reformists; Serrati was confident of securing a majority of votes at
the forthcoming party congress, although some of those in his own
Maximalist group were prepared to expel the reformists in order to
qualify for membership of the Comintern.
A Communist faction was created in October and November 1920,
supposedly aimed at uniting all those prepared to act on the
Comintern’s strategic advice. But the driving force in the faction
was Bordiga’s followers, who were keen to keep out the left wing of
the Maximalists. Lenin’s tactical advice, by contrast, was that the
forces of the left should unite with the party’s leadership to oust
the reformist right wing of the party; after all, the far left and
the Maximalists shared a common fidelity to the Comintern and were
fervent supporters of the Russian Revolution.
But things took a different turn in January 1921 at the PSI
congress in Livorno. The far left walked out to launch a new
Communist Party after securing 58,785 votes to Serrati’s 98,028 and
the right wing’s 14,695. The voting figures exaggerated the new
party’s strength. Three months later Gramsci estimated it had just
25,000 adherents. Bordiga was the architect of this botched birth,
while Gramsci paid for his isolation in Turin. [6]
He did not speak at the congress, was not elected to the Communist
Party’s leadership and was subject to abuse from all the factions
for his supposed support for Italy’s entry into the First World War
(a canard based on a confused youthful article). As Davidson points
out, ‘Gramsci helped to create the sort of party he did not want’.
[7] It was formed too late to act at the
decisive revolutionary moment in autumn 1920. It was too small and
too sectarian to meet the danger now bearing down like a locomotive
on the Italian working class – fascism.
The confusion was assisted by something else. A section of the
Comintern leadership, acting independently of Lenin and Trotsky (who
were preoccupied with civil war raging in Russia), had adopted ‘the
theory of the offensive’ – the notion that if the new Communist
Parties in Western Europe adopted a continual insurrectionary
approach they could spur the working class to make the revolution.
[8] Two Comintern emissaries to the
Livorno congress – the Hungarian MÃ¡tyÃ¡s RÃ¡kosi and the Bulgarian
Khristo Kabakchiev – backed Bordiga’s approach. In March 1921 the
German Communists, influenced by these ideas, launched an
insurrection. It was a disaster, leaving 4,000 Communists in jail and
halving the party’s membership of 350,000. Lenin and Trotsky led a
full-scale attack on such adventurism, on the ‘theory of offensive’
in general and on the ‘left’ Communists at the third congress of
the Comintern later that year.
Meanwhile the failure of the Italian Communists to galvanise a
fighting United Front of resistance to fascism was one for which the
Italian working class and peasantry would pay a high price – as
would Gramsci. The entire left and working class movement was in
retreat. In 1920 the PSI had 216,000 members. A year later the
combined membership of the PSI and Communist Party was just 100,000.
[9] The membership of the CGL fell from
two million to one million. The retreat quickly became a rout in the
face of mounting unemployment. In spring 1921 Fiat suddenly
threatened to sack 1,500 of its 13,000 workers. When the internal
commissions moved to oppose this, the company demanded they dissolve
themselves, declared a lockout and rushed in troops to occupy its
plants. The workers held out for three weeks before agreeing to
Fiat’s terms. The factory councils were finished. As the lockout
ended, a fascist ‘punitive expedition’ burnt down the casa
del popolo. It was their first significant action in Turin.
No faction of the Italian left could offer a practical response to
the fascist terror. The reformists and the CGL union asked workers to
turn the other cheek, and even signed a truce with fascist leader
Benito Mussolini (the truce remained a dead letter). The Maximalists
intensified their rhetoric about revolution, acting as if it were
still on the immediate agenda, while the Communists retreated into
splendid isolation. All three groups turned in on themselves, in
denial about the victory nearing Mussolini’s grasp. The new
Communist Party turned its back on another piece of advice from Lenin
that Gramsci later recalled:
He told comrade Serrati: ‘Separate yourselves from
Turati [the leading reformist], and then make an alliance with him.’
This formula should have been adapted by us after the split ...
though continuing the ideological and organisational struggle ... we
should have sought to make an alliance against reaction. [10]
 
Gramsci denies his instinct
Gramsci was isolated even in Turin as the group around L’Ordine
Nuovo disintegrated. Gramsci’s closest collaborator, Palmiro
Togliatti, now sided with Bordiga. Gramsci slumped into nervous
exhaustion and a breakdown. Yet what is striking about Gramsci’s
writings in 1921 and 1922 is that his instinct was almost always
correct, but ultimately he always fell in behind Bordiga’s line.
This was shown over the question of the arditi del popolo.
These were groups made up of socialist, republican, anarchist,
revolutionary syndicalist and Catholic activists. They aimed to fight
off fascist attacks. They had close connections with the working
class – for example, in Rome they received donations from builders,
railway workers and post workers. They successfully prevented fascist
squads attacking the working class areas of Livorno, Civitavecchia,
Sarzana, Arezzo, Ferrara and Parma. On 9 November 1921 fascist bands
from Emilia-Romagna and Tuscany arrived in Rome for a national
fascist congress intent on carrying out another punitive expedition.
The arditi del popolo organised to counter them. The battle
lasted five days and left seven dead and 200 wounded. The fascists
were forced to beat a humiliating retreat from their national
conference, burning the theatre they had met in.
Gramsci’s L’Ordine Nuovo had printed a supportive
interview with Argo Secondari, a key figure in the formation of the
new anti-fascist movement. Three days later the paper ran a piece by
Gramsci himself in which he wrote, ‘Are the communists opposed to
the arditi del popolo movement? On the contrary: they want
the arming of the proletariat, the creation of an armed proletarian
force.’ [11] Gramsci went on to argue:
In each home in which working class families live, groups
of proletarian defence should be formed in which able workers of all
parties should participate. Each group, linking with the groups of
neighbouring homes, should become an element of the neighbourhood
unit ... The arditi del popolo could effectively coordinate
the workers’ squads, organising them in groups at pre-established
points in every neighbourhood to intervene, in case of need ... [12]
Three days later the paper published an appeal for the creation of
a single anti-fascist defence force. Turin’s Communists were
involved with Socialists, anarchists and a range of the city’s
working class organisations in creating a united arditi del
popolo group. But the Communist Party leadership issued a
circular instructing party members they could only belong to a
defence force that was under party control and calling for members to
quit the arditi del popolo. Later the leadership under
Bordiga went further and denounced the arditi del popolo.
Gramsci accepted this line. He not only bowed to the line of the
leadership, but repeated the claptrap that fascism was just another
form of bourgeois reaction, whose time in power would be brief, and
that if fascism destroyed parliamentary democracy this would benefit
the left because it would destroy illusions in parliamentary change.
Yet he understood that fascism represented a mortal danger to the
Italian working class. Later, in 1932, Trotsky recalled that Gramsci
was the only Italian Communist who saw the possibility of a fascist victory.
In October 1921, as fascist violence intensified, the CGL
announced it was forming an alliance of labour (alleanza del
lavoro) with the smaller anarchist and syndicalist union
federations, as well the rail workers’ and seafarers’ unions, to
fight the fascist onslaught. Gramsci’s initial response was to
welcome this as a step forward, which the Communists could develop at
grassroots level. Once again, however, he accepted the leadership’s
rejection of any such alliance. Later Gramsci explained that he
wished to avoid a split with Bordiga. [13]
Of all the Italian leftists, Gramsci was the nearest to Leninism in
theory, but he lacked Lenin’s single-minded determination and his
readiness to take a minority position in the party if necessary.
 
The Comintern and the debate on revolutionary strategy
Gramsci escaped his political purgatory when he was appointed as
the Italian Communist Party’s representative to the Comintern
executive committee in Moscow. He left for Russia in May 1922. The
stress of acting as a loyal party member while privately disagreeing
with Bordiga’s leadership had taken its toll. In Russia he suffered
a nervous breakdown. But his experiences in Russia enabled him to
mature as a revolutionary. Events in Italy also played no small part.
On 28 October 1922 Mussolini arrived in Rome by sleeper train to
be taken to the palace and appointed premier. Only then were the
fascist squads allowed to march past their leader and the king,
before being hurried on their way home. This was the reality of the
‘March on Rome’. In truth the various fractions of the Italian
ruling class, the heads of the security forces and the king had
decided to accept Mussolini as prime minister in an effort to secure
stable government. As with Adolf Hitler 11 years later, Mussolini
initially headed a coalition government in which the fascists held a
minority of cabinet positions. Like their German counterparts, the
Italian ruling class turned to fascism with distaste, believing they
could co-opt and neuter the upstart they had ushered to power.
The Italian working class was far weaker than the German working
class – yet it offered far more spontaneous resistance to fascism.
It was badly served by its parties. Days before Mussolini’s
appointment Bordiga had penned a circular to party branches denying
that fascism could triumph. Palmiro Togliatti, who was allied with
Bordiga in the party’s leadership at the time, later admitted:
Right up to the eve of the March on Rome, and even while
it was taking place, the Communist Party was denying the possibility
and the actuality of the coup d’etat. Immediately after the march
on Rome the party’s theoretical journal published an article which
maintained that the advent of Mussolini to power would not
substantially change the country’s political situation. [14]
The reality of fascism must have hit home to the exiled Gramsci
when, three days before Christmas 1922, fascist squads attacked the
capital of the Italian workers’ movement – Turin. The offices of
L’Ordine Nuovo were sacked and 12 workers were killed. A
fascist bomb exploded in the CGL offices, killing 20 workers. Gramsci
grasped that fascism was not simply another form of reaction and that
its violence would go far beyond normal means of state repression –
destroying all forms of working class organisation and any body
independent of the state.
Despite his illness Gramsci was able to participate in the fourth
congress of the Comintern, held in November 1922, which centred on a
continuing debate about the need to win a majority among Western
European workers through the policy of the United Front. Powerful
Communist Parties now existed in some Western European countries, but
in none did they enjoy the allegiance of a majority of the working
class. That honour remained with the reformist parties. Only by
struggling alongside the reformists in defensive struggles could the
revolutionaries break that hold. The term ‘hegemony’ was employed
to explain the domination of the bourgeoisie over the proletariat
through the latter’s acceptance of the division between economics
and politics:
The bourgeoisie always seeks to separate politics from
economics, because it understands very well that if it succeeds in
keeping the working class within a corporative framework no serious
danger can threaten its hegemony. [15]
There was still opposition from many ‘left’ Communists who
believed that the revolutionary offensive should be continued at all
times as the way to waken the working class and break it from
reformism. Almost simultaneously Trotsky, as head of the Red Army,
was countering those who argued that revolutionary military strategy
depended on a permanent offensive theory – a war of manoeuvre.
Trotsky argued that all wars require a combination of offence and
defence – in other words of manoeuvre and position. Gramsci would
have been familiar with these arguments among the leaders of the Red Army.
In Italy the fledgling Communist Party was the primary target of
fascist violence and repression. By early 1923 its membership had
slumped to around 5,000. Adopting the United Front strategy was now a
matter of life and death for a party desperately isolated in the face
of massive repression.
 
Rearming the Communist Party
Victor Serge provides a vivid pen portrait of Gramsci when both
were living in Vienna working for the Comintern, in late 1923:
An industrious and Bohemian exile, late to bed and late to rise ... His head was heavy, his brow
high and broad, his lips thin; the whole was carried on a puny,
square-shouldered, weak-chested, humpbacked body. There was grace in
the movement of his fine, lanky hands. Gramsci fitted awkwardly into
the humdrum of day to day existence, losing his way at night in
familiar streets, taking the wrong train; indifferent to the comfort
of his lodgings and the quality of his meals; but, intellectually, he
was absolutely alive. Trained intuitively in the dialectic, quick to
uncover falsehood and transfix it with the sting of irony, he viewed
the world with exceptional clarity.
Serge explains Gramsci’s desire to return to fascist Italy:
When the crisis in Russia began to worsen, Gramsci did
not want to be broken in the process, so he had himself sent back to
Italy by his party; he who was identifiable at the first glance
because of his deformity and his great forehead. [16]
Italy’s fascist rulers were unlikely to have forgotten Gramsci.
In a speech in December 1921, Mussolini had attacked a certain
‘Sardinian hunchback and professor of economics and philosophy’
who had ‘an unquestionable powerful brain’. [17]
From Vienna Gramsci began organising to win the leadership of the
Italian Communist Party from Bordiga, who had been arrested and
jailed. The first step was to win the support of his old comrades
from L’Ordine Nuovo – Togliatti and Umberto Terracini. In
April 1923 Bordiga smuggled out a document which was fiercely
critical of the Comintern leadership, which he asked other party
leaders to sign. Gramsci refused, although Togliatti urged him to
sign. This sparked a debate among the old L’Ordine Nuovo
comrades. Gramsci wrote to Togliatti, arguing in favour of adopting a
United Front approach:
Three years experience has taught us, not just in Italy,
how deeply-rooted social democratic traditions are, and how difficult
it is to destroy the residues of the past simply through ideological
polemics. An immense and at the same time painstaking political
action is necessary, that can break down this tradition day by day,
by breaking down the organism which embodies it. The tactics of the
International are adequate for this purpose. [18]
In another letter Gramsci argued that Bordiga mirrored the
reformist Second International in preventing individual initiative
and leaving party members passively waiting on the party’s
leadership, encouraging the idea that the party’s strength and very
existence itself would determine the possibility of revolution: ‘The
party has not been seen as the result of a dialectical process, in
which the spontaneous movement of the revolutionary masses and the
organising and directing will of the centre converge’. [19]
He continued:
In central and western Europe the development of
capitalism has not only determined the formation of the broad
proletarian strata, but also – and as a consequence – has created
the higher stratum, the labour aristocracy, with its appendages in
the trade union bureaucracy and the social democratic groups ... This
makes the action of the masses slower and more prudent, and therefore
requires of the revolutionary party a strategy and tactics altogether
more complex and long-term than those which were necessary for the
Bolsheviks in the period between March and November 1917. [20]
By March 1924 Togliatti and Terracini had swung behind Gramsci and
the Comintern intervened to impose a new executive committee of the
Italian party, including Gramsci. Bordiga and his key supporter
resigned from the executive. Gramsci pushed through the creation of a
cell structure, with factory groups, which better suited the new
political situation (and held out the future possibility of
initiating factory councils) and, in February 1924, the launch of a
daily newspaper, L’Unità. Gramsci suggested the title and
insisted it should involve the supporters of the Comintern expelled
from the PSI. He himself edited a new fortnightly L’Ordine
Nuovo. [21] He stressed a degree of continuity:
The specific aims of the review, in my opinion, should
still be the factory and the organisations of the factory ... We
should seek to reconstruct among ourselves an environment like that
of 1919–20 with the means we have at our disposal. Then, no
initiative was taken if it had not been tested against the reality,
if first we had not probed the opinion of the workers about it in
various ways. [22]
In May 1924 Gramsci finally returned home to Italy after his
election to the chamber of deputies gave him parliamentary immunity
from arrest.
 
The search for the United Front
The reorientation of the party came just as Mussolini’s regime
was thrust into a crisis that threatened its continued rule. On 10
June 1924 the Socialist deputy Giacomo Matteotti was kidnapped on the
streets of central Rome after a speech in parliament denouncing
electoral fraud and then found murdered. The kidnappers were
identified as a fascist squad operating under Mussolini’s control.
The reaction to the assassination took Mussolini by surprise:
‘Spontaneous demonstrations in favour of the opposition broke out
in the streets, which was something that had not been seen for a long
time.’ [23] Mussolini’s attempted
to crush the protests by calling out the fascist militia. But, as
Gramsci wrote, ‘The first attempt to mobilise the national minority
failed utterly, with only 20 percent answering the call; in Rome only
800 militiamen presented themselves at the barracks.’ [24]
This failure meant that between 14 June and 16 June the anti-Fascists
had a chance to control the streets.
The liberals, republicans and Socialists quit parliament in
protest, collecting together in an alternative assembly on Rome’s
Aventine Hill. Gramsci and the other Communist deputies joined them,
arguing that they should call a general strike and hold
demonstrations. [25] An anti-fascist living in Rome recalled the
atmosphere – and the paralysis which infected the opposition:
We went almost every night to a restaurant ... with the
leaders of the Socialist Party ... For a week or ten days there was
no sign of the fascists on the streets of Rome. It was known that the
people of Trastevere, all republicans, were ready to march with their
clubs and revolvers. They only awaited the orders of the Aventine
opposition ... But no one wanted to give the order. [26]
The Aventine leaders hoped they could appeal to the king to
dismiss Mussolini. But as Mussolini played for time, the fascist
squads rallied to him and the king reaffirmed his support for the
regime. By the end of 1924 Mussolini was able to unleash the fascist
squads again, this time targeting liberal and bourgeois opponents of
fascism as well as the left, and establishing a far tougher
dictatorship. Looking back Gramsci argued:
If the Mussolini government had fallen, whatever the
means which had caused it to fall, an extremely deep political crisis
would have opened up in Italy, whose development no one could have
foreseen or halted. But the opposition forces too knew this, and they
therefore excluded right from the beginning ‘one’ way of bringing
fascism down, the only possible way, the mobilisation and struggle of
the masses. [27]
Eventually Gramsci led the Communist deputies back into the
chamber, seeking to use it as a platform for their views.
The efforts to create an effective anti-fascist United Front
brought into the open the battle with Bordiga inside the party.
Gramsci debated with Bordiga in Naples. Here Gramsci argued the
necessity for ‘every member of the party’ to be ‘an active
political element, a leader’. That required them, ‘each in his
own milieu’, being ‘made capable of orienting themselves, of
knowing how to derive from reality the elements needed to establish a
policy’ so that ‘the working class will not lose courage but feel
it has leaders and is still able to fight ... Precisely because the
party is strongly centralised, a vast amount of propaganda and
agitation among its ranks is required. It is necessary for the party
in an organised fashion to educate its members and raise their
ideological level.’ [28]
The party now experienced substantial growth, with 27,000 members
by the end of 1925. The fascist secret police reported that the
Communists had survived repression better than any of the other left
parties – not only ‘maintaining ties with the masses but ...
semi-clandestine, it had also partly salvaged the essential structure
of its organisation’. [29] This was
in part due to Gramsci’s insistence on a cell structure, rather
than Bordiga’s preferred geographical branches. The factory groups
in particular found it easier to hold together.
Gramsci now worked on theses for the party congress due to be held
early in 1926 in the safety of Lyon, France. The ‘Lyon theses’
argued that the party had not capitalised on the factory occupations
or intervened to attempt to stop fascism’s victory in October 1922:
The defeat of the revolutionary proletariat in this
decisive period was due to political, organisational, tactical and
strategic deficiencies of the workers’ party ... the proletariat
did not succeed in placing itself at the head of the insurrection of
the great majority of the population, and channelling it towards the
creation of a workers’ state ... The victory of fascism in 1922
must be seen, therefore, not as a victory won over the revolution,
but as a consequence of the defeat suffered by the revolutionary
forces through their own intrinsic weakness. [30]
Gramsci offered his vision of a revolutionary party:
The principle that the party leads the working class must
not be interpreted in a mechanical manner ... The capacity to lead
the class is related, not to the fact that the party ‘proclaims’
itself its revolutionary organ, but to the fact that it ‘really’
succeeds, as a part of the working class, in linking itself with all
the sections of that class and impressing upon the masses a movement
in the desired direction and favoured by objective conditions. Only
as a result of its activity among the masses will the party get the
latter to recognise it as ‘their’ party (winning a majority); and
only when this condition has been realised, can it ... draw the
working class behind it. [31]
Leadership required the party taking up immediate or partial struggles:
The Communist Party links every immediate demand to a
revolutionary objective; makes use of every partial struggle to teach
the masses the need for general action and for insurrection against
the reactionary rule of capital ... In every case, the party utilises
the experience of the movement in question, and of the outcome of its
own proposals, to increase its influence – demonstrating through
facts that its action programme is the only one which corresponds to
the interests of the masses and to the objective situation – and to
transport a backward section of the working class on to a more
advanced position. [32]
The stress on the United Front does not stop Gramsci from
continuing to define the ultimate tasks of the Communist Party as:
(a) to organise and unify the industrial and rural
proletariat for the revolution; (b) to organise and mobilise around
the proletariat all the forces necessary for the victory of the
revolution and the foundation of the workers’ state; (c) to place
before the proletariat and its allies the problem of insurrection
against the bourgeois state and of the struggle for proletarian
dictatorship, and to guide them politically and materially towards
their solution, through a series of partial struggles. [33]
The vote at the Lyon congress reflected Gramsci’s rearming and
rebuilding of the party – he secured 90.08 percent of the vote.
 
The road to Calvary
Gramsci had little time left in freedom after the success of the
Lyon Congress. In autumn 1926 Mussolini stripped deputies of their
parliamentary immunity and Gramsci was arrested on 8 November after
being forced by the fascist police to abort a meeting with a
Comintern representative. His Calvary at the hands of Mussolini
lasted from then until his death. The abortive meeting was to have
been with Jules Humbert-Droz. He had been charged with persuading
Gramsci to support Joseph Stalin and his ally at the time, Nicolai
Bukharin, in their campaign against the Joint Opposition within the
Russian party led by Trotsky, Gregory Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev.
Gramsci was not a supporter of the Joint Opposition. But in October
1926 he had written to the leadership of the Soviet party stating
that this factional campaign was doing great damage at home and
abroad and should be halted. Togliatti, representing the Italian
party in Moscow, refused to pass on the letter, though he did read it
out to Bukharin. Gramsci responded angrily to Togliatti. [34]
The stage was set for a more serious break with Moscow and with
Togliatti. In 1929 Stalin declared that the world had entered a new
‘third period’ in which insurrection was on the cards virtually
everywhere and in which the social democrats would help the
bourgeoisie turn towards fascism. According to Stalin, the social
democrats’ ‘social fascist’ character ruled out any United
Front with them. Togliatti, under pressure from a pro-Stalin young
guard in the party, agreed that Italy too was on the verge of a
revolutionary crisis. Activists were dispatched across the Alps to
stimulate mass work – in reality returning to arrest and
Mussolini’s jails.
Gramsci refused to endorse such lunacy. He had fought hard for the
United Front policy against fascism, the strategy now being denounced
by Stalin and Togliatti. He challenged the idea that the mass of
Italian workers was breaking with reformism, and that the country was
approaching a revolutionary situation that would sweep fascism away
and install the dictatorship of the proletariat. Instead he pressed
for united action with the Socialists and other anti-fascists, and
for the raising of a demand for a constituent assembly. He believed
that if fascism fell, as a result of the global recession that
followed the 1929 Wall Street Crash, for instance, the strongest
likelihood was this would be followed by a period of parliamentary
rule. In his prison writings he outlined his hopes that this might
allow for the reconstruction of the factory councils and that they
could prepare the way for a future insurrection. Interestingly, at
almost precisely the same time, in May 1930, Trotsky was engaged in a
correspondence with some of Bordiga’s sympathisers in the
International Left Opposition over their attempt to combine the
demand for a constituent assembly with a demand for workers’ and
peasants’ committees. Trotsky argued that if fascism fell it might
well be superseded by a period of democratic rule, rather than
socialist revolution, and argued that revolutionaries could raise
democratic demands and ‘invest them with the most audacious and
resolute character possible’. [35]
Gramsci’s argument led to attacks from fellow Communist prisoners,
who refused to talk to him, while Togliatti refused to let the wider
world know of his criticisms of the new policy.
Gramsci had entered prison a staunch revolutionary. His final
speech to the Italian parliament, where the small Communist group of
deputies faced Mussolini and the massed fascist ranks with
blackshirts guarding every exit, was brave and uncompromising:
We are sure that we represent ... the essential interests
of the majority of the Italian people. Proletarian violence is
therefore progressive and cannot be systematic. Your violence is
systematic and systematically arbitrary because you represent a
minority destined to disappear. [36]
But Gramsci’s work as a mature revolutionary has been passed
over or bowdlerised by those keen to utilise his name. This process
started with the publication of his prison writings just after the
Second World War, when Togliatti portrayed Gramsci’s strategy as a
precursor for the Italian Communist Party’s decision to rebuild a
capitalist Italian republic in alliance with Christian Democracy. The
attempt to paint Gramsci as a figure who rejected insurrection and
presented an alternative to Leninism continued into the 1970s and
1980s with the Eurocommunists and into the 21st century with today’s
neo-Gramscians.
Gramsci’s Prison Notebooks can only be fully understood
as a continuation of his political fight to rebuild and rearm the
Italian Communist Party. [37] Above all
they are a sustained defence of the political strategy he championed
during those years and drew heavily on the debates in the Comintern
at its third and fourth congresses. Martin Clark points out that
‘Gramsci in prison thought constantly about the “revolution that
failed” in 1919–20’ and that the ‘analysis of why revolutions
fail is a major theme of the Prison Notebooks,’ providing
‘the stimulus’ for his views on hegemony, political organisations
and parties, and intellectuals’. [38]
One of the key sections of the Prison Notebooks contrasts
revolution in Russia and the East with revolution in the
parliamentary democracies of the West. It is not to belittle the
importance of the Prison Notebooks to point out that this was
hardly controversial within the Comintern. Lenin recognised that ‘in
Western Europe it will be much more difficult to begin the
proletarian revolution than in Russia. But it will be much easier to
continue and complete it.’ Bordiga had argued at the Comintern’s
second congress for a policy of abstention from parliament and
parliamentary elections because conditions for making a revolution
were different in the West, where ‘bourgeois democracy has
functioned for many years and ... the revolutionary crisis will
consist simply of a direct transition from that political system to
the dictatorship of the proletariat ...’ This ‘requires first
breaking out of the limits of bourgeois democracy and demonstrating
the deceitfulness of the bourgeoisie’s claim that every political
struggle should take place within the parliamentary machinery’.
[39] Accordingly, claimed Bordiga, the
experience of the Bolsheviks in the Duma (the assembly established
under the Tsar) had no application in the West. Lenin countered:
We are obliged to carry on a struggle within parliament
for the destruction of parliament ... Can one conceive of any other
institution that all classes participate in to the degree they do in
parliament? This cannot be created artificially. If all classes are
drawn into the parliamentary struggle, it is because class interests
and conflicts are reflected in parliament. If it were possible
everywhere and immediately to bring about, let us say, a decisive
general strike to overthrow capitalism at a single stroke, the
revolution would have taken place in a number of countries. But we
must reckon with the facts, and parliament is a scene of the class
struggle. [40]
Perry Anderson’s 1976 article, The Antinomies of Antonio
Gramsci, written at a time when Anderson broadly identified with
Lenin and Trotsky, showed that it is impossible to understand
Gramsci’s prison writings outside the context of the debates in the
early Comintern:
The theory and practice of the Third International ...
had been saturated with emphasis on the historical necessity of
violence in the destruction and construction of states. The
dictatorship of the proletariat, after the armed overthrow of the
bourgeois state apparatus, was the touchstone ... Gramsci never
questioned these principles. On the contrary, when he started his
theoretical explanations in prison, he seems to have taken them so
much for granted that they scarcely ever figure. [41]
But the fact that Gramsci took them for granted is no excuse for
neo-Gramscians pretending that he rejected them. The strategic stress
on the United Front and the issue of the relationship between party
and class were the dominant concerns of Gramsci in his years as an
active member of the Communist Party. They remained so in his prison
years and they resonate throughout the Prison Notebooks.

Notes
1. Alfred Rosmer, Lenin’s Moscow
(London 1971), p. 21.
2. Lenin, Collected Works
(Moscow, 1982), volume 31, p. 251.
3. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from
Political Writings 1910–1920 (London 1977), pp. 190–195.
4. Alastair Davidson, Gramsci and Lenin 1917–1922, in Socialist Register 1974, p. 125.
5. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from
Political Writings 1921–1926 (London 1978), p. 268.
6. Gwyn Williams, Proletarian Order
(London 1975), p. 281.
7. Alastair Davidson, as above, p. 138.
8. Khristo Kabakchiev made two
speeches, the first a violent attack on Serrati designed to win few
friends and a concluding speech which announced that all those not
voting with Bordiga and his allies would be excluded from the new
international. RÃ¡kosi would become general secretary of the
Hungarian Communist Party from 1945 and also prime minister from 1952
until the 1956 revolution. He described himself as ‘Stalin’s best
pupil’. Trotsky described the Bulgarian as ‘a lifeless doctrinaire’.
9. John Cammett, Antonio Gramsci
and the Origins of Italian Communism (Stanford 1967), p. 153.
10. Antonio Gramsci, Selections
from political writings 1921–1926, as above, p. 381.
11. As above, p. 56.
12. As above, pp. 151–154.
13. Quoted in Alberto Pozzolini,
Antonio Gramsci: an Introduction to his Thought (London 1970), p. 43.
14. Palmiro Togliatti, The
Hegemony of the Working Class in the Anti-Fascist Struggle, in
David Beetham (ed.), Marxists in the Face of Fascism
(Manchester 1983), p. 133.
15. Quoted by Perry Anderson in The
Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci, in New Left Review 100,
November–December 1976, p. 18.
16. Victor Serge, Memoirs of a
revolutionary (Oxford 1975), p. 186.
17. John Cammett, as above, p. 138.
18. Antonio Gramsci, Selections
from Political Writings 1921–1926, as above, p. 139.
19. As above, p. 198.
20. As above, p. 199.
21. John Cammett, as above, p. 166.
22. Alberto Pozzolini, as above, p. 42.
23. Andrew Lyttelton, The Seizure
of Power: Fascism in Italy 1919–1929 (London 1983), p. 241.
24. Antonio Gramsci, Selections
from Political Writings 1921–1926, as above, p. 259.
25. Andrew Lyttelton, as above, p. 248.
26. Stanislao Pugliese, Carlo
Rosselli: Socialist Heretic and Anti-Fascist Exile (Cambridge, MA
1999), p. 41.
27. Antonio Gramsci, Selections
from Political Writings 1921–1926, as above, p. 434.
28. As above, p. 290.
29. John Cammett, as above, p. 169
30. Antonio Gramsci, Selections
from Political Writings 1921–1926, as above, p. 349.
31. As above, p. 367.
32. As above, p. 370.
33. As above, p. 357.
34. As above, p. 432.
35. Leon Trotsky, letter, Problems of the Italian Revolution, 14 May 1930.
36. Quoted in Alberto Pozzolini, as
above, p. 75.
37. The party was known as the
Partito Comunista d’Italia (PCd’I), or Communist Party of Italy,
until 1944 when it was renamed the Partito Comunista Italiano (PCI),
or Italian Communist Party.
38. Martin Clark, Antonio Gramsci
and the Revolution that Failed (London 1978), p. 225.
39. In John Riddell (ed.),
The Communist International in Lenin’s Time: Proceedings and
Documents of the Second Congress, 1920, volume 2 (New York 1992), pp. 434–438.
40. As above, p. 459.
41. Perry Anderson, as above, p. 46.
 






Labour’s success and the defeat of the BNP in last month’s
local elections gave socialists a real cause for celebration. Chris
Bambery looks at the results and beyond to the possibility of
future struggles



There was one man unhappier than John Major on the night of May’s
local elections – Derek Beackon, the defeated British National
Party candidate on east London’s Isle of Dogs.
Britain’s Nazis cut a sorry figure amongst their European blood
brothers. Today, 50 years after Auschwitz, the MSI – heirs of the
fascist Mussolini – are in government in Italy. In France the Nazi
National Front has over 1,000 local representatives to the BNP’s none.
The Independent was quick to claim the BNP’s defeat in
the Isle of Dogs was a tribute to the resilience of Britain’s
democratic tradition. In reality it was a tribute to months of hard
campaigning by the Anti Nazi League in Millwall. While many of the
left was prepared to accept the notion that the Isle of Dogs was a no
go area for anti-racists, the ANL went out week after week on the
Island’s estates and to its workplaces.
While Beackon claimed that he got the white working class vote,
the truth is that Labour would have won even if not a single black
voter on the Island had voted. On election day the Island had
something of a carnival atmosphere as white and black voters showed
their contempt for the BNP.
The inability of Britain’s Nazis to copy the success of their
European counterparts is not just a result of the ANL’s success
this time round, but the legacy of its success in the late 1970s.
Then the National Front could contest every seat in the 1977 Greater
London Council elections while it could poll 44 percent in a council
by-election in Deptford in 1976. This year the fascists scraped a
miserable 3 percent in the same area.
Ray Hill, who was a mole within Britain’s Nazis for the
anti-fascist magazine Searchlight, has recorded:
‘After its first flush of success, the NF was knocked
back by the hugely successful campaigns of the Anti Nazi League which
organised rallies of tens of thousands against the NF, and produced
millions of highly effective leaflets which circulated in factories,
offices and housing estates.’
The effect of that can be seen in parts of London which the Nazis
regarded as ‘theirs’ in the late 1970s: areas like Hoxton in
south Hackney where the BNP does not openly appear. It can be seen in
other ways. The argument about denying the Nazis a platform was
bitterly attacked by Labour leaders like Michael Foot in the 1970s.
Today this position has been more widely accepted, with Media Workers
Against the Nazis drawing large scale support.
In the 1970s the Anti Nazi League operated against the background
of a Labour government which achieved things like a real reduction in
wages and health expenditure that neither Margaret Thatcher or John
Major has emulated. Whilst the League involved individual Labour MPs
and party supporters it was clearly independent of Labour and
critical of the right wing Callaghan government.
This contrasts with the record of an organisation like SOS
Racisme in France during the 1980s. On the surface its concerts
and festivals echoed the ANL Carnivals of the late 1970s. However,
not only did it shy clear of directly confronting Le Pen but it was
closely linked to the increasingly right wing Socialist government.
Yet it would be too easy to see Beackon’s defeat as the end of
the matter. The election results give no such room for complacency.
In south Newham the BNP could poll 32.9 and 24.1 percent of the vote
in Beckton and Custom House and Beackon’s own vote increased from
the by-election. The BNP’s vote in Millwall stood at 28 percent
while in nearby Globetown it polled 22.8 percent. Outside east London
the BNP could poll nothing of this size. But the rise of the European
Nazis still gives confidence to British fascists even if their
electoral showing is pathetic in most places.
Here it is important that we draw the lessons of Millwall. Over
the months local socialists built up support so that local
firefighters, civil servants and health workers leafleted against the
Nazis. The BNP tried to claim we were outsiders – though Beackon
himself does not live on the Island. The involvement of local workers
went a long way to undercutting this idea.
Success also meant going beyond simply exposing the BNP as Nazis
to addressing issues such as housing, the closure of a local
community centre, VAT on fuel and local health cuts. The Nazis had
nothing to offer over anything that smelt of a fightback against the
system. When the BNP leafleted houses with the ‘Island
Nationalist’, the local SWP branch hit back with ‘Island
Socialist’. Where the BNP had built up networks of local supporters
we toured door to door building up a network of Socialist Worker readers.
Labour has promised new houses for thousands of local people. Now
that it runs the council the danger is that Labour will repeat its
past performances and fail to meet that pledge. Socialists need to
channel any resulting anger in the right direction by building a
fightback. Otherwise the Nazis can cash in.
The fight against the Nazis is not divorced from the wider
fightback against the Tories. The turnout at the ANL Carnival from
trade unionists can breed confidence not only to fight racism but to
fight on a wider level over jobs and wages. That has been true with
workplace anti-Nazi groups, which have registered some of their most
impressive support in the post and fire services – groups noted for
recent high levels of industrial militancy.
On the doorstep it is often difficult to break down the views of
isolated, bitter individuals who can become prey to the fascists. Yet
there is not a workplace or union branch in the country where it is
impossible to get a hearing for an anti-racist message. Across the
country groups of often mainly white trade unionists voted support
for the Carnival in the collective solidarity of the workplace.
In the long run whether racism will increase will largely depend
on the level of working class struggle in this country. In the Royal
Mail the recent spate of disputes has brought black and white
together. Here we should always remind ourselves of one simple fact,
John Major is a walking corpse. Everything he touches turns to ashes.
In the words of his arch critic, Richard Littlejohn of the Sun,
he is a ‘hopeless, lying, incompetent, hypocrite’. It was almost
beyond belief that the anniversary of the D Day invasion could turn
into a fiasco for the Tories with even Vera Lynn turning on them.
This follows the back to basics fiasco as Tory sex scandals wrecked
Major’s claims that the Tories were the party defending moral
standards.



Past Nazi Votes
The following figures put the Nazi vote into perspective.
The Nazis are not able to do what the NF did in 1977 when they
contested every London seat in the GLC elections. Neither are
they able to achieve what they did in a Deptford by-election in
1976 when they polled 44 percent.
1973 local council elections NF votes
Feltham/Heston 7.7 percent
Hayes and Harlington 8.5 percent
Average NF vote May 1977
Greater London Council elections
Bethnal Green & Bow 19 percent 
Stepney & Poplar 16.4 percent 
Barking 9 percent
Bermondsey 10.2 percent 
Deptford 14.5 percent 
Newham South 15.1 percent
Average NF votes across area May 1982
BNP/NF vote April 1992 local elections
Bethnal Green & Stepney (BNP) 3.595 percent
Bow & Poplar (BNP) 2.96 percent
Dudley East (NF) 1.19 percent
Rochdale (BNP) 1.15 percent
Southwark & Bermondsey (BNP) 1.4 percent (NF) 0.4 percent
Other significant Nazi votes
March 1937 Bethnal Green 23.1 percent (British Union of Fascists)
Oct 1949 Shoreditch 15 percent (Union Movement)
Dec 1972 Uxbridge by-election 8.2 percent (NF)
May 1973 West Bromwich by-election 16.2 percent (NF)
February 1974 general election Bethnal Green & Bow 7 percent (NF)




Average NF votes local elections 1976–1980




 


’76


’77


’78


’79


’80




Rochdale


  7.1


  4.1


3.6


3.0


3.0




Birmingham


  4.3


  5.2


3.9


—


2.1




Dudley


—


10.6


5.2


3.4


6.0




Sandwell


17.0


  9.6


8.3


—


3.2




Solihull


  3.5


  6.7


5.1


3.6


1.8



But for the political interlude caused by John Smith’s death, it
is questionable whether he would once again have been on the ropes
following the Tories’ disastrous performance in May’s local
elections. Already an unofficial leadership election was under way
with Michael Portillo and Kenneth Clarke as well as Michael Heseltine
throwing their hats into the ring. The local elections left Britain’s
ruling party in third place at town hall level in England and Wales
while in Scotland it is reduced to fourth place.
While the media claimed the main victor of the elections was Paddy
Ashdown’s Liberal Democrats, in reality the Labour Party was the
chief prizewinner. Labour matched its success of 1990 at the time of
the poll tax when Labour was extremely popular, while inside London
it increased its vote, winning Croydon, for the first time in its
history, Enfield and Ealing from the Tories and Tower Hamlets from
the Liberals. The Tory Party now controls only four out of the 32
London boroughs, while the Liberals lost around 30 seats in London
overall, including on the other council it controlled, Richmond.
Labour’s success was tempered by losses in Sheffield, Lambeth,
Southwark, Islington and Kirklees where there was a reaction to the
right wing policies of the Labour councils. In many of these areas
Labour also felt the loss of activists removed as a result of the
purge of the left. Yet in places such as Hackney, Haringey and Camden
Labour gained despite its record in the town hall.
The genuine grief at John Smith’s death reflected the widespread
hope for a Labour victory. Yet that grief has been tempered by
concern about the media packaged campaign to install Tony Blair as
the new Labour leader.
Rupert Murdoch’s Sun has been in many ways the most
biting critic of John Major. The paper’s columnist, Richard
Littlejohn, says, ‘What is wrong with British politics is that
there is little to choose between the two main parties.’ Littlejohn
backs Blair because he wants to see a realignment of British
politics, with a pro-European Labour Party and an anti-European Tory
Party. His position reflects the confusion and deep divisions on
Europe within the Tories’ ranks.
But Blair has little to offer those worried about their jobs,
their housing or racist attacks. Neither will they have experienced
the political truce of the kind observed at Westminster after Smith’s
death. They are still facing redundancy and increased taxes. The
hypocrisy of all this is staggering. The Tories’ Euro election
guide, written before Smith’s death, described his performance as
‘ineffectual and visionless’ with his ‘double standards’
making ‘Neil Kinnock look like a first class leader’.
Despite all of this the Tories seem set for a further humiliation
in the Euro elections which will reopen the gaping wounds in their
front ranks. Beyond all this there are signs of wider concerns among
Britain’s rulers. Prince Charles dropped his liberal facade when he
made a speech echoing an earlier statement by Michael Portillo when
he claimed:
‘We tend to be subjected to the most all-pervading
cynicism about almost every aspect of our national life. Nothing ever
seems right ...
‘An insidious impression is thereby created that, for
instance, the police are corrupt, British justice is flawed, the BBC
is moribund and public servants are time wasters of taxpayers’
money’.
This cynicism no doubt got a boost when it was revealed taxpayers
were forking out £3,000 a week to cover Princess Diana’s bill for
clothes, beauty treatment and Chinese foot massage!
Yet there are those on the left who still urge caution. The trade
union leaders are falling over themselves to avoid any talk about
action and to conform with every tightening of the anti-union laws.
Even the left wing New Statesman writes:
‘Yet, even now, the signs are that there is nothing
about the Conservatives’ position that could not be remedied by the
smack of firm (and different) leadership in combination with real
economic recovery’.
Any visitor to the union conferences this spring would have left
with the idea that new realism reigned supreme. In the new, super
public sector union, Unison, the conference voted down even balloting
for a day’s strike over pay, with the union’s general secretary
Alan Jinkinson, claiming such a ballot ‘would give comfort to the
most unpopular prime minister this century’. The TUC went so far as
suppressing a poll showing majority support for strike action over
public sector pay.
The effects of more than a decade dominated by defeat and
demoralisation go beyond the top tables of union officials. The
legacy has left its scars among the rank and file. Yet there are
signs that the Tory travails can only feed what is growing discontent
at grass roots level in the working class. In recent months there
have been a blaze of walkouts across Royal Mail in response to
management’s arrogance. This has happened despite the postal union,
the UCW’s, desperation to dissociate itself from much of this
action. In Liverpool an illegal city wide strike spread from the main
sorting office after a manager mocked a postal worker’s stutter. A
mass meeting voted down the union’s secretary, Alan Johnson, in
favour of continuing the action. Johnson only forced a return to work
through a reps’ meeting at which he threatened to remove their
union credentials.
In the fire service there has been a series of protests and
ballots in response to attacks on conditions. In Glasgow a dispute at
the Royal Infirmary made headline news north of the border after
porters and cleaners voted to strike against privatisation. NHS trust
management threatened, in the words of the city’s Evening Times
headline, to ‘bring on the scabs’ and was then forced into a
humiliating victory. In Bedford engineering workers registered a
‘score draw’ after a strike while 700 mainly women workers at
Elkes Biscuits in Uttoxeter won a pay increase after ten days on strike.
This is occurring even before the effects of Tory tax increases
make themselves felt on workers’ pay packets. With most workers £5
worse off already and with more to follow, it is difficult to see
such a weak and divided government holding the line on pay in the
long run.
Neither do we face a confident management as we did in the early
1980s with Michael Edwardes at what is now Rover, and Ian MacGregor
at first British Steel and then British Coal. Individuals like John
Birt at the BBC, Iain Vallance at BT or the new breed of NHS trust
managers are hated figures.
Most people can be forgiven for knowing little of this. It is not
reported outside the pages of Socialist Worker. Papers such as
the Financial Times, which once seriously monitored industrial
relations, now rarely cover industrial disputes. The union leaders do
little to publicise resistance.
Socialists cannot affect the level of struggle by an act of will.
They can address the doubts which remain in workers’ heads while
boosting the desire for a fightback. Where there is a socialist
presence it can ensure that the trade union officials don’t stifle action.
Last year that was true at Timex where there was a group of long
term Socialist Worker readers. This year that has been true at
Glasgow Royal Infirmary (where a regular sale mushroomed to over 100
in the week of the dispute) and at Liverpool’s main sorting office.
One simple task we can all set ourselves is to ensure that such
workplace sales happen in every part of the country.
At present the situation is one where industrial disputes bubble
up but never quite come to the boil. The legacy of years of defeat
means that the anger in people’s minds is still mixed with a lack
of confidence about how to fight.
But we only have to look across the Channel to France to see how
quickly mass strikes and protests can develop. It is only a matter of
time before the explosions which are recent features of continental
Europe also happen here.
 



Nor Meekly Serve My Time – The H Block Struggle 1976–1981
Brian Campbell, Laurence McKeown and Felim O’Hagan
Beyond the Pale Publications £9.95
The date will remain with me for ever. In the early hours of
Tuesday 5 May 1981 I was woken by the sound of dustbin lids being
beaten on the small streets off Belfast’s Falls Road. After a few
moments the realisation of what had happened sank in. Bobby Sands, MP
for Fermanagh and South Tyrone, had died on the 66th day of his
hunger strike. As the senior IRA officer in the H Blocks he had
volunteered to lead the second hunger strike demanding Republican
prisoners were given political status.
Over 100,000 people attended Bobby Sands’ funeral two days
later. When he had won the Fermanagh and South Tyrone seat with
30,492 votes a few weeks before it had been a slap in the face to
Margaret Thatcher who had boasted that Sands and his fellow hunger
strikers had little or no support.
Throughout that spring and summer people took to the streets,
workplaces walked out on strike, two prisoners (one the hunger
striker Kieran Doherty) were elected to the Irish parliament, while
Sands’ election agent Owen Carron held his parliamentary seat. None
of it was enough. Nine more would die.
Francis Hughes’ funeral took place in the countryside. Going by
bus from Belfast meant running the gauntlet of Loyalist stone
throwers and having to march across fields when the RUC halted the
coaches. Martin Hurson died suddenly and shockingly after just 46
days. Joe McDonnell’s funeral procession was attacked by troops
with plastic bullets. Kieran Doherty died after an agonisingly long 73 days.
As the weeks dragged on there was more and more a sense of
powerlessness. If this was true on the outside it must have been a
hundred times more so inside the H Blocks. The prisoners knew
comrades and friends were dying just a few yards away in the hospital
block. This book tells of the hunger strike as they experienced it. I
cannot do it justice. Their words speak for themselves.
What remains with everyone active over the hunger strike is the
bitterness towards Britain’s political establishment. Margaret
Thatcher coldly watched ten men die while Labour’s Don Concannon
flew in to spend a few minutes with a dying Bobby Sands, tormenting
him with the information that Labour was backing Thatcher’s line.
These men and women – women in Armagh jail joined the first
hunger strike which was called off when the Tories seemed to offer
concessions which were withdrawn – were not acting on orders from
‘the evil IRA godfathers’ the British press bleated on about. The
leadership of the Republican movement argued against the hunger
strike. It was the prisoners who decided on this course of action.
In the end the hunger strike set its own deadline. Once Bobby
Sands and the other three original strikers had died it was difficult
to see how victory could be achieved.
The strike ended when relatives started insisting on medical
treatment when their sons slipped into comas. This must have been a
terrible decision. The relatives had been the ones who had begun the
protests when the first H Block Republican prisoners refused to wear
prison uniform or accept prison discipline. They had seen their sons
and husbands live for months and even years with only a blanket to
wear in an empty cell (a mattress was only thrown in at lights out)
and suffering beatings. They had gone through the worries of the
first hunger strike and the brief elation when it seemed to have
achieved a successful conclusion.
This book began as a pamphlet for the tenth anniversary of the
strike. It is a tribute, as are Bobby Sands’ writings, to how
ordinary people can not only take everything the establishment throws
at them, but how in the process they blossom into fuller human beings.
 



A History of Warfare
John Keegan
Hutchinson £20
‘War is hell.’ So wrote General Sherman towards the end of his
life and he should have known. Sherman was one of the founders of
modern ‘total’ warfare – war where the destruction of the
enemies’ fighting soldiers is no longer sufficient as a goal but
where, in a modern industrialised society, victory rests on
destroying the enemy’s economy and the morale of its civilian
population. Sherman’s march to the sea and the destruction of the
Confederate state’s railroads, the cotton plantations on which its
society was based and the burning of cities like Atlanta, effectively
ended the American Civil War.
John Keegan’s A History of Warfare starts with the
Prussian theoretician von Clausewitz’s maxim that ‘war is the
continuation of policy by other means’. He goes on to paint a broad
historical sweep from Ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt up to the Second
World War and Vietnam.
Keegan is no left-winger, having been a senior lecturer at
Sandhurst and going on to become defence editor of the Daily
Telegraph, getting an OBE in the Gulf War honours list. Yet he is
also no Colonel Blimp. As in his other books he does not shirk from
detailing what war entails at the cutting edge. The very breadth of
his study is stimulating and it makes for an easy read.
But it is also a book through which runs a debate Keegan has not
resolved. Its writing coincided with the ending of the Cold War and
the widespread acceptance that the great wars between continental
powers are a thing of the past. Keegan accepts that and goes on to
look for a role for the modern soldier.
His answer lies in a peacekeeping role round the globe’s
troublespots. The brutality of the American intervention in Somalia,
the inability of the West to prevent the eruption of wars which
stretch from Italy to China and the futility of the West’s Gulf War
all blow a wide hole in such hopes.
In an argument with Clausewitz, Keegan argues that war cannot be
identified with modern states or with power politics. Rather its
origins lie in human nature. ‘Man’, for Keegan, ‘is a thinking
animal in whom the intellect directs the urge to hunt and the ability
to kill’.
This is the most annoying part of the book. Humans have been on
the globe for some 1 million years while their antecedents were
around for two million years. The view that warfare emerged alongside
the creation of agricultural societies is one now accepted by not
just Marxists but most mainstream anthropologists. Yet Keegan’s
argument that the origins of war lie somewhere in our inner selves
rests on an examination of societies which were already developed,
like those of Ancient Mesopotamia, or tribes already in contact with
more developed societies. At the earliest his examples start some
6,000 years ago.
In carrying forward this critique of Clausewitz, Keegan goes on to argue:
‘Politics played no part in the conduct of the First
World War worth mentioning. The First World War was, on the contrary,
an extraordinary, a monstrous cultural aberration, the outcome of an
unwitting decision by Europeans in the century of Clausewitz ... to
turn Europe into a warrior society.’
This can only be maintained by an argument that contrasts the
century running up to the First World War with the rest of human
history where, he argues, war had nothing to do with politics but
emerged from particular military cultures.
But the First World War can only be understood through the
emergence of the great Western powers and their division of an
emerging world economy. The war itself ended with the explosion of
the class differences on which these states rested with revolution in
Russia and Germany.
Throughout his book, however, John Keegan goes out of his way to
show how warfare developed in relation to the development of
humanity’s productive capacity. This is the meat of the book and
makes its reading worthwhile.
 






Mass student protests in the US in the 1960s aimed to fight
racial segregation. As Chris Bambery explains, the protests
also drew in thousands of workers and radicalised a whole generation



Thirty years ago thousands of American students, mostly from
comfortable white middle-class homes, gave up their summer vacations
to go South into Mississippi and other former slave states. They went
to challenge the racial segregation which equalled virtual apartheid.
Others went into the slums of the Northern industrial cities to build
community organisations and education projects.
The years 1964–65 were the high water mark of American
liberalism. President Lyndon B. Johnson got Congress to pass the
Civil Rights Bill and a year later the Voting Rights Act was made
law. Johnson announced a War On Poverty as part of a move towards
what he termed ‘the Great Society’.
The organisations which would spawn the New Left were at their
peak. The Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and the
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) were spearheading Freedom Summer
in Mississippi. Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) provided the
young idealistic students who went South and into the Northern slums.
The Free Speech Movement erupted at the University of California in
Berkeley over the administration’s ban on political meetings and
stalls. It ushered in a wave of campus unrest which burned for a decade.
What unfolded was a process of disillusionment with any hope of
reforming American society and a process of radicalisation. The young
blacks at the centre of SNCC and CORE would move away from the ideas
of non-violence and Martin Luther King towards the revolutionary
ideas of Black Power and the Black Panthers. SDS would explode in a
debate involving tens of thousands of young people who were groping
towards revolutionary politics.
At the beginning of the 1960s the assumption was that the civil
rights movement could herald a new coalition between liberals and the
trade union movement which would either create an equivalent to
Britain’s Labour Party or transform the existing Democratic Party.
Trade union leaders like Walter Reuther of the United Automobile
Workers helped fund the activities of SDS, CORE and SNCC and threw
their efforts behind Martin Luther King. Thousands of rank and file
workers joined King’s March on Washington. The demonstrators’
songs illustrated the link between the trade unions and the civil
rights movement. Thousands joined in revised versions of Which
Side Are You On and Hallelujah I’m A Bum (changed to
Hallelujah I’m a Travellin’). Even Freedom Train a
Comin’ was adapted from Union Train a Comin’!
In September 1963 hundreds of members of the United Packinghouse
Workers came to Washington to meet with civil rights leaders. CORE
leader James Farmer led them in a song discovered by left wing folk
singers on a picket line in the 1940s, We Shall Overcome.
Later more than 60 members of the teaching union (more than half
from New York City) went to Mississippi to teach black youngsters
during Freedom Summer. In San Francisco dockers, teamsters, teachers
and construction workers joined with CORE to fight racial segregation
and discrimination at the prestigious Palace Hotel. This helped
trigger the free speech fight at Berkeley just across the bay.
After sit-ins began against segregation, trade unionists picketed
or called sympathy strikes at companies like Woolworth’s.
Packinghouse workers joined pickets of the company’s stores with
placards declaring ‘If You Support Woolworth’s Here, You Support
Segregation in the South!’ In New York 800 members of the Garment
Workers’ Union turned out on a single afternoon.
Student activists demonstrated their solidarity with labour when
New York newspaper workers struck in 1962. A year later in Wisconsin
students organised a boycott of a car dealership chain involved in a
dispute with the UAW, in New York they backed striking retail and
hospital workers and in Oregon students joined auto workers on the
picket line.
Peter B. Levy’s The New Left and Labour in the 1960s
charts the uneasy relationship between the new generation of
revolutionaries which was emerging and the trade unions. The
breakdown of the alliance between trade union officialdom and SNCC,
CORE and SDS came over the two burning questions of the decade –
black liberation and the Vietnam War. The unions were extremely right
wing and conservative.
Many SDS leaders were ‘red diaper babies’, sons and daughters
of Communists and radicals who had been involved in the strike waves
and factory occupations of the 1930s and 1940s. Then the Communist
Party had grown to 100,000 and hundreds of thousands of American
workers experienced interracial solidarity as they fought to win
union organisation.
But any working class continuity with that tradition was broken by
the anti-Communist crusade of the 1950s spearheaded by Senator
McCarthy. The American ruling class, aided by the dominant union
leaders, helped create an ideological climate in which left wing
views of any shade were sidelined.
At the beginning of the 1960s the leaders of the American unions
backed the new student groupings because they seemed to share their
distaste for Communism.
As early as 1964 a turning point was reached at that year’s
Democratic Party convention, when 68 pro-civil rights Freedom
Democrats challenged the right of 68 whites elected on the basis of
segregation to represent the state. The union leaders were desperate
to see President Johnson elected at all costs and didn’t want to
upset the Democrats’ apple cart. Walter Reuther threatened Martin
Luther King with withdrawal of financial support unless the Freedom
Democrats backed down. This incident was held up by Stokeley
Carmichael and James Farmer of CORE as proving the need for blacks to
organise their own separate power base.
The head of the AFL-CIO (equivalent of the British TUC), George
Meany, wrote attacking the Black Panthers and Stokeley Carmichael:
‘I’ve got news for Mr Carmichael, the reputed author
of the Black Power slogan. The Negro goons who go on racist rampages
know exactly what Black Power means. To them it is the chance to go
on a spree of violence with testimonial as a “freedom fighter”
for a cover.’
Union leaders like Meany had turned their backs on fighting
discrimination on the shopfloor and even within the unions. But even
black union leaders joined in denouncing the revival of black
nationalism. Yet at grass roots level it was a different story. DRUM,
the Dodge Revolutionary Union Movement, was formed among black car
workers in the Detroit area. In early 1968 at a Ford plant in New
Jersey black workers formed the United Black Brothers after the union
refused to act over racial harassment and organised a sit down
protest.
In May 1970 hard hatted construction workers marched through New
York in support of President Nixon and the war in Vietnam. Long
haired men passing by were set upon. This helped turn many radicals
away from any idea that ordinary workers could be a force for change.
Yet attitudes began to change as the realities of war came home to
working class America. A majority of union members polled in May
1970, 53 percent, opposed both Nixon’s extension of the war to
Cambodia and the construction workers’ rampage in New York.
Levy concludes:
‘Contrary to the stereotype of “hard hats” as
hawks, virtually every survey demonstrated that at any given time
manual workers were just as likely to oppose the war as were youths,
the archetypal doves.’
In the autumn of 1970, 63 percent of Detroit residents voted in a
city wide referendum for immediate US withdrawal from Vietnam. These
voters were overwhelmingly working class. By the end of 1971 Gallup
polls showed 61 percent favoured withdrawal with trade union
households supporting this view more than any other group except blacks.
The bodybags returning from Vietnam were overwhelmingly working
class, and black. The costs of the war ended Johnson’s War on
Poverty and increased inflation hit wage packets. On 15 October 1969
the anti-war movement called for workers to strike and join a
nationwide moratorium against the war. Levy suggests it might have
been ‘the single largest general strike’ in US history. In New
York 40 trade unions endorsed the protest. Local UAW officials led
massive protests in the city and in Berkeley, while tens of thousands
of trade unionists rallied in central Detroit.
A month later between 500,000 and 800,000 people demonstrated in
Washington with another 250,000 protesting in San Francisco. Levy
notes that, while students predominated, vast numbers of trade
unionists were there joining in singing Give Peace a Chance.
Across America 1969 and 1970 saw a major wave of industrial
unrest, often involving unofficial, wildcat strikes. In the South
former SNCC and SDS activists had helped organise and lead strikes at
Levi Strauss plants (SDS chapters in New York, New Orleans and
Atlanta gave support by staging strip-ins of their jeans), in
Carolina textile plants, among Mississippi wood mills and Memphis
sanitation workers.
Early in 1969 Standard Oil workers struck in California. The
company obtained a court order limiting picket numbers. The strikers
responded by asking for outside help. Students from San Francisco and
Berkeley flocked to support them.
In October there was a strike lasting all winter at the giant
General Electric. Across the country students organised collections
of food and money, joined picket lines and took up the chant,
‘Warmakers, Strikebreakers, Smash GE’. In the Boston area
students stopped GE from recruiting on campus. When student radicals
disrupted an address by the company’s vice-president at Boston
University they were met with a court injunction and club wielding
police. A strike against the subsequent arrests and suspensions got
the support of 10,000 students out of a total student body of 17,000.
In mid-1970 200,000 postal workers in New York defied a court
injunction and federal law to walk out in defiance of their union
leaders. The start of the college term in October 1970 coincided with
the biggest walkout, by 400,000 General Motors workers. A former SDS
leader organised 2,000 students in the Chicago area in support of the
strike. In Los Angeles law students gave strikers free advice,
students organised a strike benefit with Joan Baez and Arlo Guthrie,
and encouraged the Black Panthers to support strikers.
In this atmosphere tens of thousands of students rallied to left
wing ideas.
American capitalism had to adjust to contain the insurgency of the
1970s. President Nixon was hustled off amidst scandal to be replaced
by Gerald Ford and the Democrat Jimmy Carter. Carter signed an accord
with union leaders to police their members, helped promote the rise
of middle class blacks and implemented the monetarist policies
carried on by Reagan and Bush in the 1980s.
The book ends not in lamenting the passing of the spirit of the
1960s but in hope. As Levy points out, the 1960s removed forever the
America of ‘coat hanger abortions, school prayer, atmospheric
testing of atomic weapons, Jim Crow [institutionalised racial
segregation], wanton imperialism, mandatory ROTC, dress codes,
dormitory curfews, the draft, bomb shelters, strident (domestic)
anti-Communism and legal sexual and racial discrimination in the
workplace and housing market’.
Neither can America turn the clock back, whatever the sentimental
twaddle like Forrest Gump peddled by Hollywood. Working class America
carries all the scars and bitterness of the Reagan-Bush years. Peter
Levy quotes Martin Luther King on the eve of his assassination:
‘I’ve been to the mountain top. And I’ve looked
over. And I’ve seen the promised land. I may not get there with
you. But I want you to know ... that we, as a people, will get to the
promised land.’
The New Left and Labor in the 1960s, by Peter Levy,
£14.95 (from Bookmarks)
 






The year 1934 marks the moment 60 years ago
when the workers’ movement internationally turned towards
militancy and resistance in the face of the fascist threat and the
misery of unemployment. Chris Bambery looks at some of
their fights



As 1934 opened the fascists believed that their hour had come.
Hitler was consolidating his dictatorship in Germany. Fascism seemed
set to sweep the board in France and Austria.
The traditional party of the French middle class, the Radicals,
was losing its support. The various French fascist bands claimed a
membership of 1 million. A series of financial scandals involving
Radical Party ministers had rocked France. In January a Ukrainian
Jewish speculator, Stavisky, was found shot dead in an Alpine resort.
The common view was that he had been killed to stop him revealing
links with top politicians.
The fascists responded to the Stavisky affair with a mix of
anti-Semitism and denunciation of corrupt politicians. On 6 February
the various fascist bands called a demonstration outside the Chamber
of Deputies, and tried to force their way in. Marbles were thrown
under the hooves of police horses, fascists wielded canes with razors
attached, railings were torn up to be used as missiles and a bus was
set on fire. Not until the early hours were the rioters finally
dispersed. Fifteen people were killed and 1,435 wounded.
While all this was going on the Radical government had won a vote
of confidence. But the next day, fearing it could no longer maintain
order, it bowed to the fascist threat and resigned. A right wing
government of ‘order’ took over. It presented itself as a bulwark
against fascism, but to most workers it seemed a step towards fascism.
The Communists and the Socialists were divided. But the main trade
union federation, the CGT, called a nationwide strike. The CGT was
led by right wingers but its leadership was under more direct
pressure from the rank and file than either the Socialist or
Communist leaderships.
No one knew how the strike call for 12 February would be met. The
French working class had suffered a series of defeats since the end
of the First World War. Union membership was low. The Communist Party
refused to back the day of action until the day before. The general
strike met with a huge response. In the Paris region alone a million
workers downed tools. In the capital there were two demonstrations,
one called by the Communists, the other by the CGT and the
Socialists, which converged on the Place de la Nation. The Socialist
leader, Leon Blum, recalled:
‘I was marching in the front row. The gap between the
two columns narrowed from second to second and we all shared the same
anxiety; would the meeting of the two columns be a collision? Was
this journée going to degenerate into a conflict between two
factions of the working class population of Paris ...?
‘Now the two columns were face to face and from all
sides the same cry sprang up ... People shook hands. The heads of the
column melted into each other. This was not a collision but a
fraternisation. By a sort of popular groundswell the people’s will
had imposed unity of action of the working class’.
In the weeks following, the Socialist and Communist leaders
retreated into their old posturing. But at a rank and file level
Committees of Vigilance sprang up which mobilised against the
fascists. Within weeks the two parties had to enter into a ‘Unity
Pact’ under pressure from below. The French fascists were thrown
back from the edge of power onto the defensive. Native French fascism
was never able to challenge for power. The working class began a
process of radicalisation which would explode in June 1936, with the
biggest general strike the world had yet seen and nationwide factory occupations.
Events in France were in strong contrast to those in Austria.
Rather than imposing a fascist dictatorship directly, the Austrian
chancellor Dolfuss aimed to chip away at the Socialists’ power
base. In February 1934 he was confident enough to order the Heimwehr
(the fascist militia), the police and the army to ‘cleanse’ the
working class areas of Vienna.
The working class districts of Vienna were ringed with artillery
and tanks. A three day battle began. But the Socialist Party ordered
that resistance should be left in the hands of a few thousand
Schutzbund (Socialist militia) members. As house to house
fighting went on there was the strange spectacle of the bulk of
Vienna’s workers left to watch the fighting as spectators, cheering
on their side! After three days of heavy fighting the Schutzbund
was overwhelmed. Some 2,000 workers were killed, over 5,000 were
wounded, while tens of thousands were jailed. The Socialist Party and
the trade unions were banned.
Yet the resistance of the Viennese workers was an inspiration to
workers across Europe. The slogan ‘Better to die in Vienna than
surrender in Berlin’ served as a call to action, and nowhere more
than in an isolated mining region on the other side of Europe.
For seven years, from 1923 to 1930, Spain had been under the heel
of the military dictatorship of General Primo de Rivera. The
dictatorship collapsed amidst popular jubilation in 1930. A year
later the monarchy was swept away and a republic proclaimed. But the
carnival atmosphere soon gave way to a growing polarisation. After
years of repression the working class expected great things from this
republic. The country exploded in a strike wave led by the
revolutionary anarchist trade union federation, the CNT. In the
countryside landless labourers seized land. Within a year the CNT
reached its peak membership of 1,200,000.
In response, the Spanish upper classes increasingly looked to the
newly formed semi-fascist CEDA. The right wing won a victory in the
elections of November 1933, helped by the CNT’s boycott of the
poll. This new government began to crack down on the workers’
movement and invited CEDA to join it in office.
The Socialist Party underwent a sweeping radicalisation. Its timid
constitutionalism was replaced by openly revolutionary language. Its
leader, Largo Caballero, who had previously collaborated with the
dictator de Rivera, was now called the ‘Spanish Lenin’! Among the
party’s rank and file this new language had a powerful effect. The
Socialist Youth began to describe themselves openly as Marxists.
The Socialist Party joined the Workers’ Alliance, a united front
which included the Communist Party and revolutionaries. This promised
that if CEDA joined the government it would organise a nationwide
insurrection. Caballero hoped that this threat would in itself be
enough to stop CEDA from taking office. Meanwhile the CNT refused to
join the alliance.
Only in one area, the mining region of Asturias in north west
Spain, was there true unity. Here the CNT joined the regional
Workers’ Alliance which aimed to mobilise the workers against
fascism, not just to defend democracy but to make the revolution.
They argued this was the only way to defeat fascism.
On 4 October CEDA entered the government. The Socialist Party
leadership’s bluff had been called. Reluctantly it proclaimed a
general strike, which with no preparation was a failure everywhere
except Asturias. The miners had waited months for what they saw as
the day of the revolution. Hastily formed militias besieged the hated
paramilitary police Civil Guard posts. Local Workers’ Alliance
committees rapidly took over the villages and towns, and organised
every aspect of local life from food and hospitals through transport
and communications to a makeshift war industry.
The miners had few arms but seized on dynamite from the mines to
defeat the civil guards. A thousand dynamiters were dispatched to the
regional capital, Oviedo. Here revolutionary power was established on
the streets. Prostitutes joined workers in bitter hand to hand
fighting with the government forces who were driven into a few
isolated strongholds. Such was the optimism of the workers of
Asturias that they dismissed news of the general strike’s failure
elsewhere as government lies.
The government sent troops under the command of General Franco to
crush the Asturias Commune. In the mountain approaches they faced
stiff resistance. Giant catapults rained down dynamite on them. When
the 20,000 strong Red Army ran out of explosives they fought with
rocks. But inevitably they were pushed back. On 18 October the
Commune surrendered. Franco’s troops entered the mining communities
leaving a trail of murder, rape and torture. Over 3,000 workers died
during the revolution and 30,000 were jailed.
Nevertheless the heroism of the Asturian miners was not in vain.
They effectively stopped Spanish fascism from coming to power
constitutionally as Hitler had done in Germany. Above all the
uprising accelerated the radicalisation of the Spanish working class.
The left won a sweeping victory in the elections of February 1936,
and when in July Franco led the army in an uprising, the workers did
not hesitate to take to the streets, to arm themselves and to seize
the factories.
Across the Atlantic 1934 marked an even more dramatic reversal in
the fortunes of the working class. A mere 3 million American workers
were organised in trade unions before the Wall Street Crash of 1929.
Union organisation was confined to craft workers, whose leaders
argued that unskilled workers were ‘unorganisable’.
In the great steel, car and rubber plants non-unionised workers
could be fired at will. They faced a ten to 12 hour day and regular
speed up on the production lines. The level of fightback was low. In
the Great Depression unemployment topped 18 million. Over 3 million
workers were forced to take 10 percent wage cuts. More than a million
were homeless, on the road in search of work and food.
The leaders of the union federation, the AFL, were unconcerned
with their fate. In 1932 they even opposed federal unemployment
benefit! Trade union membership fell by 7,000 a week. In 1932
unemployed demonstrators in River Rouge were machine gunned. Four
protesters were killed. In Washington unemployed war veterans were
driven off the capital’s streets by cavalry.
Yet things were set to change. In 1933 Franklin D. Roosevelt was
elected president as the Democratic Party candidate. He had promised
change which he would not deliver but the vague talk of change
encouraged resistance. At the beginning of 1934 there was a brief
economic recovery. Unemployment fell by two million to ‘just’ 14
million. The effect of this was dramatic, removing the threat of
redundancy and of the blacklist for many workers.
Three strikes – among Toledo auto component workers, San
Francisco dockers and Minneapolis teamsters (truckers) – all
unofficial, triggered a nationwide strike wave which swept the old
union leaders aside.
In Minneapolis a small group of Trotskyists had spent years
working among the truckers, organising the union. At the beginning of
1934 they were able to lead a strike of 600 coal shovellers to
victory. The effect of the strike in the city was dramatic and the
Trotskyists were able to spread the message that workers could fight
and win.
Within weeks all the teamsters walked out to secure union
recognition. The strike then spread to affect all the city’s
workers. The bosses caved in, only to renege on the deal having
ensured the state governor would mobilise the National Guard. The
second strike which followed remains a model for revolutionaries.
Cruising pickets went back on the streets. When they met with
opposition from the police they brought out other workers in
solidarity. Strikers’ wives were mobilised as picket squads, as
were unemployed workers. Decisions were taken by mass meetings and an
elected strike committee.
The picture in Toledo and San Francisco was similar. In Toledo
socialists had organised an unemployed movement which allowed them to
win support among car workers which, when the strike broke, gave them
a position of leadership. In the San Francisco docks a group around
the Communist Party had launched a rank and file paper, the
Waterfront Worker. From a small beginning they were able to
build an all out dock strike.
Victory in all three strikes was gained by new methods. Each was
run by elected strike committees. When cops attacked pickets other
groups of workers struck in solidarity. Previously unorganised
workers showed great militancy. In Toledo 10,000 pickets defied a
court injunction, chased off the National Guard and then bombarded
scabs in the plant with rocks using giant catapults made from tyre
inner tubes!
Within two years of these strikes America was rocked by a new
strike wave which threw up another new tactic – factory
occupations. The leaders of the AFL were simply swept aside. A new
union federation, the CIO, was built among the unskilled.
The year 1934 was a year in which the fortunes of the working
class shifted dramatically. In the case of France, Spain and the
United States this shift was unexpected, stemming from rank and file
action. What mattered was that socialists could respond to that
shift. In the 1930s there were just handfuls of revolutionaries so
the main beneficiaries were the Communist Parties, which swelled in
size. Today, 60 years on, events are moving with the same urgency.
 



Britons: Forging the Nation 1707–1837
Linda Colley
Pimlico £10
There is an advert on television for Typhoo tea featuring the
speech from Shakespeare’s Richard II which describes this
‘sceptred isle’. It comes with the required image of a Britain
complete with cricket on the village green, scones and, of course,
tea. Yet there is a jarring note at the advert’s end. Shakespeare’s
speech is a triumph of praise for ‘this England’. In 1994 the
advertisers have scored out the name England and replaced it with Britain.
It is a reminder of just how recent the notion of a British nation
is. The mythology woven around the crown and the ‘mother of
parliaments’ is that these are institutions rooted in the mists of
a common past. The truth is rather different. The idea of Britain as
a single nation state is little older than the creation of the United States.
Until the close of the 18th century anyone living in London would
have regarded all Scots, whether Gaelic or English speaking, as
aliens and would have found it difficult to communicate with the bulk
of the population elsewhere in England.
Linda Colley’s book is an excellent examination of how the
notion of a British state was born. For her it centres on war, and in
particular the long war with France in the 18th century. This war
would become the first world war, with European armies fighting in
North America and India and their navies engaged in battle off the
Australian coast.
The final victory of this long contest at Waterloo in 1815 marked
more than military success. Colley reproduces a painting by the
Scottish artist David Wilkie depicting news of victory over Napoleon
being brought to Chelsea pensioners. This painting was a top draw
when it was first exhibited. Within it are various images of Britain
– the pubs named after various military grandees, the piper from a
Highland regiment, Chelsea pensioners and even a black bandsman who
conjures up the idea of empire.
Yet just 50 years earlier the London mob rioted in support of John
Wilkes’ claims that George III was promoting Scots to rule the
kingdom of England and that by their nature Scots were enemies of liberty.
Linda Colley is strongest at showing the various threads which
were sewn together to create the idea of the British nation. Unlike
many on the left she is absolutely clear that 18th century Britain
was a capitalist economy. The ruling oligarchy may have been
aristocrats but they were intimately connected to industry, commerce
and the slave trade.
Agriculture was increasingly geared to feeding the growing cities
and for export. The ruling class expanded beyond its earlier
oligarchical core and threw up cultural and political institutions
which extended down into the lower classes.
Unlike France, Britain’s wars did not centre on the geographical
expansion of its borders, but rather on the acquisition of ports and
colonies for commercial gain.
But the book falls down in trying to carry an argument against
E.P. Thompson and other Marxist historians who have demonstrated the
class polarisation of Britain in this period, the level of repression
and the rich culture of opposition to the ruling class. Colley
argues, however, the majority of Britons accepted the new British
nationalism and the ruling class which spawned it.
But there is a problem here when one tries to examine what is
often termed ‘the silent majority’. These are people who can
suddenly find themselves moving sharply in different directions. The
same people who might have cheered George III’s jubilee could turn
on his rakish successor. Those who sang of British liberty could
employ those ideas in an entirely different direction when it came to
demanding parliamentary reform. The London mob might riot for king
and country but they could also carry through near insurrection –
in what the history books call the Gordon Riots – against the
symbols of the ruling order.
In her chapter on the abolition of slavery, Colley simply looks at
those in the ruling class who came to support abolition. She misses
the popular protests which ensured black people were freed if they
set foot on British soil and that slavers could not recapture them.
 






Sometimes images can express reality more
strongly than words. Chris Bambery reviews a new
art exhibition whose work depicts the terror of the First World War
and the hope that grew out of it



Looking back on the First World War in his novel, Tender Is The
Night, F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote of the slaughter in the
trenches:








Over the top, John Nash



‘All my beautiful lovely safe world blew itself up here
with a great gust of high explosive love’.
To understand what Fitzgerald meant, visit this exhibition at
London’s Barbican Gallery and contrast two self portraits by the
German artist, Otto Dix. Self portrait as a Soldier was
painted in 1914 and showed his enthusiasm for the war in those early
months. A year later his Self portrait as Shooting Target
shows an entirely different man. Dix survived to produce a series of
etchings in 1924 showing disturbing images of the Western Front as a
counterblast to the militarism of the German right.
This exhibition looks at the reactions of avant garde
artists to the war. If the term avant garde is to mean
anything it describes a variety of artists who broke from the
classic, romantic tradition of the 19th century. They were rebelling
against a capitalist world and the impact of machinery and modern
production techniques. The front line of this movement was in those
cities which were being cast into the melting pot of mass
industrialisation – Vienna, Milan, Barcelona and St Petersburg.








Torso in metal from the ‘Rock Drill’,
Jacob Epstein



When used to describe this generation of artists, the term avant
garde includes expressionism, where the object’s dimensions are
torn apart and its colours distorted to reveal its true nature. It
also includes futurism – a movement largely based in Italy and
Russia – where artists consciously wanted to celebrate the age of
the machine.
The Italian futurist, Marinetti, welcomed the war,
campaigning for Italy’s entry on the side of France and Britain,
because it would be ‘the health giver of the world’. This idea
was taken up by the British futurist, Christopher Nevinson, who
stated in 1915:
‘This war will be a violent incentive to Futurism, for
we believe that there is no beauty except in strike, and no
masterpiece without aggressiveness’.








The widow II, Käthe Kollwitz



The slaughter led Nevinson to break from abstract art to produce
in 1916 La Patrie, a painting of dead and wounded lying in a
Dunkirk shed waiting evacuation. A year later the British government
censored Nevinson’s Paths of Glory, because it depicted
British dead. Nevinson’s War Profiteers gives a political
edge to his anger.
In 1913 Jacob Epstein exhibited a metal sculpture of the torso of
a man working with a drill. In 1916 he returned to lop off its limbs
to produce a shocking portrayal of terrible, frightening wounds.








Self portrait as shooting target,
Otto Dix









Berlin street scene, George Grosz









The soldiers of King Albert the Ready,
Walter Sickert



There is in this exhibition a sense of premonition in the final
years before the war of what lay ahead. Bohumil Kubista, serving with
the army of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in the Balkan Wars of 1912
and 1913, painted Heavy Artillery in Action, which could have
been any of the battles three or four years later – the Somme,
Verdun or Passchendaele. The German artist, Franz Marc, died at
Verdun, but in 1913 he painted The Unfortunate Land of Tyrol,
which seems to herald a future cataclysm.
The title of this exhibition, A Bitter Truth, gives a
good sense of experiences and reactions to the war of the various
artists on exhibition here. There are some exceptions. Walter
Sickert, by 1914 an establishment figure, has two paintings on show
celebrating ‘brave little Belgium’, whose defence was the reason
presented for Britain’s war with Germany. The American artist
George Bellows returned to this theme shortly after his country’s
entry into the war with Massacre at Dinant, depicting the
massacres supposedly inflicted on Belgian civilians by the conquering
German army.
The British artist Paul Nash’s sense of despair is on display in
his ironically titled We are Making a New World, showing the
day breaking over the shattered landscape of the trenches. Nash’s
The Mule Track, far from being a celebration of the machine,
shows all the horrors of modern technology in the shape of high
velocity shells and shrapnel being unleashed on humanity.
There is a common sense of horror at the realities of the war. But
beyond that it is difficult to say more. In the world that emerged
after 1918 much of the avant garde was moving into the
mainstream – as can be seen with the English artist, Stanley
Spencer. Even in his 1916 depiction of a dressing station in
Macedonia there is no cry of anger. It is almost as if in death or
suffering there is redemption. By 1922 his Unveiling Cookham War
Memorial seems to be a celebration of the timeless Englishness of
this Thames Valley village.
Whatever the similarities between the different artists showing
here, they were moving in different directions – artistically and
politically. For, as the war ended in revolution, the two could not
be separated.
The Russian artist Malevich made six lithographs in 1914 appealing
in a naive, cartoon like style to support the Tsar’s war effort. By
the war’s end Malevich supported the Bolshevik Revolution. The
Italian futurist, Marinetti, became a champion of Mussolini’s
fascism – a political path followed by the British artist Wyndham Lewis.
This exhibition offers something more than ‘war is hell’. The
experience of war was a threshold to a more fragmented and
unconfident world. This is a world with which we are familiar and
that’s why anyone who has a couple of hours to spare should make an
effort to see this exhibition.
The final word must go to the works of those artists working in
Germany between the wars end and the victory of Nazism. The
sculptures and woodcuts of Kathe Kollwitz, George Grosz’s drawing
Berlin Street Scene and Dix’s etchings are works of artists
who have gone beyond examining the bitter truth of the war to portray
the naked reality of the society which spawned such horrors.
A Bitter Truth – Avant Garde Art and the Great War:
Barbican Art Gallery, London, 29 September–1 December, Admission
£41.50 (£12.50 concessions, reduced admission £12.50 every evening
Monday–Friday 5 p.m.)
 



In 1938 Trotsky looked out from exile in Mexico on a Europe
entering a new world war. The Munich Agreement, handing the Nazis a
slice of Czechoslovakia, had just been reached between Hitler’s
Germany, Britain and France. The Western Communist Parties were
embracing their respective national flags, seeking alliances with the
most reactionary sections of society on the basis of opposition to
Germany. The Popular Front line imposed by Stalin was at its height.
Trotsky pinpointed a contradiction within the Communist Parties:
As regards the ex-Comintern, its social base, properly
speaking, is of a two-fold nature. On the one hand, it lives on the
subsidies of the Kremlin, submits to the latter’s commands, and in
this respect every ex-Communist bureaucrat is the younger brother and
subordinate of the Soviet bureaucrat. On the other hand, the various
machines of the ex-Comintern feed from the same sources as Social
Democracy, that is the super-profits of imperialism. The growth of
the Communist Parties in recent years, their infiltration into the
ranks of the petty bourgeoisie, their installation in the state
machinery, trade unions, parliaments, municipalities, etc., have
strengthened in the extreme their dependence on national imperialism
at the expense of their traditional dependence on the Kremlin.
Ten years ago it was predicted that the theory of
socialism in one country must inevitably lead to the growth of
nationalist tendencies in the sections of the Comintern ... Today we
can predict with assurance the inception of a new stage. The growth
of imperialist antagonisms, the obvious proximity of the war danger,
and the equally obvious isolation of the USSR must unavoidably
strengthen the centrifugal nationalist tendencies within the
Comintern. Each one of its sections will begin to evolve a patriotic
policy on its own account. Stalin has reconciled the Communist
Parties of the imperialist democracies with their national
bourgeoisies. This stage has now been passed ... Henceforth, the
communo-chauvinists will have to worry about their own hides, whose
interests will by no means always coincide with the ‘defence of the
USSR’. [1]
Trotsky’s time scale was wrong. The monolith of World Communism
would remain intact through a number of further crucial shifts
imposed by Stalin. In particular the parties broke from their Popular
Front allies when Stalin sided with Hitler in September 1939 and then
again in 1947 when they were ordered to make a similar break with the
onset of the Cold War.
Yet within a year of that shift there came the first break in the
monolith, the split between Stalin and the Yugoslav leader Tito. The
Sino-Soviet split would produce further shock waves. Under pressure
from events in Hungary in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968 and Poland in
1981 the Western Parties began openly distancing themselves from
Russia. At the same time Moscow relied less on using these parties as
a means of pressurising Western governments to establish friendly
relations with the Russian state.
By the mid-1970s the emergence of what would be termed
‘Eurocommunism’ saw Trotsky proved correct. A succession of
Western Communist Parties openly sought to transform themselves into
classical reformist parties. The Italian party (the PCI) led the way,
embracing support for Italian membership of NATO.
Finally, the shock of revolution in Eastern Europe in autumn 1989
and the collapse of its Stalinist regimes led to a further turn of
the wheel. In Italy the PCI announced it would be now named the
Democratic Party of the Left (PDS). The party leadership hoped to go
further and immerse themselves in a broad centre-left coalition. In
Britain the editor of Marxism Today, the magazine of the
Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB), wrote in Rupert Murdoch’s
the Times:
Even the most conservative position on offer acknowledged
that democratic centralism, Marxism-Leninism, and the name Communism
should be ditched ...
Moreover, the death of the CPGB may well be part of the
slow death of the old Socialist left. If that is so – and I think
it is – the CP, in its final years, will have performed the useful
task of helping to bury it. That task is now more or less complete.
It is time to move on. RIP. [2]
Jacques wishes to disband the party entirely. Its newly appointed
general secretary, Nina Temple, declared: ‘The title of the new
party is up for discussion. My personal preference is for the Radical
Party – or something like that.’ She added: ‘I have never been
a Marxist-Leninist because it was too restrictive.’ [3]
If one needed a precise moment for the death of the international
Communist movement 23 May 1990 would do-on that day Reuters sent out
this brief report:
The World Marxist Review, set up by Communist
Parties around the world to discuss the theoretical problems of
Marxism, is folding because of lack of interest. ‘There didn’t
seem to be any reason to continue publication’, the monthly
magazine’s liquidator, Jaroslav Precek, said in Prague yesterday. [4]
The World Marxist Review was the last thread linking what
had once appeared a seamless Stalinist monolith, directed from Moscow.
 
After the war
The Western Communist Parties emerged from World War Two with
immense prestige. In France it was the Communist Party (PCF) that
formed the crucial cadre in the resistance to German occupation. The
Allied landings in Normandy were accompanied by a national uprising
which saw the Communist-led resistance forces liberate the bulk of
the country, including Paris. A national strike of railworkers
paralysed much of the transport on which the German army depended.
General de Gaulle confessed to his memoirs: ‘the leadership of the
fighting elements was in the hands of the Communists’. [5]
In Italy on 24 April 1945 60,000 Milanese workers in the zone of
German occupation struck, setting up workers councils. The strike
spread to Turin and assumed insurrectionary levels, with 20,000
fascists executed (including Mussolini). In Greece the resistance
movement (EAM, dominated by the Greek Communist Party) liberated the
country without Allied help. A British observer reported that: ‘By
the time of liberation EAM numbered about 2 million members, out of a
total population of over 7 million ... There seemed to be nothing
that could stand against them.’ [6]
In Spain, just six years after the victory of General Franco, it
seemed only a matter of time before the fascist dictatorship would
fall. Thousands of Communists and other leftists crossed the Pyrénées
to attempt to launch full scale guerilla war. Even in Britain and the
United States, the most stable of the Western powers, Communism was a
growing force. In 1945 two Communist MPs were elected to Britain’s
House of Commons. In the United States the CPS membership reached
100,000 by 1944.
The prestige of Stalin’s Russia, which had fought Hitler
virtually single handedly from 1941 to 1944, plus the CPs’ role in the
resistance gave the Communist Parties immense prestige. That
coincided with a wave of radicalisation which raised the spectre of
revolutionary change in the West.
The PCF grew from 292,701 members in 1937 to 371,471 in 1944 and
616,348 in 1945. In Austria the CP grew from 16,000 members in 1935
to 150,000 in 1948; in Finland the party grew from 1,200 in 1940 to
150,000 in 1946; in Italy the PCI grew from 402,000 in 1944 to 2
million plus in 1946; in Denmark membership stood at 9,000 in 1939
but reached 75,000 in 1945; in in Norway membership went up from
5,272 in 1939 to 45,000 in 1946 whilst in Japan, where the CP was
underground and tiny before the war’s end, it polled two million
votes in 1946, winning five seats (by 1949 it took 3 million votes
and 35 seats). [7]
Nineteen forty-five seemed a year pregnant with possibilities for
socialist change. Yet as events were to show Western capitalism not
only stabilised itself, breaking free from the protracted crisis of
the 1920s and 30s, but entered into its greatest and most sustained
economic boom. Central to capitalism’s ability to achieve this was
the role played by the Western Communist Parties under the
instructions of Stalin. As the former Spanish Communist Party (PCE)
leader, Fernando Claudin writes: ‘only the Communist Parties could
halt the revolutionary movement of the proletariat, and in practice
this is what they did.’ [8]
Stalin had already made it clear he wanted the continuation of the
grand wartime alliance and was content with the carve up of the world
achieved at Yalta. In 1943 he formally buried the corpse of the
Communist International. It meant little in practice but it
demonstrated to the Allies that Stalin renounced even the rhetoric of
what the US Vice President Henry Wallace called in March 1943 ‘the
Trotskyist idea of fomenting world-wide revolution’. Instead Stalin
wanted a far reaching agreement with US imperialism based on sharing
out ‘spheres of influence’. [9]
In brutal terms Stalin was willing to restrain the hands of the
Communist Parties in order to get Eastern Europe. This can be traced
in the histories of the French, Italian and Greek Communist
Parties.
 
i) Rebuilding ‘La France Eternelle’: The exiled French
Communist leader, Maurice Thorez, returned from Moscow in November
1944 to declare ‘One state, one police force, one army.’ [10] De
Gaulle had only granted a pardon for Thorez when it became clear the
PCF was not going to challenge for power.
The concrete issue was the the maintenance of the patriot
militias and committees of liberation. Thorez backed their
dissolution by de Gaulle. The General commented in his memoirs: ‘From
the moment of his return to France Thorez has been helping to clear
up the traces of the “patriot militias”.’ [11] The PCF now
threw itself into the restoration of what it termed ‘la France
eternelle’ through a ‘battle for production’. The campaign
reached its peak when Thorez told striking miners, ‘we must stop
playing at civil war and not allow provocations against the working
class and our country’. [12]
Despite this, and despite a voting system discriminating against
the Communists, the PCF emerged as the biggest single party in the
election of October 1945. De Gaulle needed the PCF in order to keep
the working class in check. Their price for collaboration was not
high. De Gaulle made it clear they could have ministries in his his
government dealing with economic affairs but not with responsibility
for foreign affairs, the police or the army.
For the next two years the PCF in government loyally pursued the
policy of reconstructing ‘la France eternelle’. When
French troops gunned down thousands in response to the first major
demonstrations for Algerian independence in early 1945 the PCF’s
daily paper defended the shootings. This defence of France’s
overseas empire reached even more grotesque levels when France
launched an all out war against Ho Chi Minh’s Vietminh, who had
liberated the French colony of Vietnam. For four months at the start
of the war there was a Communist minister of defence conducting the
war against Ho Chi Minh.
In March 1947 the Communist ministers voted for war credits in
order to maintain ‘government solidarity’. In all of this the PCF
was slavishly following the line from Moscow.
 
ii) Italy – revolution averted: In March 1944 the PCI and
the Socialist Party (PSI) issued a joint appeal for a general strike
across the north of the country, which was still under German
occuption. Over a million workers responded, representing the most
important working class action in occupied Europe during the war.
The PCI’s exiled leader, Palmiro Togliatti, counterposed a
nationalist message to the struggle of the working class which had
reached the point of dual power in Turin, Milan and Genoa. Togliatti
arrived in Naples in March 1944. The situation was this: In July 1943
the king and Marshall Badoglio had ousted Mussolini in a coup. Both
had been loyal supporters of Il Duce. But now Badoglio saw his
chief aim as forestalling the bitterness accumulated under two
decades of fascism from exploding into a revolutionary upsurge.
The PCI and PSI had entered discussions with Badoglio but these
broke down because of the repressive moves he had initiated and his
benign policy towards the Germans. The PCI and PSI continued to call
for the removal of the king and Badoglio whom they argued, correctly,
were a survival of fascism. When Churchill mocked these views the
workers of Naples struck and the campaign against Badoglio swept the
southern half of the country.
But at the height of this agitation in March 1944 Badoglio could
announce the recognition of his government by Stalin (something
Churchill and Roosevelt had still not granted). At the end of March
the newly returned Togliatti, in the words of his officially approved
biography, proposed ‘the immediate setting up of a government of
national unity’. [13]
Togliatti carried with him the full authority of Stalin and if
Moscow had backed the Badoglio government that is what Communists had
to accept. The whole affair was officially termed by the PCI, the
svolta di Salerno (the Salerno switch). The Soviet
Encyclopedia explained events thus: ‘On the initiative of the
USSR, which had established direct relations with the Italian
government on 11 March, the Badoglio cabinet was re-organised on 22
April 1944 to include representatives of the six parties of the
anti-Fascist coalition.’ [14]
While the PCI joined in creating ‘national unity’ the ruling
class concentrated on muzzling the movement of the masses in southern
and central Italy before the north was liberated. ‘The north wind’,
the radicalisation sweeping south from Turin and Milan dominated
Italian political life.
The PCI made its position on the partisans in the north clear. It
accepted the ‘Rome Protocol’ with the Allies and the government
(now led by a former Socialist, Bonomi), which agreeing to Allied
instructions on the conduct of the war and an Allied officer as
overall military leader. The PCI’s own Storia della Resistenza
Italiana admits:
It seems as if the liberation movement was forced, with
this agreement, to make heavy concessions; in reality the Allies
simply obtained confirmation that the partisan movement ‘would not
make a revolution’, which, obviously, was worrying them. [15]
Throughout the Winter of 1944–45 the Allies observed a de
facto truce whilst the Germans and their fascist allies launched
offensive after offensive against the partisans. In April 1945 (with
Germany on the verge of collapse) the Allies moved but by then the
partisans had liberated much of the north.
A retrospective view by PCI leader Luigi Longo described the
situation as follows:
When the Allied authorities reached the north with their
troops, they began to remove from important posts the men of the
resistance appointed by the national liberation committees, and
replaced them with officials from the old administrative apparatus. [16]
Yet Togliatti told the PCI’s fifth congress in December 1945,
‘We are all united by our agreement to have no recourse to violence
in the struggle between the parties. This agreement calls for the
disarming of all, and we were the first to carry it out.’ [17] In
the new post-war government the PCI, dragging the PSI with it,
offered concession after concession to the Christian Democrats. The
crunch came in December 1945 when the Christian Democrats appointed
one of their own leaders as head of government and consolidated their
hold on the state.
In the January 1946 elections the Christian Democrats became the
major party in Italy after two years of ‘national unity’. None of
this was inevitable. The Christian Democrats were far from being the
major political force when the war ended. Togliatti admitted the PCI
had not distinguished itself enough from the Christian Democrats:
‘their economic and social programme was no different from that of
the Communists and Socialists’. [18]
Whilst they had 40 percent of the population’s support the PCI,
with the PSI tailing behind, acted as loyal members of a Christian
Democrat government. The peace treaty imposed on Italy was massively
unpopular and it took all the efforts of the PCI (following Moscow)
to secure its acceptance. Togliatti agreed to recognition of
Catholicism as the state religion, a ban on divorce and recognition
of the privileged position of the Vatican.
 
iii) The Greek tragedy: Despite the fact that Greece had
been liberated by the forces of EAM resistance under the leadership
of the Greek Communist Party (KKE) the party’s leaders recognised
the agreement between Stalin and Churchill which placed Greece in the
British sphere of influence.
Following the Moscow line EAM entered a coalition government under
the regency of Archbishop Damaskinos. A KKE manifesto in October 1944
stated, ‘It is everybody’s primary national duty to ensure order
and a smooth political life for the country. [19] While the British
troops who occupied Athens under General Scobie were welcomed as
‘liberators’, Churchill was sending these instructions to Eden,
his representative in the Mediterranean:
In my opinion , having paid the price we have to Russia
for freedom of action in Greece, we should not hesitate to use
British troops to support the Royal Hellenic Government under M.
Papandreou ... I fully expect a clash with EAM, and we must not
shrink from it, provided the ground is well chosen. [20]
When Scobie ordered EAM to disarm full-scale war followed.
Churchill visited Athens to tell EAM leaders: ‘The British had gone
into Greece with the agreement of President Roosevelt and Marshall
Stalin.’ [21] The head of the Russian mission, who stayed in the
British military’s headquarters throughout the fighting, was
present and confirmed Churchill’s statement. Two days later when
negotiations had broken down and the RAF was strafing Athens Stalin
appointed an ambassador to the Royal Hellenic Government.
The fighting ended when EAM signed an armistice to coincide with
the summit at Yalta. Stalin declared: ‘I have confidence in the
British government’s policy in Greece.’ [22] The ceasefire saw
the British and the monarchy unleash a wave of fascist terror on
supporters of the wartime partisans. At the end of 1946 full-scale
civil war began. But by now the Communists were in a far less
favourable position and the Americans provided more and more weaponry
(including napalm) supplanting the British.
 
The honeymoon ends
At the beginning of 1947 countries which had Communists in
government included Austria, Belgium, France, Iceland, Italy, Chile
and Finland. Then in May of that year, in a universally repeated
move, both the PCF and PCI ministers were dismissed.
The post-war agreement could not hold. Neither side was satisfied
with the partition of the world agreed at Yalta. Whilst Russia had
dominance of Europe in conventional military terms, only America had
the atomic bomb. Above all in 1947 Western Europe’s economic
reconstruction was the crucial question. Unemployment and inflation
still dragged at many of Europe’s economies. Massive investment was
needed. The only possible source of this was the USA, but this
carried with it acceptance of US economic hegemony.
It also opened the door for the US in Eastern Europe. Many of
those ruling the countries of what was termed the ‘Buffer Zone’
were keen to gain US aid. Stalin could not countenance that.
The opening shots of the Cold War began in March 1947 when
President Truman announced US intervention in the Greek civil war.
This would become known as the Truman doctrine – the declaration of
America’s intention to intervene military to defend its perceived interests.
In June Washington announced the Marshall Plan for economic aid to
Europe. The aim was to revive western Europe as a market and to
integrate it fully into the US bloc. Part of the price of accepting
Marshall aid was removal of the CPs from office. Initially Togliatti
announced Italy would welcome the aid. And in July 1947 the Czech
government agreed to discuss aid terms with Washington. But then on 2
August Moscow rejected the plan and CPs everywhere fell into line.
Other pressures were also at work. In France growing working class
discontent with low wages and high prices threatened to undercut the
PCF’s base. In April a strike over wages swept through the giant
Renault car plants. In the absence of a lead from the PCF or CGT the
few Trotskyist militants in Renault seized the opportunity.
On 30 April Thorez, under growing pressure from this movement told
the cabinet the PCF could no longer support the government on prices
and wages. A vote of confidence was arranged and after voting against
the government the PCF left office.
Yet the party’s leadership had little inkling that an historic
chapter was over. The difficulties over Marshall aid were seen as
temporary. Thorez still presented the PCF as the real ‘party of
government’. And aging party leader Marcel Cachin asked the 11th
party congress in June of that year in reference to Thorez: ‘What
madness made them get rid of such a statesman?’ [23]
In Italy the PCI was dismissed from government shortly after the
prime minister, de Gasperi, returned from a visit to Washington.
Togliatti complained that:
An intelligent and capable adversary would not have
removed us from the government. Quite the opposite, he would have
taken us at our word as regards our declared aims, and would have
dared us to stick to them. He would have worked to create a situation
in which we could have been overwhelmed with no hope of escape and
from which we could only emerge crushed. [24]
Yet just as this was happening Stalin was preparing to pull the
PCF and PCI into line, demanding yet another change in their
political strategy. This would be as dramatic as the shift to the
Third Period in 1928, the shift to the Popular Front in the mid-1930s
and the somersaults over the attitude to War required in 1939 and 1941.
 
The Cominform straitjacket
In October 1947 the Communist Parties of the USSR, Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Romania, France and
Italy met in secret in Poland to found the Cominform, the Communist
Information Bureau. At first sight it must have seemed to Communists
throughout the world as the resurrection of the Comintern, the
Communist International. But the list of invitations, drawn up by
Stalin, gave the game away.
A number of the states in the ‘buffer zone’ had responded
enthusiastically to the lure of Marshall aid. The economies of these
states were still closely linked to the West. On 4 July 1947 the
Czech government agreed to take part in the Paris conference summoned
to discuss the Marshall Plan. (The Communist Party was a minority
within the Czech government, albeit one which controlled the armed
bodies of the state).
In Poland Communists were discussing participating in the Marshall
Plan. Stalin decided the matter for them. On 8 July Radio Moscow
announced Poland had refused to participate in the Paris conference.
On the same day a Czech delegation left for Moscow to be told bluntly
by Stalin that there was no question of even discussing participation
in the Marhall Plan.
The satellites had to act as such. Within the ‘buffer zone’
the Communist Parties, using their control of the police and army,
backed by the Red Army, moved to oust their partners in the coalition
governments which had existed since 1945, and created People’s
Democracies. The people were not consulted.
Stalin’s response to Washington’s attempt at forcing its
political and economic hegemony on Europe was to switch to a hard
line in his dealings with his former allies. His aims were simple: to
secure control of Eastern Europe (winning recognition from the West
that the post-war division was permanent) and prevent the US from
combining all the Western European countries, including Western
Germany, into a single bloc under Washington’s control. The
Cominform was no indication of desire to launch a new revolutionary
wave against US imperialism. The aims were the same as at Yalta.
Stalin was simply changing from a soft to a hard line in order to
force Washington to recognise bipartite control of the world.
Stalin had already agreed to surrender the Third World to the
Allies. That explains the absence of the Chinese Communist Party from
the Cominform (at the moment they were on the verge of power). The
Greeks had already been abandoned: first to Churchill, and now to
Truman. The PCP and PCI were invited because they were the two most
important parties in the crucial area of Western Europe. The Albanian
Communist regime was barred from the Cominform at the insistence of
Yugoslavia. [25]
When the Comintern was dissolved in 1943 the statement announcing
its termination spelt out the way ahead for the Communist Parties: a
supporting role for the wartime grand alliance, an alliance Stalin
wished to see continue after victory over the Axis.
Now the report delivered on behalf of Stalin by his henchman,
Zhdanov, argued the way ahead for a period which lasted until
Stalin’s death in 1953. Zhdanov argued that the world had split
into two camps: ‘the imperialist and anti-democratic camp on the
one hand and the anti-imperialist, democratic camp on the other’.
[26] The whole concept rested on a world divided between states and
blocs of states, not classes. The working class, and the Communist
Parties in the rival bloc, played an entirely subordinate role.
Nowhere in Zhdanov’s report or in the subsequent declaration of the
nine parties was there any mention of the fight for socialism. Rather
the ‘fundamental task’ of the anti-imperialist camp was ‘to
ensure a lasting democratic peace’.
The tasks set out centred on achieving an alliance to preserve
‘national independence’ and ‘democracy’. The report did not
rule out alliances with sections of the European bourgeoisie who
might oppose Washington’s plans. Zhdanov went out of his way to
talk of the ‘possibility of collaboration between the USSR and
countries with different systems, on condition that the principle of
reciprocity is observed and agreements made are kept’. [27]
The Cominform period also saw a return to a marked hostility by
the Communist press to social democracy. But unlike the Third Period
of 1928–34 reformists were not all labelled ‘social-fascists’.
Great care was taken to distinguish between those social-democrats
allied to Washington and those friendly to Moscow.
The Stalinist approach to the mass reformist parties in the West
always began with Moscow’s perception of whether it judged
particular Western powers to be potential allies. The orientation on
the reformist parties begins with their leadership. These leaders
orientate on their national states, and their ruling
classes. They could either influence these ruling classes or could
articulate the particular argument of these rulers within the labour
movement. Nowhere was the starting point the need to win common
action with reformist workers and, when possible, their
leaders, against the employers and their state.
 
Back to the streets
The level of class struggle rose across Western Europe between
1947 and 1950. This was not the result of the Communist plot, alleged
by Western bourgeoisie. Rather it was a defensive response by the
working class to an employers’ offensive aimed at imposing
rationalisation in order to lay the basis for participation in the
Great Boom opening before them.
Even before Cominform the Communist Parties been forced to shift
towards united identification with this resistance (witness the PCF’s
eventual response to the strike at Renault in 1947).
In the 18 months after the PCF left office strikes involving more
than 2 million workers swept France. Having been forced to react the
PCF tried to impress Moscow by giving this movement a political edge.
The CGT was forced to include amongst its aims opposition to the
Marshall Plan and a call for the banning of the atomic bomb (still a
US monopoly).
The French government – including the social-democrats –
conjured up a ‘Communist plot’ which allowed it to unleash a wave
of repression against the strikes. In the major towns and cities
clashes took place between workers and the forces of repression.
Communist militants were in the front line, displaying great courage
and attempting to give a lead.
But what was the aim of the powerful resistance they spearheaded?
Was it simply to defend and improve living standards, or was it to
force the French ruling class to allow the PCF to re-join the
government, or to destabilise France and thus the emerging Western
Alliance? The PCF leadership itself was unclear.
Late in 1947 the CGT split. The Socialist leader, Leon Blum, had
used the PCF’s own statements to good effect, proving its
subordination to Moscow and the need for a new independent union
federation: the new federation, Force Ouvrière, took 500,000
CGT members. Massive amounts of US money and expertise were used to
stabilise the new union. Force Ouvrière probably never even
reached a million members but it helped undermine working class
resistance. A miners’ strike in late 1948 collapsed after miners
began returning to work and the CGT ordered the strike’s end. In
1950 a strike across the crucial Michelin combine ended in failure.
The pattern of declining struggle soon became clear – CGT
membership which had topped 5 million in 1947 fell to just over 2
million by the mid-1950s. The PCF had also begun its long decline in
membership which has continued until today. In 1947 it claimed
700,000 registered members in 1954 it claimed to issue 500,000 party
cards (a figure which would be higher than those formally registered).
In Italy the PCI was in a more favourable situation. Whilst the
PCP found itself in complete isolation the PCI preserved its alliance
with Nenni’s PSI (a break away Socialist Party specialising in
witch-hunting the PCI, formed in January 1947). The two parties
entered the March 1948 election to speculation that they would
improve on the (almost) 40 percent of the vote they had won in 1946.
Faced with the threat of a left victory the US moved to buttress
the Christian Democrats. The first Marshall aid ships arrived amidst
much publicity, while Truman returned gold seized by the Nazis and
made a gift of 29 merchant ships. The US State Department stated that
PCI voters would be prevented from emigrating to America. Other more
direct measures were used. US and British warships anchored off major
Italian ports. The Vatican chipped in, threatening to deny absolution
to PCI-PSI voters.
Despite hopes of victory the left list gained only 31 percent of
the vote, whilst the Christian Democrats share climbed to 48.5
percent. As in France, the employers were able (with the help of US
cash) to split the CGIL, ensuring that it became more marginal in
firms like Fiat.
The PCI was able to limit the damage to its fortunes. It reached
its post-war membership peak in 1953 with over 2 million members and
took 22.5 percent of the vote that year. Because of this success
Togliatti has been held up as an independent figure by the PCI, one
relatively untainted by Stalinism. [28]But in 1951, ever the loyal
Stalinist, he told the Seventh PCI Congress he was willing to tame
working class action in return for changes by the Italian government
in their attitude to Russia.
Across Europe the Cominform period was one of declining membership
for the Communist Parties. Claudin offers the following figures:



Communist Party Membership [29]




 


1944–48


1951–55




Austria


150,000


28,000




Belgium


100,000


14,000




Denmark


  75,000


21,000




Finland


150,000


50,000




Britain


  47,513


34,801




Netherlands


  53,000


16,000




Norway


  45,000


28,000




Sweden


  48,000


28,000




Switzerland


  13,500


  8,000



In 1948 the American Communist Party (CPUSA) adopted what became
known as the ‘five minutes to midnight line’. The party warned of
a new depression, the triumph of domestic fascism and war between the
USA and Russia.
In line with this doomsday scenario the CPUSA threw its all into
the ‘Third Party’ presidential campaign of Henry
Wallace-Roosevelt’s wartime vice-president who favoured maintaining
close links with Moscow. But Wallace came nowhere and in the trade
unions the bureaucrats moved to break the CPUSA’s not
inconsiderable presence in a number of key unions.
Isolated, the CPUSA’s central leaders found themselves brought
to trial under wartime legislation – more than a hundred would be
jailed. Members and ex-members were barred from jobs, deported or had
their war pensions rescinded. Amidst this witch-hunt, which would be
identified with Wisconsin Senator Joe McCarthy, the party reacted by
launching an internal purge of ‘unreliable elements’, in
imitation of the purges in the People’s Democracies and by going
underground. The effects were to decimate party membership and
deliver hundreds of embittered ousted members into the hands of the FBI.
Meanwhile, as the name of its journal – For a Lasting Peace
– suggests the overall goal of the Cominform was to create a
powerful peace movement. The aim was to create a classic
international Popular Front organisation, on the lines of the 1930s,
in order to pressurise Western governments into accepting what Moscow
termed ‘peaceful co-existence’. In 1950 the World Peace Congress
gave birth to the World Peace Council which issued the famous
Stockholm Appeal for the banning of nuclear weapons. Some 500
million signatures were collected including ‘the whole adult
population of the USSR, the whole adult population of the People’s
Democracies and of 223 million Chinese’. [30]
The whole exercise – with its stress on winning the signatures
of individual ‘peace fighters’ and on winning respectable
establishment figures – had a powerful effect on the day to day
work of the Communist Parties. Tied in with a need to climb the
ladder of trade union officialdom its effect was to lessen the
centrality of shopfloor organisation and, indeed, of class struggle.
 
The monolith cracks
The first crack in the Stalinist monolith appeared on 28 June 1948
when the Cominform issued the following statement: ‘The Information
Bureau condemns the anti-Soviet attitude of the leaders of the
Communist Party of Yugoslavia as incompatible with Marxism-Leninism
and only fit for nationalists.’ [31] In Paris Le Monde said
the news ‘was nothing short of a bomb’. [32]
Alone in Eastern Europe Tito had come to power on the back of a
mass movement. He had his own power base. Tito was an ultra-orthodox
Stalinist but his attempt to emulate Stalin by following his own
version of socialism in one country, i.e. of independent capital
accumulation on national lines, brought him into conflict with
Stalin’s determination to reduce Yugoslavia to the status of yet
another satellite.
In Eastern Europe a wave of show trials culminating in mass
executions were conducted against supposed sympathisers of Tito
(Communists who had led their respective parties on the ground and
not from Moscow during the war were suspected of being too
independent). The denunciation of Tito was accepted by the world
movement with little complaint.
For the KKE in Greece this was suicidal. They had depended heavily
on the Yugoslavs in the civil war. Now the party broke all links with
Tito (its border guards were told to fire on those attempting to
cross into Yugoslavia!). Victims of the subsequent purge included
many of the best elements in the partisan army. In the autumn of 1948
the CIA had been worried about the success of the KKE but from the
end of 1948 the balance of the war swung against the KKE.
All the Western parties churned out hack denunciations of the
Yugoslavs. By some coincidence both the French and British parties
produced literary delights with the identical title, From Trotsky
to Tito.
Tito quickly sought aid from the Western powers and Western
reformists. When the Cold War boiled over in Korea Tito backed United
Nations intervention. This helped ensure Tito’s breakaway did not
lead to any serious ruptures in the Western parties.
Another challenge to Moscow’s authority was also rising in the
East. In 1949 Mao Ze Dong proclaimed the Chinese Peoples Republic in
Tiananmen Square, Beijing. The Chinese Communist Party had seized
power despite Stalin. From the beginning relations between the two
powers were uneasy as both related to each other not through any
sense of proletarian internationalism but as two states thrown
together in the face of potential enemies.
Nineteen forty-nine was also the year the Russians completed a
successful atomic test. Washington hoped their hydrogen bomb would
maintain US advatange but the Pentagon knew Russia would soon be able
to deploy such an awful weapon. The nuclear gap was closing fast.
In fact it was announced that Russia had developed the hydrogen
bomb in August 1953. Until then the Western parties had been the one
threat which Stalin could employ, beyond risking war, to pressurise
the ruling classes of the West. Now the Russians were developing more
effective frontier guards.
But the Russians had other problems, a fact highlighted by
Stalin’s death. First, as more sophisticated means were needed to
administer a relatively modern industrial economy the old, simple
policy of overt repression could no longer deliver. [33] Second,
Stalin’s policy of rapprochement with the West was pursued more
vigorously by Russia’s rulers. Both blocs now stared out at each
other across a nuclear balance of power. That meant further
downgrading the Western Communist Parties. The Cominform ceased to
function in 1953, though its death was only pronounced in 1956.
Finally the idyll of Russia and Eastern Europe pictured to
millions of Western Communists and their fellow-travellers was ripped
apart. Vicious infighting between Stalin’s heirs also created its
own dialectic. At first the secret police chief, Beria, served as
scapegoat. In 1955 the new leader Khrushchev visited Yugoslavia
(which, as suddenly as it had become so, ceased to be a ‘fascist’
state) and explained to Tito that relations had been ‘disrupted’
because of material fabricated by that ‘agent of imperialism’,
Beria. [34] The presses churning out anti-Yugoslav propaganda had
ceased to turn sometime before.
Then came Khrushchev’s bombshell at the 20th party congress in
February 1956. He delivered two speeches. In public session he
limited himself to denouncing ‘the cult of the personality’
without named reference to Stalin. In private session, with foreign
visitors barred, it was now revealed that power had been not in the
hands of the workers or ‘the leading party’ but an all-powerful
tyrant served by a vicious secret police. Evidence drew on matters
only tiny groups of Trotsky’s supporters had attempted to draw
attention to: the murder of the leaders of the Bolshevik Party,
Stalin’s responsibility for the disasters at the outset of the
German invasion and the glorification of the cult of the personality. [35]
But all of this was blamed on the individual failings of Stalin.
In order to secure his own position and to institute a reform
programme to tackle emerging economic problems Khrushchev needed to
outmanouevre his opponents, but he could not undermine a system to
whose ruling class he himself belonged.
Stalin’s death had already led to the first explosion in Eastern
Europe, the workers’ uprising in East Berlin. A building workers’
strike spread to other towns in East Germany. Russian tanks were sent
in to crush the uprising. The Western authorities in the other
sectors of the city showed they were prepared to let the Russians do
what they considered necessary in their sphere of influence.
But the biggest blow to Stalinism came with the crushing of a
mass, working class rising in Hungary in October 1956. This rising
reproduced all the features of working class revolts in Berlin 1919
or Barcelona 1936: the formation of workers councils; armed militia
units and mass strikes. At first Russian tanks ‘withdrew after
meeting popular resistance on the streets of Budapest. But the
Russians waited, beginning negotiations with the new government
before returning to raze whole areas of the capital to the ground.
The leaders of the government, headed by the old Communist Imre Nagy,
were to be executed. The whole affair stank of the suppression of the
Paris Commune.
All of this created a massive crisis within the Western parties.
At the time of the secret speech most activists had denied the leaks
in the Western press. The Australian CP’s paper argued: ‘don’t
fall for the press’ series of attacks on the late J.V. Stalin at
the 20th congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union’. [36]
Delegates from the CPGB took shelter in denying any inkling of the
whole matter! At the congress itself Thorez alone among Communist
leaders mentioned Stalin’s name. Even Enver Hoxha of Albania
praised Khrushchev and refrained from mentioning the dead dictator.
In June 1956 the PCP politbureau criticised the lack of
consultation about the secret speech. In reality The New York
Times, to which the speech was deliberately leaked by the Russian
leadership, now counted for more than Thorez and the PCF. It was a
full two months after the speech before the CPGB’s Harry Pollitt
offered a ‘full explanation’ in an article entitled The 20th
Congress of the CPSU. The standard Moscow line then on offer was
proffered: ‘in the last 20 years of Stalin’s life the carrying
through of the correct general line ... was accompanied by mistakes,
abuses and injustices arising from Stalin’s increasing dependence
on the security forces’. [37]
But doubts were growing in the British party’s ranks. In July
1956 the first of three issues of a duplicated magazine, The
Reasoner, appeared. Copies were snapped up by party members who
flooded it with letters.
The editors, E.P. Thompson and John Saville, argued that within
the CP there were:
deep disagreements on the very meaning of ‘Marxism the
presence of grossly irrational and authoritarian attitudes
intermingled with claims to a ‘scientific analysis’; the
hardening of theory into dogma, of socialist education into
indoctrination. [38]
Thompson and Saville went further, casting doubts on the central
faith of Stalinism:
History has provided a chance for this re-examination to
take place; and for the scientific methods of Marxism to be
integrated with the finest traditions of the human reason and spirit
which we may best describe as humanism. [39]
Both men would be suspended from the CPGB for their pains.
The Australian Communist Party admitted the party had developed
‘tendencies towards exaggerated praise and adulation of individual
party leaders ... But it never grew to any proportions amongst us ...
it was rather alien to the Australian outlook for one thing’. [40]
In New York the effect of a reading of the secret speech to the
CPUSA’s National Committee was recalled by its chair, Steve Nelson:
I could see people, old Party leaders, crying in the
audience. When the report was finished, I made the first comment. I
said something like ‘This is not the reason why I joined the Party.
From now we have to reject this; we have to make our own decisions;
there are no more gods.’ [41]
The American Daily Worker opened its letters pages to
discussion of the affair. When the State Department released a full
transcript of Khrushchev’s secret speech they printed it in full
with an editorial criticising the Russian leadership for not having
made it public.
Such was the atmosphere in the Western parties when the tanks went
into Budapest in October 1956. The delegates return and the
suppression of the workers’ uprising triggered an earthquake which
shook the Communist monolith to its foundations. The party leaders
hurried to defend the line from Moscow.
L’Humanité carried a statement from the Central
Committee of the PCP on 3 November which stated: ‘It is now obvious
that there existed in Hungary an illegal counter-revolutionary
movement, with foreign assistance and well-armed, prepared by
experienced cadres of the former fascist army.’ [42] But even the
disciplined PCF had difficulty getting their members to swallow this.
Pablo Picasso was among those who denounced the Russian invasion.
Militants within the CGT refused to distribute leaflets offering the
PCF’s explanation. By February 1957 the PCF had lost 70,000 members.
In Italy Togliatti loyally defended Khrushchev’s intervention.
In January 1957 he delivered a speech which stated: ‘... it was
clear that the aim was the annihilation of all the gains of the
revolution, the restoration of a new fascist regime, which would
quickly have become a cockpit of war provocation against all
socialist countries’. [43]
But the PCI paid a price for this. The PSI leader Nenni defended
the Hungarian revolution and the alliance between the two parties was
breached. The CGIL also broke ranks to declare: ‘the CGIL ... finds
it deplorable that the intervention of foreign troops was requested
and occurred in Hungary’. [44] The PCI would retain its hold on the
CGIL but party membership fell from 2,036,000 in 1956 to 1,790,000 a
year later.
The crisis probably rocked the Communist Parties most deeply in
what were still the two major capitalist powers of the time: the US
and Britain. The British party leadership loyally toed the Moscow
line, referring to ‘the White terror in Hungary’. But the party
paper’s own correspondent in Budapest, Peter Fryer, was sending
truthful reports of the revolution, sympatheitic to the workers.
These had to be suppressed by The Daily Worker.
The CPGB historian Christopher Hill was among 30 CP intellectuals
who wrote a dissident letter to The New Statesman and Tribune,
both journals identified with the Labour Party. Within the party
dissidence went beyond a small circle of intellectuals. A breakdown
of reported votes within various bodies of the party a month after
the uprising’s suppression gives a representative, if incomplete,
picture. A total of 3,582 members voted to back the party executive,
but 1,080 voted against and 414 abstained. A quarter of the
membership were defying the leadership.
An exodus from the party began. Christopher Hill, who left
himself, estimated that 7,000 left. The party’s own membership
figures state that membership fell from 33,095 in February 1956 to
24,670 in February 1958. The party leadership tried to argue the loss
could be put down to ‘intellectuals, of whom many lack a firm class
outlook, easily panic, and see in mistakes and setbacks the end of
everything’. In fact among those who resigned were trade union
leaders in the Electricians Union, the Fire Brigades Union and the
Scottish miners! [45]
Among those intellectuals who remained loyal was the historian
Eric Hobsbawm who argued in a letter to The Daily Worker:
All Socialists ought to be able to understand that a
Mindszenty Hungary [Mindszenty was Hungary’s Catholic cardinal],
which would probably become a base for counter-revolution and
intervention, would be a grave and acute danger for the USSR,
Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia and Rumania which border upon it. If we
had been in the position of the Soviet government, we should have
intervened. [46]
Hobsbawm supported the intervention ‘with a heavy heart’ and,
whilst criticising the CPGB’s lack of democracy, stayed within the fold.
Most of those who departed would leave politics altogether or
drift rightwards. But a minority would move leftwards to break with
Stalinism. Out of 1956 and The Reasoner came today’s New
Left Review, whilst a small but crucial layer of activists would
move toward Trotskyist ideas, albeit in a distorted form. That would
be crucial to the rebirth of the revolutionary tradition in Britain.
At the CPUSA’s 1957 convention the dissidents actually formed a
majority of the delegates but compromised with the old pro-Khrushchev
leadership. For some Communists who had stuck through the witchunts
and the internal purges Hungary was the final blow. They upped and
left, to drift out of politics. Steve Nelson, a leader of the
dissidents, recalled:
we had a chance to take over the Party. We had a
majority. But what are you going to do when Gates gets up and says,
‘I’m walking out’. And Charney says, ‘I’m walking out’.
[Gates and Charney were the crucial party leaders who backed the
dissidents] And the whole New York leadership decides to walk out. I
remained there for another eight months or so, and then I said, ‘What
the hell am I doing here?’ and I walked out. [47]
Party membership shrank from 20,000 in January 1956 to half of
that by the summer of the next year and to a mere 3,000 by the
following summer. One party loyalist admitted:
The core of those who left was that whole generation of
younger people who had come into the party from the YCL, the Spanish
vets, and the people who had been active in the mass movements.
Afterwards there just wasn’t any real know-how people left in the
party, and we weren’t able to pick up the pieces. [48]
 
Holding the line
Yet as the fallout from Hungary cleared the Communist Parties were
able to rebuild and the old leaders re-established their hold. By the
beginning of the 1960s the Western parties had in many cases made up
their membership and electoral losses. The myth of a world communist
movement was still potent. In 1960 Moscow could still assemble
representatives from 81 parties in a seemingly united conference.
Yet the strains were becoming more and more visible. The Russian
leaders themselves were increasingly dismissive of the Western
Communists. As the Cold War melted away new friends and opportunities
were opening before them. The PCF had to swallow hard when the
Kremlin’s new chief idealogist, Suslov, told their July 1956 Congress:
For its part, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union is
strengthening its friendship with the brother Communist Parties,
while seeking to establish and develop relations with the Socialist
Parties, including with the French Socialist Party. It is convinced
that these contacts will serve the cause of peace and socialism. [49]
These same Socialists were members of the government waging a
savage colonial war in Algeria.
Increasingly too the trend toward social democracy was receiving a
fillip from Moscow. As early as 1951 the British party had adopted a
programme – The British Road to Socialism – drafted by
Cominform experts with Stalin’s direct encouragement, which mapped
out a parliamentary road to socialism.
After Khrushchev told the 20th congress of the possiblity of
Western parties, in alliance with the reformists, ‘winning a solid
majority in parliament and transforming this organ of bourgeois
democracy into an instrument of the true popular will’. [50] Pravda published an article by Togliatti spelling out the universal
applicability of this parliamentary road to socialism.
Throughout the late 1950s the PCF searched unsuccessfully for
alliances with the Socialists (or indeed anyone else available). That
meant dropping any criticism of the war in Algeria and refusing to
mobilise against virtual pogroms of Algerian immigrants. But all to
no avail. The party remained in isolation. In 1958 the Fourth
Republic broke under the strains of the Algerian war. The French
bourgeoisie turned to de Gaulle who assumed power on the basis that
he could run France as a presidential regime. In the election to
ratify de Gaulle’s position the PCF vote dropped by a million. In
the ‘red belt’ of Paris, the PCF’s stronghold, de Gaulle won 68
percent of the vote.
The PCF was able to make up this temporary loss of support. It
remained bigger both in membership and in terms of votes than the
largely discredited Socialists. Under de Gaulle it could maintain a
verbal militancy whilst searching for ways to break the isolation of
the party. In 1965 it succeeded in uniting with the Socialists in
support of the presidential candidature of François Mitterrand.
Under Communist leadership the CGT maintained a rather ritualistic
opposition to de Gaulle, which took the form of periodic one day strikes.
In Italy the PCI found itself drifting into isolation. The
disintegration of its alliance with Nenni’s PSI culminated in 1963
when the PSI entered government in coalition with the Christian Democrats.
As the Socialists shifted rightwards the PCI outstripped them
electorally. The party successfully manouevred to maintain control of
the CGIL.
The PCI was also concerned to develop its independence from
Russia. In 1956 Togliatti had laid out his concept of polycentrism
whereby each Communist Party was to be fully autonomous, i.e. free
from Moscow’s direction. Although forced to recant this view
formally in 1961 Togliatti had let the genie out of the bottle.
Togliatti had already made it clear he saw nothing, except the matter
of support for NATO, which prevented the PCI joining the Christian
Democrat-Socialist coalition. Later that condition would be dropped.
In France and Italy the Communist parties retained mass support,
although just 20 percent and 30 percent of the working class
respectively were unionised. In Franco’s Spain it remained central
to the underground opposition. But in Northern Europe the picture was
different. In 1956 the West German government felt able to ban the
German Communist Party. In 1966 the Belgian party ceased producing a
daily paper and the Austrian party decided not to contest elections.
In Britain the CPGB placed more and more emphasis on its
parliamentary road but each election saw its already tiny vote fall,
despite standing more and more candidates. In 1945 21 candidates
received 102,780 votes. By 1970 58 candidates got 37,966 votes. [51]
Meanwhile the world Communist movement had seen its biggest split:
in 1963 China and Russia broke relations. Within four years they were
clashing on their common border. The split had been brewing for
years. Both sides had argued against each other in coded language.
The radical rhetoric the Chinese rulers employed, with its argument
that nuclear war was not something to be avoided, had little
attraction for most Western Communists. In Europe the Chinese were
not able to build anything but tiny groups of die-hard Stalinists at
this stage. But Moscow’s authority had again been defied. ‘National
roads’ now meant two ‘Communist’ states sparring militarily.
 
May ’68 and after
The May 1968 student demonstrations in Paris, triggering the
greatest general strike in working class history, brought the spectre
of working class revolution to the West. [52] In the beginning PCF
leader Georges Marchais used crude workerism to attack the students.
But the party was forced to backtrack and defend the students. When
strikes began swelling into a general strike the CGT gave the
movement its sanction.
Whilst de Gaulle fled to consult with the generals in West Germany
power seemed to lie in the streets and the factories. But the PCF’s
slogans did not echo this rank and file upsurge. On 17 May they urged
‘For an authentic, modern democracy in conformity with the
interests of the French people’. [53] The PCF wanted to force the
Socialists and former Radicals into an electoral alliance. The CGT
wished to be treated as the crucial element by the employers and the
government in the bargaining process. In this it reflected the
classic concerns of any social democratic party.
In order to achieve these aims the party had to place itself at
the head of the movement during the French May and then to divert it
into safer channels. Thus the CGT backed factory occupations and
spread the strikes. But increasingly it argued they were simply about
economic issues. Their cadre ensured radical students had no contact
with the strikers. The PCF took to the streets en masse but
argued for the calling of elections and a common left slate.
The working class still saw the PCF as its party. The
‘groupuscules’ of the revolutionary left were too small to carry
the argument that the power with which the workers had paralysed
France could go further, to oust de Gaulle and go further still.
When de Gaulle called his opponents’ bluff by calling elections,
Seguy, the head of the CGT responded by welcoming the elections. At
the same time the government and employers made massive concessions
over wages, hours and conditions. The CGT and other union federations
urged acceptance and a return to work. As the revolutionary wave of
May rededed into June they began to overcome the initial resistance
of workers, many of whom had refused to go back. The French May was over.
Italy did not undergo one, violent explosion like the French May.
But student protests helped trigger ‘the long hot autumn’ of 1969
when mass strikes spread across the giant industrial concerns.
Revolutionaries began to build support on the factory floor but
through lack of clarity and inexperience were not able to break the
hold of the CGIL officials who, by 1971, had regained control of the
factory floor.
These events had been accompanied by yet another crisis provoked
by Russian action. In August 1968 Russian tanks went into action
again, this time to crush the Prague Spring. Whilst the reformist
Czech leaders talked the students and workers took to the streets and
struck. Whilst resistance did not involve actual fighting it was
clear that in the Czechoslovakian Peoples’ Democracy the people
were in opposition.
The government’s reforms and promised liberalisation of
Czechoslovakia had been lauded by the Western Communist parties. They
took up the talk of ‘socialism with a human face’. The events of
1968 and the crushing of the Prague Spring pushed the Western parties
further down the road to hard social democracy. They were emerging
from the extra-parliamentary ghetto. In many countries they could
envisage the possibility of being allowed access to government. They
wanted to jump ship from the world Communist movement and knew their
members would not stomach any repeat of the lies of 1956.
Little of this mattered to the Russians. The Western parties were
of little importance by the late 1960s. When the Spanish Communist
Party’s Santiago Carrillo and Dolores Ibarruri, La Pasionaria
of civil war fame, approached the Russian leader Brezhnev about their
concerns he told them that the Western parties could ‘sound off –
but so what? ... For 50 years they have not mattered one way or another.’
 
Compromise, austerity and Eurocommunism
The years from 1968 to 1974 were one of rising struggle across
much of the Western world. Revolutionary organisations emerged in
country after country and began to build among a minority of workers.
Most of these looked to Beijing and the radical rhetoric of Mao, but
others identified with the anti-Stalinist tradition of Trotsky.
In November 1969 the PCI expelled a grouping around Lucio Magri,
Rossana Rossanda and others who had begun publishing a monthly
journal Il Manifesto. It rejected cross class alliances and
argued Western Europe was ripe for socialism, and that the working
class and oppressed could take power. Together Il Manifesto,
Avanguardia Operaia and Lotta Continua could, at their
height, boast some 15,000 members. [54]
Italy saw the far left at its strongest, but similar developments
took place across the Western countries. Yet despite these advances
the resources in the hands of these revolutionaries were outstripped
by the scale of events. They could make some impact, they could lead
particular struggles even, but they were too new and too small to
break the hold of the traditional workers’ parties.
One result was that, despite their politics, the reformist and
Communist parties benefited from this upsurge. In part the ruling
classes were forced to turn to them in the hope that these parties
could parry the working class advance.
The PCF were in the ‘Union of the Left’ with Mitterrand’s
Socialists between 1971 and 1977. The PCF remained the larger party
both in terms of votes and members. For the PCI these were years of
growth. Between 1968 and 1971 the party recruited some 15,000 youth.
The PCI’s vote was steadily climbing.
In the mid-1970s these developments coincided with an event in
Latin America which was to turn the quantitative adaption to social
democracy into a qualitative shift to the politics of classic
reformism. In 1970 Salvador Allende had been elected president of
Chile at the head of a Popular Unity government which embraced the
Socialist Party, the Communist Party and various radical parties.
Allende had an absolute majority. The parliamentary road was being
put to the test. Across the world Communist Parties focused attention
on the ‘Chilean experiment’. Space does not permit a full account
of the events in Chile. [55] Suffice it to say that Popular Unity
found itself obstructed at every turn by a powerful alliance of the
employers, the military and US imperialism. This resistance sparked a
growing radicalisation among the working class which Popular Unity
tried to guide into constitutional channels. Eventually, as civil war
threatened, it urged the working class not to act, to stay off the
streets and not ‘worsen’ the situation. The scene was set for the
brutal coup under General Pinochet in September 1973.
In reaction to the disaster of Chile the PCI leader Enrico
Berlinguer delivered his verdict: Popular Unity had gone too far, too
fast in polarising the situation. Addressing the Italian context he
called for a new departure arguing:
It’s not by obtaining 51 percent of the vote that the left wing
parties can be sure of governing and achieving their work of renewal
because a vertical split down the middle of our country would not be
in the interests of the country and would ruin the experiment of
renewing our society. That is what happened in Chile ... the
necessity to open at long last a sure road of economic development,
social renewal and democratic progress ... make it increasingly
necessary and pressing to arrive at what we call the great new
‘historic compromise’. [56]
The compromise was made with the Christian Democrats. The spectre
of civil war in Italy was used to urge a convergence between the two
great parties of the contending classes in Italian society. Writing
in Britain, Eric Hobsbawm commented:
I believe it underlines the importance of maintaining
both unity and the broadest possible from of support. This may mean
what the Italian Communists now call a ‘historic compromise’ –
i.e. governing down the pace of social change to what is acceptable
to the potential allies or the political neutrals among the middle
class. [57]
The importance of this shift cannot be overemphasised. First, in
Italy itself the crisis of the Western capitalist states had reached
its peak. The workers’ movement was the most combatative in Europe.
Italy’s Communist Party was the largest in the West. The
revolutionary left was also the largest of any in the world and of
some influence internationally. It was widely expected that the PCI
and PSI would win an overall majority in the 1976 elections.
Second, the historic compromise was seized on by bourgeoisies
elsewhere as a way of using reformist and Stalinist parties to
‘govern down the pace of social change’. It would be utilised in
Britain under a Labour government where the unions agreed to the
‘social contract’. It would be used in Spain where the Spanish
Communist Party and the militant union federation it controlled
signed the Pact of Moncloa, geared to ensuring a peaceful transition
from Franco’s dictatorship to stable bourgeois democracy.
Third, the PCI was now making an historic break with its past. One
sign of this was Berlinguer’s support for NATO. In 1976 he told a
journalist it ‘safeguarded the Italian road to socialism’, adding
in reference to the Eastern Bloc, ‘I feel safer being on this side
of the fence.’ [58]
In the 1976 election the PCI’s vote went up 7 percent to 34.4
percent (an all time high), but the Christian Democrats increased
their share of the vote to 38.7 percent. The failure of the left to
win an overall majority created a degree of demoralisation. In
keeping with the historic compromise the PCI agreed to support the
Christian Democrat government without being admitted to office. In
1977 it agreed an ‘emergency programme’ of austerity measures
with the Christian Democrats. The British Economist
commentated that it ‘contained precious little a British
Conservative would sniff at’.
By 1979 the Christian Democrats felt confident enough to ditch the
historic compromise and rule without the crutch of the PCI. In that
year’s elections the PCI vote fell by 4 percent. One observer,
sympathetic to the PCI, sums up the historic compromise in this way:
The PCI accepted the international rules of the game:
inflation was enemy number one: to defeat it enormous sacrifices were
necessary. A ‘Social Contract’ was drawn up: working class
austerity in exchange for defence of full employment and existing
purchasing power. Yet, at the same time, it was believed that it was
not possible to offer state led economic growth. This, in the
conditions prevailing then, meant no growth at all. Thus the working
class had to tighten its belt now in exchange for the promise that
later (much later) there would be growth. When growth eventually came
Craxi [the PSI leader in coalition with the Christian Democrats], the
labour movement and the unions had been defeated and the ground was
clear for ‘modernisation without reforms’.
Readers old enough to remember a Labour government will
perhaps recall that Healey’s strategy in 1976–79 was similarly
based. [59]
The comparison is exact. In both Italy and Britain working class
advance was turned into retreat, living standards were reduced (in a
way Thatcher has been unable to achieve) and the policies we know as
‘monetarism’ or ‘Thatcherism’ introduced. In both cases the
winners were the right wing.
The PCI’s break was central to what was termed Eurocommunism.
What defined Eurocommunism was the need to make an explicit break
with Russia and ‘actually existing socialism’. By dropping the
rhetoric and not just the allegiances of Stalinism a number of
Western parties wanted to prove their acceptability to their own
rulers. After all, the reason for their isolation in the 19503 was
that they were marked off from the social democrats precisely by the
link with Moscow.
In 1977 the general secretary of the Spanish Communist Party,
Santiago Carrillo, published Eurocommunism and the State. In
explaining Stalinism it borrowed from Trotsky’s Revolution
Betrayed, but rather than give a revolutionary critique of
Stalinism the book’s aim was to make a public break from the very
idea of revolution. Carrillo argued it was necessary to transform the
capitalist state ‘into a valid tool for constructing a socialist
society, without needing to destroy it radically by force’. [60]
In France the PCF’s 22nd Congress dropped the term ‘dictatorship
of the proletariat’ from its programme and renounced the Russian
model of socialism. But this flirtation with Eurocommunism came up
against a problem.
Under the leadership of François Mitterrand the Socialist Party
had modernised itself and had begun to rebuild its support,
benefitting from the Union of the Left. Increasingly Mitterrand was
emerging as the crucial figure in this alliance. In 1976 an opinion
poll showed 38 percent of industrial workers would vote Socialist
compared with 34 percent who would vote Communist. In 1977 the PCF
under Georges Marchais broke with the Socialists, denouncing
Mitterrand as an ‘unacceptable ally’. The series of faction
fights, expulsions and resignations continue today.
The PCF turned ‘left’ – back towards its Stalinist legacy.
The PCF would back General Jaruzelski’s coup in 1981 and would
welcome Russia’s invasion of Afghanistan. Its propaganda focused on
attacking Mitterrand and the Socialists in order to recoup its
losses. At the same time the PCF was prepared to court rather more
unsavoury elements in French society. As racism began to rise the
party paper stated that ‘immigration must be stopped so as not to
worsen unemployment’.
None of this could halt the PCF’s decline. When the Socialists
won the election in 1981, the party’s share of the poll fell to a
record low, 16.1 percent. Worse was to follow.
 
A downward spiral
Marxism Today’s Stuart Hall reacted to Thatcher’s third
electoral victory in 1987 by announcing ‘If I’ve got a glimmer of
hope at the moment it’s the Italian Communist Party.’ [61]
Yet it was hard to see the hope which glimmered from within the
PCI. Since the 19405 the PSI had been in the electoral shadow of the
PCI. In the wake of the historic compromise its fortunes seemed about
to be reversed. In the 1987 elections the PCI vote fell by another
3.3 percent to 26.6 percent. But the PSI’s rose by 2.9 percent to
14.3 percent. In 1976 the PCI got four times the PSI’s vote; in
1987 it polled only twice as much. In 1988 in a series of
administrative by-elections the PCI polled 22.8 percent to the PSI’s
18.1 percent (the PSI’s vote stood at 9.63 percent in 1972). The
PCI faced the prospect of the PSI repeating the achievements of Mitterrand.
In 1985 the PCI had called a referendum to defend the scala
mobile – the automatic pay rises which compensated for
inflation. The PSI-Christian Democrat government under the Socialist
Craxi was proposing its abolition. The Communists expected to win,
and so inflict a major blow on the PSI. In the event Craxi won by 3
million votes, carrying Milan, Turin and Genoa!
This result reflected the damage inflicted on the Italian working
class and the atrophy of the PCI. The PCI had been unable to mount an
effective strategy in the wake of the historic compromise. Until 1989
its slogan called for a vague ‘democratic alternative’. Meanwhile
in 1983 Craxi had broken the PSI’s alliance with the PCI in running
Milan, Turin, Rome, Naples and Venice. The PSI was set to re-join the
Christian Democrats in office. In 1987 it tried to show its ability
to govern by including in its slate the likes of the financier Guido
Rossi. Craxi and the PSI were benefitting from being in government
during an economic upturn.
This was the state of affairs in which the PCI confronted the
developing crisis in Eastern Europe and Russia. At first the new
party leader Achille Ochetto hoped he could cash in on the Gorbachev
phenomenon. At its March 1989 congress Gorbachev addressed the PCI
from a giant screen.
Ochetto claimed the party was on a new course. The watchword was
now riformismo forte, tough reformism. In contrast the PSI was
said to represent weak reformism. On this basis the PCI offered a
pact to Craxi. Riformismo forte did not mean tough on the
capitalist class. Rather it meant bitter medicine for the Italian
working class. Ochetto stated, ‘We are going beyond the old guard
over whether there should be more market and less state. We are
changing the terms of the problem by saying there has to be a better
state and a better market.’ [62]
Events in Eastern Europe produced even further movement. Three
days after the Berlin Wall came down Ochetto travelled to Bologna to
announce the need for the PCI to ‘reconstruct’ and change its
name, dropping the label ‘Communist’. Eight months previously he
had opposed this action. The speech followed consultations between
Ochetto, Neil Kinnock of the British Labour Party and Willy Brandt of
the West German SDP. Interviewed by Eric Hobsbawm in Marxism
Today, Ochetto argued:
We have had basically three stages: first, we were the
most critical component of the international communist movement;
second, we were in open disagreement, and third, we left the movement
and declared ourselves an integral part of the European left ...
I think there can be a broad coalition, including the
Democratic Christians, in a government committed to constitutional
change ... [63]
At a Congress in Bologna in March 1990 the PCI voted to drop the
word ‘Communist’ from its title. The most prominent visitor was
Craxi of the PSI. The party also announced its application to join
the Socialist (or Second) International. To head off all of this
Craxi moved to adopt the name Socialist Unity Party.
These shifts do not seem to have halted the party’s decline. In
the May 1990 local elections its share of the vote had slipped 5
percent from comparable elections in 1985. The root cause of this
decline is the downturn in the fortunes of the Italian working class
since 1976 and the PCI’s response – to move ever rightwards.
Yet, if the PCI’s story in the 1980s was of slow decline, the
PCF seemed trapped in an alarming collapse, not knowing which way to
turn. In 1981, having campaigned hard against Mitterrand and the
Socialists, the party did an about turn and agreed to two of its
members joining his cabinet. Throughout this period it stayed silent
on Mitterrand’s austerity measures.
In 1984 it quit the government despite the opposition of its two
ministers. In 1986 its 9.7 percent vote equalled that of Jean Marie
Le Pen’s Nazi National Front. In 1988 the party polled only 6.76
percent, compared to the Front’s 14.38 percent.
Clinging to Stalinist rhetoric created new problems with the
arrival of Gorbachev. In December 1988 Marchais was forced to state
that perestroika stopped at the borders of the USSR! All this created
the most serious split in the PCF’s post-war history: an opposition
formed around Central Committee member Pierre Juquin – it raised
3,000 signatures in 1986 for a special party congress to examine the
PCF’s electoral collapse. Marchais denounced it as factional.
By 1988 Juquin along with a number of key figures in the local
leadership and in the CGT had left the party. In the presidential
elections of that year Juquin ran in opposition to the PCF. The
French Section of Ernest Mandel’s United Secretariat of the Fourth
International, the Ligue Communiste Révolutionnaire, backed
Juquin, arguing: ‘The whole landscape is being shaken. The
possibility of building a revolutionary party in France is formulated
in new terms.’ [64]
Juquin got 2.10 percent of the vote (the candidate of the LCR’s
rivals Lutte Ouvrière got 2 percent on a straight
revolutionary programme). Far from moving in a revolutionary
direction Juquin’s supporters split three ways. One group
(including Juquin) favoured joining the Greens, another preferred
standing for ‘Communist renovation’, and another saw the way
forward as claiming to be part of the ‘presidential majority’
(i.e. joining Mitterrand’s camp).
By 1990 there were whole areas of the country where the party had
ceased to function. This included the Doubs where the crucial Peugeot
plant at Sochaux is situated, employing 23,000 workers. Within the
CGT crucial officials are departing for the Socialist Party. The
party leader, Georges Marchais, was so associated with the Stalinist
rulers in Eastern Europe that the party’s fortunes must suffer
further. Confronted with the overthrow of Ceausescu, Marchais could
still talk in terms of the ‘globally positive balance sheet’ of
the Stalinist regimes and of ‘problems of growth’ in Romania
itself! Another veteran leader, Jacques Denis, lamented:
It is a fact that the class struggle is now unrolling in
a context that is more favourable to the capitalist forces ...
Recently I visited Berlin and there I witnessed its annexation to
capitalism ... NATO has advanced and the Warsaw Treaty is no more. I
am not in agreement with Novosti which says that German unity is a
triumph of justice ... I cannot understand how comrades persist in
looking at events through rose coloured spectacles. [65]
If the Italian party was suffering a fall in support and the PCF
from anorexia nervosa, the British party was awaiting burial. In May
1990 the CPGB’s weekly paper 7 Days reported, ‘... the
Communist Party of Great Britain decided to cease production of 7
Days ... orders and subscriptions [are] now under 3,700 ...’ A
month later the Independent reported:
The Communist Party of Great Britain yesterday took the
first formal steps towards following the example of its Eastern
European counterparts by ditching the dreaded word ‘communist’
from its title.
One insider said: ‘With the options now before us, I
cannot see any concluding decision that would result in retaining the
words “Communist Party”.’ [66]
The death agony of the CPGB continues as I write. According to the
party secretary, ‘most organisations with a graph of decline like
ours would give up’. [67]



UPS AND DOWNS









Communist Party membership is almost back to where
it started in 1920



In autumn 1990 the threat of war in the Gulf as the US and Western
forces lined up against Iraq produced further evidence of the
evolution of the Western CPs away from even formal identification
with opposition to imperialism. In Italy the PCI divided into three
currents. The right wing around Giorgio Napolitana aims at entering a
broad centre-left European coalition. The centre, around party
secretary Achille Ochetto and the current leadership, is a few steps
behind on the rightward march. An alliance of old conservatives has
formed around the figure most traditionally associated with Moscow,
Armando Cossutt, ex-party leader Pietro Ingrao and the ex-leaders of
the far left PdUP, Lucio Magri and Luciana Castellina.
In the parliamentary debate on whether Italy should send warships
to the Gulf in support of the US the leadership abstained, having
backed United Nations intervention against Iraq. Ingrao denounced the
war drive but the left walked out of the chamber leaving the
government a free hand. In Britain the CPGB’s international
secretary, Chris Myant, attacked ‘knee-jerk pacifism’ and argued
in support of Western intervention. In France the PCF has echoed
Gorbachev in denouncing Iraq but insisting on the United Nations flag
flying over any intervention.
 
The exceptions?
Communist Parties in two countries seemed to offer an exception to
the pattern of decline. One was the Chilean CP, the other the South
African CP.
Before the military coup of 1973 the Communist Party of Chile
(CPC) regularly enjoyed between 15 and 20 percent of the popular
vote. As one observer notes the party was:
deeply committed to the norms and procedures of
capitalist democracy and to a broad alliance policy geared especially
to ‘progressive’ sectors of Christian Democracy-so much so that
it was ideologically and organisationally ill-equipped to confront
the bloody military coup and its aftermath. [68]
Thousands of party members were killed, tortured or jailed after
the coup. Over time a new ‘internal’ leadership emerged which
began to look towards a political and military strategy against the
Pinochet dictatorship. Nineteen eighty-three saw the revival of mass
opposition to the Pinochet dictatorship on the streets of Santiago De
Chile. The Communist Party was central to the rebirth of resistance.
The Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front began an armed struggle in
1983 which, three years later, almost succeeded in assassinating
General Pinochet. The old, exiled leadership had to bow to the
Patriotic Front. Throughout the world Chile held a dear place in the
hearts of Communists, and now the Communist Party seemed set to
topple the butchers of 1973. The Chilean party offered a beacon of hope.
But the underlying strategy of the party had not changed. In 1986
came an abrupt switch. The attempt on Pinochet’s life had led the
centre-right opposition coalition to break all links with the CPC and
the organisations of popular resistance. These divisions plus a
series of crackdowns in the shanty towns led to a decline in the
protests. The old leadership and the old strategy reasserted themselves.
Corvalan was interviewed by the Chilean magazine ASPI and
stressed the need for dialogue with the armed forces. He recalled the
experience of Popular Unity:
Let me tell you something. At the moment of Salvador
Allende’s victory, in the very tense days between his election and
his inauguration, we Communists made contact with top officers of the
armed forces. Modesty aside, I can say that we helped establish a
certain understanding between them and the new president regarding
some problems.
In that period, we had many meetings with the generals
... They learned to know us on many levels ... many of them learned
to know us and to respect us for our successes and our honesty.
That interview was followed by the dropping of a boycott of
Pinochet’s 1980 electoral process; the party urged supporters to
register to vote.
On her return from exile in 1988 Volodya Teitelbaum was asked by
El Pais about the experience of Popular Unity. She replied:
One sector of the UP, mixing up the stages, decided to
speed through them quickly to socialism. This was not possible in
Chile at that time, and I believe that it even helped nourish right
wing propaganda.
The Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front was now denounced. The party
backed the Democratic Coordination under Patricio Aylwin, a Christian
Democrat who had backed the 1973 coup. The CP agreed not to formally
join the alliance so as not to alienate the military. In December
1989 Aylwin won the election to succeed Pinochet as president.
Pinochet himself was allowed to stay on as head of the armed forces.
His security council oversees the return to democracy. Guarantees of
no reprisals against military officers were made and the army was
even allowed to maintain control 15 percent of the economy. In
October 1990 it was reported:
Mass defections and criticisms of its inflexibility are
continuing to cause major problems for the Chilean Communist Party
... Chile’s return to democracy in March, combined with the death
of Communism in Eastern Europe, has fanned internal dissent. As the
CPC debates its future there is strong disagreement over democratic
centralism and over the party’s support for ‘popular rebellion’
and the Patriotic Manuel Rodriguez Front guerrilla movement.
Recently 488 party activists signed a petition
criticising the central committee’s ‘repressive attitude ’
afier the ‘removal’ of critics from the CC. Leading CP
intellectual Luis Guastavino has challenged the CPC leadership to
stop inciting confrontation and paramilitary activity and to promote
discussion about a clear political project to replace empty rhetoric
about revolution. [69]
The party seems to be tearing itself apart as growing
demoralisation seizes the country. Guastavino’s move rightwards has
been countered by a strong show of support for the Patriotic Front,
against the wishes of the CPC leadership.
‘In most places, communism has waxed and waned ... Not in South
Africa ... Whenever the black, green and gold flag of the African
National Congress (ANC) [appears] the Red Flag follows nowadays’,
reported the Economist on 28 October 1989. By March 1990 the
South African Communist Party (SACP) was legalised, along with the
ANC. It mushroomed in size.
Following the explosion of mass resistance by black workers in
1984 SACP had provided an inspiration for those Communists who
yearned for an old, hard Stalinist party, loyal to Moscow. Above all,
whilst everywhere else Communism was in retreat, in South Africa it
was visibly popular amongst the Black population. In the summer of
1986 at the height of the township uprisings SACP was confident
enough to publish an article entitled The Beginnings of Peoples
Power. It argued:
The time will soon come, if it has not come already, when
we shall have to measure the level of development of our revolution
no longer by the number of strike days the workers have had per year,
nor by the number of military battles we have waged during any given
period, but instead by the number of peoples communes we shall have
helped organise in both town and countryside, building them on the
ruins of apartheid structures.
Our immediate task is to provide administration for our
newly liberated districts ... peoples communes aim at seizing control
of every facet of life in their district. Schools, rent offices,
clinics, sports stadiums, beerhalls and other such state owned
infrastructures as exist in the townships should be transferred into
the hands of the community, so that these services will cease to
operate under the aegis of the apartheid state.
It was a radical vista. Yet socialism was still not considered to
be on the agenda. In its 1962 programme The Road to South African
Freedom SACP had argued that what existed in the country was
‘colonialism of a special type’, that two societies existed
superimposed on each other, one an exploiter white imperialist
nation, the other a black colonised nation. The SACP’s aim, through
the agency of the ANC, was a ‘democratic state’. Regarding the
black population it held ‘there are no acute or antagonistic class
divisions at present among the African people’. Joe Slovo, SACP
general secretary, was clear on the nature of the ‘democratic
state’. In December 1986 he told Marxism Today: ‘I believe
there will be a mixed economy in the post-liberation period, in which
in particular the black middle class and small black bourgeoisie will
come into their own.’ [70]
This stress on separating the fight against apartheid from that
for socialism meant much of SACP’s propaganda was aimed at
‘workerists’, particularly in the new black trade union
federation, COSATU. They rejected cross class alliances and talked of
fighting for socialism. Thus the SACP magazine Umsebenzi
argued in late 1987, ‘We must therefore take guard against
premature attempts to formally incorporate the objectives of
socialism into programmes of trade unions ...’
All of this was accompanied by a language and a stress on
attacking evidence of Trotskyism which was a throwback to the days of
Stalin. In 1986, for instance, Joe Slovo turned on left wing critics
who argued socialism was on the agenda, saying, ‘It can only be an
indigenous representative of the disastrous Pol Pot philosophy.’
The high hopes of ‘peoples power’ were dashed during the state
of emergency imposed by President Botha in 1986. The South African
Defence Forces moved to successfully crush the township resistance
and the guerrillas of the ANC were incapable of launching a serious
armed struggle.
In 1989 the Seventh Congress of SACP adopted a new programme, The
Path to Power. It rejected the previous insurrectionary
perspective. Instead it argued, ‘Armed struggle cannot be
counterposed with dialogue, negotiation and justifiable compromises,
as if they were mutually exclusive’ (original emphasis). The
needs of the South African regime brought the possibility of a
negotiated settlement with the release of Nelson Mandela in March
1990 and the opening of negotiations with the ANC.
The crisis in Eastern Europe did not bypass the SACP. Earlier this
year Joe Slovo was forced to publish a pamphlet entitled Has
Socialism Failed? – by socialism he meant what had existed in
the Stalinist states. Breaking with years of party rhetoric he
denounced ‘Stalinism – socialism without democracy’, rejected
the concept of the dictatorship of the proletariat and condemned ‘the
over-centralised and commandist economies of the socialist world’
which created what he termed ‘socialist alienation’.
At the time of Mandela’s release the SACP seemed set to go from
success to success. But already problems are starting to re-emerge.
One is the continuing crisis in the USSR itself. One consequence of
this crisis is that the Gorbachev leadership, in its search for
detente with Washington, is keen to resolve regional ‘difficulties’
like South Africa and Chile. Both Communist Parties were closely
linked to Moscow while in exile. In part the shifts outlined above
were initiated by the Russians.
The other area of difficulty is that the quest for a negotiated
settlement has led to a further extension of the stages theory. In
New Era magazine, produced in the Cape and closely linked to
SACP, Tony Karon argued, ‘the immediate phase of our own struggle
is not for a national democratic state. It is for the creation of
democratic conditions in which the political contest can continue’.
[71] Karon was previously known for his defence of the Freedom
Charter as an instrument for achieving socialism. Now any
expectations being raised by the release of Mandela were being
shattered by supporters of the organisation still identified
in popular eyes with socialism and the working class.
This shift towards a new realism has, tragically, been accompanied
by the collapse towards the SACP of some of its hardest critics
within the trade unions. That was summed up by the decision of the
leader of the metal workers’ union, Moses Mayekiso, to join SACP.
In the mid-1980s the union had been at the centre of a network of
anti-Stalinist worker militants and intellectuals. In 1985, when the
SACP was talking of popular power and the mobilisations were at their
height, this network was deeply suspicious of the SACP, the ANC and
their stages theory. They in turn were labelled ‘workerists’ by
the SACP. These militants have now dropped their previous positions.
They are entering the SACP on its terms, using the argument that it
is a ‘broad party’.
This shift has been accompanied by a growing bureaucratisation of
the crucial Black trade union federation, COSATU, and attempts of the
South African regime to co-opt the union leadership. A debate on the
‘Soviet experience’ has led to a rejection of revolution. Alex
Erwin of the metal workers’ leadership, previously a key
intellectual for the ‘workerists’, moved first, initially
supporting a mixed economy with a degree of workers’ control or
self-management and then arguing the case for the industrial
efficiency of the South African economy and co-operation with the
employers and state.
It is no longer just a question of the ANC/SACP alliance lowering
expectations. The lack of focus for struggle has allowed the regime
to use the right wing forces of Inkatha to attack ANC supporters in
the townships. In a classic trick of counter-insurgency the regime is
capitalising on a period of confusion and passivity following a
period of prolonged struggle to try and confuse and derail the opposition.
 
Conclusion
For six decades revolutionaries have had to confront the existence
of mass Stalinist parties in the West. Stalinism was the product of
defeat, of the defeat of the Russian Revolution and the success of
Stalin’s counter-revolution, of the defeat of the revolutionary
wave which passed over Europe following the First World War and of
the defeat of the Chinese Revolution of 1927. These defeats in turn
helped isolate revolutionary Russia and so created the conditions in
which Stalin could strangle the revolution.
The existence of these mass Stalinist parties cannot be separated
from the existence of the state capitalist regime in the USSR. But
for revolutionaries it is vital to separate the Communist Parties of
the East from those of the West. The Communist Parties in Eastern
Europe, Russia, China and the other state capitalist countries are,
or were, the parties of the ruling class, of the enterprise managers,
the secret chiefs and tire army generals. No doubt the heads of the
Western parties aspired to such positions, but they were excluded
from the ruling hierarchies in the West precisely because their first
loyalty was, or was perceived to be, to Moscow.
But rank and file CP members were some of the best elements of the
working class – fighters from the shipyards of Glasgow, the docks
of San Francisco and Sydney, the Renault and Fiat car plants. And to
be a Communist in the 1940s and 1950s meant to be ridiculed or
witch-hunted and, in a dictatorship like Spain, to risk death. It was
for similar reasons that Trotsky distinguished between Western and
Eastern CPs even after members of the Mexican Communist Party had
tried to assassinate him! In discussions with American Trotskyists in
June 1940 he pointed out:
Of course the Stalinists are a legitimate part of the
workers’ movement. That it is abused by its leaders for specific
GPU ends is one thing, for Kremlin ends another. It is not at all
different from other opposition labour bureaucracies. The powerful
interests of Moscow influence the Third International, but it is not
different in principle ... the political current of Stalinism is a
current in the workers’ movement.
In France the Stalinists show great courage against the
government. They are still inspired by October. They are a selection
of revolutionary elements, abused by Moscow, but honest.
We can ’t let the antipathies of our moral feelings
sway us. Even the assailants on Trotsky’s house had great courage.
I think we can hope to win these workers who began as a
crystallisation of October. We see them negatively; how to break
through this obstacle. We must set the base against the top. The
Moscow gang we consider gangsters but the rank and file don’t feel
themselves to be gangsters, but revolutionists. [72]
Trotsky died at the hands of a Stalinist assassin. He believed
neither Stalin’s regime nor the mass Stalinist parties would
survive the war. He predicted World War Two would end with a global
revolutionary upsurge. In this last prediction he was not far wrong,
as we have seen. But we know that Stalin’s Russia emerged from the
war more powerful and that, far from collapsing, state capitalism was
consolidated in Eastern Europe. We described too how the Communist
Parties were able to strangle the revolutionary movement of the
masses in 1944 and 1945.
That circumstance created a massive problem for the Trotskyists.
The arguments about the nature of Stalin’s Russia, and what was
termed the ‘buffer zone’ in Eastern Europe, influenced their
attitude to the Western Communist Parties. After much hesitation the
post-war leaders of the Fourth International, Michel Pablo and Ernest
Mandel, coined the phrase ‘deformed workers’ states’ to
describe the Stalinist states of Eastern Europe – capitalism had
been overthrown not by the self activity of the working class, but by
the Red Army. This discovery ripped the core from Marx’s thinking –
that the emancipation of the working class was the act of the working
class itself.
From that it flowed that, far from being counter-revolutionary as
Trotsky had argued, Stalinism had carried through the revolution,
however qualified. Faced with the onset of the Cold War the
Trotskyists therefore saw a world where two camps based on different
classes faced each other. Ultimately they accepted Washington’s and
Moscow’s view of the world. Since the threat of a third world war
loomed, Pablo and Mandel argued, the Stalinist states would be forced
to unleash the Stalinist parties on the Western bourgeoisie. The
perspective was one of ‘war-revolution’. The political
consequences for revolutionaries were spelt out by Ernest Mandel
(writing as Ernest Germain):
The possibility of the outstripping of the Communist
Parties by their own mass base which in action can go beyond the
objectives set by the Kremlin and escape from its control ... placed
in certain exceptional conditions, entire Communist Parties can
modify their political line and lead the struggle of the masses up to
the conquest of power ...
The growing pressure of the masses is liable to force the
French and Italian Communist Parties to modify their pacifist course
of ‘neutralising’ the bourgeoisie. These parties could then ...
project a revolutionary orientation and see themselves forced to
undertake a struggle for power ... [73]
The job of Trotskyists, then, was to join these parties and help
this process. The whole mission of Trotsky, to create a revolutionary
organisation independent of the Stalinists and the reformists, should
logically have been thrown out of the window. Yet the same Ernest
Mandel and his followers under different circumstances were capable
of falling into Stalinophobia. This later attitude chimed with the
feelings of many of the revolutionaries of the 1970s who were
influenced by Maoist ideas. For them Communist Parties were simply
‘revisionist’ and would be automatically swept away as workers
grew in militancy.
Some believed Russia was ‘social fascist’ and that the Western
Communist Parties were ‘social fascist’ too. This fitted
Beijing’s world view which, in the 1970s, saw Moscow as the main
enemy. Taking the logic of this argument to its extreme one Maoist
group in Portugal, the MRPP, organised attacks on Communist Party
offices as part of the witch-hunt in Northern Portugal in the summer
of 1975.
When workers did not spontaneously break from their traditional
parties and the struggle began to wane many of these organisations,
whose leaders had broken from the CPs over ‘revisionism’, began
to see the possible electoral success of the CPS as a way forward.
This was especially true in Italy. In 1976 the PdUP began to see
its role as being ‘the motor to 25 million legs’, in other words,
as a ginger group on the PCI. Democrazia Proletaria offered
the perspective of ‘a left government’ which would comprise
itself, the PCI and PSI. This would) ‘open the revolutionary road’.
The failure of the PCI to beat the Christian Democrats and the
experience of the historic compromise helped demoralise thousands of
Italian revolutionaries and led to the collapse of their
organisations. When the PCI dropped the label Communist, Democrazia
Proletaria seemed set to take up that title and aim for a
realignment with the traditionalist wing of the PCI.
Similarly Mandel’s supporters in France, the LCR, placed the
emphasis of their propaganda, following the collapse of the Union of
the Left in 1977, on the need for a joint electoral pact between the
PCI and Mitterrand’s Socialists. Whilst this was not incorrect in
itself, the weight placed on the need for such unity was such that
the impression created was that this was the way forward for
the French working class. Little effort was made to point to the
record of successive reformist governments and the need to create a
revolutionary alternative.
Mandel seems to have believed that the development of
Eurocommunism opened up a new pool in which his Fourth International
could fish. [74] Yet by 1978 the struggle was entering a downturn.
Across Europe and in North America the working class was on the
defensive. The evolution towards Eurocommunism did not carry with it
any gains for the working class, as Mandel had hoped.
In contrast the Socialist Workers Party in Britain, faced with a
small Communist Party with significant working class roots, adopted a
radically different approach. It spent much of the 1970s proposing
joint activities to the Communist Party. On the basis of this united
front approach it was able to win an audience amongst workers
influenced by CP ideas and was able to build successful mobilisations
over racism and unemployment. This did not mean dropping
revolutionary politics: this approach was accompanied by constant
attacks on the CP’s support for the parliamentary road and the
Social Contract and the Communist Party’s role in Chile and Portugal.
In those few countries like South Africa where the Communist Party
remains a force this is the only approach revolutionaries can follow.
Today the collapse of Stalinism is creating a vacuum on the left
internationally. It is a vacuum which can be filled by
revolutionaries, but only on the basis of clarity of ideas. That is
one lesson we can draw from the failings of much of the revolutionary
left in the late 1970s.

Notes
1. A Fresh Lesson, Writings of Leon Trotsky, 1938–39 (Pathfinder Press, 1974).
2. Times, 12 September 1990.
3. Morning Star, 10 September 1990.
4. Guardian, 23 May 1990.
5. C. de Gaulle, War Memoirs (Weidenfield and Nicolson, 1955).
6. Quoted in I. Birchall, Workers Against the Monolith (Pluto Press, 1974).
7. Figures from F. Claudin, The Communist Movement: From
Comintern to Cominform, Vol. 2 (Monthly Review Press, 1975).
8. Ibid.
9. F. Claudin, Vol. 1.
10. F. Claudin, Vol. 2.
11. C. de Gaulle, op. cit.
12. G. Kolko, The Politics of War (London 1967).
13. Quoted in F. Claudin, op. cit..
14. Ibid..
15. Quoted in ibid.
16. L. Longo’s report in The Cominform Conference 1947.
17. F. Claudin, op. cit.
18. Ibid.
19. I. Birchall, op. cit.
20. Quoted in F. Claudin, op. cit.
21. Ibid.
22. Ibid.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid.
25. The Albanian Communist Party was initiated in 1941 by the
Yugoslavs and was dominated for much of the war by Yugoslav representatives. On the foundation of the Albanian CP see S. Premtaj, Stalinism and Communism in Albania, in Revolutionary History, Summer 1990.
26. Zhdanov’s report, The Cominform Conference 1947.
27. Ibid.
28. Togliatti was of course in Moscow during the purges and was
secretary of the Communist International. In February 1988 the PCI
paper Unità published an article by a veteran of the 1930s
entitled Was everything done for Gramsci?, which suggests both
Togliatti and Stalin were not particularly interested in freeing an
independent Marxist leader from Mussolini’s jails. See Ghosts in
the Machine by T. Behan, Socialist Worker Review, May 1988.
29. F. Claudin, op. cit.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid.
33. For a deeper analysis see T. Cliff, Earthquake in the East, Socialist Worker Review, December 1989.
34. I. Birchall, op. cit..
35. Ibid..
36. T. O’Lincoln, Into the Mainstream: The Decline of
Australian Communism (Sydney 1985).
37. L. German, 1956 – Shattered Illusions, Socialist Worker Review, October 1986.
38. Ibid.
39. Ibid.
40. T. O’Lincoln, op. cit.
41. Quoted in M. Isserman, Which Side Were You On?
(Wesleyan University Press, 1982).
42. I. Birchall, op. cit.
43. Ibid.
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid.
46. L. German, op. cit.
47. M. Isserman, op. cit.
48. Ibid.
49. I. Birchall, op. cit.
50. Ibid.
51. Ibid.
52. For a fuller account of this and much that follows concerning
the upsurge of the early 1970s see C. Harman, The Fire Last Time
(Bookmarks, 1988).
53. Ibid.
54. T. Abse, Judging the PCI, New Left Review 153.
55. See M. Gonzalez, The Coup in Chile and the Left, International Socialism Journal 2 : 22, Winter 1984.
56. Marxism Today, February 1974.
57. Marxism Today, October 1974.
58. I. Birchall, Bailing Out the System (Bookmarks, 1986).
59. D. Sassoon in Marxism Today, August 1989.
60. S. Carrillo, Eurocomrnunism and the State (New Left Books, 1977).
61. Marxism Today, July 1987.
62. Marxism Today, April 1990.
63. Marxism Today, February 1990.
64. Rouge, 26 February 1987.
65. Changes, 27 October 1990.
66. Independent, 1990.
67. Changes, op. cit..
68. J. Petras, The New Class Basis of Chilean Politics, New Left Review 172.
69. Changes, op. cit.
70. Marxism Today, December 1986.
71. New Era, Cape Town, Winter 1990.
72. Discussions with Trotsky, Writings of Leon Trotsky 1939–40.
73. What Should Be Modified and What Should Be Maintained in the Theses of the Second World Congress of the Fourth International on the Question of Stalinism (Ten Theses), E. Germain, 15 January 1951.
74. See From Stalinism to Eurocommunism (New Left Books, 1978).
 

