in Barker: Origins and Significance of Meiji Restoration (Part 2)


Colin Barker Archive/a>   |   Trotskyist Writers’  Index  |   ETOL Main Page

The Meiji Restorarion

Colin Barker
 
Origins and Significance of the Meiji Restoration
 
Was Tokugawa Japan “Feudal”?
The pattern of social relations in the Tokugawa period was of great significance in shaping the form in which Japan, from the last third of the nineteenth century, was to industrialise. The form of the Tokugawa ruling class, and its relations with the rest of Japanese society, affected the way in which the political revolution of 1868, the necessary prelude to industrialisation, would proceed. Japan’s revolution of 1868 was – as is well discussed in Smith (1960) – an “aristocratic revolution”.
Among the countries of Asia, Japan alone was successful in the nineteenth century in beginning the processes summed up in the term “modernisation”. It is reasonable to try to explain this in terms of the character of the preceding society. Many scholars – among them E.H. Norman, Samir Amin, Barrington Moore Jr., Jon Halliday, Perry Anderson – suggest that Japan’s success is due to the fact that the society of the Tokugawa period was “feudal”; it thus shared important characteristics with the society of medieval Europe, the birthplace of capitalism.
The argument for the “feudal” character of Japan rests on the existence of military warfare among competing warlords before the 17th century, and seemingly on the perceived diffusion of political sovereignty from around 1600 until the 1860s.
Other authors are less disposed to apply the term “feudalism” to Japan – at least after about 1600.
Some issues are agreed. Japan in the Tokugawa period was “pre-capitalist”. In pre-capitalist class societies, some form of “extra-economic coercion” is normally required as a means of appropriating surpluses from the immediate producers, the peasants. The form that this “extra-economic coercion” takes is thus of great significance in determining the character of the exploitation process. As Perry Anderson suggested:
The superstructure of kinship, religion, law, or the state necessarily enters into the constitutive structure of the mode of production in pre-capitalist social formations. They intervene directly in the “internal” nexus of surplus extraction. (Anderson, Lineages, p. 403)
Thus pre-capitalist modes of production may be distinguished from each other both by the organisation of the direct producers and their relation above all to the land, and by the social and political structures through which surpluses are extracted from them. All of this is directly in line with Karl Marx’s argument of in Capital Volume III; there – in the course of a discussion of “Labour Rent” – he breaks off to make a general methodological statement on the analysis of modes of production:
The specific economic form, in which unpaid surplus labour is pumped out of direct producers, determines the relationship of rulers and ruled, as it grows directly out of production itself and, in turn, reacts upon it as a determining element. Upon this, however, is founded the entire formation of the economic community which grows up out of the production relations themselves, thereby simultaneously its political form. It is always the direct relationship of the owners of the conditions of production to the direct producers – a relation always naturally corresponding to a definite stage in the development of the methods of labour and thereby its social productivity – which reveals the innermost secret, the hidden basis of the entire social structure, and with it the political form of the relation of sovereignty and dependence, in short, the corresponding specific form of the state. (Karl Marx, Capital III, ch.xlvii, Moscow, 1962 ed., p. 772)
The key focus here is not simply on the organisation of the ruling class, but on its relations with the subordinate class of direct producers.
Using criteria of the kind, the application of the term “feudalism” to Tokugawa Japan seems inappropriate. The similarities between Japan and Europe are much less interesting or significant than the differences.
Max Weber also – although his criteria were different from those of Marx – excluded Tokugawa Japan from the “feudal” category, preferring to treat it as a case of “patrimonial bureaucracy” (Weber, Economy and Society, chs.7 & 8). Land in Tokugawa Japan, he pointed out, was not the hereditary and autonomous property of the lord, but was rather a “benefice” held at the will of the ruler. Feudalism in Europe permitted the development, on the basis of the lords’ private property in land, of “Estates” capable of bargaining with the royal power, an outcome notably lacking from Japanese development. There the daimyo, in Weber’s terms, held “prebends” rather than “fiefs”, while the samurai received for their services not land but stipends.
Trimberger (1977) suggests that Japan is best understood, in the Tokugawa era, in terms of a “tributary mode of production” (a term she draws from the work of Samir Amin, who does not himself apply it to Japan). The “tributary mode of production” has some similarities with the “feudal” mode. In both, the peasantry have some control over the means of immediate production, and produce agricultural surpluses. The non-producing ruling class uses its control over the means of judicial and military power to appropriate a large percentage of these surpluses. Appropriation takes place, not through economic exchange, but as an outcome of the political, legal and cultural authority of the rulers. As in the feudal system, the peasantry and the lordly class struggle over the distribution of the surplus.
But, these similarities apart, it is the differences between the “feudal” and the “tributary” modes of production which are more significant.
In feudalism, appropriation of the surplus is undertaken by a lord who has direct and personal control over the serf-tenants who work on his manor or estate. He collects the surpluses in the form of labour-services or “rent”. In the tributary mode, by contrast, a state-class uses its control of the centralised political apparatus to “tax” the peasantry, who work the land in autonomous villager communities. Individual members of the ruling class, in the latter mode, do not participate directly in the process of production as directing agents.
In feudalism, the ruling class lives in the rural areas, on its manors and estates, and exerts individual authority over the peasants. The landlord takes on, in his person, the functions of the state, acting as judicial authority. On the other hand, in the tributary mode of production, the state directs and regulates agricultural production, but only through impersonal and indirect controls over the peasant communities. The rulers live in the towns – in Japan, anyway – and the state takes on, through its regulations, the functions of the landlord.
The difference between Japan and Europe lies, crucially, in the simultaneous conversion of the samurai into state bureaucrats and the peasants into members of autonomous village communities.
A feudal mode of production exists when agricultural surplus – in the form of labour or rent – is personally extracted from peasant producers by landlords who exercise political authority in the absence of a centralised state apparatus. A tributary mode of production exists when agricultural surplus – in the form of labour or tax – is impersonally extracted from peasant producers by state officials in the absence of landlords with personal control over the producers. (Trimberger, 1977, p. 88)
Two differences may be further noted between the European feudal system and the Japanese tributary system, both differences being of major significance for the later development of Japanese society. The first concerns the relation between the noble class and the land: the lords are not tied to the land by relations of direct property-interest. Japan thus lacked a conservative landowning class of the type of the Prussian Junkers, who might later oppose moves towards industrialisation. The second concerns the relations between the aristocratic ruling class and the commercial sector. The European states had far less control over the activities of the trading sectors, who developed considerable legal and political autonomy from the nobility. In the Japanese case, however, the state-class maintained far more despotic control over the activities of trade, handicraft production and merchanting than they did over the activities of the peasants. In this sense, Europe and Japan may be contrasted in terms of the degree of despotic control over the peasantry on one hand and the urban classes on the other.
Trimberger (1978) in fact suggests that a more fruitful set of comparisons can be made between Japan and Turkey than between Japan and Western Europe. These comparisons concern not only the forms of society in the pre-capitalist era, but also the forms of their “modernising” political revolutions and their subsequent capitalist development. She writes:
Tokugawa Japan and Ottoman Turkey as patrimonial states were thus structurally distinct from the feudal states of Western Europe. The power of patrimonial aristocracies in Japan and Turkey was based on office, not on land. Even during the decline of feudalism in Europe, the landed nobility “continued to own the bulk of the fundamental means of production in the economy, and to occupy the great majority of positions within the total apparatus of political power.” Because of this congruence of economic and political power, the absolute monarchies in Europe acted to protect and stabilise the social and economic power of the landed nobility. In Europe, “the increase in the political sway of the royal state was accompanied, not by a decrease in the economic security of noble landownership, but by a corresponding increase in the general right of private property. The age in which “absolutist” public authority was imposed was also simultaneously the age in which absolute private property was progressively consolidated. It was this momentous social difference which separated the Bourbon, Hapsburg, Tudor, or Vasa monarchies from any sultanate, empire or shogunate outside Europe. (Trimberger 1978 pp. 60–1. The quotations are from Perry Anderson, Lineages, p. 429)
 
Top of the page
 
Economic Change in Tokugawa Japan
Tokugawa Japan was anything but economically stagnant. The introduction of the “tributary” mode of production both directly shaped aspects of social and economic life, and opened space for new economic forces to develop.
One immediate result of the Baku-han system was the speeding up of urban development. The noble caste was shifted from the countryside into castle towns, within whose protection there grew up artisan and merchant quarters to supply and coordinate the needs of the ruling class. By the end of the Tokugawa period, in the mid-nineteenth century, some ten per cent of the population were living in cities and towns with a population of over 10,000. The enforcement of the alternative residence system on the daimyo helped Edo (modern Tokyo) to grow enormously: in the eighteenth century its population may well have been as high as a million, and it was certainly a much more populous city than any in Western Europe in the same period.
The internal peace which the Tokugawa shogunate succeeded in imposing on Japan for a period of two and a half centuries provided a framework within which – inside the “tributary” organisation of the economy – quite rapid processes of commercialisation of economic activities developed. This commercialisation of economic relations began to compete with, and to undermine, the Tokugawa system of stratification and organisation. For through it, sections of the lower classes rose to greater wealth and economic power, while the ruling samurai class found its fortunes undermined.
The processes of commercialisation proceeded apace, affecting both rural and urban relations.
The most complete treatment of the question of agricultural change in this period is that provided by Smith (1959), who summarises the whole process of agricultural change as follows:
At the beginning of the period, farming was generally carried on through the cooperation of families organised into actual or putative kinship groups, who to some extent shared land, labour, animals, tools and even food or housing. By the end of the period, however, such cooperation had largely disappeared. Although it lingered on for a generation or more in isolated places, in the end the individual family nearly everywhere clearly emerged as the centre of production organisation and economic interest. (Smith, 1959, p. ix)
Several factors encouraged the development of smaller, nuclear-family-based farming units. The first was a series of technical changes in farming (for details, see Smith, 1959, chapter 7). New implements, fertilisers and seed strains became available, partly in response to and partly as a result of commercial and urban development. The growth of urban areas promoted demand for new, marketable crops, including silk, cotton, paper, wax, rape seed and indigo. From about 1700, partly through the influence of the small Dutch trading station at Nagasaki, scientific treatises on agriculture began to appear, and these became available to the more active farmers. Techniques of irrigation were improved, the paddy was better used, and the rice crop improved. Commercial fertilisers improved both in availability and usage, as did new threshing devices.
The effect of this kind of technological development was not – as is sometimes the result of technological development – to displace and reduce the demand for labour in the countryside, but the opposite: Japanese agriculture suffered from a labour shortage. Not only that, but the quality of labour needed was rising:
Far from simplifying and making more uniform the multitude of tasks that confronted the labor force (as mechanical innovations presumably would have done), innovations actually increased the demands made on every farm worker. They demanded of him more specialised knowledge and skill, more attention to detail, the exercise of more initiative and judgment. Weeding, seed selection, planting in rows, the use of strong and costly fertilisers, the levelling of fields, the use of water as protection against frost – these and many other operations depended for their effectiveness on the alertness, effort and skill of individual workers. To speak metaphorically, rather than impelling farming forward to a manufacturing stage of production these operations served to strengthen its handicraft character. The increasing emphasis in farming on just such operations put the larger labor force at an ever greater disadvantage in competing with the small one. The large labor force with its hereditary servants and nago, its part-time workers and degrees of family membership, was a loosely organised and relatively heterogeneous group. By contrast the small labor force, which in most cases coincided with the nuclear family, was tight, disciplined, and socially homogeneous. It consequently not only could supervise its members more successfully, but could rely on them to a far greater degree for spontaneous effort since it gave them stronger and more immediate incentives. Under the circumstances, technical innovations brought the opposite of the economies of scale we tend mistakenly to associate with all technological advance; that is, beyond a certain small size, the larger the farming unit the more inefficient it was likely to be. (Smith, 1959, p. 105)
As labour became more difficult to obtain, the cost of obtaining it rose. Wages available to those working outside their immediate families rose, and this exercised a pull on the large, heterogeneous labour force of the early period, tending to disintegrate it. The result was a gradual dissolution of the extended family group into its various nuclear family components.
... the extended family was a product of the older mode of cultivation. Just as that mode had required a large family organisation, so the shift on large holdings to tenant cultivation now required a small labor force. With the trend to tenant cultivation in full tide, the raison d’être of the extended family disappeared. (Smith, 1959, p. 106)
Smith also notes how this pattern of agricultural development was different from a typical Western pattern:
The long-term significance of the trend to smaller units of farming will be more clearly understood, perhaps, if seen in a larger context. We must remember that it is by no means the only historical pattern of agrarian development. In some Western countries, indeed, the overall trend during the past three or four centuries has been towards larger farming units. This trend has encouraged mechanisation in farming; has increasingly divided the farm population into a few capitalist farmers on the one hand and many wage labourers on the other; has weakened the solidarity of the village community by increasingly differentiating its members as to status, role, and wealth; has largely deprived the family of significance in the organisation of production; and has drastically altered the ratio of urban and rural population by increasing food output while simultaneously reducing the labor requirements of agriculture.
Inadequate as this series of statements patently is to describe the jigsaw of agrarian development in England and some other places, it at least suggests how remote that development was from the experience of Japan, despite the fact that the starting points in the two cases were similar in important respects. For in Japan the trend towards smaller units of farming made mechanisation virtually impossible; it kept the agricultural population a relatively homogeneous class of small peasant farmers despite the presence of landlords and obvious differences of wealth; it preserved the organic unity of the village community despite the growth of a nonfarming population within it; it enhanced rather than diminished the role of the family in farming; and it maintained the farming population at a constant level, and so at a very high ratio to urban population despite industrialisation. (Smith, 1959, pp. 106–7)
A third factor, additionally, played a major part in the victory of small farming over large: the nuclear family labour force was uniquely capable of combining its agricultural work with other occupations. The early Tokugawa period was characterised by “a prodigious waste of labour” in farming. “Only for a few brief periods during the year could the labour force be fully employed; the rest of the time it was unemployed in varying degrees” (Smith, 1959, p. 129). With the growth of commercialisation, and the demand from urban areas for commodities, this “spare labour” could now be put to profitable use, in cottage industries. And the most efficient way of organising such labour was in nuclear family units.
But, if individual farming offered economic advantages, it did not require large-scale ownership of the land. The unequal distribution of land as between families which characterised the villages of the early Tokugawa period was not overcome, but the pattern of relations obtaining between richer and poorer peasants did change quite markedly. The better-off peasants reduced the amount of land they worked themselves, but expanded the size of their holdings, relying increasingly on tenant-farmers, paying rents, to work their lands. The old kinship system of agricultural organisation was thus gradually displaced by landlord-tenant relations among the peasantry themselves. The nobility, who had withdrawn from direct management of agriculture at the onset of the period, took no part in this. Indeed, since the exchange of land-holdings was strictly illegal, much of this real process of land-concentration in the hands of peasant-landlords took place under legal fictions such as “permanent mortgages”.
The old pattern, under which labour-services had been given by clients and dependants to the wealthier village families, was gradually displaced by one where families paid money-rents to landlords. The process of transformation was slow and uneven, and included such transitional forms as the commutation of part of the money rent by labour services. Smith comments:
When this occurred we can no longer properly speak of labor services. For labor services had now lost their social meaning and become mere substitutes for payments in money or kind. This of course was much more than a change in the character of labor services: it bespoke as well a transformation of the relations of the persons who received and gave them. No longer were these persons bound to one another by powerful mutual obligations rooted in cooperative farming. Cooperation on anything like the old scale had disappeared, and the two parties now stood in a relationship impersonal to such a degree that one would no longer give the other so much as a day’s labor without specific compensation. (Smith, 1959, p. 139)
The form in which rents were paid to landlords varied, though Smith suggests that we can see these different forms as a kind of developmental sequence:
A massive governmental survey of tenancy practices originally published in 1921 revealed five distinct types of rent extant at that time. Buried in this mass of data concerning diverse practices relating to tenancy, these variations were looked upon as representing little more than intriguing local idiosyncrasies until Professor Ariga, who on other occasions has also turned his ethnological interests to the aims of history, brilliantly showed that at least the first three types represented successive evolutionary stages. Although instances of the last two were rare at the time of the survey, which perhaps caused Professor Ariga to give them but little attention, they clearly represent further stages just then emerging.
The five types of rent were: (1) kariwak, or sharecropping, under which rent was a percentage of the tenant’s crop; (2) kemmi, under which rent was paid in kind, but instead of being a fixed percentage of the crop, the percentage was fixed annually after an estimate of the coming harvest was made; (3) jomen, which was a stipulated payment in kind rather than a percentage of the harvest and was fixed for a period of about five years at a time instead of annually; (4) daikin, a pseudo-money rent fixed in kind (for a number of years, like jomen), but actually paid in money; (5) a real money rent that was fixed as well as paid in money. Let us now trace the evolution of landlord-tenant relations through these five types of rent, in order to glimpse the shift to individualistic values within a cooperative relationship.
Kariwake, or sharecropping, was the most primitive type of rent; it occurred mainly in relatively backward areas, where crop yields were low and farm income could not be significantly supplemented by earnings from other employments. Under this form of rent the landlord shared the risks of farming with the tenant inasmuch as his share of the crop declined in proportion to any drop in crop yields; but the average rent for this reason was 20 or 30 percent higher (in relation to crop yields) than other types of rent. Kariwake thus not only was a product of impoverished and backward farming but tended to keep the tenant and his farming poor.
Since the landlord shared with the tenant the risks of farming to a greater extent than under other types of rent, he naturally exercised a firmer and more detailed supervision over the tenant’s farming decisions and even his daily routine of work, advising him what crops to sow, what fertilisers to use, when to plant and harvest. He also contributed capital from time to time to improve the tenant’s yields – after all, yields were shared – and he might even contribute labor if that was necessary to avoid a drop in yields. These functions obviously required that the landlord himself be an active farmer. Otherwise he would not have equipment to loan, knowledge to supervise the tenant intelligently, or the skill or labor to cut, transport, and thresh his own share of the crop after it was divided, according to common kariwake practice, as it stood ripening in the fields; and he would not be able to make use of the straw and chaff that were the chief reasons for dividing the crop at this time rather than after the harvest. Virtually every distinctive feature of kariwake – poverty, technical backwardness, dearth of accompanying by-employments, and the active role of the landlord – suggests therefore that it represents the first stage of the evolution of tenancy from cultivation by the holder (tezukuri).
Kemmi marked a considerable advance over kariwake, and its adoption was both a stimulus to better farming and a sign of it. Because it meant lower rents in relation to yields, kemmi strengthened the tenant’s incentive to invest and left him more to invest with. For yet another reason it signified a more advanced agriculture than kariwake. Although admitting of a reduction of rent in especially bad growing years, the reduction was not automatic as in the case of kariwake, nor was it necessarily in proportion to yields; hence kemmi could be practiced only where yields were relatively high and stable, or earnings from by-employments unusually reliable. Since kemmi rents were usually not lowered at all until yields fell more than 10 percent below normal, the landlord shared considerably less in the risks of farming than under kariwake. As a result he had less to say about how the tenant farmed, and he contributed capital less frequently and labor almost never. Since in addition the tenant paid the rent in threshed grain rather than in crops as they stood in the field, it was unnecessary that the landlord be a farmer himself. It is possible that the spread of kemmi to some extent reflected the withdrawal of large holders from cultivation, tending of course to reduce the supervisory role of the landlord. Nevertheless, the landlord’s paternal role toward the tenant did not entirely disappear. Rent was fixed annually, rather than for longer periods, explicitly to permit a closer adjustment to fluctuations in crop yields – for the tenant’s sake as much as for the landlord’s; kemmi in this respect as in others seems to have stood midway between kariwake and jomen, incorporating features of both.
Jomen fixed rent for a period of years; it permitted adjustments in the meantime but only when yields fell drastically – by custom 20 to 30 percent below normal. The entire loss from all but the most severe annual fluctuations therefore was placed on the tenant, so that it was only in areas where agriculture was especially productive that jomen was feasible. At the same time, by guaranteeing to the tenant the whole of any increase in productivity during a period for which the rent was set, jomen provided a powerful incentive to progressive farming. Like kemmi, jomen represented a restriction of the role of the landlord in farming since he had less reason than ever to contribute to the tenant’s efforts and less grounds for interfering with them. Indeed, jomen was compatible with a complete withdrawal of the landlord from farming, even eliminating the need present under kemmi of inspecting the tenant’s crop annually in order to set rent.
Some responsibility remained to the landlord for the tenant’s welfare, however. The landlord was still expected, when a harvest was exceptionally bad, to make an adjustment in rent – to revert temporarily, as it were, to the practice of kemmi. Admittedly his concern for the tenant was self-interested: in the long run his losses would be smaller if he made concessions than if he forced his tenant into failure by stubbornly demanding rent in full. This is another way of saying that the landlord was not purely a rentier, but was in a position that obliged him to contribute, though somewhat passively, to the tenant’s farming success. It is significant, however, that the size of his contribution, in the form of reductions in rent, could not always be based exclusively on crop yields. The tenant’s family and farm economies were so closely meshed that, in deciding whether and how much to reduce rent, the landlord was obliged also to consider the state of the tenant’s health and capital equipment, the condition of his finances, and numerous other factors that lay at the very heart of his family life. Adjustments in rent by the landlord therefore often had something – or appeared to have something – personal about them.
From jomen it was but a short step to the pseudo-money rent, since it was natural under certain circumstances to commute rent levied in kind into a money payment. This helped both landlord and tenant. The landlord need not market the commodities after receiving them and the tenant need not transport them to him, tasks that were especially onerous when the landlord lived in town or in another village. Commutation was possible, however, only if the tenant could market a very much larger share of the harvest than he had been accustomed to, and if the landlord were not interested in rent in its original form of commodities. These two conditions could not be satisfied unless there were an extensively developed market and both parties were deeply involved in it. When one adds to these conditions that payment in money was especially advantageous when the landlord had withdrawn entirely from farming, particularly if he no longer even lived on the land, it is not surprising that with this type of rent landlord-tenant relations became quite businesslike. This was evinced above all in the fact that landlord-tenant relations, hitherto based on oral agreements, tended to be reduced to detailed, written contracts. These documents less left to chance or goodwill, attempting to stipulate rights and obligations as fully and precisely as possible. Despite all this the sense of mutuality did not utterly disappear. So long as rent was levied in kind, the question of its amount could not be completely separated from the question of crop yields, so that in exceptionally bad years the landlord was still bound to make some concession and the tenant was beholden for it.
The true money rent appeared when rents were not only paid but also fixed in money. Because this severed any direct link between rent and crop yields money rents tended to be more rigid than other types. This meant of course that the tenant accepted more, if still not quite all, of the risks of farming. An even more significant change was that the tenant was now fully exposed for the first time to the vicissitudes of the market. So long as rent was levied in kind, the landlord shared the risk of loss from unfavourable price movements by accepting rent in kind (or its monetary equivalent at current prices). But with the true money rent the entire risk of adverse prices was assumed by the tenant, who undertook to pay the landlord a certain sum of money whatever the state of the market. Added to the internal danger to the tenant of crop failure, there were the hazards (and opportunities) of the businessman betting on price. The tenant could venture such grave risks only when an expanding economy gave him reasonable hope of gain and some margin for loss, and further when he had learned to think of himself as an autonomous economic unit whose fate was divorced from others’. It would be foolish to say that there were then no traces left in tenancy of cooperative relations, but whatever traces were left were mere vestiges and clearly did not characterise the institution as a whole.
A word of explanation is perhaps required at this point lest the impression be given that this stage of development had been widely attained even in 1921 when the government survey of tenancy was made. Actually it was to be found only here and there as a faint beginning. It must be remembered that the various types of tenancy, or more strictly speaking rent, did not follow one another in simple sequence anywhere. All five types existed in 1921 and no doubt they had much earlier, too. Nor were the diverse types regionally distinct; on the contrary they were intricately mingled within regions and even to some extent within villages and on individual estates. Evolution therefore consisted of no simultaneous movement over the country from one type of tenancy to another, but of the continuous development, at different rates, of particular instances of tenancy from more personal to less personal forms. This had the effect of continuously altering the proportions of the various types of tenancy, but so slowly and in such complex ways that the changes cannot be followed. All that can be discerned is the general drift. (Smith, 1959, pp. 152–6)
The major means by which landowners increased their holdings was by foreclosing on loans for which land had been pledged as security. Peasants, as everywhere, were unwilling to sell land – but “if the peasant were loath to sell land he would borrow money on it to avoid selling, and in the end he often lost his land anyway.” (Smith, 1959, p. 158) Thus, as in Western Europe, the local moneylender came to increase his landholding and his power in the village. Not for nothing did the Russian peasants call the similar figure in their villages kulaks (“fists”).
This developing pattern of agriculture produced larger surpluses than the earlier form. But these surpluses did not necessarily flow into the hands of the noble class, the daimyo or samurai. The samurai might hold, in the words of a rhymed couplet, that “Peasants are like sesame seeds; the more you squeeze, the more comes out” (cit Moore); but the problem was the squeezing. Taxes were raised. But in the new structure of the village, where taxes were effectively levied on the landowners, higher taxes were passed on in the form of higher rents. This tended to contribute to the breaking down of solidaristic relations within the village community, sharpening class antagonisms within the ranks of the peasantry, and partially weakening the village as an agency of control of the ruling noble class. There was an increasing wave of peasant revolts and disturbances in the late eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries, aimed at both grasping landlords and tax-collectors. The state was sufficiently alarmed at rural unrest to retreat from its attempts at tax-hikes, with the result that the shogunate and daimyo governments were unable to get hold of a good part of the new surpluses flowing from the individuation and commercialisation of agriculture.
It was not only peasant-landlords whose wealth increased. The merchant class also prospered in the commercialising environment of peaceful Tokugawa Japan. The daimyo collected taxes from the peasants in the form of rice, most of which they could not consume directly, even when it was paid out as stipends to their samurai (who likewise could not consume it directly). What the daimyo and the samurai wanted was cash for spending on all the expenses of civilised and city life. The rice therefore had to be marketed, and the noble class itself was precluded for status reasons from participating in trade. The great han, therefore, contracted with merchants to establish warehouses for their rice and other han products in Osaka and Edo, and to act as their commercial agents. Other merchants took their profit from the purchase and resale of the daimyo rice taxes and the samurai rice stipends. Needing cash for their enforced urban life, the warrior class was forced to develop ties with the merchants, much as they despised them.
Traditionally, the feudal aristocracy had considered money matters unclean and beneath the samurai’s dignity. As in medieval Europe, usurious profit was held in disesteem. The chonin (merchant) style, which included profit taking and the accumulation of capital, was consequently misunderstood and suspect. Thus the Tokugawa merchant remained far more vulnerable to the arbitrary actions of government than his European counterpart. But on the other hand his profits were never so systematically taxed.
While the samurai scorned the merchant’s way of life, in actual fact he became deeply dependent on his services. Restricted to an “inn-like existence” in the castle towns, the samurai was forced to rely upon the chonin to bridge the gap between town and country ...
Increasingly, the samurai class became dependent on financial agents: the shogunate on its currency monopolists and its large financial agents, the hatamoto (Tokugawa vassals below daimyo rank) on money changers who converted their rice stipends to cash, the daimyo on their Osaka or Edo warehouse agents. Conversely, as the commercial houses became involved in nearly every aspect of the fiscal transactions of the administrative class, they were bound to become a major creditor group. (John Whitney Hall, 1970, pp. 206, 208)
To the considerable resentment of the samurai, the merchants waxed very fat on the proceeds of their activities.
The growth of commercial capital is revealed in the estimate that by 1761 there were in Japan over two hundred commercial houses each valued at over 200,000 gold ryo. (The ryo was roughly equivalent to a koku of rice.) Thus in total capital worth the great merchants had become the equivalent of many daimyo. (Hall, 1970, p. 209)
The samurai class’s rice and other commodities were never sufficient to provide the cash they wanted, for in Edo and the other cities the world of pleasures was always expanding, expensively. The daimyo and the samurai fell, more and more, into debt with the merchant class, whose wealth provided them with the means for the development of a vigorous and sophisticated urban cultural life. At least one of the great capitalist concerns of modern Japan – Mitsui – began its life as a merchant family engaged in draperies and then banking for the great noble houses of the Tokugawa period.
Urban life, and the growth of a commercial network linking the various parts of Japan together – though it was still inhibited by internal tolls and controls erected by the various han authorities as an additional source of taxation – also promoted the growth of handicraft industries. These often took the form of cottage industry in the villages, as we noted earlier. Here and there, factories developed, through they were all quite small and relatively unimportant. In several of the textile trades, workplaces employing up to a hundred people are recorded, and small factories also existed in sake brewing and in wax manufacture. In gold, silver and copper mining, and in the iron industry, even larger enterprises grew up. The expansion of this commodity production provided the basis for a steady accumulation of capital for the traders and money-lenders, and also for the rural landlords emerging from among the peasantry who were diversifying their activities from agriculture into handicraft production.
Thus, already in the later Tokugawa period, labour was taking the partial form of wage-labour within handicrafts industries. The situation in this respect was not unlike that in sixteenth century England.
But the possibilities of capitalist growth were limited. Commercialisation took the form of petty commodity production rather than of full-scale capitalism. Commercialisation, in both urban trade and in rural handicrafts and agriculture, was sufficiently powerful a tendency to provoke a growing crisis in the tributary economy of the nobility, but it did not lift up a new class of urban bourgeois capable of challenging the political status quo. Japan, given its different structure, lacked the crucial dynamic element that appeared in Western European medieval society: the “free town”.
It was not among the chonin (merchants) that the leadership needed to usher in the new world was mainly found. Some of them, notably Mitsui, helped to finance the revolt against the Tokugawa. But, as a class, the chonin owed their wealth to their position as financial and commercial agents of the daimyo and Shogun; the interests of most of them were bound up with the old regime, even though they might sometimes suffer from its exactions. Insulated by the Seclusion Edict from the vitalising impact of foreign trade, they had become as a class conservative in temper and restrictionist in commercial policy. With a few notable exceptions, the great merchants failed to seize, either before or after the Restoration, the new opportunities offered to them by the opening of the country to the commerce of the world and by the development of new industries. (G.C. Allen, 1962, pp. 28–9)
While the merchant class saw their wealth increase, they remained in a pattern of symbiotic dependence on the aristocracy. They never developed a general critique of the social relations of their period; their writers and actors satirised existing society and its values, but the merchant class never developed anything approaching a systematic challenge for power. Like the rural landlords, the merchants remained excluded from political power, and seemingly accepting of their exclusion. If in Europe the bourgeoisie played a “revolutionary part” (Marx), their role in Japan was one of passive bystander.
Commercialisation in Japan never led to capitalism. The profits of trade were never accumulated by merchants for investment in production, which remained primitive in technique and scale, and mostly artisanal in form. Japanese capital, restricted in its development by the shogunate’s ban on foreign trade, remained at the level of usury or merchant capital. If anything, the peasant-landlords were a little more dynamic: they were the ones who developed the rural handicrafts and manufactures. But their activities were limited by the commercial blocks erected between the han and by Tokugawa edicts restricting their movements.
Nor did the commercialisation of agriculture lead towards capitalism. Land was rented to tenants, not by improving capitalist landlords as in England, but by peasant landowners who could not obtain the needed labour to work the land themselves. The only surplus population in existence was that section of the samurai class (perhaps half the samurai, or three per cent of the total population) who had no form of activity, and they were banned by status reasons from wage work, from commerce and the like. Given the existence of land, and of rural handicrafts, few peasants were willing to become full wage workers. The late Tokugawa period experienced a severe labour shortage, not a surplus population searching for employment; that condition, and the limit placed on increasing exploitation by peasant revolt, massively inhibited the development of a proletariat.
Thus, the effect of commercialisation in Japan was very different from that in England. There commercialisation, with other developments, broke down the traditional structures of agricultural production much more severely. With the ending of serfdom in England, the peasants gradually lost in large part the protection of their use of and access to the land. In becoming free, they became free to lose the land (see e.g. Brenner, or Saville). But, in Japan, the forces of commercialisation did not break down – even if they did weaken – the pattern of paternalism and communal solidarity in the villages. Japan experienced no “functional equivalent” of the enclosures in England, no mechanism by which the population might be forced off the land to create a labour reservoir and the basis for a free labour market. (Trimberger, 1977)
Commercial capital in Japan was thus “constantly reined in and re-routed towards parasitic dependence on the feudal nobility and its political system” (Anderson, Lineages, p. 454 – though he is probably wrong about the term “feudal”).
If commercialisation ran increasingly into contradiction with the tributary system, and no capitalist development of an indigenously inspired variety seemed likely, the only other possible outcome was a slowly maturing crisis in the whole system of social relations. Had Tokugawa Japan remained isolated, it seems quite possible that the whole system constructed in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries would finally have fallen apart. How this might have happened it is obviously difficult to say, but one possible outcome might have been a “re-feudalisation” of the social system, with local warlords – not necessarily the daimyo themselves, but perhaps members of their bureaucratic staffs – attacking the shogunate directly and breaking away from it. In a brief but suggestive discussion based on Weber’s account of “patrimonial bureaucracy”, David Lockwood has suggested that this form of resolution of the contradictions of such social forms may be a likely outcome (David Lockwood, 1964)
Certainly the signs of incipient crisis within Japan were plain to see.
Some of the literature appears to suggest that Japan was running up against some kind of Malthusian growth limit. The evidence takes two forms: the rising level of peasant unrest in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and recurrent famines. The authorities were also campaigning constantly against the practice of infanticide both in the villages and among the lower samurai. Akamatsu (p.63) gives cautious credence to the idea that Tokugawa Japan had a “population ceiling level” of around 27 millions. In both 1782 and 1832, the population was approaching or had surpassed this limit when famine broke out, forcing the population down. Hall (1970, p. 203) is more cautious, and seems to point to the spread of landlordism and commercial activity as the cause of the difficulties.
The ruling class’s finances, in any case, were becoming steadily more critical:
... the total seignorial value of the (shogunal) domain around 1800 was slightly below 4,500,000 koku and the Bakufu’s receipts, in principal dues, were slightly above 1,500,000 koku, or almost thirty four per cent. This proportion gradually fell to an average of thirty per cent in the six years between 1836 and 1841. Apart from this, the total seignorial value of the domain was then barely 4,200,000 koku: average annual receipts were around 1,320,000 koku. Moreover, the shogun’s personal gold-stocks, which amounted to 1,717,000 ryo in 1770, fell to 417,000 ryo after the famines and then to 377,500 ryo in 1816.
As for the daimyos’ administrations, they were all suffering financial difficulties and many of them – and not the least important, like Hagi or Kagoshima – made good their deficits by credits from merchants at Osaka or Edo, which they were incapable of paying back. In these circumstances, the seignorial economy was stagnant, if not declining, in the first half of the nineteenth century. (Akamatsu, p. 38)
If the financial situation of the Shogun and the various daimyo was becoming more difficult, that of their samurai was much worse. Their stipends were paid at the will of their lord – and according to his capacity to pay. To the degree that the Shogun and the daimyo were suffering restrictions, they passed them on in more than full measure to their servants, the samurai officials, who suffered cuts in their stipends. Many lived in penury, even being forced to abandon the pride of their warrior status to take up commercial or agricultural pursuits. Some entered into (strictly illegal) marriage alliances with merchant families, or “adopted” sons from merchant families in return for financial assistance.
The growing indebtedness of the whole class – which, precisely because it was a patrimonial bureaucracy, needed a steady flow of cash income for the payment of officials’ salaries – constituted a major and persistent problem for the Tokugawa regime. Various not very effective measures were adopted at different times to “reform” the system. These included repeated devaluations of the coinage, the extraction of forced loans from the politically powerless merchants, the raising of land taxes, the imposition of new taxes on commodities, attempts to stem the flow of the population to the cities, placing legal limits on interest charged on loans to members of the samurai class, cancellation of samurai debts by fiat, enforced price-cuts on commodities, and injunctions against the luxurious life. None really worked for long: the symptoms of crisis would rapidly reappear.
One might perhaps summarise the problem by saying that the cash spending of the samurai class was rising faster than their tax revenues from the peasantry. In other words, there was a a crisis of “luxury”, promoted by the very commercialisation of economic relations. “Consumption requirements expanded beyond the inelastic limits of a backward and exploitative agrarian society, as a result of population growth and the insatiable demands of a parasitic ruling class” (W.W. Lockwood, 1968 p. 5). But this is rather too static a view. The heart of the problem appears to be the one already suggested: the contradiction between (limited) commercialisation and the tributary mode of production. The form in which the crisis was manifesting itself was a “fiscal crisis”.
The system, based on the absence of lordly private property in land, lacked the degree of flexibility provided by the Chinese:
The Chinese gentry could be financially secure even though his dynasty was bankrupt, because his family usually owned land, and independently of his authorised salary he was able to squeeze a good living out of his local gentry functions. The Japanese warrior of the Tokugawa period, however, had no such freedom, for his entire income, regardless of its form, was usually derived directly from his lord’s tax sources. The lord’s poverty was equally the vassal’s. (Conrad Totman, Politics in the Tokugawa Bakufu, cit. Trimberger 1977)
In the short run, one way out of the crisis might have been simply to reduce the size of the samurai class, by pushing large numbers of the lower samurai into lower strata – a development which was anyway occurring here and there, in a piecemeal fashion, through the operation of economic forces. Yet the tensions created by such a “Thatcherite” solution – the trimming down of the bureaucracy in response to financial crisis – might well, in view of the armed character of the Japanese “civil servants”, have provoked a wave of civil wars and rebellions – leading, as suggested above, to the “re-feudalisation” of Japan.
Already, the signs of danger in that respect were apparent. Numbers of samurai, discontented and burning with many partial grievances, had – either deliberately, or as a result of failure to find a salaried office – become ronin, masterless warriors, bands of aristocratic rowdies involved in various semi-criminal conspiracies in the cities. Such men were to provoke a series of crises in the 1850s and 1860s.
Certainly many of the samurai – the only class permitted to engage in any form of political activity – were involved in numbers of political and cultural movements provoked by the crisis in Japanese society. The growth of market relations and commerce, the emergence and growing wealth of the rich peasant-landlords and merchants, were partially dissolving the inherited rigidities of the status-class structure. Samurai writers bitterly criticised the new developments:
Fear for the future was no doubt one reason that Tokugawa writers, most of them warriors, evinced the keen interest they did in “gono”, as wealthy peasants were called. Fascinated by this new social phenomenon, they rightly regarded it as a threat to their way of life. If the mere sight of great wealth in the hands of peasants did not fill them with misgivings, bitter experience with the power of such wealth drove the lesson home. Large numbers of the military class of every rank depended on loans or contributions (goyokin) from wealthy peasants to remain solvent. What better proof to them of institutional disintegration could there possibly be, unless it was the fawning respect for wealth that they perceived in every class and that they thought was destroying all sense of rank, and belittling the traditional values of frugality, industry, and modesty. “High and low compete in ostentation while government becomes more and more lax!” Fujita Yukoku exclaimed, and then he subsided with a sigh: “This is an age when money buys anything.”
This was a favourite theme of political and economic writers. Love of money was corrupting all classes, none more dangerously than the peasants, who after all were the prime producers of the economy and the base of the social order. But the gono were the worst offenders of all; they lived (it was said) in the style of the city rich, foreclosed the land of their neighbours, welcomed crop failures for the opportunity of buying up land at distress prices, kept concubines, corrupted officials with gifts and bribes, were pretentious of culture, and much more. Buyo Inishi’s indictment of them is more or less typical:
“Now the most lamentable abuse of the present day among the peasants is that those who have become wealthy forget their status and live luxuriously like city aristocrats. Their homes are as different from those of the common folk as day from night or clouds from mud. They build them with the most handsome and wonderful gates, porches, beams, alcoves, ornamental shelves and libraries. Some give money to the Shogun and receive the right to swords and surnames in return.... Others lend money to daimyo and local officials and ... exercise influence in their localities and abuse the common peasants. Still others despise the minor officials and win favour with imperial princes, with members of the royal family who have taken Buddhist orders, and with people versed in court affairs.... Moreover, village officials and others of wealth entrust cultivation to servants; they themselves wear fine clothes and imitate the ceremonial style of warriors on all such occasions as weddings, celebrations., and masses for the dead.”
There was more than a grain of truth in such descriptions; in numerous ways wealthy peasants were taking on the social characteristics of the warrior class. The most important distinction between the warrior and the peasant was that only the warrior had the right to bear a surname and to wear a sword; swords particularly were forbidden to peasants on pain of severest punishment. Exceptions to the general ban on weapons were occasionally made, but until the latter half of the Tokugawa period they were confined to a relatively few village officials whose descent from warriors was both relatively recent and generally acknowledged. By the early nineteenth century, however, both the Shogunate and baronial governments as a financial measure were resorting to the sale of the right to both arms and names – the sale above all to wealthy peasants. Not even a pretense was made the purchasers had aristocratic origins; a man had only to make a sufficient contribution to his lord’s perennially straightened finances to qualify; who he was made little difference.
Nor was this all: warrior offices which carried the reality as well as the appearance of power were coming into the hands of peasants. This seems to have occurred mostly frequently in the Kinai, where petty lords, especially Tokugawa vassals called hatemoto, commonly lived in Edo and entrusted the collection of revenues to local agents called daikan. Partly for reasons of economy, but chiefly to facilitate the collection of revenue and the raising of local loans and contributions, absentee lords often appointed wealthy peasants to this enormously powerful political and traditionally warrior office.
In still other ways wealthy peasants were taking on warrior characteristics. From at least the early Tokugawa period the upper stratum of peasants had been literate, but by the last century of the period the literacy of wealthy peasants in many cases went far beyond its former utilitarian limits. Peasants began to cultivate the fine arts and invade the field of scholarship and speculative thought, all previously the special province of warriors and the city rich. (Smith, 1959, pp. 176–7)
Not only did the samurai complain about the “jumped up” peasants and merchants, but they also directed their anger at the their own lords. Smith, in a discussion of “merit” as an ideology among the samurai, notes that, for the samurai, access to office was crucial to their economic and personal security. In practice, all manner of considerations other than “merit” determined possession of office, promotion and the like: kinship links, anxiety among the daimyo to preserve rank-order among the various strata of the samurai, wealth, connections, bribery and others. If it was little honoured in practice, the principle of “merit” as a basis for appointment to office was “warmly regarded” by the samurai at large:
Partly this was because few samurai held office and all wanted it. Office gave power and privilege and was nearly the only means of advancement in income and rank. In peacetime it was also the only way of serving the lord, and the urge to serve was exceedingly strong. Besides, given the taboo on business and the special temperament required for the arts and scholarship, it was nearly the only escape from inactivity and boredom. For a large number of samurai, therefore, the merit principle held out of the only hope of office and office the only hope of self-fulfilment....
Still another reason for the strong appeal of the merit principle was that, after all, things were going badly in the country. After the late seventeenth century, the bakufu and the han were in serious financial difficulties, which was perhaps the least of their troubles. Peasants were abandoning farming for trade, merchants growing so powerful that they could bring all but the greatest lord to heel by withholding credit, samurai losing their martial qualities, and the lower ranks being ground down by frightful poverty. To all these classic symptoms of dynastic decay was added, toward the end of the eighteenth century, the threat of barbarian domination and debauchment. If things were to be put right and the country saved, clearly the bunglers (proved so by the troubled times) must be got rid of and abler men given power. (Smith 1967, p. ?)
Throughout the Tokugawa period, there was a steady groundswell of complaint about the barriers to talent, which mixed in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries with new issues – especially those concerning Japan’s relations with the West, and the relationship between the Emperor and the shogunate – to form a truly explosive mixture. In crucial senses, the top layers of the ruling class were losing their legitimacy in the eyes of their own cadres. The existing rulers were judged, by their immediate subordinates – samurai who were members of the same class – to be feckless and incompetent, resistant to a renewal of the regime through the opening up of careers to talent.
On no broad political principle, not even perhaps on the Emperor, were the anti-bakufu agitators so nearly united [after 1853, CB]. And for the majority of the samurai, one must remember that the opening of careers to talent was no abstract issue but a matter of the greatest personal urgency – offering hope of escape from poverty, boredom and helplessness. (Smith, 1967, p. 90)
Thus the Tokugawa system was being mined from within by many of its own personnel.
Those writers therefore seem correct who emphasise, beside the impact of the West on mid-nineteenth century Japan, the accumulation of tensions and contradictions within Japanese domestic society. Large sections of Japanese society – even if they had no clear vision of the method – were already anxious and prepared for some kind of thorough-going social change.
The country was full of restless spirits, dissatisfied with their conditions and thirsting for activity. There were nobles who wanted independence and foreign trade, to develop the resources of their domains; samurai who wanted opportunities to use their talents, whether as soldiers or as officials; merchants who wanted to break the monopolies of the guilds; scholars who wanted to draw knowledge from new springs; humble peasants and townsmen who wanted just a little freedom from tax and tyranny. Every force but conservatism was pressing from within at the closed doors: so that when a summons came from without they were flung wide open, and all those imprisoned energies were released. (G.B. Sansom, Japan: A Short Cultural History, p. 524, cited by W.W. Lockwood 1969, p. 9)
 

in Barker: Origins and Significance of Meiji Restoration (Part 1)


Colin Barker Archive/a>   |   Trotskyist Writers’  Index  |   ETOL Main Page

The Meiji Restorarion

Colin Barker
 
Origins and Significance of the Meiji Restoration
 
Tokugawa Japan
The Japanese imperial house is one of the most ancient ruling houses in the world, tracing its origins back to the first millennium AD. From the twelfth century, however, the emperor’s authority was symbolic rather than actual. Real national power rested with the leading “vassal” of the emperor, the Shogun. His full title, seiitaishogun, meant “great leader of the army for conflict with the barbarians”.
Japan, up to the sixteenth century, is probably best understood as a “feudal” system, bearing more resemblance to the system in medieval Europe than to that in China. Power in the countryside was exercised by a class of warrior nobles, the samurai, organized into bands of retainers owing loyalty to warlords, the daimyo. The shogun was the greatest of the warlords.
Hall (1970, pp. 94–5) provides us with an account of the warrior class of this period.
The bushi, or samurai, stood out from among the types of leaders produced by East Asian societies as something quite distinct. Certainly the bushi had little in common with the scholar-officials of China and interestingly enough compared more closely in style of life and basic values to the European knights of roughly the same period. Products of a feudal environment, they contrasted also with the older court aristocracy which remained in control of the city of Kyoto. By the end of the twelfth century, the bushi had become a major element in Japan’s higher culture, not just in political and military affairs. And while the way of life represented by the bushi had not by any means become predominant in Japan by this time, the national cultural scene was increasingly affected by the tastes and values of this new class of leaders.
The bushi, although of the ruling class, lived a life which contrasted greatly with that of the court nobility. He was essentially a provincial aristocrat dedicated to the bearing of arms, and, by contrast to the kuge, was preoccupied with the problems of the sword and the land. Most bushi were directly involved in affairs of land management, living on or close to the land. The court nobility lived off the land in their own isolated world of the capital. The bushi therefore emphasized, in contrast to the genteel accomplishments of the kuge, such skills as horsemanship, archery, swordsmanship, and the leading of men. They exalted such personal qualities as loyalty, honor, fearlessness, and frugality. The two prime symbols of this class were the sword (the soul of the samurai) and the cherry blossom (whose petals drop at the first breath of wind, just as the samurai gives his life to his lord without regret). Between the requirements of serving his lord and reflecting honor on his family name, the bushi was constantly entwined in a network of strenuous obligations. The bushi was also obliged to live a life of physical hardship in the field (or else imposed upon himself by contrived conditions of discipline), enduring such rigors in the belief that he was thereby “building character.” Frugality was a major precept, not only because the bushi lived from the limited produce of the soil, but because luxury presumably led to weakness. He thus tended to scorn the easy life of the courtier as soft and lacking vigor. He even scorned an easy way of taking his own life. For the bushi brought back into vogue the resort to suicide as “the honorable way out” and as a means of showing “earnestness” or opposition to a superior. But the accepted method of taking one’s own life, by slashing the bowels (seppuku), imposed the most gruesome and lingering of deaths. Here to some extent was evidence of brutalization. The bushi lived a rigidly disciplined life under absolute demands of authority, with the constant threat of death about him. Roughness, directness, and above all action was demanded of him.
In time, as the bushi class absorbed more and more of the powers of government, they came to develop a mystique about themselves as the only competent leaders of Japanese society. Scorning the effete courtiers and the money-tainted merchants, they held to a pride in profession which, in theory at least, was dedicated to the general welfare. Such sentiments were not fully developed by the thirteenth century, but they were in the making. It was not until the seventeenth century that the idealized cult of the bushi (bushido) was expounded, by which time principles derived from Confucianism were introduced to provide more generalized ethical supports.
But if this class’s “ideal ethic” was to be given full elaboration in the seventeenth century, this was also the period when their whole social role was to undergo a significant transformation.
From the end of the sixteenth century, through a series of major battles, the supremacy of the Tokugawa family was established, through the reorganization of the Shogunate. The whole social system of Japan was significantly reorganized. Without gross over-simplification, we may describe the Tokugawa system as follows.
The emperor remained the purely nominal ruler of Japan. His court was settled at Kyoto, where he was surrounded by a retinue of equally powerless nobles, the kuge. They and the emperor were, to all effects, the dependent pensioners of the Shogun.
The Shogun’s Bakufu (“war camp”) was established at Edo (sometimes spelt Yedo, and later renamed Tokyo). Here the Shogun ruled through a council of clan elders drawn from the Tokugawa family and assisted by a bureaucracy made up of samurai, including a network of spies who kept watch on the rest of the aristocracy. Over time, the council and the bureaucracy came to exercise much of the power of the shogunate.
The shogunate reorganized the land of Japan into some 250 “fiefs”, each ruled by a daimyo, a great lord. The consolidation of the shogunate’s power involved the reorganization of the daimyo lands, to reward loyalty to the shogunate and to check the power of the nobles. The shogunate claimed the right to confiscate or reduce the domain of any daimyo for such reasons as failure to produce an heir, mis-management of his domain, or infringement on the prerogatives of the Shogun. A large part of the lands of the various daimyo were in fact redistributed during the seventeenth century, most daimyo losing their original holdings (Trimberger, 1978).
The daimyo themselves were organized into three broad groupings:

The Tokugawa clan itself, holding the “home provinces” around the centre of Japan.
 
The fudai daimyo (“house nobles”), those whose clans took the Tokugawa side in their struggle for ascendancy, holding their lands in the areas surrounding the centre.
 
The tozama daimyo (“allied nobles”), those who submitted to the Tokugawa only after their military victory, holding the outer provinces.

Thus those whose loyalty to the shogunate was most suspect were placed furthest from the centre, where they could also least easily combine against the Bakufu.
The shogunate never created a completely centralized state. The daimyo retained final powers of taxation and judicial power over the populations of their domains. But the shoguns did impose a series of controls over the daimyo and their samurai retainers, depriving them of any independent bases of power:

First, as noted, they redistributed their land-holdings.
 
Second, the shogunate weakened the daimyos’ economic power by requiring them to provide men and materials for castle-building, fortification, road-building and maintenance, land reclamation and the like.
 
Third, the shogunate promulgated a whole series of regulations governing the conduct of the daimyo in their own domains. Each daimyo was required to pull down all castles and fortifications bar one in each domain, and to limit his military forces. He was required to cooperate with the shogunate’s inspectorate, who had the right to examine his internal administration and finances. Rules on dress and private conduct were imposed, and marriage alliances were controlled from the Bakufu in Edo.
 
Fourth, each daimyo, with an appropriate retinue of samurai, was required to spend a part of each year at the Bakufu, at the Shogun’s court. When he was at home in his domains (the han) he had to leave his wife and children with the Shogun as hostages. In this way his loyalty was maintained. The Baku-han system, as it was known, also required him to spend part of his resources on maintaining alternate residences for himself and his retinue and on making regular journeys from his domain to the Bakufu.

At Yedo ... the daimyo, though certainly surrounded with honours, was subjected to an authoritarian, thorough and in certain respects humiliating control. When he returned to his fief... he was separated from his family and tied down to the services he always owed the shogun. He collected the share of the harvests which was due to him and he carried out an economic policy to suit himself, often turning to a monopoly of trade in certain products, like porcelain and cotton at Nagoya, wood and mandarins at Wakayama, paper, wax, indigo and cloth imported from China by Nagasaki at Hagi, sugar and camphor at Kagoshima, etc. The daimyo administered his territory and had a government similar to the shogun’s but on a smaller scale; he had a proper seigniorial court. (Akamatsu, p. 22)
The shogunate’s stabilization of Japan, and its maintenance of internal peace, was achieved in part through the enforced isolation of the country from the outside world. In the latter part of the sixteenth century, European merchants had begun to establish trading relations with Japan: first the Portuguese, then the Spanish, then the Dutch and finally the English. The Iberian traders had been followed by Jesuit missionaries, who converted some thousands of Japanese, including some of the warrior caste, to Christianity. But early in the Tokugawa period, Japan was closed to foreigners. Ocean-going ships were forbidden to the Japanese. Any Japanese who left the country was forbidden to return, on pain of death. Christianity was likewise banned, and fiercely destroyed. Trade with Europeans was heavily restricted, being limited to a single trading post conceded to the Dutch alone on a small island in Nagasaki harbour, well away from Edo and Kyoto. Portuguese vessels were banned. The import of European books was strictly controlled, no work referring to Christianity being permitted. In this way, the Tokugawa protected Japan from formal or informal colonization by the West, and cut off the possibility of local daimyo combining with foreigners to attack their power. Japan thus remained a unique bastion of independence for two and a half centuries, until the mid-19th century.
The effective closure of Japan in the early seventeenth century was not simply a function of domestic Japanese politics, but also of the relative weakness of mercantile capital in Europe:
It is well to remember that the first phase of East-West contact involved a very different “West” from that of the nineteenth century. The Portuguese and Spanish who ventured to the Orient in the sixteenth century were stretching their capacities to the limit when they established their colonies in Malaya and the Philippines. Their manpower was limited and their staying power rested as much on the weakness of the people they conquered as on their special military superiority. The Dutch and English who entered Asian waters in the seventeenth century were not yet prepared to exert a major effort to penetrate the China and Japan trade. And so, after a century and a half, both China and Japan were able to “control” the Westerners. The Portuguese were expelled from Japan and restricted to the small colony of Macao in China. The Dutch accepted a small, controlled trade with Japan at one port of Nagasaki. Both China and Japan were able to return to their traditional policies of isolation. (Hall, 1970, p. 135–6)
The Tokugawa period was characterized by internal peace among the nobility. In 1600, Japan had been less of a “nation” than a loose conglomeration of tiny, warring principalities with a total population of around twenty million. Over the next 250 years, it developed as a remarkably unified and peaceful polity whose population rose to nearly thirty million.
Beneath the shogunate, Japanese society as a whole was quite extensively reshaped, on the basis of a strict hierarchy of status-classes. At the top was the class of bushi, the nobility as a whole, consisting of the daimyo and samurai, and amounting to some six per cent of the total population; below them were the peasants, making up three quarters of the population; below them again were artisans; and at the bottom of the heap came the merchants. This last group, those who engaged in commerce, were allotted a social status rather like that of the Jews in Iberia: as pariahs.
The introduction of the shogunate’s central power involved a considerable re-shaping of the various social classes, their powers and their functions. Central to this were several processes. The first, the establishment of the Baku-han system of relations between shogunate and daimyo, we have already described. The second was the reorganization of agricultural relations.
From 1585, Hideyoshi, one of the figures centrally associated with the establishment of the Tokugawa system, began a careful national survey of the entire landholdings of Japan. All proprietary rights were reassessed and redefined, and vested solidly in the hands of the daimyo and their national overlord. This survey of Japanese land served as the basis, not only a for the redistribution of daimyo rights, but also for a new form of village organization. Village lands were assessed as a whole for tax purposes, and whole villages made responsible for tax assessments and for their own self-government.
The survey “had other profound consequences, for it became the legal basis upon which a new separation of status between the peasant and the warrior-aristocracy came to rest” (Hall, 1970, p. 154). A complete and sometimes arbitrary division was made between the cultivators and the professional military class, on the basis of the kenchi (land survey):
For once the kenchi had passed over an area, simply by definition, a line was drawn within Japanese society between the farming and non-farming populace. Those listed in the cadastral registers along with the assessed epics of land, their families and other attached personnel, were the hyakusho (free cultivators). Those who were listed on the rolls of the daimyo as fief-holders or stipendiaries were bushi (military aristocracy, samurai). (Hall 1970, p. 154)
Previously, there had been some interchange between peasantry and lower samurai. Peasants had borne arms, while samurai residing in their fiefs had farmed, or managed farming processes in the village. Now all that was ended. A man was either a peasant in a village community, or a samurai cut off from that community. Each status-class had its boundaries defined by law, and movement across those boundaries was forbidden. Each class had its place and its functions, together with its dress and residence patterns, fixed by national regulations.
This process of class separation was made final and irreversible by still another policy adopted locally by individual daimyo and eventually on a national basis by Hideyoshi, namely the effort to restrict the bearing of arms by any of the bushi class. “Sword-hunts” ..., meant to disarm the rural and urban populace, occurred sporadically during the 1580s. Hideyoshi ordered a nationwide sword-hunt in 1588. Two years later, when defeat of the Hojo gave him authority over all Japan, he issued the famous three-clause edict which froze the social structure and prohibited further class mobility or change of status. Bushi were prevented from returning to the villages, peasants were tied to their occupation and restricted from entering the trades or commerce, bushi were prohibited from leaving one master for another. Thus the basis for laid for the eventual perfection of a four-class social system wherein samurai, peasants, artisans, and merchants were given separate legal identities. (Hall, 1970, p. 154–5)
Tokugawa Japan was organized around a process of exploitation of the peasants by the nobility, the class of samurai:
Fundamentally, they viewed (the rural world) in its function of food-supplier to the cultured world entrusted with administering, educating and preserving the peace – in other words, the civil and military nobility and the ministers of religion. They practiced the maxim that the peasants should be governed in such a way “that they do not die and that they do not enjoy life”. To offer the fruits of the land to the nobles and to their officials – this was the aim of the peasants’ existence. Even if it is true that the Bakufu was careful to prevent extortion, at least half the harvest went to the noble. (Akamatsu, pp. 25–6)
But the introduction of the Baku-han system involved a considerable shift in the role of the samurai class, and in the situation of the village peasantry.
Just as the Shogun reduced the domainal powers of the daimyo, so too the samurai lost their previous powers. They were removed from their former fiefs, the villages, to the castle towns of the various daimyo. Instead of receiving tribute from the peasantry directly on their own fiefs, they received stipends in the form of rice from the granary of the daimyo. They were cut off from the direct ownership of land, their stipends now being dependent on office. The size of these stipends was determined by their place in the service and favour of their lord. The samurai, a former class of warrior-peasants, were effectively de-peasantized by the Tokugawa regulations. As a result of the shogunate’s limits on armies, a good half of the samurai became local civil officials in the administration of the daimyo. The Shogun’s own samurai were drawn into the city of Edo, to the Bakufu, where they too lived on stipends. Some 2,500 of the Shogun’s samurai were granted small domains, with the requirement attached that they – like the daimyo – engage in alternative residence; but their autonomy was still more restricted, for the collection of taxes and administration of justice on their lands fell under the Bakufu’s direct control.
Overall, the situation of the samurai as a class was greatly transformed:
Though as class they nostalgically clung to the concept that they were a landed aristocracy, they had been converted, in reality, to little more than salaried officials of the daimyo. As their bureaucratic functions multiplied, their security became increasingly identified, not with the land, but with government service. Separated from the duties of actual management, they became a thoroughly urbanized group living increasingly in sedentary style (Hall, 1955, p. 52)
The samurai, numbering some two million, formed a very large noble class. Among themselves they were in practice stratified into three broad groups:
a small upper group, linked to their lord’s house by ties of blood or long service, wealthier than the average and sometimes – on the shogunal domains – holding land as “small daimyo”;
a middle group, excluded from the highest posts, but often playing an important role in administration and policy-making;
the lower group, comprising foot-soldiers, minor office-holders, etc.
As a class, the whole of the samurai retained the right to carry arms, in particular the two swords of tradition – a long sword, with which they were empowered to behead any member of the lower classes who failed to show the proper respect, and a short sword for ritual self-disemboweling in case of dishonour.
Within the noble hierarchies, both of the Bakufu and of the various han, the exercise of power did not in practice rest with those in whose names it was held. Just as the power of the Japanese emperor was largely symbolic, so to at the level of the Shogun and the daimyo. The fact that each daimyo must spend half his time in his mansion at Edo meant that he must leave the administration of his han in the hands of his local samurai, who were able to develop their own rule and government with relatively little interference. But the Shogunate and daimyo offices were filled on a hereditary basis, a system little designed to search out talent, and a good part of the administrative work and actual policy-making was undertaken by samurai bureaucrats.
Just as the shogun’s chief administrators were drawn from the ranks of the “hereditary” daimyo, so the chief administrators under each daimyo were drawn from his major hereditary vassals, usually called “family elders” (karo). But most of the daimyo, like the shoguns, were little more than figureheads, and only rarely did their chief officers take political initiative. Lower officers, often of humble origin inside the samurai class, were not infrequently the chief formulators of policy, which they carried into effect by winning formal approval from the daimyo and “family elders”. Han bureaucracies at times became divided into rival factions clustering around statesmen of this type, and “reform” and “conservative” parties might alternate in power. (Fairbank, Reischauer and Craig, p. 185)
Village life was regulated through the land-surveys and a variety of national laws. On the basis of the surveys, the average value of every piece of land was assessed as a basis for determining taxes. Taxes were paid in rice, measured in koku – a koku equaling something over five bushels, and representing the amount reckoned necessary to feed a man for a year. Taxes were paid, not by individual households, but by villages who were held collectively responsible for their payment.
The effect and intention of the laws was to minimize peasant spending and consumption and to maximize yields. Thus fields were never to be left fallow, rice fields were never allowed to be dry fields. Silk clothes were forbidden to members of the peasant class, and the size of peasant houses and the materials of their construction were minutely regulated. The pursuit of occupations other than farming was carefully limited. Peasants were forbidden to sell land to townsmen, to exchange their holdings, or to leave the land. Possession and bearing of arms was strictly forbidden them, as were the study of the Confucian classics or engagement in novel religious practices (especially Christianity).
The peasants were organized by the daimyo’s servants to build castles, to develop and maintain roads and irrigation facilities. They were also called on to work on land reclamation, though the fruits of this labour – additional farming land – were then given to the villages.
Village life was highly conformist. The village headman, the hereditary agent of the daimyo and his samurai officers, sought to establish and maintain village consensus. It was his responsibility to ensure that the village’s taxes were paid, and that the lords’ laws were kept. The Tokugawa rulers revived the ancient Chinese administrative system, the pao, by which village households were divided into groups of five men, each of whom was held responsible for the conduct of the others. These groups were bound by oath to the lord. Each household was placed under the control of the village, a control which extended to such matters as marriage, adoption, inheritance, and succession.
The village, as a collective body, held the land, both ploughland and common. Agriculture was centred on rice production, and took a semi-cooperative form, being dependent on careful irrigation on terraced hillsides. Kinship and pseudo-kinship ties were used to mobilize cooperative labour, especially at planting times.
The village was – thanks to the withdrawal of the samurai to the castle-towns of the daimyo – a partially autonomous association of peasants, and was treated as such at law. It could, as a collective body, sue, make contracts, and borrow money. In criminal law the whole village was held collectively responsible for the activities of its members. It maintained its own police, its own roads, its own irrigation.
Among the peasantry in the village, there was quite wide differentiation. Farm units were of different sizes. Unlike the Russian mir, the Japanese village did not engage in periodic land redistribution, so that inequalities in land holdings were perpetuated over time. But the organization of village life represented not so much a cluster of autonomous farming units as a set of mutually dependent units of different sizes. They were bound together, by real and fictive kinship ties, in a series of exchanges of services: animals, seeds, fertilizers and the like were regularly exchanged in return for labour services. Among the differentially wealthy peasant groupings in the village there was little development of conflict, since the form of village organization was such as to provide a whole series of linkages of clientship and the like between the propertied and propertyless. Barrington Moore comments:
The pre-modern Japanese village community gives every sign of having been a powerful mechanism for incorporating and controlling individuals with real and potential grievances. (Moore, p. 266)
 

in Barker: Origins and Significance of Meiji Restoration (Part 4)


Colin Barker Archive/a>   |   Trotskyist Writers’  Index  |   ETOL Main Page

The Meiji Restorarion

Colin Barker
 
Origins and Significance of the Meiji Restoration
 
The Meiji Restoration
From 1866, leading officials from the “outer” han of Choshu and Satsuma especially began to put together an alliance which involved officials from a few other han and a group of nobles at the imperial court. Choshu and Satsuma had been developing their relationships with the western powers, particularly Britain, and using these contacts to strengthen and modernise their armed forces. In these and other han, vigorous new leaderships had arisen, sometimes out of young men who had survived the experience of “extremism” and now developed a new orientation to the problems of Japanese politics. Their nominal lords, the daimyo, “were to remain fairly conservative in their thinking about the future” but “their activist agents and officers were moving towards the abolition of the shogunate and the creation of a new government under the emperor” (Hall, 1970, p. 262)
The situation moved towards a climax with two events in early 1867. The emperor died, to be succeeded by his fourteen-year-old son. And the former regent to the shogun, Tokugawa Yoshunobu (or Keiki) succeeded to the shogunal office. These changes at the top served to bring political agitation to its conclusion. The new shogun made a last-ditch effort at internal reform, backed by the French. Some of the daimyo tried to work out a new form of conservative coalition, whose aim was to preserve the shogunate together with their own positions, but in much closer association with the imperial court. To this end one of them, the lord of Tosa, persuaded Keiki, the shogun, to resign in favour of a council of daimyo working together under the emperor, a council in which the Tokugawa head of house would retain his powers and lands. The Shogun, in acceding, effectively brought about an “imperial restoration” of a sort.
But the solution was unacceptable to the radical samurai officers of Choshu and Satsuma, and their allies in court. They were determined to strip the Tokugawa clan of its powers and material possessions, and to take the political initiative themselves. They moved warriors into the imperial capital at Kyoto, and seized power on 3rd January 1868 through an attack on the shogunal palace. Keiki himself was probably disposed to accept the situation, but his clan henchmen insisted on a trial of arms. The ensuing civil war was brief and decisive. The armies of the Shogun met those of Choshu and Satsuma later in January 1868. Two and a half centuries before, at the battle of Segikhara in 1600, Keiki’s ancestor, Tokugawa Ieyasu, had crushed the western feudal lords and established the supremacy of the Tokugawa shogunate. Now, after a three-day battle, the situation was reversed. And, as in 1600, the battle was in large part won and lost through treachery: a substantial section of the Tokugawa forces changed sides. Keiki surrendered at Edo, and went off into exile.
Thus a new regime was established, an empire without a Shogun. The new government soon had control of the whole country. The imperial capital was moved from Kyoto to Edo, where the emperor took over the old shogunal palace. Edo was renamed Tokyo (“Eastern Capital”). The new regime was given a “period name” which would also be the name of the young emperor: Meiji. Thus was the Tokugawa shogunate replaced by the “Meiji Restoration”.
 
Top of the page
 
Consolidating the New Regime
The process by which the old Tokugawa regime was overthrown was, by comparison with other revolutionary overturns, a relatively simple matter:
Most of Japan, divided into units that were either too small or too indecisive to take effective action, simply stood by and watched, while a small group of dynamic young samurai, many of humble birth, seized control of the han governments of Satsuma and Choshu, then with the connivance of a few friendly nobles won control of the court, and finally, through daring use of the military power of Satsuma and Choshu, won mastery over the whole nation. (Fairbank, Reischauer, Craig, p. 226)
The real problems were to follow the seizure of power. It is by no means clear that, beyond a fairly general commitment to “modernisation” of Japanese society, the group of young samurai who now effectively ruled Japan knew what they were then going to do. As events would prove, they were themselves not united in their aims. Rather, as they gradually strengthened their power over the next decade, they were to clarify their goals. Between 1868 and 1877 the Meiji revolution went through a series of step-by-step, incremental policy changes; in the process, a new kind of Japanese polity emerged. In the course of this evolution, the victors in the new regime would more than once have to employ the state’s ultimate resource, armed force, to secure their position.
One of the first steps taken by the new rulers was to have the young emperor issue a “Five Articles Oath” (often referred to in English as the “Charter Oath”). This was drafted by the young samurai, and promulgated from the throne on 6 April 1868:



The Five Articles Oath of 1868 




1. Deliberative assemblies shall be widely established and all matters decided by public discussion.
2. All classes, high and low, shall unite in vigorously carrying out the administration of affairs of state.
3. The common people, no less than the civil and military officials, shall each be allowed to pursue his own calling so that there may be no discontent.
4. Evil customs of the past shall be broken off and everything based upon the just laws of nature.
5. Knowledge shall be sought throughout the world so as to strengthen the foundations of imperial rule.



Of the five clauses, the first represented not a guarantee to establish a parliamentary form of government, but rather a general promise to significant forces in Japan – probably the ambitious samurai of other han in particular – that they would not be excluded from the new regime. The second and third were more radical in their implications, for they pointed to the abolition of the Tokugawa status-class system. The fourth was vague, but suggested major changes in the form of rule. The last was probably the most important of all, for it signalled an orientation towards the development and strengthening of Japan through the use of western knowledge – and thus a repudiation of the former radical samurai aspirations to “expel the barbarians”.
Although the han officials from Satsuma, Choshu, Tosa and Hizen who had assumed power were to proceed towards the destruction of the old system of power, they moved cautiously, one step at a time. Initially, they established a form of government around the emperor in which daimyo played the public roles, while the real formulation of policy went on behind the scenes. Only gradually did they emerge from careful obscurity to take on top offices. It was only after a year and a half that the real government of Japan emerged to declare itself as such.
An oligarchy was beginning to take shape, composed at this time (August 1869) of somewhat less than twenty men drawn almost evenly from the court and the four main han, though behind them in the lower ranks of the central government there was a great preponderance of men from Satsuma and Choshu. Hence Japanese have referred to this as the “han clique” (hambatsu) government. (Hall, 1970, p. 275)
And, while in practice the measures which the new government was to push through amounted to a “revolution from above”, many of the measures were framed and announced, not in the name of novelty but in the name of the revival of traditions from the dim pre-shogunate past.
The old order was attacked in the name of a transcendent and still more ancient sanction which was moreover supremely “Japanese”. Japan’s initial reaction to the western impact was taken in the name of a “return to the past” (fukko). To this extent a “restoration” had taken place. (Hall, 1970, p. 265)
Potential resistance to the new regime was contained in two ways. First, while the old han governments were disrupted and had their powers transferred to the new central government (see below), the new system opened up all manner of opportunities for able and ambitious men among the former samurai and village officials. For the more energetic among the samurai, the new regime provided opportunities for the realisation of the old samurai demand for recognition of “merit”, by opening new channels of mobility. And, in line with the first of the classes of the Charter Oath, new local assemblies were established, to act as a series of “safety valves” which could absorb the energies of large numbers of politically ambitious individuals, while preserving the real power of the centre.
In 1871 the government encouraged the establishments of Consultative Assemblies (Kaigi) at the lower levels of government within the new prefectures. In most parts of the country these came into being quickly at the village, district and prefectural levels. Village assemblies thus became a repository for men of local influence (generally former village heads) who might otherwise be deprived of any status. District assemblies were drawn from the membership of village assemblies, and prefectural assemblies were formed by representation from the districts. These groups served both as bodies for the voicing of political ideas and also as agencies through which the government was able to secure backing for its more controversial reforms in land ownership and taxation. Since the assemblies were given powers of debate only, they did little to impede the course of policy determined from Tokyo. (Hall, 1970, p. 277)
The consolidation of central government required the abolition of the old han governments and the dispossession of the old powers of the various daimyo. The ruling samurai clique moved a step at a time to destroy the remnants of provincial autonomy and to abrogate the traditional aristocracy. First, the lands of the defeated Tokugawa – amounting to a quarter of Japan – were placed under central control, and reorganised not as old-style han but as prefectures of the government. The other lords did not see this as a threat, for it seemed that the emperor was becoming his own Shogun. In 1869, after first ensuring that the regiments drawn from Satsuma and Choshu were strong enough to form an imperial army, the ruling samurai persuaded the daimyo of the four principal coalition han – Satsuma, Choshu, Tosa and Hizen – to “return” to the emperor the titles to their domains. To ease the blow, the former daimyo were immediately reappointed “governors” of their former territories. Thereby the former “fiefs” were in effect abolished, in the name of “tradition”. Other daimyo were induced to follow suit. Those who did not volunteer the surrender of their domains were then ordered to do so. Two years later, after careful preparation, the final move was made: the ex-daimyo were summoned to the emperor’s presence and baldly informed that by imperial decree the former han were now abolished. The old domains were replaced by imperial prefectures, under newly appointed governors. The former daimyo were pensioned off, their han and their armies abolished, their former castle headquarters confiscated by the government. The existing 305 units of local administration were then reduced by merger to 75, all under centrally-appointed governors. Thus the top layer of the aristocracy, and the former basis of its rule, were summarily abolished.
By European standards, the destruction of the old nobility was an extraordinarily simple operation, conducted with a minimum of resistance by the old “feudal” lords. The ease of the transition from the former Baku-han state system to a modern, central government in which the new oligarchy was in full command seems to have been due to several inter-related factors.
First, there was the method by which the new ruling clique proceeded. Each step towards the abolition of the han was taken slowly, and without any explicitness about what was to follow. Hence every step became harder to resist. Second, the first steps – persuading the four “outer” daimyo to surrender their domains to the emperor – were possible because these daimyo believed that they would thereby reduce the fears in Japan of a new Shogun emerging out of the defeat of the Tokugawa. Third, the deal offered to the former daimyo was not very difficult to refuse. “There were no guillotines awaiting the dispossessed daimyo, rather they received generous financial settlements at the same time that they were freed from the burdens of office.” (Hall 1970, p. 272). Even the old han debts, and the old paper currencies they had issued, were taken over and absorbed by the new regime. They were given government bonds in return for their former domains, enabling some of them over the succeeding years to make the transition from territorial to financial magnates. Fourth, despite the grandeur of their titles, the daimyo had in a real sense become figureheads of their han governments. Fifth, the very fact that they were not “feudal lords” on the European model made the transition much easier: they had no intimate ties of property and management with the lands of their domains, over which the power they and their servants had exercised was more of a “tributary” than a “feudal” character. The shock of the transition was thus not half as great as it would have been for the English, French or Prussian aristocracies, among whom the relationship with land was much more direct and intimate. In any case, at every stage in the process of dispossessing the daimyo the government did not act until it was sure of deploying sufficient military force to carry the day, a point that will not have gone unnoticed by the daimyo as they meekly surrendered their previous powers, domains and offices. In return, the government ensured an easy material transition for them – even the former Shogun, Tokugawa Keiki, was given a comfortable financial settlement and made a prince in 1903 – and it was thus able to draw on the ideology of imperial loyalty in a situation of national crisis to ensure their submission.
To the former daimyo, the government assigned one-tenth of their former han revenues as private income. In reality, this made them better off financially than they had been before, for as well as wiping out their debts and assuming all the costs of local government, the state also took over their responsibility for paying samurai stipends.
The class of samurai as a whole did much worse out of the reform process than their former lords. Their stipends were cut by 50 per cent or more. A large part of the samurai found themselves in a much worsened financial situation. Later in the decade, the state was to reduce its compensations to the samurai still further, provoking revolts.
In paying off the daimyo and samurai as generously as it did, the government ensured a form of relative stability within the process of social and political transformation. The Japan it was moving towards “modernising” had a noble class of some 1,900,000 – about ten times, in the proportional terms, the size of the privileged classes in France at the time of the 1789 Revolution. It would have been no easy task to dispossess such a large class, who had monopolised both the martial arts and political leadership in Japan for centuries, without any form of compensation. Certainly no such thing could have been achieved without turning the “Meiji Restoration” into a very different kind of revolution, in which the mass of the population were mobilised into radical action. The new rulers therefore were bound to tread carefully, and to treat the abolition of privilege with great caution.
Yet, at the same time, the level of compensation they assumed created major financial difficulties for the new regime. A financial and fiscal reconstruction became a vital necessity, and thus a further step towards “modernisation”. A small amount of foreign borrowing was arranged: £930,000 at nine per cent interest was raised in London in 1869 to finance a railway from Tokyo to the nearby port of Yokohama; in 1872 a loan of £2.7 millions was raised to help cover the government’s financial obligations after taking over the management and costs of the provinces. But the Japanese government was anxious not to fall into financial dependence on the west, and this method was not used again. A second source of finance was the traditional Tokugawa one of forced loans from the great merchant houses. In 1868, out of total government receipts of less than 9,000,000 yen, some 3,838,000 was raised in this manner. Some writers (e.g. E.H. Norman) make much of this merchant financing of the new government, seeing in it evidence of the “bourgeois” character of the Meiji revolution:
Less dramatic than the political and military exploits of the samurai, but more far-reaching in accomplishing both the overthrow of the Bakufu and the stabilisation of the new regime, was the financial support of the great chonin (merchants), especially of Osaka, where it is said that 70 per cent of Japan’s wealth was concentrated. According to Professor Honjo, the decisive battles in the war for the Restoration were fought and won with funds supplied by the chonin. The official record of the House of Mitsui says, “The loans required for the military operations of the Imperial forces were largely furnished by the House of Mitsui.”
What is even more important, the new regime... could not have extricated itself from its financial plight and begun the gigantic task of reconstruction but for the contributions and loans of such great merchants as the Mitsui, Konoike, Ikasaki, Ono and Shimoda ... The Meiji Restoration then was the outcome of this coalition of merchant class with lower samurai ... (E.H. Norman, pp. 49–50)
Barrington Moore Jr. too sees the Meiji Restoration in “class-instrumentalist” terms. But, as we shall see, this kind of analysis really does not fit the situation in Japan. That the merchants sought to win the favour of the new government seems undeniable, but to treat of the relation between them and the ruling group of samurai as a “coalition” implies a more active political role for the merchants than the evidence warrants: “The merchants ... acquiesced in making the loans and in some cases added additional gifts of money, but it never occurred to them to dictate basic government policy.” (Fairbank, Reischauer and Craig, p. 234)
In any case, as well as a reconstruction of governmental financial mechanisms and the currency, fiscal arrangements needed a thorough-going reform. In July 1873 a revision of the agricultural tax system inherited from the Tokugawa was begun. The land tax that was introduced was to provide the major source of government revenue: as late as 1880 it still provided four-fifths of all tax income. The state was unwilling to impose significant taxes on trade and industry, for it was looking to their growth to meet the foreign economic threat. Tariffs on foreign trade were relatively insignificant as a source of revenue, for under the “unequal treaties” the shogunate had signed with the western powers import and export taxes were limited to five per cent ad valorem – and the agreements had saddled the regime with the costs of building lighthouses and providing buoys and lightships at the trading ports.
What the state needed was “a unified system of taxation – a tax that was easy to collect and difficult to evade, and above all a tax that would not fluctuate according to the harvest” (E.H. Norman, p. 140). But the development of such a tax implied the reconstruction of rural relationships, a “land reform”. The Japanese land settlement, Hall (1970, p. 278) suggests, is sometimes compared with the freeing of the serfs in Tsarist Russia a decade earlier. In reality, the measure was inspired by different motives, took a different form, and had different consequences from that in Russia. The Japanese motive for reform was fiscal, not social. In order to alter and improve the basis of tax revenues, the ownership of land had to be placed on a new legal footing. Land reform was thus preliminary to tax reform.
Previously, agricultural taxes had been calculated as percentages of agricultural yields. Variations in the harvest meant unpredictability in tax revenues and therefore in state budgeting. In 1873, therefore, taxes were recalculated, at fixed levels, as a charge not on harvests but on land values. The initial level was set at three per cent of land value (roughly half its theoretical productivity) but when this proved too disruptive and dangerous it was lowered in 1876 (?) to two and a half per cent.
As a preliminary to collecting this new tax, however, the ownership of land had first to be established. The government issued “certificates of landed property” to individual landowners. All previous communal and pre-capitalist forms of land-holding were thereby abolished, and private property in land was established, together with the legal right of sale and purchase of land. Under the new law, the man paying the tax – whether as independent cultivator or as landlord whose fields were worked by tenants – was the landowner. The law thus effectively legitimised the situation which had developed in the Japanese village during the Tokugawa period, through which a commercialising agriculture had given rise to a class of peasant landlords who received rent for their land from tenants. What had been strictly illegal, but widely practised before the Meiji Restoration, now became the legal basis of agriculture in Japan.
Even this “modernisation” of rural land-holding was carried out in part under the flag of a “restoration” of ancient ways.
... when the “certificates of landed property” were issued after 1871, the administrators were aiming at restoring imperial taxes; their only purpose was to secure regular revenue for central government finances. The 1873 law was entitled “Reform of the Tax on Land” and not ... “Introduction of Land Tax” or “Abolition of Dues”. In the jurists’ minds, taxes and dues went hand in glove. The dues, misappropriated by the usurpers, had to be brought back into taxes. Men, therefore, had a revival in mind in the early years of Meiji, and not an innovation as we might think today. The movement forward was made by referring to the past. (Akamatsu, p. 300)
What was totally new was the payment of all taxes in money and not in kind.
The legal reorganisation of landed property brought in its train a series of developments in rural relations. While the overall tax level was no higher than in the later Tokugawa period, the fixed, cash form of tax meant that the producer was no longer cushioned during years of poor harvest as he had been. In the past, the lords’ policy – that the peasants should have “just enough to live on and no more” – meant in practice that their tax exactions were reduced in bad years. Now that paternalistic variation was gone.
... the peasants were now freed from the oppressive bondage of feudalism and at the same time deprived of the “paternal” consideration of their lord whose problem it was to see “that they neither died nor lived”. In the new society they were free to choose their own fate; to live or die, to remain on the land or sell out and go to the city. In this way the majority of the rural population, while released from the tyranny of feudalism, were not at the same time accorded state protection in the same way as were the landlords by the guarantee of the right to private ownership of land. (Norman, p. 143)
Those who could not pay their taxes, thanks to the vicissitudes of nature (storms, blight, crop failure) or of the market (fall in the price of rice) had either to accept the confiscation and sale of their land, or to have recourse to the money-lenders and thus to enter on the treadmill of interest payments which might at any time end in fore-closure. The need for money to pay taxes pushed the peasant away from self-sufficiency toward market production, yet without the resources of the landowner who could store his rice in granaries while the price-level improved. The peasant cultivating his own land thus entered a new world of risks. The tenant, on the other hand, might pay his rent in either cash or kind (mostly the latter in the early period) to the landowner, who paid part of the rent over to the state as taxes and pocketed the rest as plain profit. Thus the effect of the revision in land tax was to hurry along the already evident tendency towards the dispossession of the small peasantry and the parallel concentration of land into the hands of the landlord class. The most rapid development of these two inter-connected tendencies was seen in the 1880s. The Meiji land reform promoted both peasant discontent and a sharpening of rural stratification divisions, as peasant farming was more and more displaced by landlord-tenant relations.
In line with the general aim of “modernisation” the regime moved to abolish the legal basis of the former status-class system. All occupations were declared open to all citizens of the Japanese empire. Where previously only samurai might bear family names, now these were also available to former commoners. Freedom of marriage was introduced, and restrictions on dress and hairstyle were abolished. The wearing of swords by samurai was declared optional. As the regime became more secure, and its armed forces were reorganised, it began to cut the cost of its support to the lesser members of the old noble class. In 1873 all stipends were declared subject to taxation, on a sliding scale. In 1874 samurai were given the option of commuting their stipends into government bonds, or selling them for cash; in 1876 all remaining stipends were ordered to be thus commuted. In this way the state reduced the cost of its remuneration to the former samurai to one-tenth of what it had been. The outcome was the financial destruction of the samurai. A small minority turned their government money into capital to invest in business, but the majority – having little talent or training for the new commercialising official world of Japan – saw their money wiped out in a relatively short time. They sank into penury – or died in the last revolts of the samurai (below).
Perhaps the worst blow to the samurai as a class was the government’s law introducing conscription for the army and navy. The former military caste thus lost its special access to its main occupation. Under the 1873 law, all males at age 21 were placed on the conscript registers and made liable for three years’ service, plus an additional six years in the reserves. The conscription law was, in its implications, probably the most revolutionary of all the measures carried through by the young Meiji bureaucrats:
For almost three centuries commoners had been denied the right even to possess swords. The whole division of classes had depended on this clear functional division between them and the samurai. Now the weaponless peasant masses suddenly became the foundation of a greatly expanded and entirely centralised and modernised military system. Naturally it took several years to put universal conscription fully into effect, but as it gradually became a reality the new government established firm control over the whole country. (Fairbank, Reischauer and Craig, pp. 237–8)
Within a few years, through a series of new legal enactments, the young Meiji bureaucrats had placed Japanese society on a new basis. The whole process of creating a modern nation of equal citizens, with all (or most) previous privileges abolished, in which land – still the basis of most people’s livelihood – was converted into taxable private property, and where every young man must serve a period in the armed forces, was achieved remarkably swiftly. The process, naturally, threw Japanese society into turmoil. Some men from every class seized the opportunities to forge ahead in business and the professions, but millions found the transition exceptionally difficult.
Many of the merchant companies, accustomed to close and profitable dependence on the daimyo and the han governments, as bankers and purveyors, could not adjust to the new conditions and went bankrupt.
The peasants seethed with discontent. To gain equal civil status with the samurai was no real gain, while the legal rights granted to the landlord-peasants were seen as state theft of the land. The fixed monetary tax, and conscription, were hated and feared. Conscription was officially termed a “blood tax “ – a phrase that frightened the peasants, among whom the rumour spread that the blood of young male conscripts would be sold to foreigners. Peasant uprisings, which had anyway more than doubled during the 1860s, became still more frequent after 1868, rising to a crescendo after the Conscription Law of 1873. But the government’s new military forces – peasant sons in uniform – put them down, and the rural dangers to the regime subsided, especially after the 1876 cut of a half per cent in the tax level.
Peasant revolts were, in any case, a phenomenon with which the ruling classes of Japan had long become familiar. Much more threatening was unrest among the former samurai. The leaders in Tokyo, themselves drawn from this class, continually expressed their concern about the plight of their former fellows. Efforts were made to open up the island of Hokkaido to give them land, and as many as possible were absorbed into the expanding government service and into government-sponsored industries as both foremen and labourers.
The issue of the future of the former samurai provoked a split among the ruling group. Those who were more traditionally inclined saw a possible solution to the problems of samurai redundancy through the enlargement of the army and its use in foreign wars. In particular, the idea of a war against Korea gained widespread favour, winning support from within the small ruling group. The idea of this military enterprise appealed especially to those who looked to a strengthening of the traditional martial virtues, now threatened by the new modernising Japan. For others in the new leadership, the idea of a Korean expedition was an anathema: it would slow down the destruction of the old class system, divert to war resources which were urgently needed for industrialisation, and generally hold back the process of modernisation. It was not, as the modernisers said, that they were opposed to the idea of Japanese overseas expansion in principle – but the time was not yet ripe. This group managed to carry the day, and the Korean adventure was called off. A section of the leadership resigned in disgust, retiring to their former han to brood.
Between 1873 and 1877 there were four rebellions led by former samurai, and numbers of assassination attempts, some successful and some not. The most dangerous, and the last of these rebellions was that led by Saigo Takamori of Satsuma, one of the key leaders of the Meiji revolution who had resigned in 1873. In the battles of the Satsuma rebellion, 13,000 were killed and 24,000 wounded. (Though, as Trimberger notes, the level of violent deaths was far lower than for example in the French Revolution: 400,000 were killed in the Vendée, reaction in France, and more than 700,000 Frenchmen alone were killed in the foreign wars of 1792–1800.) The Satsuma rebellion was put down by the new army, and Saigo himself died on the battlefield.
After the defeat of the Satsuma rebellion, the new regime settled down more comfortably in office. From now on, issues to do with economic growth and expansion would concern it more closely than the reform of national institutions and the consolidation of its own power.
 

in Barker: Origins and Significance of Meiji Restoration (Introduction)


Colin Barker Archive/a>   |   Trotskyist Writers’  Index  |   ETOL Main Page

The Meiji Restorarion

Colin Barker
 
Origins and Significance of the Meiji Restoration
 
Introduction
Japan is today the world’s third largest industrial power, measured in terms of gross national product. Yet, in the mid-19th century, the Japanese economy was at a level not dissimilar to that in England under the later Tudors. The story of Japanese industrial growth is quite spectacular.
The present notes do not deal with the whole history of industrialising Japan. What is dealt with here is just one problem: the “political revolution” of 1868 through which Japan was converted from a “traditional” to a “modern” state. That process is, I hope, sufficiently interesting to merit consideration in its own right. I have quoted extensively and shamelessly from other authors.
I hope some time to add one additional section, dealing at least briefly with the consequences for Japanese development of the peculiar form of its “revolution from above”. In the meantime, anyone interested is recommended in particular to look at Ellen Kay Trimberger, Revolution From Above, especially pp. 105–138, or at the article by the same author.
The bibliography at the end lists the sources I have used, in each case indicating – if the item is available within the Polytechnic library system – where it may be obtained.
This handout was produced in a great rush, and no doubt suffers from the circumstances of its production. Any comments, queries, criticisms and the like will be more than welcomed by
Colin Barker
Department of Social Science, Manchester Polytechnic
1 February 1982
 
Postscript (1991). Over the years since this paper was originally drafted, there has been a tremendous amount of new material published in English, as Japanese studies have – very properly – expanded. There is a good listing of recent work in the Bibliography to the recent book by Janet E. Hunter: The Emergence of Modern Japan: An Introductory History since 1853 (Longman 1989). There is a very useful theoretical and comparative discussion of some of the issues posed by the Meiji Restoration in Alex Callinicos, Bourgeois revolutions and historical materialism, International Socialism 43, June 1989. Also of interest is Germaine A. Hoston, Marxism and the Crisis of Development in Pre-war Japan, Princeton University Press, 1986
Postscript (2001). The volume of materials appearing over the past ten years has been tremendous. I have not managed to keep up with them. But any modern reader should look out for the multi-volumed Cambridge History of Japan, which contains large amounts of really excellent materials.
Colin Barker
Department of Sociology, Manchester Metropolitan University
email: c.barker@mmu.ac.uk
Feb 2001
 

in Barker: Origins and Significance of Meiji Restoration (References)


Colin Barker Archive/a>   |   Trotskyist Writers’  Index  |   ETOL Main Page

The Meiji Restorarion

Colin Barker
 
Origins and Significance of the Meiji Restoration
 
References
Akamatsu, Paul, 1972, Meiji 1868 (London: Allen & Unwin)
Allen, G.C., 1962, A Short Economic History of Japan (London: Allen & Unwin)
Anderson, Perry, 1974, Lineages of the Absolutist State (London: Verso)
Barker, Colin, 1978a, A note on the theory of capitalist states, Capital and Class 4, Spring
Barker, Colin, 1978b, The state as capital, International Socialism 1 (second series), July
Barker, Colin, 1979, Miliband on the state – a slightly different critique (mimeo)
Beasley, W.G., The Modern History of Japan (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson)
Bendix, Reinhard, 1967, Preconditions of development: a comparison of Japan and Germany, in Dore, R.P., 1967
Block, Fred, 1980, Beyond relative autonomy: state managers as historical subjects, The Socialist Register 1980
Brenner, Robert, The agrarian roots of European capitalism, in T.H. Aston and C.H.E. Philbin, eds., The Brenner Debate: Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe (Cambridge U.P., 1985)
Brinton, Crane, 1965, The Anatomy of Revolution (New York: Vintage)
Crawcour, E. Sydney, The Tokugawa heritage, in Lockwood, William M, ed., 1965
Dore, R.P., ed., 1967, Aspects of Social Change in Modern Japan (Princeton: Princeton U.P.)
Draper, Hal, 1977, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, vol. 1: State and Bureaucracy (New York: Monthly Review Press)
Fairbank, John K., Reischauer, Edwin O., and Craig, Albert H., 1965, East Asia: The Modern Transformation (London: Allen & Unwin)
Hall, John Whitley, 1955, The castle town and Japan’s modern urbanisation, Far Eastern Quarterly, 15.1
Hall, John Whitney, 1970, Japan: From Prehistoric to Modern Times (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson)
Halliday, Jon, 1975, A Political History of Japanese Capitalism (New York: Pantheon)
Hobsbawm, E.J., 1975, The Age of Capital 1848–1875 (New York: Mentor)
Gerth, Hans and Mills, C. Wright, From Max Weber (London: Routledge & Kegal Paul)
Lockwood, David, 1964, Social integration and system integration, in Zollschan, George K., and Hirsch, Walter, eds., Explorations in Social Change (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul)
Lockwood, William W., ed., 1965, The State and Economic Enterprise in Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press)
Lockwood, William W., 1968, The Economic Development of Japan (Princeton: Princeton U.P.)
Marx, Karl and Engels, Friedrich, 1848, Manifesto of the Communist Party
Marx, Karl, 1976, Capital, vol. I (Harmondsworth: Penguin) (different edition)
Marx, Karl, 1962, Capital, vol. III (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing)
Miliband, Ralph, 1969, The State in Capitalist Society (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson)
Moore, Barrington Jr., 1967, Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy (London: Allen Lane)
Norman, E. Herbert, 1940, Japan’s Emergence as a Modern State (New York: Institute of Pacific Relations)
Saville, John, 1969, Primitive accumulation and early industrialisation in Britain, in Ralph Miliband & John Saville, eds., The Socialist Register 1969
Sims, Richard, 1973, Modern Japan (London: The Bodley Head)
Skocpol, Theda, 1973, A critical review of Barrington Moore’s Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, Politics and Society, 4.1, Fall
Skocpol, Theda, 1978, States and Social Revolutions (Cambridge: Cambridge U.P.)
Smith, Thomas C., 1960 Japan’s aristocratic revolution, The Yale Review, 50
Smith, Thomas C., 1959, The Agrarian Origins of Modern Japan (Stanford: Stanford U.P.)
Smith, Thomas C., 1967, “Merit” as ideology in the Tokugawa period, in Dore, R.P., ed.
Storry, Richard, 1960, A History of Modern Japan (Harmondsworth: Penguin)
Trimberger, Ellen Kay, 1977 State power and modes of production: implications of the Japanese transition to capitalism, The Insurgent Sociologist, vol. 7
Trimberger, Ellen Kay, 1978, Revolution from Above: Military Bureaucrats and Development in Japan, Turkey, Egypt and Peru (New Brunswick: Transaction Books)
Wallerstein, Immanuel, 1974, The Modern World System, vol. 1 (New York: Academic Press)
Weber, Max, 1968, Economy and Society (New York: Bedminster Press)
 

in Barker: Origins and Significance of Meiji Restoration (Part 3)


Colin Barker Archive/a>   |   Trotskyist Writers’  Index  |   ETOL Main Page

The Meiji Restorarion

Colin Barker
 
Origins and Significance of the Meiji Restoration
 
Intrusion from the Outside World
For two and a half centuries, the Tokugawa regime preserved the isolationist policy that characterised its rule. In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, various attempts from the outside to persuade the regime to open its ports to trade and to establish more ties with the world economy were rebuffed.
But the world outside Japan did not stand still. The European influences that had been expelled in the early seventeenth century had taken the shape of occasional commerce and Christian missionaries. But by the mid-nineteenth century the process of unifying the world into a single “world system” (Wallerstein) was gathering pace, as full-scale capitalist production developed rapidly. The commerce now sought was permanent and continuous; the weapons by which it might be enforced were no longer bibles but steamships and modern artillery. Japanese isolationism could not survive this new onslaught. That Japan would have to deal with European and American traders and governments, backed by superior military force, became – painfully – apparent. The question then became, not whether Japan should enter the world system, but how.
One possibility was shown by the experience of its great neighbour, China. The 1839–1842 “Opium Wars” between Britain and China revealed what the real balance of forces was: China was defeated and “opened” to western trade by force. A “semi-colonial” solution was one method by which Japan might be forced into the modern world. Might not Japan suffer the same fate as China?
All around the Pacific, the capitalist world system was now closing in on Japan. Russia was expanding into Siberia and colonising Alaska. By the mid-nineteenth century, the Moscow government was anxious to secure supplies for eastern Siberia and Alaska. The British, with their trading concessions on the Chinese mainland, across the East China Sea , were ever keener to win port rights in Japan. Over the Pacific to the East, the United States was rapidly expanding its frontiers: in 1846, the British conceded Oregon to the USA; the 1846–1848 US-Mexican War won the USA the prize of California, and with it a long continuous coastline on the Pacific. Transcontinental railroad projects were already being actively discussed when gold was discovered in California in 1849, giving a new boost to the world economy. The new state of California, under the impact of the Gold Rush, developed rapidly. In 1851, a second Gold Rush began in Australia, to Japan’s south. A newly formed Pacific Mail Steamship Company was planning a regular route from San Francisco to Shanghai – a route that would take the steamships close to the Japanese coastline. The American whaling industry – the same that was celebrated in Moby Dick – was rapidly expanding in the Pacific. More sailors and whalers were being wrecked on Japan’s shored; more steamships sought coaling facilities; more commercial interests were seeking new openings for trade. The dynamism and expansive character of Atlantic capitalism were now reaching strongly into the Pacific.
After one unsuccessful and rather cautious attempt at negotiating an opening of Japan, the US government sent a squadron of four warships under Commodore Perry to try again. Perry’s instructions permitted him to use force if necessary to gain concessions from the Japanese government. At about the same time, Tsarist Russia sent a fleet under an admiral, with much the same intentions. The British decided to wait on the results of the American effort.
In 1853, Perry’s “black ships” arrived. Perry made it clear to the Japanese what he wanted, and that he would not take “no” for an answer. He announced that he would return the following year, with a bigger fleet, for Japan’s reply.
Perry’s ultimatum sparked off a major crisis in Japan – a crisis whose outcome was the fall of the Tokugawa shogunate, and an entirely new line of development for Japanese society.
 
Top of the page
 
The Problem of Development
The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world market given a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in every country. To the great chagrin of reactionists, it has drawn from under the feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. All old-established national industries have been destroyed or are daily being destroyed ... In place of the old local and national seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction, universal interdependence of nations ...
The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the most barbarous, nations into civilisation. The cheap prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the barbarians’ intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate. It compels all nations, on pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels them to introduce what it calls civilisation into their midst, i.e. to become bourgeois themselves. In one word, it creates a world after its own image. (Marx, The Communist Manifesto, 1848)
From the time that western pressure revived in the mid-nineteenth century, Japan faced a set of problems that have re-appeared time and again as a central set of problems for “emergent nations”. These problems are sometimes summarised as “the problem of development”.
Japan is often judged to have been very successful in solving the development problem, and one focus of interest is therefore on the specific causes of Japan’s “success” – as well as on some of the difficulties and crises posed by that “success”. In this sense, Japan is full of interest for a “comparative sociology of development”. But Japan can also be considered in a slightly different light, as a particular case of the “development problem”, in that the problems faced by Japan are general to other nations. Thus Japan can also provide a starting point for examining what exactly it means to be an “emergent nation” – indeed, to be a “nation” more generally. This second line of discussion would point us towards considering, not the differences between Japanese experience and that in other countries, but the more general similarities. In this light we might, for example, what – say – the modern histories of two countries like Japan and China have in common.
It might be supposed that these two countries are as different as chalk and cheese. After all, one is “capitalist” and the other “communist”. One is counted a leading member of the curiously named “western world”, the other is a leading example of a “Third World” country. Apart from the fact that the two are neighbours in East Asia, and share some common cultural characteristics inherited from the distant past, what possible similarities could there be between these two countries today? Yet, if we consider the “development problem”, we find reasons to doubt that these two countries do really represent widely different systems. Rather, there is an important sense in which they can be comprehended, not as two distinct “systems” but as “parts” of a more encompassing single “system” from which they both derive common characteristics.
John Whitney Hall, in his Japan from Prehistory to Modern Times, writes that “in the nineteenth century both China and Japan faced first what might be called their crises of identity”. Both had somehow to deal with the situation in which pressure on them from the West was mounting; they had “somehow to acquire a will to survive... and to remake themselves into definable national entities” (p.245). The point Hall is making is perhaps so obvious and familiar that we take it for granted. The “world of nations” is such an apparent aspect of our experience that we do not question exactly what it means to say that a “country” has to become a “definable national entity”. Yet something of this sort is what is involved in being an “emergent nation”.
To become a “nation” in the modern world is more than simply to be a body of people with a common descent, or language, or culture, or historical tradition. A modern “nation”, indeed, may involve the existence of more than one such body of people. The only guarantee (or perhaps semi-guarantee) of “nation-hood” is the possession of a nation-state. The problem of “emergent nations” is a political problem. A modern “nation” is a collection of people, occupying a definite piece of Terra Firma which in some definable and practically defensible sense is “theirs”. Over that territory the “nation” – effectively the nation-state – has “sovereignty”, defined in my dictionary as “supreme independent power”. What Hall terms a “definable national entity” must be able to determine what happens on its own territory, and to do so as an autonomous political unit. It must be able to determine the laws that shall apply to people living on, or visiting, its territory, and to enforce those laws. It must be able to defend its law-making and law-enforcing powers against “non-nationals” to whom it denies “sovereignty” within its bounds. It must be able to defend its territory against encroachment from without. All of this is bound up with the idea of becoming a “definable national entity”.
We are so used to presuppositions of this kind that we risk forgetting that all these ideas and practices have a definite history. The very idea of “nations” is a relatively recent one, emerging some time probably in the late Middle Ages or early modern period in Europe. Indeed, its appearance in Europe was one of the things that was to make Europe so important in modern world history.
This is not the place to trace – even in outline – the process by which Europe became the “world of nations” that crystallised out of the complex mixture of feudal, Christian Europe. Nor is it the place to discuss the interaction between that development of autonomous nations in Europe and the simultaneous development of the first stages of the capitalism’s emergence to dominance. But two general points are worth making.
The first is that, when Europe began to expand outwards to the rest of the globe, it did so in a form previously unknown. There had, of course, been great geographical expansions before. The Roman Empire provides a good example. But previous expansions by whole civilisations took the form of “imperial” expansions: from a single political centre, by military, political, economic and other means, an “empire” expanded its frontiers by incorporating into its monocentric political framework previous outsiders and “barbarians”. European expansionism, however, was from the beginning “polycentric”. Some of the “emergent nations” of Europe did attempt, at various points, to convert themselves, by war, diplomacy and alliance, into monocentric empires. But no European nation, in practice, was sufficiently strong to establish “sovereignty” over its rivals. Nor was the Catholic Church, the other imperial contender, able to achieve more than a kind of partial cultural hegemony over Europe. The result was that territories outside Europe, which were incorporated into what Wallerstein has called the “European world system” as European armies and traders pushed outwards, were themselves drawn into a political system which was not an “empire” but a system of nation-states.
In the short run, European expansion took two political forms which – in the longer run – were to coalesce more or less into a single form. Some of the peoples which the nations of Europe came up against as they spread across the globe were colonised, becoming subordinate extensions of the European nation-state that seized them. Others were treated, in effect, like other European nation-states: sometimes they had war waged against them and sometimes more simply had trading relations opened, but they were “respected” as sovereign states. Over the course of time, in a process which is still not totally completed, the colonised territories themselves threw off or won freedom from the colonial yoke and entered the “world of nations” themselves, as additional elements with their own sovereignty.
Thus the processes of global social and economic unification into a single “system”, which began in Europe, took a political form which permitted “new nations” to enter the world-system the Europeans had begun. The terms of entry to the world system were in important respects different from those through which colonised territories were brought into the frameworks of previous empires. The imperialism initiated by Europe was systematically different from that of Rome, China or earlier empires. Instead of political subjugation, entry into the new world-system was permitted – in principle, at least – on the basis of national autonomy, political independence and sovereignty.
On the one hand, while entry as a “sovereign state” was allowed, what was impossible was a refusal to join at all. The economic, military and technological superiority of the expanding European world was such that self-isolation was an impracticable stance. If, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, countries like Japan and China could be relatively successful with policies of domestic isolation, and exclusion of the western “barbarians”, their policy could not stand for ever. It was one thing, on the far margins of European penetration, to refuse admittance to mercantile capitalism; it was quite another to try to refuse entry, in a Pacific basin that was being sucked into the immensely more powerful world of nineteenth century industrial capitalism. The issue now became, not whether China or Japan – or another people – would join the world system, but how, on what terms and under whose power?
The second point is that the world system was not simply one of nation-states, but also one of capitalism. Capitalism is defined by the co-existence of two kinds of fundamental social relations: class, and competition. Capitalist class relations depend on the monopolisation, by one section of society, of access to the means of production, so that the other section of society is forced into a particular pattern of dependence that Marx summarised as “wage labour”. Capitalist class relations involve a specific form of exploitation, of the appropriation by the monopolising class of the surpluses produced under its direction by the dependent class (the “proletariat”). Thus, in one aspect – though an aspect that takes on the disguise of formal equality in the market – capitalism involves the “despotism” of one class over another. But capitalist relations of production are not simply these “vertical” relations of domination and exploitation. Capitalist relations include, simultaneously, a complex division of labour and division of productive property into a whole number of competing, autonomy yet interdependent, units. Capital appears, always, in the form of “many capitals”. No one centre of exploitation and accumulation has mastery over the whole of production – if there were such a total monopoly there might be a class system, but not a capitalist one. The “horizontal” relations between capitals, their mutual competition, force each capital individually to pursue the crucial dynamic of the capitalist system – accumulation. Yet that pressure exerted on every independent capitalist unit is exerted “impersonally”, not by some individual or group that decides it shall be so, but rather by “the logic of the system”. In the capitalist system each individual unit is in principle autonomous, free to determine its own path of development. It is “sovereign” over the part of total social property which falls beneath its sway. Yet, at the same time, it is constrained severely by its interactions with all other “sovereign” capitals. It is “free”, yet confined by its place in a larger system of which it is merely a part – and a system which operates “blindly”, with its own pattern of movement, its own self-governing mechanism (Adam Smith’s “invisible hand” or Karl Marx’s “law of value”).
Between capital – “a definite social production relation” – and the world system of nation-states there is a fundamental homology (Barker, 1978a). In an important sense, every capital and every nation-state shares the same form. Each is autonomous, sovereign, self-willed and yet at the same time constrained by the competitive action of all the others. Each is, internally, a form of “despotism”, of the exercise of exploitative power by a minority over a majority. A nation-state is a form of the exercise of class power, and a form of competitive relations; so is a capital. The “logic” of the world-system operates not simply on “economic” units such as corporations and companies, but also on “political” units, above all on nation-states.
The point of this rather abstract digression is that we can now be rather more precise about the questions with which we began.
The “crisis of identity” to which Hall referred, and which faced China and Japan in the nineteenth century, is a crisis about entry into this capitalist world system. Hall suggests that the problem each people faced was that of making themselves into a “definable national entity”. There is no law which says that every people must become such an entity; the process of making themselves such requires a definite struggle. It was perfectly possible – as happened to China for a whole period – for a pre-capitalist country to become the political and economic subordinate of one or more of the foreign powers, possibly losing, in the process, its own geographical and cultural coherence through being divided internally by the colonising powers. In some parts of the world, “definable national entities” could only emerge among the peoples of an area as a result of colonisation, and as a result of the drawing of political boundaries between colonies where previously no boundaries of a similar kind had existed: the history of the whole of the Americas, in effect, and of large parts of Africa, took this form. If an existing social and political formation were to manage, without the experience of colonisation, to make itself into a “definable national entity”, it must in practice reorganise its internal political structure – and probably its economic and social structure too – to become a “sovereign nation-state” existing in a world of such states. It must become capable of maintaining and protecting its place in such a world, for in that world, ultimately, the “rights” of nations depend on their “mights”.
Thus, the emergence of a modern nation-state, capable of preserving its sovereignty against outside contenders, in practice involved the necessity of a wholesale destruction of pre-existing powers, interests and structures which stood in the way of such an achievement. That is, a pre-condition for the emergence of a viable nation-state was some kind of internal political revolution.
For a political revolution to occur, not only must the old form of social and political organisation break down, but some social force must emerge to challenge the existing ruling classes and leaderships, and to mobilise behind itself (or at least neutralise) other elements within the nation to achieve the necessary re-structuring. Unless and until some such social force emerged to reshape the nation as a “definable national entity”, the particular country would remain the plaything of warring external and internal forces. It would not be a sovereign “nation”, an autonomous competing power.
Which social force would arise to carry through this achievement, the necessary preliminary to “modernisation”, was a question not easily answered in the abstract. For each separate “nation”, before its entry into the world-system, had a different history and a different internal structure. The circumstances of the entry of each into the world-system, and the timing of that entry, were different. The creation of a world society of nations was anything but a uniform or simultaneous process. Hence, in crucial respects, Marx’s suggestion in the “Preface” to Capital Volume I, that each nation would follow the path marked out by England, the first industrial capitalist nation, was just plain wrong. Every nation had a different point of origin, a different set of social forces both needing to be re-structured and available to do the re-structuring. Different social forces needed to be overthrown, mobilised, blocked, organised. Thus the national histories of the processes by which each nation approached the “problem of emergence” are all different. There is a crude variant of “Marxism” (though not found in Marx and Engels) which supposes that, since the problem is reducible to the problem of capitalist development, then a capitalist class – a bourgeoisie like that of Holland or England – must play the revolutionary part, and itself unify the nation as a “definable national entity”. In a small number of countries, the revolutionary role was assumed by something like a classic bourgeoisie, but elsewhere the same role might be played, with of course individual variations, by other actors. Here a self-transformed monarchy, there a populist political leader; here a cohesive bunch of civil or military bureaucrats, there a bunch of religious fanatics; here an autocrat, there a democrat; here a “liberal”, there a “communist”.
Each revolutionary leadership set its particular stamp on the form that the “modernising nation” took; each had its particular social forces to mobilise, to neutralise, or to defeat. Thus each national revolution shaped the form of the polity that emerged. Sociologists, political scientists and economists have attempted, with varying degrees of success, to create typologies of the different “paths to development” that the nations of the world have followed and are still following. But it is the rich diversity of national histories which needs to be stressed.
Yet within that diversity there is nonetheless a common thread, a unifying theme. For all these different forces and movements, for all these nations, the “problem of development” is the same problem. And the problem of development is not simply defined within each nation taken in isolation, but is also defined by the pattern of interaction between that nation and the rest of the world-system. The pattern and task of development are posed, and re-posed, by the development of the whole of world capitalism.
It is not enough to become a “definable national entity”, as if this were a once-for-all act; remaining one is also part of the problem. To survive, every nation-state must – by coercion, by fraud, by ideological mobilisation, by economic incentive, etc – compel its subjects to subordinate themselves and their activities to the imperative of capitalism: competitive accumulation. Hall writes, of China and Japan,
Each nation ... was obliged to defend its identity if it was to maintain its security in a hostile world.
To succeed in that enterprise, each nation must learn to “compete in the modern world”. The price of failure is the same as that facing any unsuccessful company in the market-place: loss of autonomy, subjection to takeover bids, incorporation into the hegemony of a richer and more powerful “partner”, the division of national assets among bigger and more successful rivals. The price of success is a permanent effort to maintain a rate of exploitation and accumulation, a pattern and a tempo of production, whose parameters are set, not merely inside the nation-state, but in the world economy and society at large.
The world of nations, like the world of production of which it is an integral part, is a world of permanent competition, permanent accumulation drives, permanent exploitation, permanent war and preparation for war. Every nation-state must not only place itself in a position to join the race, it must mobilise the resources to stay there and if possible to move forward relative to its rivals. “Modernisation” and “development” are not single acts, but a compulsive way of life, the life of the whole global society.
It was this whole way of life that came knocking on Japan’s door in 1853, when Commodore Perry’s black ships entered the waters in front of Edo.
 
Top of the page
 
The End of Tokugawa Japan
The arrival of Commodore Perry in 1853 initiated a crisis in Japanese political life which ended, fifteen years later, with the “Meiji Restoration” of January 1868.
The story of the period of transition from Tokugawa to Meiji Japan is one of incredible complexity, in which a whole series of movements interwove and conflicted. (For a fairly full account, see Akamatsu.) Here we can only signal major moments in that development.
Perry in 1853 had demanded a treaty, opening Japan in some respects to the rest of the world, and announced his intention of returning the following year, with reinforcements, to collect his treaty. The shogunate faced a terrible dilemma. Military resistance to such an obviously powerful enemy was hardly feasible. The Americans were so blatantly superior, and Perry could easily block coastal shipping and starve the capital city of Edo. The shogunate might adopt a rearguard position, giving away as little as possible, but it was clear that the West was going to force an entry to Japan. It could, of course, contemplate the total ruin and subjugation of the country, its conversion into a colony or semi-colony of one or more of the industrial powers – like India, or China. It could open Japan to the West without opposition, but what then would be the position of the Shogun, the “Barbarian-subduing Generalissimo”? The shogunate already had plenty of enemies; they must surely multiply and fester now.
The shogunate was no longer a military dictatorship controlling overwhelming military power. It had become a flabby bureaucratic regime, divided by policy differences among its members. Lacking an unchallengeable leader, it depended on the “public opinion” of its own retainers ... It could not be expected that this conglomeration would present a united front to the rest of the nation on any issue so intensely controversial as the opening of Japan to the West. (Fairbank, Reischauer and Craig, p. 202)
The shogunate was unable to determine, alone, what to do. It therefore consulted the whole of the daimyo on their opinions. “This act, while reasonable in the circumstances, had unfortunate consequences, for it made bakufu policy for the first time a matter of public discussion” (Hall, 1970, p. 355?). Consultation with the daimyo was a public announcement to the whole of Japanese political society (effectively, the class of samurai at large) that the Bakufu was weak. The daimyo did not even help much, for they disagreed among themselves in the advice they offered, the majority being in favour of a policy of total opposition to Perry and his ilk.
The Bakufu officials relaxed the rule limiting daimyo military establishments, in order to strengthen Japan’s defences, but also with the effect of weakening the absolute predominance of the shogunate at Edo. They spent large sums on a rather tardy attempt to improve their own defensive capacity, at the cost of a further weakening of the shogunate’s already depleted finances. And, when Perry returned in 1854, with eight ships, they gave him his treaty. It was not yet a commercial treaty, but it opened two ports to the Americans, guaranteed good treatment for shipwrecked sailors, and allowed the Americans to settle a consular official at Shimoda. Other Western states pushed at the door the Americans had passed through, and over the next few years won similar treaties.
In 1856, to the shogunate’s immense discomfiture, the first American consul arrived. He spent the next two years gradually negotiating his way to an audience with the Shogun, and winning a full commercial treaty, which opened Japan’s ports, imposed low import and export duties on foreign trade, and granted “extra-territoriality” to foreigners (i.e. left them subject to the laws of their own nations, rather than Japan’s).
The shogunate was now thrown into quite deep crisis. Having consulted the daimyo, it had gone against their majority advice. Those who took the view that trade relations with the West were inevitable found themselves more and more isolated. Lacking any clear mandate for the treaty with the US consul, the shogunate took the unprecedented step of seeking the support of the Emperor at Kyoto – in effect, seeking the backing of the purely symbolic ruler. But the Kyoto court was waking from its long political slumber, and the more powerful of the daimyo were beginning to turn towards the imperial court to win backing for their anti-bakufu views. The court denied the shogunate the support it sought for the foreign treaties.
If this were not enough, the shogunate was thrown into further confusion by a dispute over the shogunal succession. One wing of the Tokugawa clan appealed for support for its claimant to the Emperor’s court, thereby involving the imperial court in a purely Tokugawa family matter, and again signalling the decline of Tokugawa power.
In an effort to maintain an increasingly shaky regime, one of the Tokugawa elders, Ii Naosake, seized direct dictatorial control over the shogunal government, imposing his choice as heir to the shogunate and signing the treaty with the Americans despite the court’s opposition. When criticism of his methods and policies followed, Ii Naosake used stern repressive methods to deal with his opponents. For two year, Ii ruled in an authoritarian absolutist fashion.
Trade with foreign merchants was opened at Yokohama, near Edo, in July 1859. Foreigners were now seen more often in the area of the shogunate’s headquarters, provoking the anger of strongly xenophobic elements among the samurai. The freeing of trade with the West threw existing merchant monopolies into confusion, and led to an externally induced inflation, which still further worsened the position of the samurai on their fixed stipends.
In the early period of the commercial opening of Japan, under Ii Naosake’s authoritarian government, the foreign merchants quickly discovered a way of making profits on their new transactions in Japan.
They knew that the gold-silver exchange rate was around one to six in Japan, whereas it was one to fifteen or sixteen in Europe and China. In other words, gold compared with silver was less expensive in Japan than elsewhere. Consequently a profit of one or two hundred per cent could be made simply by taking (silver) piastres out of Shanghai ..., exchanging them for gold at Yokohama and taking this gold back to Shanghai. This trade in gold grew more intense in the summer of 1859 and reached its culminating point in the autumn. (Akamatsu?)
Trade had to be suspended. Operations in foreign exchange resumed in December but the leak of gold from Japan could only be stopped completely by bringing the Japanese gold-silver exchange rate to the same level as in other countries. (Akamatsu, p. 131). This reorganisation of bullion rates was a sign of the way in which the opening of Japan to the world would, over a period, lead to the “revaluation” of the whole of Japan’s production and commerce, and with it Japanese political life. Survival of Japan as an independent nation, open to world influences, would soon involve much more than the adjustment of bullion rates.
The opening of trade initiated a new period in Japanese politics, a period of terrorism, organised by extremist groupings from among the samurai class called shishi (“men of determination”). Within weeks of the opening of trade at Yokohama, men with swords set on a party of Russians, killing two of them. In November 1859, the Chinese servant of the French consul was killed. In February 1860, the captain of a Dutch ship and one of his men were assassinated.
The terrorism was not restricted to foreigners. In March 1860, in a snowstorm outside the shogunal palace at Edo, Ii Naosake, the strongman of the shogunate, was attacked and killed by a band of shishi. His death brought to an end the shogunate’s ambitions to control the situation in Japan. Its fortunes were never again restored to the same level.
Ii’s strong reassertion of leadership was perhaps the only way the shogunate could have maintained itself ...
Had Ii lived, the shogunate might have survived under his strong leadership to play a major role in Japan’s subsequent modernisation, but this seems improbable, because the shogunate, heavily burdened by tradition, was less capable of revolutionary change than were certain other groups. And Ii’s reassertion of Tokugawa absolutism was more apparent than real. Actually, Edo’s prestige and authority had both been greatly reduced. Every han now felt entitled to express opinions on any matter of national policy. Despite longstanding prohibitions, daimyo and their agents, and even samurai acting of their own initiative, now felt free to approach the court in Kyoto to win it over to their views. It had become clear that now imperial sanction was needed for any major policy decision. Even Ii, by taking care to obtain the emperor’s approval of the commercial treaties, tacitly recognised the inability of the shogunate to continue ruling without court backing. Ii’s strong measures, moreover, only exacerbated the factional divisions that had produced them. His purge drove the opposition underground, where it built up greater violence. Most thinking Japanese, resentful of foreign pressures and frustrated by their inability to resist them, were bitterly anti-foreign. This resentment was increasingly directed against the shogunate which had signed the commercial treaties against popular wishes and the emperor’s expressed desires. (Fairbank, Reischauer and Craig, p. 209)
Over the next three years or so, “extremists” set the pace in Japanese domestic politics. In 1861 a group of samurai assassinated Heusken, a Dutchman acting as permanent interpreter to Townsend Harris, the US consul.
The foreigners at Edo lived in terror. In the streets – although the population was generally curious but friendly – they were in danger of being molested at any moment by some madman armed with two swords. The worst was that they did not know where these enemies came from, who struck unexpectedly and who disappeared leaving no trace. (Akamatsu, p. 143)
The Bakufu was, in effect, powerless to control the shishi. They accused the lord of Mito, one of the daimyo, of harbouring a nest of extremist samurai dissidents, but could not act directly, given the daimyo’s judicial independence.
In July 1861 the English legation was attacked. In February 1862, samurai attacked the procession of Ando Nobumasa, chief among the shogunate elders, nearly killing the lord himself. In September 1862, men of the Satsuma han, proceeding back to Satsuma with one of their nobility, killed an Englishman, Richardson, whom they met on the road. 
Extremist samurai were gaining the upper hand in the councils of some of the daimyo. In this same period, as the centre of politics shifted away from Edo and the shogunate towards the imperial court at Kyoto, xenophobic elements gravitated towards the emperor and his advisers, who were gradually becoming politically active after centuries of passive and mere symbolic rule. The Kyoto court became a centre of extreme anti-foreign nationalism. Under the strong influence of these elements, the emperor issued an edict in 1862 instructing the shogunate to set about the expulsion of the foreigners from Japan by the summer of 1863. The shogunate temporised: it publicly accepted the imperial instructions, but assessed the real balance of forces to be such that no action would in practice be taken against them. The shogunate persuaded the emperor to delay his policy of expulsion until the shogunate’s armed forces were strengthened sufficiently to permit engagement with the foreign powers as a practical policy.
But the extremist wing would not wait the ten or so years the shogunate advised. In 1863 the new English legation buildings were set on fire, and on the date originally set by the emperor for the expulsion of foreigners the shore-batteries in the Choshu han fired on foreign ships in the straits of Shimonoseki. In carrying out this military engagement, Choshu had deliberately flouted the shogunate’s wishes.
The Western reply to these “outrages” came quickly. In revenge for Richardson’s murder, an English fleet attacked the castle-town of the Satsuma han in southern Japan, at Kagoshima, burning a third of the city to the ground. In September 1864, an allied fleet – in which the British were predominant – attacked the shore batteries at Choshu and destroyed them, re-opening the straits of Shimonoseki by force. The allies’ attack on Choshu was not displeasing to the shogunate, but it was also a sign that the Bakufu at Edo had to rely on foreign forces to do its own domestic policing work.
By the autumn of 1863, in reality, the extreme nationalist samurai movement was largely spent. It fed on the growing resentment of the samurai, already simmering in the period before Perry’s arrival. As the Tokugawa regime slowly decayed, samurai resentments had become more and more focussed into a highly reactionary politics centred on two political slogans: joi (“expel the barbarians”) and sonno (“revere the emperor”). Bands of samurai, inspired by these ideas, were responsible for the acts of terrorism noted above, and others less notable. They had also won control of Choshu and Satsuma, for a period, and won a partial hegemony over the imperial court. Trimberger (1978, p. 75) suggests that the joi-sonno terrorist movements were initiated by lower-level samurai who were blocked from mobility to high office in the han and the Bakufu. Their politics involved an idealisation of the samurai past, to which they hoped to return. If their methods were radical, their aims were reactionary and traditionalist rather than revolutionary. Their movements lacked any clear programme of alternative institutions; they wanted limited reforms in the existing polity, more chances for mobility in office, and consultative power in the highest seats of government. In focussing on the emperor as the prime symbol of loyalty, they strengthened an incipient Japanese nationalism which was later to be shaped and used by rather different social and political forces.
By 1863 their movement was effectively crushed. A “moderate” party emerged, centred on Satsuma, and this carried out a coup d’état in the imperial palace at Kyoto in September 1863, driving out the extremists who surrounded the emperor. The event signified not only the end of the real power of the extremists, but also the further weakness of the shogunate: for Satsuma, one of the “outer” han with least loyalty to the Tokugawa, had “cleaned up” the imperial palace in a way that the shogunate could not.
The extremist movement failed for several reasons. One was the conflicting and ambivalent character of its goals. Another was the ineffective nature of its organisation: its supporters tended to engage in militant acts of individual heroism but suffered from having too many leaders, too little discipline, and a poor sense of tactics and organisation. Third, the extreme nationalist samurai lacked any economic power base: they were a movement of the minor aristocracy with little support in other classes, and without a political power base within the civil or military bureaucracy. (Trimberger, 1978, pp. 75–91)
The Satsuma coup at Kyoto led to the formation of a “noble coalition”, centred on Satsuma and Aizu, an alliance of daimyo and their senior samurai which sought to subordinate the shogun to the emperor and to weaken the general position of the Tokugawa.
In 1864, shortly before the allied attack on their shore batteries, extremists from Choshu han attempted to stage an extremist return to Kyoto, by making war against the noble coalition and trying to recover their former control of the imperial palace. They were beaten back. Shortly afterwards, Choshu suffered its defeat by the western allies. The shogunate declared Choshu outlaw for having attacked the imperial palace.
Once again, the Bakufu attempted to flex its muscles. Perhaps, if it could deal the apparently weakened rebels at Choshu a military lesson, its authority and power might be partially restored. The forces of Satsuma – like Choshu an “outer” han – had fought alongside the shogunate’s forces against the rebels’ attempt to regain control of the Kyoto palace. A military force was prepared, to march against Choshu and put the outlaws down.
But the shape of Japanese politics was changing. Both Satsuma and Choshu had experienced military defeat at the hands of the foreigners. Their reaction to these defeats was hardheaded: rather than continue in their (militarily unrealistic) extremist politics, they began to develop diplomatic, economic and military ties with the British, from whom they purchased modern arms. If in one sense they were now pursuing policies akin to those of the Tokugawa shogunate, they were doing so independently, and with a growing view of the possibility of overthrowing the shogunate altogether. In Choshu the reorientation was such as to permit the formation of a new kind of military force, including armed peasants formed into special companies. This development in Choshu of a “modern” army drawn from the citizenry at large, rather than from a narrow stratum of warrior aristocrats alone, was a sign of the extent to which a “reform” politics was gaining ground in the “outer” han.
The Bakufu’s expeditionary forced marched against the men of Choshu, with the support of some of the daimyo – unwillingly given in some cases. The Satsuma forces went along with the shogunate, though their longer-term interests pointed increasingly in the direction of an alliance with Choshu rather than against it. The Choshu leaders were persuaded to avoid battle, and thereby to preserve their army, at the cost of a formal apology and the execution of three extremist nobles.
The advocates of a revived and stronger shogunate were not satisfied with this outcome, however, and launched a second and more serious assault against Choshu in 1866. But to the dismay of the Tokugawa, the new forces of Choshu defeated the Shogun’s army. For the first time since 1600, the Tokugawa shogunate was no longer the military master of Japan. Its fall was now virtually inevitable.
 

in Barker: Origins and Significance of Meiji Restoration (Part 5)


Colin Barker Archive/a>   |   Trotskyist Writers’  Index  |   ETOL Main Page

The Meiji Restorarion

Colin Barker
 
Origins and Significance of the Meiji Restoration
 
The Social Character of the Meiji Restoration
The Meiji Restoration initiated a new line of development for Japan. From being a pre-capitalist “tributary” state, partially unified under the shogunate, and within which petty commodity production and commercialisation had made quite significant advances, Japan was converted into a unified state within which industrial capitalism made rapid strides forward. Within thirty years of the Restoration, Japan was emerging as a contender for a place among the great powers. Japanese industries were growing fast, and the state had already been embroiled successfully in its first “imperialist adventure”. In 1905, its army and navy were to defeat the forces of the mighty Tsar of All The Russias.
The Meiji Restoration, and the radical reform of Japanese social institutions which succeeded it, did not of course introduce capitalist social relations to Japan all by itself. Japan would anyway have experienced the development of capitalist relations in the latter decades of the nineteenth century, had the Restoration not occurred. The forces of western capital were simply too powerful to have been resisted. But, without the Meiji Restoration and the political transformation that followed, the introduction of capitalism into Japan would have taken a very different form. Trimberger (1977) outlines how this might have occurred, and with what consequences:
The influx of foreign goods at a cheaper price than native handicrafts began to destroy rural industry ... Peasants unable to supplement their farming income through handicrafts would have lost their land and become a proletariat. Wealthy peasants able to sell raw or semi-finished materials on the world market would have become capitalists. Foreign investors would have gradually created capitalist enterprises in Japan. Certainly the high degree of pre-capitalist commercialisation and the extent of petty commodity production in Japan would have facilitated this transition. But without state intervention, and especially if the state had actively tried to maintain pre-capitalist modes of production, the transition would have been much slower. With few natural resources, Japan could have ended up like some of the poorest and most dependent third world nations today – tied into the world capitalist system, but with an extremely underdeveloped internal capitalism.
What the Meiji Restoration did was to prevent this line of semi-colonial development – preventing, say, a Chinese pattern of perpetuated “backwardness” – and instead to make possible the development of Japan as an aggressive, industrialising, capitalist power in its own right, able to “hold its own” on the world market. As Trimberger concludes, “The Meiji Restoration was the key event in consolidating a state apparatus able to seize the initiative in Japanese industrialisation.”
With that conclusion there will be few to argue. Yet the Meiji Restoration poses some problems for social and political theory. For it does not conform to certain kinds of widespread theoretical assumptions. Those assumptions, by and large, have their origins in generalisations about the historical experience of industrialisation and revolution in Western Europe in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. As derived from or applied to European experience, those generalisations retain, perhaps, some validity. But it is only through rather considerable distortion of the actual history of Japan that they can be made to fit the case of the Meiji Restoration and its significance.
We have already suggested that Japan in the Tokugawa period was not easily assimilated to the model of “feudalism” developed on the basis of European experience. It also appears that Japan’s early capitalist development is difficult to explain in terms of the kinds of categories with which important aspects of European experience are often grasped.
A consideration of the Japanese case should, therefore, serve firstly to suggest a need for caution in applying concepts and theoretical frameworks, initially developed in a European context, to the experience of non-European countries faced with problems of “modernisation” and industrialisation. Secondly – though this will not be developed very much here – examination of the Japanese case should also suggest ways in which some aspects of European industrialisation itself have been characterised. In the light of Japanese developments, it may be that some of the received accounts of European political and economic history require some reconceptualisation. One obvious field where this might prove fruitful is in relation to the role of nation-states in the development of capitalist relations. And that in turn would suggest the need to proceed with caution in the use of a popular style of analysis (sometimes termed “Marxism”) which depends on a particular understanding of the relations between “economic” and “political” spheres of action, and of the place of classes and class struggles in capitalist development. And, finally, issues to do with the precise conceptualisation of “capitalism”, “capital” and “the capitalist class” are also posed by the particular history of Japan; here these will be touched on only marginally, since they are more fruitfully pursued in the still more controversial context of twentieth-century developments in Russia, Eastern Europe, China, Cuba, etc.
Perhaps the basic question which the Meiji Restoration poses is, how could it happen at all? Thomas Smith (1960) opens his provocative article with a quotation from Alexis de Tocqueville:
An aristocracy seldom yields (its privileges) without a protracted struggle, in the course of which implacable animosities are kindled between the different classes of society.
But, Smith continues, not all aristocracies have behaved in this way. The large Japanese noble class, the samurai, and their leading noble section, the daimyo and the shogunate, failed to live up to de Tocqueville’s expectations:
Japan’s warrior class, a feudal aristocracy though it differed from European aristocracies in crucial respects, did not merely surrender its privileges. It abolished them. There was no democratic revolution in Japan because none was necessary: the aristocracy itself was revolutionary. (Smith 1960, p. 370)
In terms of western experience, what happened in Japan is not easy to understand. True, there was a major challenge from the west to Japanese aristocratic society; but a common reaction to such a threat might have been a re-affirmation of traditional values, rather than a relatively peaceful auto-destruction by the aristocracy in favour of a decision to “modernise” and industrialise.
Of course, as Smith knew, and indeed went on to show, the matter was not quite as simple as his opening remarks might suggest. In reality, it was not “the aristocracy” in general which was “revolutionary”. The top layer of the Japanese aristocracy – the shogunate and the daimyo – did not play a very revolutionary part in Japan: the “revolution” swept them off the stage, even if it paid them quite handsomely for quitting. As for the large class of warrior-nobles, the samurai, the majority of them also played anything but a radical part. Some, hopelessly aspiring to retain their samurai privileges, died in numerous revolts and individual engagements with the forces of change; others were simply consigned to end their days as factory foremen, common labourers, peasants, small businessmen, police constables. As a class, the Japanese aristocracy was not “revolutionary”, and by and large they probably regretted the necessities imposed on them by the Meiji Restoration. Yet it is also the case that their opposition to it was also markedly subdued. The various revolts never involved more than a small minority of the samurai class, while the majority – if with mixed feelings – submitted peacefully to the dissolution of their privileges.
Certainly the emperor – the very symbol of the “restoration” – played no significant role himself in the whole process. The Meiji Restoration was not the establishment of a European royal absolutism. The emperor was a symbolic front-man for others. His “restoration” was not even a fundamental cause of the “modernisation” of Japan:
... the imperial “restoration” ... furnishing an understandable ideological basis for radical change ... proved a successful response to the crisis, and its adherents grew rapidly. Actually there was no “restoration” in the sense of recreating the imperial system of antiquity. The role of the emperors remained almost purely symbolic, and the political institutions that developed were those that fitted nineteenth century conditions. In short, the “restoration” was the biggest revolutionary change Japan has ever experienced. (Fairbank, Reischauer, Craig, p. 194)
 
Top of the page
 
What Kind of Revolution?
Yet, if the Meiji Restoration was a “revolutionary change”, can we call it a “revolution”? Hall, for one, seems to question the use of such a term to describe the events surrounding the change of regime:
The Japanese political “revolution” had hardly been a revolution at all, for it had been contained within the old power holding group, the samurai class, and it relied upon strong continuities in loyalty symbols and political values. Japan had carried out what was essentially a controlled political reaction, and as some have put it, experienced its modernisation “from the top”. (Hall, 1970, p. 247)
Certainly, historians are agreed that the popular masses in Japan did not play any significant role in the “revolution”. Commoners did participate in the armies of both sides – “but only under elite control” (Trimberger, 1978, p 17). They fought as foot-soldiers if they were peasants, or they provided finance if they were merchants, but in neither case did they have any say in or effect on the policies pursued.
What is striking in Japan’s political and in its economic evolution from the end of the Tokugawa period to the beginning of Meiji, is the absence of the masses at major events. At no time do they appear as a personality, as a motive factor ... The masses appear as absolute victims in the events of the change of regime. (Akamatsu, pp. 287–8)
The neutralisation of the rural masses – who were quite prone to engage in riots and revolt in pursuit of their particular economic demands throughout the period, but who never became autonomously involved in any significant way in the actual political transformations – is perhaps explicable in terms of the previous evolution of Japanese society. Thanks to the separation of the samurai from the land, under the Tokugawa, all the political forces of the old regime were concentrated in the capitals of the emperor, the shogun, and the various han. In a more industrialised or urbanised country, as Trimberger (1978, p 17) points out, the elite’s exclusion of the masses from the political process might have been more difficult; it might also, she could have added, have been more difficult in a European-style feudalism. Moore (273–4) notes that throughout the period agricultural production was slowly rising, so that at no time did hunger in the towns produce plebeian allies for peasant radicalism (as happened in France). The towns, he notes, produced no substantial anti-feudal impulses. (Which, if we are correct in doubting the applicability of the term “feudalism” to Japan, seems unsurprising!)
On the other hand, it does seem appropriate to refer to a “revolutionary” movement among the samurai:
By degrees (the officials) decided to overthrow the Bakufu and supplant the daimyo class. In that sense, their action really did have a revolutionary character, given of course that it was pursued within the slim stratum of literate bushi : officials were repudiating the authority of their superiors in the service. (Akamatsu, p. 304)
It seems that, if anything, a condition for the emergence of a “revolutionary” wing of the samurai class was the absence of revolutionary impulses in the rest of society. Certainly, whenever there was a risk that the commoners might even begin to assert their own demands and interests, then the “revolutionary samurai” were prone to take their stand again on their traditional authority: “When it was a question of maintaining the hierarchy of nobles and commoners, the revolutionary became a counter-revolutionary” (Akamatsu, p. 305). And Norman (p.90) remarks, “The feudal character of the samurai opposition is clearly indicated by the fact that except where they were able to utilise peasant discontent for their own ends as in the revolts between 1874–7, they helped the government in suppressing peasant uprisings”; the samurai rebels against Meiji would also revert rapidly to agents of authority against any threat from commoners.
One possible approach to the characterisation of the Meiji Restoration would be to treat it as a case of revolution, but of a particular kind. The argument for treating it as a revolution is that an existing dominant social class was displaced from power, and an existing set of production relations was replaced by another. Yet the Japanese revolution was not a “social revolution”. Theda Skocpol (1979) makes a useful set of distinctions:
Social revolutions are rapid, basic transformations of a society’s state and class structures; and they are accompanied and in part carried through by class-based revolts from below. Social revolutions are set apart from other sorts of conflicts and transformative processes above all by the combination of two coincidences: the coincidence of societal structural change with class upheaval; and the coincidence of political with social transformation. In contrast, rebellions, even when successful, may involve the revolt of subordinate classes – but they do not eventuate in structural change. Political revolutions transform state structures but not social structures, and they are not necessarily accomplished through class conflict. And processes such as industrialisation can transform social structures without necessarily bringing about, or resulting from, sudden political upheavals or basic political-structural changes. (Skocpol, 1979, p. 4)
On Skocpol’s criteria, since the events in Japan lack the element of “class upheaval”, they do not amount to a social revolution. Yet they also amount to more than a political revolution, since the Meiji Restoration eventuated in more than a change in the structure of the state alone: the social structure itself was transformed in significant ways, through legal enactment. In Trimberger’s phrase (1978) the revolution in Japan was a “revolution from above”. A section of the existing bureaucracy took over state power, using both force and persuasion; having dispossessed sovereignty from the hands of its former masters, it reorganised state power and wielded it for itself.
This “revolution from above” was more than simply a “coup d’état” or “palace revolution”, for it had a definite social character. The new Japanese state leaders systematically and purposefully destroyed the principal legal and political supports of the previous tributary mode of production and set Japanese society on a new road of development. Trimberger suggests that what occurred in Japan from 1868 onwards may be properly compared with the “revolution from above” led by Kemal Ataturk in Turkey, or with the “military revolutions” in Egypt or Peru. Others have pointed up parallels also with the unification of Germany under Prussian hegemony (Bendix 1967, Landes 1965). More controversially, parallels could also be drawn with Stalin’s industrialisation of Russia – though there the state and social structure that was reshaped by a section of the ruling bureaucracy was a decayed popular state that had emerged from another full-blown social revolution.
Japan presents us with an example of a transition, accomplished in politics, from a pre-capitalist to a capitalist mode of production, without benefit of a social revolution. What the Japanese case shows is that the process of restructuring the social relations of production in the shift from a “feudal” or “tributary” to a capitalist mode of production need not necessarily involve the active political participation of the lower classes. Indeed, the “social revolutionary” method of transition from pre-capitalist to capitalist relations is, historically, not necessarily the most common form. As Skocpol remarks, “social revolution ... (is) a complex object of explanation, of which there are relatively few historical instances” (1979, p. 5). The masses are not necessarily active or organised agents in the process of transformation that initiates capitalist development.
A moment’s reflection suggests why this should be so. The shift from a “feudal” or “tributary” (or “Asiatic” etc) mode to a capitalist one is a shift from one form of social production in which the majority of society’s members are objects of exploitation and oppression to another form in which the same is true.
True, capitalism has been associated historically with the development of certain kinds of “freedman”, but within capitalism those freedoms are always partial and conditional in character. Where they are found, they are partial because they are combined with the continuation of exploitation and alienation. As for their conditional nature, two centuries of capitalist development have shown all too clearly that capitalism can co-exist with all manner of forms of political and legal repression, including forms of slavery, apartheid, fascism, military dictatorship, Poor Laws, etc. If there is a tendency for capitalist production to be associated with a world of “Freedom, Equality, Property and Bentham” (Marx), that tendency is often powerfully contradicted by other very different ones. There is, in the character of capitalism, nothing which per se actively promotes legal and civil rights, democratic government and like. In some circumstances, capitalist production has proved “compatible” with the manifestation of partial freedom, but compatibility is not necessity.
Hence, as the history of numbers of countries reveals, a shift from one of exploitation to another need not involve the active, polity-shaping activity of those who are subjected to that change in the manner of their exploitation. We might also add that, in those cases where the mass of the population has been involved directly in attempting to shape the character of a new state emerging from the overthrow of existing social and political relations – e.g. in France in the eighteenth century – a regular feature of the social revolutionary process has been a “reaction within the revolution”. Through this process, the insurgency of the masses, the “revolution from below”, has been repressed or contained within limits compatible with the re-establishment of exploitation.
 
Top of the page
 
The Revolutionaries
On one thing all historians appear to be agreed: the key agents in the transformation of Japanese society were a small group of men drawn from a narrow circle from within the samurai class. The “primary leaders” of the Meiji Restoration are identified by Hall:



From the Court
Sanjo Sanetomi (1837–1891)
Iwakura Tomomi (1825–1883)
From Satsuma 
Okubo Toshimichi (1830–1878)
Terashima Munenori (1833–1893)
Godai Tomoatsu (1835–1885)
Saigo Takamori (1828–1877)
Kuroda Kiyotaka (1840–1900)
Matsukata Masayoshi ((1837–1924)
From Choshu 
Takasugi Shinsaku (1839–1867)
Kido Koin (1833–1877)
Omura Masujiro ((1824–1869)
Ito Hirobumi (1841–1909)
Inoue Kaoru (1835–1915)
Yamagata Aritomo (1833–1871)
Hirosawa Saneomi (1833–1871)
From Tosa 
Itagaki Taisuke (1837–1919)
Goto Shojiro (1837–1897)
Fukuoka Kotei (1835–1919)
Sakamoto Ryoma (1835–1867)
From Hizen 
Eto Shimpei (1834–1874)
Okuma Shigenobu (1838–1922)
Soejima Taneomi (1828–1905)
Oki Takato (1832–1899)
Others 
Yokai Shonan (1809–1869, Kumamoto)
Katsu Kaishu (1823–1899, bakufu)
Yuri Kimimasa (1829–1909, Fukui)
Inoue Kowashi (1844–1895, Kumamoto)
                        (Hall, 1970, p. 268)



Hall provides a useful abbreviated set of generalisations about these men, whose actions were so fateful for Japanese history:
About this group there are a number of elementary generalisation which come first to mind. Most of them came from four large tozama han of western Japan, which shared a traditional antagonism to the Tokugawa house. They were as a group remarkably young, the average age being slightly over thirty in 1868. They were for the most part brought up in families of lower-class samurai, though some, such as Kido, were of high status. As youths they were vigorous and ambitious, and most began their careers in the traditional manner, passing up the ladder of preferment in their han, notably in military service. Not being of a landed aristocracy, their ambitions could be met by success only in government service. And because of the decentralisation of the baku-han system they found a large number of political arenas in which to prove themselves. As in pre-revolutionary America, the Japanese “founding fathers” learned to become leaders of men in their home territories before they became leaders of the nation.
Characteristic of the Restoration leaders was their uniformly high level of education and specialised training. Most had gained recognition in their han for military skills or scholarship. As a consequence they all had active early careers, serving as advisors to their daimyo, as diplomatic agents or as organisers of new military units. The military career was perhaps the most common. Saigo, Omura, Eto, Hirosawa, Itagaki and many others were foremost military commanders of han units. Ito was used as an interpreter, Kido was a chief daimyo advisor. The kind of education these men received was also significant. Brought up as samurai to endure rigorous military discipline (many of the group became excellent swordsmen), they were trained to be men of action and to cultivate a martial disposition. The intellectual content of their schooling was predominantly Confucian, stressing loyalty and dedication to society. Thus, though their personal ambitions were strong, they also were highly sensitised to national problems and inculcated with the idea of service to higher authority. Shishi that they were, most had been fired by the desire to save their country or serve their daimyo. Yet few could be considered bigoted or blind in their political views. Several had been abroad by 1868 (Godai, Ito and Inoue had been to England, Katsu had taken a Japanese ship across the Pacific), others had had associations with Westerners in Japan (Okubo, Saigo and Okuma had had long talks with Satow, the English interpreter). Though most shishi started out in 1853 violently anti-foreign (Ito had taken part in the attack on the British legation in 1863), the most fanatical had been killed off early, and those who remained were, by 1868, convinced of the superiority of Western civilisation. This change of heart which came to nearly all of the Meiji leaders was in most instances the incident which converted them from being strictly restorers to become reformers. (Hall, 1970, pp. 269–70)
These men, “all or nearly all ... of middle or low rank” (Akamatsu, p. 293) were the inheritors of larger groups of samurai who had attempted, from the time of the 1850s treaties onwards, to impose a new pattern of development on Japan. All came from the ranks of the discontented lower nobility, the class of officials who served the shogunate and the daimyo of Tokugawa Japan. The Meiji leaders were marked off from their predecessors by two particular factors: first, though their origins were relatively humble, they had all risen to high office within the han from which they launched the Meiji revolution – they were not men without office, as many of the early shishi had been; and, second, they had in practice abandoned the early samurai aspiration to “expel the barbarians” – often as a result of their own reflections on the experience of military defeat by western forces. The emergence of this wing of “revolutionary” samurai from within the larger group of the discontented, and their consolidation into a coherent group aspiring to power, was a process attended with internal conflicts and the violent deaths of many of the participants.
... brief generations of reformists followed one another in successive waves, from the middle of the nineteenth century to 1890. In particularly bloody years they disappeared in groups: first between 1859 and 1860, then in 1864, then between 1867 and 1869, finally between 1877 and 1878. First enlightened men and the strong men of the Bakufu, then the violent xenophobes, later reformists who were still attached to their fiefs, finally the founders of the first Meiji government, with the exception of Iwakura Tomomi.
And the survivors’ actions were progressively getting rid of the daimyo class. The typical Meiji statesman was the former humble-rank official. The change in regime was made possible by the transfer of power from one stratum to another of the class of old military nobility, the only one under Tokugawa which grouped a large number of literate men. Meiji therefore really was a radical upheaval, but within a very limited circle of Japanese society. (Akamatsu, p. 295)
The turnover of personnel continued in the early Meiji period, as the death-dates reveal: Saigo Takamori and Eto Shimpei died in revolt against the regime they had helped to found, in a sense because they never fully accepted the logic of Japanese “modernisation” as a whole. Okubo Toshimichi was assassinated by admirers of the late Saigo Takamori.
Those who survived were to provide the political leadership to Japan for the next forty years.
Numbers of writers seek, in a sense, to assimilate the Japanese revolutionary leaders to some model derived from West European experience. They look, one might say, for the “class forces” behind these men. A weak version of this appears in Lockwood:
Here, in contrast to France, the leadership came largely from the more able and independent members of the former ruling caste, who revived the ancient symbols of the throne as a weapon of power. Joined by similar elements from merchant and commoner ranks, they combined to form a new oligarchy securely in control of the apparatus of the modern state and armed with the techniques and resources of a developing capitalism. (W.W. Lockwood, 1968, p. 11, my emphasis, CB)
E.H. Norman refers to the compensation of the daimyo as “the final stage in the sealing of that peculiar union of merchants and financial princes with the feudal or landed princes which was already evident in the Tokugawa period.” (Norman, p. 96)
Barrington Moore Jr., trying to understand the Meiji Restoration in what Skocpol has labelled “class-instrumentalist” terms, has considerable difficulty in rendering an adequate explanation of the Japanese revolution. He asks, “What prompted this largely feudal revolution to carry out a program with undoubtedly progressive features?” (Moore, p. 245). He suggests that the banner of the Restoration was “traditionalism” and notes that the merchant classes in particular offered no intellectual challenge to the old order. He attempts an explanation of the events of 1868 in terms of a coalition between a strong “labour-repressive” landed upper class and a moderately strong merchant bourgeoisie. Through the process of the Restoration, he suggests, the landed upper class remained in power as the ruling class, and prevented basic structural changes. Yet his whole analysis fails to provide any clear answers to some rather obvious questions: how exactly does a “labour-repressive” landed class, opposed to modernisation, manage to go along with and indeed promote an industrialisation which the bourgeoisie itself could not manage alone? In practice, Moore falls into ad hoc, personalistic judgments, of a highly expedient character, about “the appearance of a galaxy of distinguished political leaders”. His account of the young Meiji leaders is thin and unconvincing:
Though the reasons are obscure, it seems unlikely that the appearance of a similar leadership in similar circumstances could be pure coincidence. All were conservatives in the political spectrum of their time and country, devoted to the monarchy, willing and able to use it as an instrument of reform, modernisation and national unification. Though all were aristocrats, they were dissidents or outsiders of a sort in relation to the old order. To the extent that their aristocratic background contributed habits of command and a flair for politics, one might perhaps detect a contribution of the agrarian ancien regime to the construction of a new society. But there were strong contrary pulls here too. To the extent that these men were aliens within the aristocracy, one may see the incapacity of this stratum to meet the challenge of the modern world with its own intellectual and political resources. (Moore, p. 440)
That final sentence, simply, underplays the practical achievements of these men: they used the “intellectual and political resources” of the modern world in a specific and innovative way, and laid the foundations of Japan’s twentieth century power.
As Skocpol (1973, 1978) has suggested, the development of an adequate explanation of Japan’s “revolution from above” of the 1860s and 1870s demands a re-thinking of inherited conceptual frameworks. This seems to be true in at least two important respects.
 
Top of the page
 
Class-Reductionism
Only through a fairly considerable distortion of Japanese history can it be maintained that the small clique who manned the top positions in the Japanese state after 1868 ever became the “instruments” of Japanese business circles. Neither the Meiji Restoration, nor the consolidation of the new regime, nor indeed its subsequent evolution, can be understood in these kinds of terms. The state leadership preserved its considerable autonomy and its independent power to shape the development of Japanese society right up to Japan’s defeat by the Allied powers in 1945. A “class-reductionist” analysis cannot grasp the essence of Japanese capitalist state development.
In reality, “class-reductionist” analysis does not only fail to explain Japanese development: it is in any case inherently flawed. Its fundamental assumptions do not withstand close scrutiny. “Class-reductionist” analysis – whether by Barrington Moore, Ralph Miliband, or a galaxy of modern “radical elite theorists” – seeks to explain state policy and political development in terms of the expression by the state of the “interests” of the business class. Such a strategy of explanation, which has sometimes been mis-identified with “Marxism”, has enjoyed a continuing popularity; however it embodies several weaknesses. Let us identify just two of these.
The first point concerns the “interests” of the business class. These are supposed to be the source and origin of state policy, but in practice their identification is much more problematical than is often supposed. It is possible to define the “interests” of capitalists, in a very general sense, as a set of “limits to action”: to “be” a capitalist, at a minimal level, one must pursue, in competition with other capitalists, the expansion of the capital under one’s control. Success or failure in this general aim is not the key point; but without the aim, and without the competitive framework that shapes it, there is no “capitalist”. In this general sense, then, the “interests” of capitalists can be defined, as the very definition of their social role. However, it is one thing to grasp the outlines of a general role-definition, and quite another to prescribe or predict how, in any given concrete circumstances, a given capitalist will seek to pursue his “generalised interest” in the expansion of his capital. In any concrete situation, each individual capitalist must “read” the situation and determine how best to pursue those interests. In line with that specific reading, he may prefer a whole range of different policies from the state. There is thus no automatic relationship between the existence of capitalists with general “interests” and concrete state policies.
Of course, the class-reductionist approach does not suppose that the “interests” of each separate capitalist are directly pursued by state policies. Rather, the argument is that the state is an “instrument” of the interests of the capitalists as a class. But the matter then becomes still more complex. For the relations between capitalists as a class are relations of competition. Thus the question arises, how precisely do capitalists as a class formulate common policies, in any given concrete circumstance? They may, of course, share a common set of prejudices – this is seemingly as far as a writer like Ralph Miliband can get – but these can hardly determine a capitalist class’s responses to a particular concrete situation. In any given field, their various readings of their interests will not necessarily coincide, whether in domestic or foreign policy. In practice, there may emerge, among the capitalists taken as a group, various “factions” or “parties” looking for different, and opposed, emphases in state policy. Arguments that the state is an “instrument” of the capitalist class in some direct sense begin to look rather ragged at the edges.
What we can reasonably say is that the functioning of the capitalist economy, whether at a national-state or world-economy level, sets various very broadly defined constraints on the policies and actions of those who manage the varied state apparatuses. But we also need to recognise that it leaves open a more or less broad area of state “discretion”. In this sense, the state is always “relatively autonomous” from the capitalist class.
The second point is that the “class-reductionist” approach tends to deny what is, as the Japanese case shows very clearly, patently very possible: namely, that in certain circumstances the “relative autonomy” of those who head the apparatuses of the state can be and has been very considerable. It is far from adequate to treat those who command the major bureaucratic organisations of the state as mere passive instruments to be used by individuals or classes for their own ends or interests. This mistaken notion, itself a (partly mistaken) generalisation from European experience, is found within some varieties of “Marxism”, and especially in those “Marxist” writers whose work approximates to the work of “elite” theory (e.g. Ralph Miliband, C. Wright Mills, etc.).
A similar idea is found in Max Weber, as Trimberger pointed out (Trimberger 1978, pp. 5–6). Weber stated very explicitly that “qualities of political leadership have never been born or brought to fruition anywhere in the world under a system of unchecked rule by bureaucracy” (Weber, 1968, p. 1413). Political leadership, he held, could only come from a man with a private means of income sufficient to free him from the necessity to work; only such a man could “live for politics”, while the salaried official must be servile and “live from politics” (Gerth and Mills, 1958, pp. 84–5). Change in social and political systems, in Weber’s conceptualisation, could only come from “charismatic individuals”. None of this, seemingly, can explain the actions of the samurai bureaucrats who led the Meiji revolution: they were, and remained, state officials, and they hardly appear in history as “charismatic” – yet they played a major transformative role.
Nor has it been only in Japan that state bureaucrats have initiated and pushed through major reorientations of social, economic and political life. Sections of the Prussian bureaucracy, in admittedly different circumstances, played a not dissimilar part in the unification of Germany and in promoting German industrialisation. Similarly, if less successfully, sections of the Tsarist bureaucracy in the late nineteenth century to all intents and purposes called a capitalist class into being in Russia. And in the twentieth century, in Stalinist Russia and elsewhere, “communist” bureaucrats have played major and significant roles as initiators and drivers of rapid industrialisation; for many of them, claims about “charisma” are absurd.
Those who head states, and who are dependent for their power in society on the possession of state office, are in reality far more capable of autonomous policy-making and –implementation than some popular varieties of theory would suggest.
 
Top of the page
 
The State in its World Setting
If we turn back to consider the work of a writer like Barrington Moore, we can also identify a second weakness in his theorisation. This is picked up by Skocpol in her critique of Moore (1973) and forms an important element in her whole theorisation of revolutions (1978). A good deal of writing on the state has tended to conceptualise the state only in its “domestic” setting, as an agency of internal control and direction. The result is that its external relations – a matter on which we have already touched briefly, in the discussion of “development” – tend to be discounted or played down. Yet, for state bureaucrats whose own positions of power are intimately bound up with the international competitive position of “their” state, considerations affecting the nation-state’s position in the world of nations are of particular relevance. Certainly, the actions of the samurai bureaucrats of the Meiji Restoration make much less sense in they are abstracted from their international setting. Their favourite mobilising aim – “Rich Country, Strong Army” – only makes sense in that setting.
 
Top of the page
 
State and Capitalist Development
The combination of these two criticisms of received theoretical wisdom points to a third set of conclusions, concerning “capital” and its “agents”. It was Marx’s argument that the proper starting point for analysing capitalism was not the individual capitalist, but rather “capital”, where “capital” was understood not as a set of things (money, machines, etc) but rather as a set of “social production relations”. These relations, and the drives associated with them, in a sense “possessed” those men who became their “agents” or “bearers”. Capital could only be grasped as a process of constantly renewed movement, through which “value” was always pushing towards its own self-expansion.
As the conscious bearer (German Träger) of this movement, the possessor of money becomes a capitalist.... It is only insofar as the appropriation of ever more wealth in the abstract is the sole driving force behind his operations that he functions as a capitalist, i.e. as capital personified and endowed with consciousness and a will. (Marx, 1976, p. 254)
In the case on which Marx focussed most attention, the link between capital and its agent or bearer was the private “ownership” by individual capitalists of money and/or means of production. But other links were also possible: the salaried manager of a modern joint-stock company might not directly “own” the corporation’s capital, yet may still “function as a capitalist”, since his own position is intimately bound up with the fate of the capital that he “manages”. He remains, therefore, an “agent” or “bearer” of capital. Similarly, as both Marx and Engels noted in their later writings, a state too could find itself in the position of a “bearer” of the movement of capital.
Since Marx and Engels’ day, these two possibilities – corporate capital and state capital – have acquired increasing practical significance. In various circumstances, those who manage states can themselves come to play the role of direct organisers of labour exploitation and direct managers of capital accumulation. A common motive for a state taking on these tasks itself is a concern with what it defines as “the national interest”. Those who head a nation-state assume to themselves the embodiment of societal interests, and use the power they possess through control of the apparatuses of the state to enforce their reading of societal interests onto their national society. In some cases, state agencies may do this more or less autonomously, in other cases they may do the same in close association with domestic and international “private” capital. The general point is that state managers (to adopt the phrase of Fred Block, 1980) become the key historical subjects through which the imperatives of capitalist development are enforced onto their particular nations.
There are various identifiable types of circumstances in which state bureaucrats come to play this kind of historical role. A rounded analysis of these circumstances, and their different consequences, is beyond the scope of this discussion, for it would require an extensive comparative discussion of, among other matters, such seemingly discrete phenomena as fascism, military revolutions, most “communist” revolutions, “national liberation movements” in the Third World, etc.
Nineteenth century Japan – together perhaps with Ataturk’s Turkey, and the military revolutions in Egypt and Peru (Trimberger 1978) – provides us with one pattern in this kind of evolution. The key point, as Trimberger suggests, is that there are conditions where state managers come to play especially significant roles. She offers a “hypothesis”:
... during a period of economic transition – when there is no dominant mode of production and no one consolidated class controlling the economy – the state apparatus can achieve dynamic autonomy from the means of production. A dynamically autonomous state apparatus does not act within the constraints of existing modes of production. Bureaucrats in a dynamically autonomous state apparatus can promote a new mode of production. The state apparatus, I further hypothesise, will only act in this dynamically autonomous manner during a period of economic transition if it is staffed by bureaucrats who do not own and do not have any personal control over any of the competing modes of production. Such bureaucrats hold a distinctive class position, but they have no possibility of becoming a dominant class within the existing social formation because they have no control over the means of production. They can, however, use their control over state resources – coercive, monetary and ideological – to destroy existing modes of appropriating the surplus and to promote a new mode of production. Thus, during a period of economic transition, bureaucrats have the possibility of entering class struggle as an independent force, rather than as an instrument of other class forces.” (Trimberger, 1977, p. 86)
Within Japan, certain conditions appear to have been important in preparing the way for the emergence of this possibility. Two features of pre-capitalist Japanese society, in particular, are of especial note. The first is that the samurai, as a class, had long ceased to be landed property owners; they were already bureaucrats. The second is that, within the framework of the Tokugawa baku-han system, an extensive process of commercialisation of economic life had already occurred, which was to provide an exceptionally favourable basis on which capitalist development could proceed in Japan. Of these two factors, perhaps the first was decisive.
Thus the particular form of pre-capitalist development within Tokugawa Japan played a significant part in Japanese “modernisation”. In Japan, the kinds of links between aristocracy and land which are so notable in European history had been broken. David Landes notes that, for the European aristocrat, “land was the foundation of dynastic continuity and prestige – the only solid and right form of wealth”. He quotes “an eloquent letter on this point” from a Belgian nobleman to a parvenu banker:
You have four sons and a whole future open to them. Build it on landed property. It is the land which forms the basis of families. This is true as much of the small rural patrimony of the peasant as of the great landed endowments of the most aristocratic persons. And so, my dear Sir, buy when you can for your children, not pieces of land, but real properties having enough compactness and extent to deserve the name of estate. There you will have solid settings for the generations that will follow you and will sink deep roots into the soil. You will have thus built on rock and not on sand. Landed property alone gives distinctive character to families, classifies them in the eyes of all, and confers upon them a solid and permanent influence. That is what instinct, the traditions handed down by my parents, experience, and study have taught me ... (cit. Landes, 1965, pp. 169–70)
But the picture of land-ownership and tenure in Japan had, for a long time, been different. “The Tokugawa had made it a point to separate the samurai from the soil, thereby depriving them of autonomous control over revenues and manpower ... under the shogunate there were to be no Junkers or great barons to exercise local sovereignty and challenge the authority of the central government.” (Landes, 1965, p. 170) The fortunes of the samurai were bound up with their place in the state service, not in estates and villages. Their identification of a renewed nation-state with their own power and interests thus came to them much more easily than to other pre-capitalist aristocracies, whether in Prussia or China.
The Tokugawa period also prepared the way for the later industrialisation of and modernisation of Japan in its pre-capitalist commercial development. This is well brought out by Crawcour, who refers to the quite high literacy rates among the population, approaching 30 per cent in the 1860s. Much of the education received by the population, apart from the samurai, was in the basics of reading, writing, practical measurement, accounting and the like. Many peasant farmers were quite accustomed to drawing financial balances, and merchants received a quite developed formal training in accounts and commerce.
Nor was rational accounting of economic advantage a new development in the late Tokugawa period; it can be seen clearly among big city merchants as early as the seventeenth century. But it became far more widespread with the expansion of business opportunities to the countryside in the nineteenth century. We should not be surprised, therefore, at the apparent ease with which rural backwoodsmen adjusted to a modern capitalist economy. (Crawcour, p. 36)
If earlier accounts of the Tokugawa period suggest a “subsistence” pattern of agriculture, more recent work offers a very different picture. The following table shows the proportion of agricultural production estimated to have been directly consumed by its producers in the 1860s:



Rice


10–30%




Coarse grains, beans & potatoes

90–95%




Industrial crops


10–20%



Vegetables


70–80%




Fruit

70–80%




Total (all crops)


31–42%




(Crawcour, p. 40, citing work by Yamaguchi Kazuo)



“It seems safe to say that in Japanese agriculture as a whole over half and probably nearer two-thirds of output was marketed in one form or another” (Crawcour, p. 41) – some directly by the peasantry, and a good part more by those who received it in the form of taxes. Additionally, as we have seen, many farmers engaged in rural industrial activities.
The already established state and tax systems also assisted the Meiji bureaucrats in their modernisation-from-above of Japan. Government officials were already accustomed to intervening in economic life with whole series of regulations, supervisions and controls:
During the inflation of the 1860s, the shogunate issued a spate of decrees to control the price of rice, oil, timber, copper, fuel, manure, and commodity prices in general. It ordered increased consignments of industrial goods to Kyoto, where the population was swollen by an influx of both loyalists and Tokugawa supporters. In the field of transport the shogunate controlled all the main highways and set freight rates. It supervised foreign trade and interest rates. It regulated wages within its domains. It encouraged land reclamation and took the lead in the settlement of Hokkaido. In agriculture it placed restrictions, which were increasingly evaded, on the sale and subdivision of land. It encouraged the production of wax, lacquer, paper and tea, but when export demand for silk led to expansion of the industry it forbade the planting of mulberries on ricefields. In industry, it set quotas for the brewing industry, regulated salmon fishing, the building trades, coopering, shipbuilding, and the production of lime and saltpetre. The shogunate and the three great Tokugawa lords owned and operated or controlled all major mines and forests. Within the shogunal domains practically no major enterprise or innovation could be undertaken without the approval of the government. (Crawcour, pp. 42–44)
Similarly in the various han, widespread aspects of economic life were routinely subject to official control and direction. Thus the institutional foundations were already partially prepared, in the Tokugawa period, for the state-centred industrialisation process that followed the Meiji revolution.
The international situation in the 1860s and 1870s, it should also be noted, was relatively favourable to Japan. As well as the success of the bureaucrats in re-shaping the state, Japan’s relative avoidance of semi-colonisation or of “impaired sovereignty” was due in part to the fact that the imperial powers were otherwise occupied. (Though Napoleon III’s minister, Leon Roches, did attempt a French alliance with the Bakufu, while the British minister was backing the outer han.) America was caught up in the bloody turmoil of her own civil war; the French were limited by Bismarck’s rise in Germany, and then by the Franco-Prussian war of 1870–71; and British attention was focussed chiefly on China by the 1860–65 Taiping Rebellion. Japan thus had “a vitally necessary breathing space” (E.H. Norman, p. 43). The samurai who seized power in Japan were thus lucky: the moment in which they acted was uniquely favourable to their nationalist enterprise.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (1-5. The tanks move in)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

Part I: Sixteen months of Solidarity
5. The tanks move in

The militarisation of the regime
For half a year the two forces contending for the destiny of Poland were neatly balanced. The party leadership was incapable of reorganising the state machinery sufficiently to undermine Solidarity seriously, while the union for its part was not prepared – or preparing – to use its mass support to displace the regime. But this condition of mutual paralysis could not last indefinitely. As the divisions within Solidarity became more apparent in the early autumn of 1981, and popular confusion grew, the ruling class was provided with an opportunity to begin to resolve its own internal crisis – as a prelude to imposing its solution on society at large.
The key here was the generals, particularly Jaruzelski.
The armed forces were the one part of the state machine that had remained relatively immune from the turmoil of the rest of society – if only because the theory of the ‘self-limiting revolution’ meant that Solidarity activists put little effort into organising there. The rank and file had not been stirred up by the experience of participation in strikes and demonstrations. And the officer corps was neither demoralised by involvement in managing an economy that was falling apart nor riven with the deep careerism and factions that rent the party leadership.
What is more, the army enjoyed a popularity with the mass of workers and peasants that was completely lacking for the party.
While the party was regarded as something utterly alien, the army was not recognised as, ultimately, a weapon to keep the same system in place. One of the reasons – it was said – the Russians held back from the invasion was that the Polish army would turn its guns round and fight against them; Jaruzelski had sworn an oath never to fire upon Polish workers, and so on. Opinion polls placed popular trust in the army only a little below that in Solidarity itself. This trust continued, in spite of the military scabbing on the printers’ strike in the summer, or the appearance of young soldiers on TV attacking Solidarity for its ‘counter-revolutionary aims’. Despite, too, the links between the hardline critics of Kania’s policy of ‘renewal’ and the army newspaper Zolnierz Wolnosci (Soldier of Freedom) which acted as a mouthpiece for those who wanted a crackdown on Solidarity’s activities.
A strong nationalist tradition that reinforced people’s hatred of the party leadership – seen as a group foisted on the country from outside – also made them identify with the army as the supreme symbol of the nation.
At some point in the summer Jaruzelski seems to have decided – perhaps with the assistance of the Russians and the regime’s ‘hardliners’ – to exploit these advantages, both to crush Solidarity and to raise himself to supreme power. In one sense he was repeating the experience of Pilsudski in the 1920s. Then too the ruling class had proved incapable of providing itself with a coherent leadership. Pilsudski had seized power using a combination of military might and personal popular support – he had, after all, been a founder member of the Socialist Party and was regarded as the architect of Polish national independence. Jaruzelski, hoping to play the part of a latter-day Bonaparte, looked to using the exhaustion of all the warring classes in society after a period of extreme turmoil, to keep himself in power – only, with the officer corps doing for the ruling class what that class could not do for itself.
When exactly the preparations for the coup began is not absolutely clear. The Sunday Times Insight team have claimed that Nato analysis of Russian military radio usage suggests that the Russians began to scheme in this as early as April – just after the Bydgoszcz crisis proved the weakness of the regime and the lack of will of the union.
‘The inference was clear. Moscow, which holds all senior roles within the Warsaw Pact, was secretly setting up its own command control network alongside the system normally operated by the Polish army. Fanning out from their Soviet army bases at Legnica and Romatov, they sorted out convenient transmitter sites, often in remote buildings like barns, or even trucks parked in fields, and tested their links with the Soviet Union. Then, as abruptly as it started, the new traffic vanished from the air.’ [85]
In June and July, careful army exercises were conducted to test the reliability of the Polish officer corps. Quite likely these did still not represent a final decision to employ the military option, but rather contingency plans to be put into effect when everything else failed.
But by the summer or early autumn, Jaruzelski must have turned the option of a military takeover into a definite programme of action. The first moves were unspectacular. Many must have gone completely unnoticed. After the Party Congress in July there were four serving generals in the cabinet. There were also five generals in key positions: in charge of the state airline, and the administrative, police, transport and mining departments. On August 2nd, Jaruzelski made a speech to the Military Council outlining its role in the crisis. He saw its tasks as ‘fighting speculation and other socially destructive phenomena.’ Civilian inspectors were to be guarded by armed military personnel. In addition, the Polish press agency PAP reported ‘in connection with the increasingly unfavourable and dangerous phenomena in the international situation in the country ... Against this background measures were discussed to ensure the required level of defence preparedness in Poland.’ [86] The military were checking the reliability of their troops.
In October the army made its first serious moves. Military service for the conscripts about to be demobbed was extended by two months. Three days later, after a bitter Central Committee meeting where the regime’s ‘reformers’ and ‘hardliners’ blocked each others’ moves, Jaruzelski displaced Kania to become the sole man in charge of the state. He now held the offices of prime minister, first Party secretary and defence minister.
Within days he announced plans for sending troops into the countryside, in small groups of three, so as to seem non-threatening. Their role, it was announced, was to ease the distribution system in the shops, put an end to the hoarding of goods, help ensure pensioners got their coal and gather in crops left to rot in the fields. This they did. There was enough chaos around for them to sort out and thereby gain some popularity; but of course the military also sat down with local administrators, looked over their shoulders at the workings of the system and did an essential reconnaissance job for the future coup. In spite of an initial announcement that they were also there to ‘solve disputes and suppress street provocations’, this was quickly played down and there are no reports known to us of them being used in that role. A month after being deployed they were withdrawn from the countryside, presumably to report back, and a week after that they began playing a similar role in urban areas, this time with much less dramatic publicity than before.
Jaruzelski’s ‘Bonapartist’ strategy did not merely rest upon the careful deployment of military power. It also rested on the assumption that the popularity of the military with the populace and the inability of anyone else to point a way out of the crisis, would gain substantial support from such an approach – including from the ‘moderate’ wing of Solidarity.
At first, his assumption seemed correct. In July Warsaw Solidarity’s Bujak noted that among many workers: ‘There exists a desire, one senses, for a strong government, although this would have to impose many restrictions ...’ [87]
And Jacek Kuron was even more perceptive: ‘Part of society could turn to the idea of a strong government as a ray of hope. We can already see the idea grow around the figure of Jaruzelski ... They think a strong movement with the army as part can save the country ...’ [88]
Illusions about the military certainly existed within the praesidium of Solidarity. When Jaruzelski took over the party leadership Walesa seemed almost favourable to the move: ‘At least it means power is concentrated in one man’s hands. What we need is a strong reasonable government we can negotiate with.’ [89]
Only a month before the coup a western socialist journalist in Warsaw could describe the mood of the union’s leadership: ‘Jaruzelski has a reputation, as premier, as an intransigent ‘liberal’. As head of the army, he refused to use troops against strikers in 1970, 1976 and 1980. This has gained him great respect among the workers. And apart from this, he appears as a man of action rather than a man of verbal promises.’ [90]
Such illusions meant that Jaruzelski was able to make his first moves towards militarisation of the country without running into widespread opposition from within the workers’ movement.
He took repressive actions so as to ‘test the water’ of union reactions – and the union leadership interpreted these as provocations directed against Jaruzelski by ‘hardliners’. Instead of mobilising the bitter and immediate anger of workers against the forces of the state, the union leaders sent them home, calling for token protests only.
The first such major confrontation since the Bydgoszcz incident came in the Silesian towns of Wroclaw and Katowice in late October. Police responded to Jaruzelski’s appointment as party leader by going on to crowded streets to seize Solidarity activists who were distributing leaflets – leaflets that in one case urged soldiers to side with workers. Huge crowds of workers immediately began assembling to challenge the police action – in Wroclaw besieging the police station, in Katowice turning over police vans to free those arrested. Yet the response of Solidarity leaders was to urge the crowds to disperse, so as not to ‘provoke’ the authorities. The national leadership of the union called a one-hour general strike in protest at the incidents – but did nothing to encourage workers on the ground to develop a movement that would undermine the ability of the police to repeat them. Walesa declared his hope that the strike would be the last one of its kind.
In November, police attacked union members at Chorzow who were mounting a poster campaign demanding greater access to the media. 21 people were detained, some beaten, one hospitalised. A week later, in Sosnowice, there was a still more serious attack on workers. Several phials of mustard gas were tossed from a car outside a mine gate 60 people, including miners and passers-by, some of them children, had to be taken to hospital.
But the praesidium was spending the month of November ... attempting to arrive at an agreement with Jaruzelski for a ‘national accord’ between themselves, the heads of the church and the state.
On the second day of the Solidarity National Commission meeting in the first week of November an invitation was received from the government for Walesa to join joint talks with Jaruzelski and Cardinal Glemp for the Church. The invitation caused widespread confusion within the union. According to one left wing western journalist in Poland, ‘Strong regional leaders – in Warsaw, Lodz, Bydgoszcz, Szczecin – were against participation in the tripartite talks. But the National Commission did not take a stand and the next day the weekly praesidium meeting of the union ended with a communique expressing goodwill to the talks.’ [91]
So in the month of November, when the final elements of the military takeover must have been being put together, the mass of union members saw their leaders engaged in apparently quite friendly talks with Jaruzelski – the head of the armed forces.
 
Solidarity’s final ten days
On the first day of December Solidarity’s praesidium still believed that the regime was acting with the best intentions in the world. ‘Solidarity’s negotiators expressed moderate optimism at the outcome of preliminary negotiations – both sides showed a willingness to compromise.’
Their illusions were not to last another 24 hours.
While the workers’ struggles had been subsiding in November, one group influenced by Solidarity struggled more than at any time in the previous 17 months. A wave of student occupations swept colleges from one end of the country to the other.
Among the institutions drawn into this was a college for trainee firemen in Warsaw. The struggle there was particularly embarrassing for the regime, since they came under the Ministry of the Interior and were theoretically subject to the same sort of discipline as the Police. Smashing this occupation was a necessary part of any run up to a complete takeover by the military and police and, what is more, could provide a very good test of what Solidarity’s reaction would be to such an eventuality.
On 2 December many hundreds of police surrounded the trainee firemen’s school and then smashed their way in, in a military style operation complete with helicopters. For the first time since Gdansk, the forces of the state had been used to smash the basic form of workers’ protest.
The regime was not playing games any more. It had shown it was prepared to smash the workers’ movement the moment it got the chance. Just to rub the point home, it announced on the same day it was going to ask parliament for the power to ban strikes for months at a time.
Lech Walesa tried, desperately, to hold the line for the old approach of conciliation with the regime. He rushed to the scene of the firemen’s occupation to urge calm. He told crowds outside ‘We must stick together. The union is a powerful weapon hanging over the authorities – but it can’t be triggered all the time.’ In the days that followed he made final desperate attempts via Cardinal Glemp to arrange a ‘dialogue’ with Jaruzelski. But even he hardly seemed any longer to believe that confrontation was avoidable. At a very important national meeting of Solidarity delegates in Radom the next day he admitted (in words which the regime was to try to use against him) ‘confrontation is inevitable and confrontation will take place. Let us abandon all illusions. They have been thumbing their noses at us.’
Walesa still wanted to put off confrontation and opposed calls for a general strike against the strike-ban law. But the other delegates were no longer prepared to sit back while the regime prepared to crush them. There was an overwhelming feeling for a general strike the moment the law was introduced and for nationwide protest demonstrations on 17 December – the anniversary of the 1970 killings in Gdansk. Bujak from Warsaw seems to have received general support when he outlined a plan drawn up by his region’s praesidium for the formation of factory-based workers’ militias to defend strikes and occupations. Apparently he argued ‘The first assault of the worker guards will be against the radio and TV’.
Suddenly, it was the radicals, not the moderates, who were determining Solidarity policy. And the approach was no longer purely defensive. The question of state power, of who ran society, was openly broached for the first time in the union’s history. The obvious preparedness of the state to smash the union meant that former moderates were being forced to think about how to pose an alternative to the state – in near-revolutionary terms.
Speaker after speaker urged the need for the union to form a provisional government ‘to pave the way for free elections’. The idea was still not for the workers in Solidarity to hold total power, but to take the initiative in forcing the other groups in society to share power with them. So Rulewski from Bydgoszcz suggested that the union form a temporary government based upon a 30% allocation of seats to the Party, 25% to the peasants, 25% to Solidarity, and 20% to other groups like the nationalist Confederation for an Independent Poland and the lay Catholics. The aim was for Solidarity to take the initiative by imposing this government, while at the same time placating the Russians by showing that their interests were to be respected. It was in this light that the suggestion was put forward of a double referendum to be organised by the union, with one question asking people to reject the party’s monopoly of power and the other asking them to reaffirm support for the Russian alliance.
The decisions were confused, in the sense that they still partially ducked the question of who was to rule Poland: the workers in Solidarity or the bureaucratic ruling class represented by the party? But within the confused formulations there was a core understanding that if the union did not try to take control of society it would be smashed. The time for shilly-shallying was over. And so people saw the threatened general strike as all-important. As Karol Modzelewski put it, this was to be ‘the final struggle’.
In the days that followed efforts were made to turn the whole union round. By 12 December one report from Warsaw suggested that: ‘The majority of union activists see a confrontation as inevitable in the near future and are already taking counter measures in the factories; in the big factories the organisation of workers’ militias is not infrequent nor is the forcing out of “orthodox” Communist Party members.’ [92]
Yet it was very late in the day to make this turn-around. For the best part of a year the day to day leadership of the union had been telling people not to strike, not to struggle, but instead to rely on the negotiating skills of union leaders. Now it was suddenly telling them to prepare for a struggle the like of which they had never taken part in before. In particular, it was telling them to prepare for a confrontation with the armed forces of the state.
Such a new mobilisation was bound to be difficult to achieve in a short time. A workers’ movement is not a trained army, that can be told to march in one direction, then another, to remain in its barracks for weeks and then to move straight to the assault. Its power comes from the way in which the very forward momentum of the most powerful sections of workers raises hope in the most oppressed, the most downtrodden, the most ‘backward’ sections, drawing them into action. As they begin to challenge the miserable conditions in which they live and work and the petty tyrannies of the foreman, of the local police, they begin to identify with the conception of an all-embracing workers’ struggle that was previously quite foreign to them. Once, however, they are told to stop struggling, the miserable conditions and the petty tyrannies are reimposed on them. Their mental horizons close in. They lose their sense of identity with a wider movement. That cannot be restored just by a different sets of commands from the national leaders of the workers movement.
Once the forward momentum of a workers’ movement is stopped, the movement necessarily recedes. And it them takes an immense and time-consuming effort of agitation to begin to restore the momentum.
What applies to workers in general applies a hundred times more to those workers the regime depends upon to smash the others, to the workers in uniform, the rank and file soldiers and police.
While the workers’ movement is going forward from strength to strength, it attracts sympathy from within even the most hardened, battle-trained sections of the armed forces. That was why in Poland Jaruzelski was not willing to risk turning the armed forces against the workers when he was asked to by leading members of the regime in August 1980, March 1981 and again the autumn of 1981. He feared that if he hit the workers’ movement with the army it might be the army that broke into pieces not the workers’ movement.
He had reason to be frightened. Even within the hardened ranks of the police, a movement developed in the first part of 1981 for the right to form a union linked to Solidarity, with groups of rank and file police sitting in Warsaw police stations over the demand. As late as early December, the ‘founding committee of the trade union in the civil militia’ protested – in the very last issue of Solidarity Weekly – at the use of the police in the raid on the fire cadets’ school. ‘The militia’, they declared, ‘was formed to protect the interests of society as a whole, and not those of the ruling minority.’ They called on all police officers to protest against ‘the use of the police in political conflicts and the suppression of justified popular actions.’ Within the army the situation must have been even more precarious – half the soldiers were conscripts, many of whom would have been Solidarity members before enrolment. Thus in October, when, as part of Jaruzelski’s militarisation measures, conscription was extended by two months, conscripts in Jelenia Gora wrote to Solidarity calling upon the union to organise demonstrations on 24 October, the day they had been due to be demobilised. ‘We have fulfilled our constitutional duty towards our homeland and we want to use the strength of our arms for our country’s benefit and not against our families’, they wrote. [93]
Yet the union did virtually nothing to encourage this ferment inside the police stations and barracks. Thus it passed resolutions in favour of a police union. But it did not mobilise the mass of its membership to support its sympathisers in either the police or the army. You only have to imagine what the impact would have been of tens of thousands of workers marching to the police stations to show their support for the police protesters inside, to see how important this would have been: no doubt rank and file police would soon have been mixing with masses of workers, creating a new solidarity between the two, with the police chiefs losing their ability to get their way over anything. Again, strikes and demonstrations in support of the conscripts on 24 October would have had the same effect.
The union, however, was committed in those months to holding the movement back. And that meant leaving the rank and file police and soldiers to the mercy of those who had command over them.
By the beginning of December, it was too late to expect the ranks of the armed forces to disobey their officers. The workers’ movement no longer seemed to have the forward momentum necessary if it was to provide protection for those who broke military discipline and refused to repress workers. If it could not protect the trainee firemen’s occupation against the state, it could not protect soldiers who faced court martial should they disobey a single order.
In such circumstances, the measures taken by Solidarity in its last ten days to prepare for all out confrontation were, tragically, bound to be inadequate. Workers militias were bound to be ineffective in defending the union in the face of an army and police force whose rank and file did not dare disobey their officers. It was not that the state was so strong that it was always bound to win in any confrontation. It was, rather, that the ‘moderate’ policies of the union’s leadership over the previous year had weakened the union while allowing Jaruzelski to restore cohesion and strength to the forces of the state.
Hence the final tragic scene of the drama. On 11–12 December the national commission of Solidarity met in Gdansk to put the final touches to its plans to resist the anti-union law. At this meeting, ‘The majority of the Solidarity leadership took a position of total confrontation, and there were bitter attacks on Walesa for having taken part in the tripartite meeting with Jaruzelski and Glemp. The creation of a provisional government was a theme running through all the contributions’. [94]
That night the armed forces closed down telecommunications networks throughout the country, sealed off the main roads and arrested the national and regional leaders of the union as they slept in their beds in a Gdansk hotel.
Polish workers awoke the next morning to find that the national and local structures of their union existed no more. In the days that followed the strongest, most confident groups of workers in the large work places of the Northern coast, Warsaw and Silesia fought a heroic, desperate rear guard action, with strikes and occupations and street demonstrations. But the absolutely solid general strike which had been hoped for, with every workplace in the country occupied, did not materialise, still less the massive mobilisations on the streets that alone could have cracked the armed forces unity. The workers movement just did not have the forward momentum at that late stage to achieve such miracles.

Notes
85. Sunday Times, 20 December 1981.
86. Guardian, 3 August 1981.
87. Robotnik, op. cit.
88. Ibid.
89. Guardian, 20 October 1981.
90. Il Manifesto, 12 November 1981.
91. Ibid.
92. Ibid.
93. Guardian, 17 October 1981.
94. Il Manifesto, 13 December 1981.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (1-7. Was a revolution possible?)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

Part I: Sixteen months of Solidarity
7. Was a revolution possible?

Social revolutions are not simply called into existence by organisations. They occur through the interaction of two forces: on one hand through the breakdown of existing state apparatuses and, on the other, through the simultaneous growth of a demand, among the widest strata of the population, for a new way of living whose realisation demands the radical re-shaping of political institutions. Social revolutions are not the same as coups d’etat, mere alterations at the top of state and society. They alter the fundamental relations of people in social production, and they alter the very goals of that production. The starting point of a social revolution is the more or less abrupt destruction by the mass of the population of the existing institutions of state power, and their replacement by a new form of state.
That, for a period, the Polish state was in disarray is beyond question. Many of its fundamental institutions were severely disrupted. Not all of them, however; in particular, the army and the security police were immunised to a large degree from the wave of popular radicalism and struggle. Without their internal breakdown, no revolutionary situation could exist, and no revolution was possible.
Opportunities to contribute to the internal fragmentation of the armed forces were missed. When the police began to demand their own Solidarity unions, there were a few banners and demonstrations in support. No serious effort was ever made to organise large demonstrations outside the local police stations in support of police unionism. The army, whose lower ranks are mostly working class and peasant conscripts, never had any significant agitation directed at them. When young soldiers whose ‘demob’ time had come, in October 1981, were told they had to stay in the army for a further two months, there was no wave of agitation in their support.
Neither of these main pillars of state power could have been undermined except through the development of a determination, within Solidarity itself, to push for the revolutionary overthrow of the state. Soldiers and police do not lightly mutiny. Their internal cohesion as armed bodies of the state will only break down if their rank and file become convinced that the workers’ movement intends to ‘go all the way’, and if they themselves are also inspired with the hope and idea of a radically different society. But that depends on the workers’ movement – on its readiness to agitate in the forces, and on its readiness to confront the armed forces directly. As this did not happen, we have to say that in one sense a revolution in Poland was never on the cards. A revolutionary situation did not exist. But, if we may make the distinction, a pre-revolutionary situation did emerge in the aftermath of August 1980, in that the conditions for a full revolutionary situation were created by Solidarity’s rise and development. Whether the possibility would become actuality depended on Solidarity’s politics.
It was not belief in the virtues of the existing situation which held Solidarity back. It was, rather, disbelief in the possibility of success. What in Polish code-language was called ‘our geo-political situation’ was seen as the fundamental barrier to revolution. In Hungary and in Czechoslovakia, with different degrees of brutality but nonetheless with armed power, the Russian forces had put paid to popular aspirations for social and political change. The possibility of Russian invasion was a permanent background to popular awareness in Poland. It was an ever-present reason for ‘holding back’, even though ‘holding back’ was again and again made impossible by the seriousness of the crisis and the urgent pressure from the rank and file for action.
The truth is that the Russian threat became a mental impediment to action. Not for nothing do the DiP group refer to it as ‘a dull, dark and ubiquitous factor paralysing the will’. [120] The universal assumption both inside and outside Poland was that the overthrow of the regime by Solidarity would be followed by Soviet military intervention. But the issue is by no means so clear-cut. The reasons tor the Kremlin going in are fairly obvious. The subjection of Poland to Russian hegemony was, and remains, of central importance to the division of Europe between the super-powers at the end of the Second World War. An independent, workers’ Poland would cut Moscow’s most direct lines of communications with the massive concentration of Soviet troops in East Germany; the example would be an inviting one for the rest of eastern Europe, and dependent nationalities on the USSR’s western borders such as the Ukraine and Estonia, to follow.
But at the same time the reasons which have kept the Russians out of Poland since August 1980 would still be there. Soviet invasion would have destroyed the cornerstone of Brezhnev’s foreign policy, his attempt to play off western Europe, and especially West Germany against the US; it would have led to the collapse of the crucial gas pipeline agreement linking Siberia to western Europe; and it might have caused the western banks to call in not only their loans to Poland, but eastern Europe’s entire foreign debt of nearly $70 billion. Finally, there would have been the sheer military difficulties of such an operation: Poland is a much larger, more populous, and more industrialized country than Hungary in 1956; nor did there exist in Czechoslovakia the massive, organized workers’ movement bitterly opposed to the invaders that the Russian tanks would have faced in Poland. Nor did the Kremlin have to bear the burden in 1956 or 1968 of a difficult, bloody and expensive low-intensity war in Afghanistan. The same reasons which have made Washington reluctant to attempt the overthrow of popular leftist regimes in Cuba and Nicaragua when they had earlier easily destroyed a mildly reformist government in Guatemala would have caused the Kremlin to hesitate in the face of a workers’ Poland.
At worst, if the Russians had invaded, the outcome might have been defeat. But wasn’t this anyway what happened as a result of Solidarity’s leaders pursuing a non-existent compromise? The only difference is that the repression is being administered by Polish rather than Russian soldiers. Of course, a defeat at the hands of the Kremlin would have been much bloodier, because Polish workers would have fought a Soviet invasion. But blood shed in a struggle where the balance of forces is known, when the possibility of victory exists, is less terrible than when it is shed in the course of a definite defeat, such as that in December 1981. For a Russian invasion could have been defeated. Polish workers, having overthrown their own ruling class, would have been ready and prepared for such an invasion in a way that they were not for Jaruzelski’s coup. And they would have had arms and those soldiers won over in the course of the revolution fighting by their side. Finally, they would be able to appeal to the workers of the rest of the eastern bloc, who also suffer from economic stagnation, food shortage, rising prices, exploitation, lack of freedom, The Kremlin might have found that it had entered a Polish quagmire far more dangerous than that in Afghanistan, one that fatally undermined its empire.
At the very least then, the balance of the argument about the practicality of a revolutionary attempt is undecided. But what else could it be? What was never undecided was the balance of arguments about the reformist strategy. It never stood a chance.
There are those who protest at the use of ‘violence’ that is inherent in a revolutionary perspective. But they are one-sided. They count the violence of armies and police, of street-fighting, but not the violence that results from refusal to challenge the state. In the coming years in Poland, there will be many unnecessary deaths. Children will die for lack of adequate nourishment, old people of hypothermia, patients for lack of medical supplies, workers from unsafe factories and from diseases caused by Poland’s polluted environment. Many others will have their days shortened by misery, poverty and despair. How many mutilations of body and spirit will there be, because the revolution did not happen? They belong in any honest balance sheet.
As it is, the issue of social revolution has only been postponed. It has not been avoided. Sooner or later, if the military machines of Moscow and Washington are not to wipe out billions of people, their power has to be struck from their hands. The issue before the workers – not only in Poland – for the present epoch remains that of world war or world revolution.
 
From reform to revolution?
But questions about revolutionary possibilities can never be assessed in the abstract. They must also be measured against the real development of the actual movement. And here it is important to remember that Solidarity itself developed considerably from its beginnings in August 1980. Most certainly, when it began. Solidarity was not a revolutionary movement. The strikes and occupations of the summer of 1980 did not formulate demands for revolutionary change, but only for ‘concessions’ from the regime. Then, the universal hope of Polish workers and their supporters in other strata was that these concessions would be achieved within the existing system. At that point, the hopes of the movement coincided with the theory of the reformists.
But, over the next few months, Solidarity members discovered that the gains they thought they had made in August were not yet achieved. The regime, as events proved, would not grant their desires. In the process of discovering that, Solidarity changed. First, its membership became more militant about their original demands, and, second, they formulated additional demands as their Movement deepened. In the process, the character of Solidarity began to be redefined.
This shift came with its discovery that, if it were not to be discredited in its own members’ eyes, Solidarity could not simply be a ‘trade union’. That, assuredly, was how it started out. John Taylor writes about Solidarity’s leadership in the autumn of 1980:
... the praesidium members I got to know in Gdansk ... were at the time genuinely content to confine themselves to establishing fully independent self-governing trade unions. That is, unions which enjoyed the whole range of civil liberties conceded in the Gdansk agreement without which they could not operate effectively, i.e. legal limitation of censorship, freedom of publication, access to the media, an end to the repression of dissident opinion. According to this view, Solidarity would remain a countervailing power, outside the party but within the framework of a socialist society, one which would give voice and muscle to the interests of workers. It would become established as a permanent, defensive, loyal opposition. [121]
If, Taylor reports, you pressed the Gdansk activists for more detail, in the autumn of 1980, on what they meant by economic reform and self-management, they said, ‘Look, we are not the government. It is up to the government to produce its proposals and then we will criticise them – or rather, our experts will help us criticise them.’ [122]
At the start, Solidarity was a trade union, albeit one which transcended the ‘normal’ limits of unionism by such things as its defence of the arrested KOR members. But the scale of the economic deterioration, and the bureaucracy’s refusal and inability to solve the crisis, placed the leaders of Solidarity in a position where they were forced to take initiatives and to shoulder responsibilities they had tried to evade. Then the issue shifted. They no longer called Solidarity simply a ‘trade union’, but – more vaguely – a ‘social movement’. And the question Solidarity activists had to grapple with became more difficult: should they take on responsibilities without also having political power, or should they actually take power and with it responsibilities? They never managed to solve the problem, within the framework of reformist thinking. The issue of Saturday working in the mines illustrates the dilemma: Solidarity couldn’t exercise responsibility for the economy without also exercising power – over the destination of coal production. Its members’ militancy wouldn’t allow less. Yet any and every exercise of power by workers brought them up against the power of the state, which couldn’t allow Solidarity to solve the crisis without itself abdicating.
The problem of power, however, became an ever more urgent one as the crisis deepened. Hence the expansion of Solidarity’s political demands, especially in the months between the collapse of the March general-strike call and the December military coup. In that period, Solidarity began, with growing urgency, to consider the necessity of re-shaping the state and the industrial management system.
In practice, as we have tried to show, this process did not bring Solidarity to a revolutionary position. But the manner of Solidarity’s development was not determined in advance. The logic of development was revolutionary, even if the participants did not fully recognise it. The reason why, for such an agonisingly long period, Solidarity remained trapped within the confines of reformism – though a more and more radicalised reformism – was, quite simply, that there was no one around to suggest anything more coherent. Which is to say that there was no revolutionary socialist organisation in Poland. And that is the heart of the problem.
Because of the influence of the reformist framework, and the absence of any revolutionary critique of that reformism, no systematic attempt was ever made to spread the idea that the workers should take power for themselves – though the idea would have fallen on anything but stony ground. No effort was ever made to engage in socialist re-education, to challenge the Stalinist perversion of Marxism.
Yet what opportunities there were! The whole movement was, through its own practice, rediscovering the heart of revolutionary Marxism, the doctrine of working-class self-emancipation. It was re-learning, in struggle, ideas and organisational forms that belong to the greatest traditions of socialism. All that was needed was to break the workers’ prejudice against thinking in terms of this language. No attempt was made – though opportunities presented themselves on several occasions – to carry out agitation in the armed forces, in the police, etc. The nastier aspects of Polish nationalism, such as anti-semitism, resurgent in Poland, were never directly attacked.
The very different sources of support that Solidarity won in the capitalist west were never critically examined in terms of their class character. The role of the Church was never subjected to any searching and critical examination. Nothing was done, in any serious way, to develop links with possible allies in other east European countries – difficult though that would have been, admittedly.
Historical ‘ifs’ are a dangerous sport. Yet, if a small revolutionary organisation, with sufficient clarity of ideas and internal coherence, had existed in Poland in the summer of 1980, its chances of expansion both in membership and influence would – in the last months of 1980 and throughout 1981 – have become ever more favourable. Such an organisation need not have been a very significant force at the start. The experience of KOR itself, which had a bare handful of members from 1976 to 1980, is sufficient witness to what can be achieved by a small but determined group in Preparing the way – and providing the politics for – a massively larger movement. Poland’s tragedy provides socialists with a measure of how far we still have to go. The influence of reformist ideas in Poland was no accident, but was the outcome of the weakness of revolutionary Marxism in the world, west as much as east. There will be many more battles before that begins to change. [123]
There will be those who refuse to learn anything useful from the Polish defeat. For them, it is the wildest sectarianism to consider that a revolutionary socialist organisation was needed in Poland – and especially to imagine that it was needed as far back as August 1980 and before.
Yet the whole tendency of development within Solidarity was such as to bring up, more and more sharply, the question of taking power. The KOR activists, to the bitter end, seem to have resisted the idea that power should be seized by the working class, yet they were forced to recognise that their former perspectives were not working. The 1st August issue of Robotnik carried a ‘round-table discussion’ between Jan Litynski, Jacek Kuron and Zbigniew Bujak, in which all the participants say that Solidarity had reached an impasse. Litynski could see no way forward, when Solidarity could no longer put demands on a regime that was falling apart. Bujak declared that the movement was weakening: in the beginning it had been based on an impeccable hatred against the power-system, but this wasn’t enough now – ‘New motivations’ were needed. The members no longer understood the leadership’s tactics. Kuron spelled out his views in a speech to the 24–26 July National Commission of Solidarity. The bureaucracy, he suggested, had no means of of solving the crisis, for it was split and weak. ‘The old order has been destroyed but there has been no attempt to build a new social order.’ The economic collapse was continuing. But he rejected proposals to take power, to form a party, to call for free elections. The revolution which was happening should continue to be ‘self-limiting’. ‘Time,’ he twice asserted, ‘is working for us’. Yet his positive proposal was that self-management should be pushed ahead, so that the workers’ movement should take effective control of the economy. [124]
The position was riven with weaknesses. The truth is that the whole state machine was not in tatters: the armed forces of the Polish state remained unified. And to reject taking power, while urging – and in a statified economy! – that Solidarity assume effective control over production through self-management organs, was in any case to push the movement into head-on confrontation with the state. It was to propose a social revolution without its necessary political complement. Kuron’s whole position – which confused the question of a workers’ party by suggesting that it must lead to Stalinism, which mis-estimated the significance of the state’s disarray, which simultaneously urged the movement forward and urged it to be restrained – was reminiscent of the muddles of syndicalism.
Yet the only challenge to it came from the right. No clear revolutionary alternative was ever proposed.
Finally, in the last days before the coup, the whole reformist position was rejected – in outline, at least – by Solidarity’s whole leadership. Even Lech Walesa, who to the end remained as much a barometer as a leader of the movement, agreed. Bitterly acquired experience finally broke the stranglehold of ‘self-limitation’. But it was too late. The re-thinking was just beginning. A large part of the final meeting of the National Commission was devoted to discussions on setting up a provisional government ‘from below’.
But an insurrectionary perspective – and it is difficult to see how this last position could develop as anything else – cannot be adopted, and carried through, in a matter of a few days. It implies a total reorientation of political thought and action, different forms of organisation, different kinds of leadership. It has to be prepared – not merely technically, but above all politically.
The tragedy is that the ruling class was ready to strike first. Its forces had been a long time in preparation.
The opposition was not prepared. Sixteen months of struggle had taught the finest trade-union movement the world has ever seen a host of lessons, which have yet to be assimilated by workers across the globe. But so many of those lessons were, in outline, ones already painfully learned by other workers’ movements in other times and places. Tragically, there was no organised repository in the shape of a party acting as even a small memory bank for the working class, to offer means by which the learning might be speeded up a little. Where was the voice that might have said ‘self-management is a delusion without state power’? Where was the voice to point out that demanding free local elections without a state under the direct power of the workers would mean nothing – except a brutal response from the bosses’ state? When Lech Walesa cried, only days before the coup, ‘They’ve just been thumbing their noses at us!’, why had no national workers’ news-sheet been making just this point for weeks and months before, to the widest possible audience within Solidarity? Who was there to challenge KOR? Or the Church intellectuals? Or the whole influence of the Professionals of the ‘Warsaw society’?
 
Conclusions
The military coup represents a major defeat for Polish workers. In place of Solidarity, Jaruzelski has imposed atomisation on the working class – so great that, at the onset of the coup, three people speaking together in the street risked arrest as an illegal meeting. Thousands of Solidarity leaders and advisers were arrested and interned. Militant workers, in the plants that resisted, were arrested and gaoled in summary ‘trials’. Silesian miners and others were shot and beaten to death. Others were severely beaten. Tanks and armoured cars patrolled the streets. The telephone network was shut down, travel on public transport tightly controlled. The armed forces took over press and TV and jammed foreign broadcasts. The borders were closed.
The workers lost, not just their political gains, but their economic ones too. Price rises of several hundred percent were announced, ‘free’ Saturdays abolished, extensive unemployment imposed.
But the Polish defeat is also a defeat for workers across the rest of the world. Throughout eastern Europe and Russia workers were discussing Poland in 1980 and 1981. The Kremlin was clearly deeply alarmed: while they never jammed western broadcasts on Afghanistan, the August 1980 strikes were more than they could stomach having discussed on the airwaves. We cannot know how workers throughout the Warsaw Pact viewed the Polish struggles, but perhaps it was with a mixture of hope and cynicism: hope that the Polish workers might be opening a way for them too; and cynicism, a feeling that the system was still too strong. The coup will have reinforced any mood of cynicism and defeatism, to the relief of the other East European rulers.
Western opposition movements will also feel the effects of the Polish coup. Solidarity had furnished the left in Europe and America with an important reply to the ‘better dead than red’ arguments of their rulers. Certainly, Solidarity helped movements like the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament to grow. Now, the Right’s case will seem stronger. And the coup will have taken away the ‘emulation effect’ of Solidarity on other labour movements: in the summer of 1981, when Ronald Reagan had 12,000 air traffic controllers sacked and their leaders arrested for striking, many American workers made powerful comparisons between the ‘free’ West and ‘communist’ Poland. Solidarity and its famous logo had rapidly become an internationally recognised symbol of workers aspirations to freedom and control. We are all diminished by its crushing.
In the preceding pages, we have tried to show something of the way the Polish workers learned, through bitter experience, a whole series of magnificent lessons. It was that learning that made Solidarity such an advanced movement. And the learning continued after Gdansk and the signing of the ‘21 points’. Solidarity – even if it did not complete the process – was changing its own self-conception as it members were forced, with ever greater urgency, to debate and face up to the unavoidable question of power.
In one sense, the coup stopped that process dead. In another, the coup itself will prove to be a mighty educational experience. The lessons learned will be both positive and negative. The positive side will include the recognition that, next time, the movement must go further and faster, aiming higher and harder. The coup may also have had the effect of undermining the cross-class nationalist sentiment that was a source of both strength and weakness in Solidarity. The question of the need to carry the political arguments into the army and police forces will have been sharply posed. The role of the Church will have been questioned by some: certainly tens of thousands of Polish workers will have watched with disgust Archbishop Glemp’s appeals on TV at the time of the coup.
But there will also be a negative side. Many will feel, despairingly, that no movement can ever win, that the state is too strong. Some will blame Solidarity, like those insidious western commentators who – siding in practice with Jaruzelski – blame the movement for ‘going too far’. For a period, despair and cynicism will probably prevail, and to that extent Jaruzelski’s forces will win. In the short run, the defeat will count for more.
But not for ever. The scale of the crisis is too severe. The new regime may hope to emulate Kadar, but it took him ten years to re-stabilise Hungary after the 1956 revolution was crushed – and Kadar’s success depended on his ability to raise living standards. Jaruzelski’s regime must not only get production restarted, it must pay back £27 billions of debts to the West plus an unknown amount to the rest of Comecon. [125] There is little hope of improvement under Jaruzelski for the Polish workers for a very long time. Indeed, even to start production again, the regime must borrow more if it can. And the crisis is now world-wide, so there is less chance for growth.
Other Warsaw Pact countries are also having difficulties with their economies, and their debts. The Polish crash has made their prospects still more difficult, for they need Polish machinery, coal and other inputs into their own production cycles. It may well be that the torch which, temporarily, has been knocked from the hands of Polish workers will be picked up and carried forward by workers elsewhere in the Eastern bloc. The signs of restiveness and struggle are growing everywhere.
And the Polish workers will rise again. They have taken on their bosses and shaken their rule four times in two-and-a-half decades – quite apart from the student movement of 1968. The workers of Poland know that they have the potential. They know too that the regime is utterly bankrupt. If Jaruzelski has won this battle, it was by force alone; Gomulka’s new regime in 1956, and Gierek’s in 1970, both took over with some degree of popular support, while the military cannot count on anything but fear and bribery and toadying to sustain them.
What will count for everything, next time, will be ideas. The implications for socialists are extraordinarily important. It is, of course, our duty to do what we can to defend and assist the battered movement in Poland, and to rescue its defence from the forces of the western right into whose hands it has – shamefully – been falling. But we have to go further. We must do whatever can be done to assist the development, in eastern Europe, of revolutionary socialists committed to the overthrow of the regimes, to the rule of the working class itself over society, and to consistent internationalism. We should not exaggerate the possibilities, but we should do what can be done – with the forces available.
And that last qualification connects with our last point. Our job is to ensure that when next oppositionists from eastern Europe look to the West in hope of assistance and ideas, they see not only the bankrupt ideas and organisations of reformism and Eurocommunism, but developing revolutionary workers’ parties. The problem of Poland is, in the most direct sense, our problem – here, and now.

Notes
120. DiP Report, op. cit., p. 104.
121. Taylor, op. cit., pp. 41–2.
122. Ibid., p. 37. Or there was the chairman of Katowice Solidarity, in December 1980: ‘We cannot be drawn into a situation of letting the government come to us and ask what we, Solidarity, propose for the democratic reforms. That is not our business. They are trying to saddle us with sharing the government and responsibility for this country. We can do it as individual citizens, but not as the union. That what we have a government for, and on that score they will have to give an account of themselves.’ (Labour Focus on Eastern Europe IV, 4–6, p. 41)
123. Anti-semitism needed to be openly confronted. Apart from the PUWP itself, another source of this was, as we have mentioned, the KPN (Confederation for an Independent Poland). KOR, at least, was worried about KPN growth. The tragedy is that, because the KPN did not draw back from the prospect of a struggle against Russia, it influenced some of the most radical layers within Solidarity. Revolutionary Marxism could have met the militant aspirations of this layer, without any concessions to anti-semitic and anti-gypsy filth.
124. One difficulty which socialists in Eastern Europe face even more sharply than those in the West is the corruption of language that has occurred as a result of Stalinism. All manner of terms have lost their normal reference – ‘Left’ and ‘Right’, ‘working class’, ‘party’, ‘Marxism’, ‘Leninism’, ‘revolution’, ‘internationalism’, ‘socialism’ etc., etc. East European political jokes catch this a good deal. Revolutionaries will have to restore the proper meanings to old terms, or discover new ones as they try to argue their ideas. Additionally, the corruption of official politics has also tended to cut militant workers off from international working-class traditions, and has made them idealise the states of western capitalism. The spirit of rebellion against the regime can thus be perverted into such manifestations as support for the Americans in Vietnam -because the government opposed it. Lenin’s slogan – ‘Patiently explain’ – has never been more relevant.
125. Der Spiegel 34, 1981. Thanks to Geoff Brown for a translation.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (2-9. The goals of production)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

II. ‘Accumulate! Accumulate!’ –
Polish state capitalism in crisis
9. The goals of production

Explaining the Crisis
Before we look at what happened in the 1970s, a general question needs to be answered. Why does this persistent tendency to crisis appear in the so-called ‘planned’ economies? The problem is well known:
The economy goes through periods when everything is all right, plans are well balanced and can be easily over-fulfilled, no shortages in the material supplies occur, etc. These are the periods when the ratio of actual output ... to the capacity level ... is increasing. Then, for some reason, the economy begins to dis-coordinate. Plans cannot be fulfilled or even be well balanced, scarcities and bottlenecks begin to grow, and the ratio of actual to capacity output begins to decline. That this has actually been happening is not difficult to prove; the question is, why has it been happening ... We have to find out why planners persistently repeat their errors by tending to overstrain the economy. [25]
The problem of ‘overstrain’ is more precisely defined by Professor Nuti, who refers to the tendency to ‘excessive accumulation’ in these countries, though without adequately explaining its causes. [26] The tendency to ‘over-accumulation’ lies behind all the various Phenomena of the crisis.
But why? Why don’t those who direct these economies behave differently? Why, when the results of their activity are increasingly well-known [27], don’t they stop this seemingly ‘irrational’ behaviour, by cutting down their plan-targets and pursuing a lower rate of accumulation? Why don’t they place more stress on producing means of consumption? Why not pursue what many economists nave recommended, ‘an equilibrium growth path’?
The answer is important for it has major political implications for those who want to change the system.
One answer which many Polish workers would give is: ‘incompetence’. A more sophisticated version of this argument points out that those who steer the Polish economy are not those with the most talent, but those who have learned how to crawl and be obedient to the party ‘tops’ and who want to get to be party and state bosses themselves. There is of course some truth in this. (The same thing is also true, for that matter, in the West, as many studies have shown – society’s ‘pool of talent’ is not properly used, for class-barriers stop working-class people getting into decision-making, etc. And among those who ‘succeed’, a brown tongue is a distinct asset.) But this does not explain why the ‘party tops’ should place such a stress on accumulation at the expense of popular consumption. Why, if they are to get ahead, must planners treat this goal as sacrosanct?
As Kuron and Modzelewski rightly insisted, the key problem in the economy is not a ‘technical’ one. The issue is not – as some economists suggest – that the methods of plan-implementation, the system of planners’ directives, the measures used to assess performance, etc. are at fault (though they are). Nor, simply, is lack of democracy in the planning system the problem (though it is obviously connected). What is crucial is the overall purpose embodied in the planning process and its mechanisms:
In fact, what we have here is not a contradiction between the objectives of the plan and the anti-stimuli resulting from faulty directives, but a contradiction between the class goal of the bureaucracy (production for production) and the interests of the basic groups who achieve the production (maximum consumption). In other words, it is a contradiction between the class goal of production and consumption, and it results from existing conditions, not from mismanagement. [28]
In other words, it is not simply that ‘planning’ is all right in principle but is ‘distorted’ by the bureaucracy. The problem is not just the form of the plan, but its content, what Kuron and Modzelewski correctly term its ‘class goal’. The heart of the problem is the tendency to over-investment, the goal imposed on Polish society by the class which rules Poland. The continual imposition and re-imposition of that goal onto production requires the maintenance of state controls over the workers, and requires the permanent subordination of the population’s consumption to the pursuit of accumulation.
In such a system, consumption is organised on the same basis as in all class societies. It is not the goal, but merely a cost of production, and a cost that needs to be kept to the minimum possible in order that accumulation, production for the sake of production, may proceed. Party planners treat ‘personal consumption as a cost of growth rather than the ultimate goal of growth ... the record indicates that the Polish planners – except when under unusual pressure from the population – repeatedly go on pushing the rate of growth, structurally biased towards the producers’ goods sector, until they reach the technico-organisational ceiling of absorptive capacity and the plan actually collapses.’ [29]
Most Polish workers recognise that the interests of Poland’s rulers are not the same as their own. But what, then, are the rulers’ ‘interests’? Several answers are often given by Polish critics of the system. The first is that the rulers want to keep themselves in power. And no doubt they do: they organise political life in such a way that it is extraordinarily difficult for the people to challenge them. They hate the very idea of democracy. But this does not explain their behaviour. If they wanted to be more secure in power, they would lower the rate of accumulation, satisfy people’s wants more, and thus be more popular. There would be less resentment of their power if they at least delivered the goods.
A second popular answer is that the rulers are out to feather their own nests, to live well at the expense of the people. (In essence, this was Trotsky’s explanation of the bureaucracy’s interests in Russia in the 1930s.) But it explains nothing. [30] Certainly the party and state bureaucrats live much better than the great mass of the Polish workers and farmers. But that does not explain why they place such an emphasis on steel mills, power stations, machine tools, military goods, shipyards and the like. Why don’t they devote the economy to producing luxury goods for themselves: to mink fur farms, champagne, brothel fittings, soft beds and the rest? The luxury consumption of the bosses does not define the class goal of production, any more than the consumption of the masses does.
Another answer which Poles often give to the question about the rulers’ interests is that Poland’s real rulers live, not in Warsaw, but in Moscow. It is the interests of Russia’s bosses that determine the life of the Polish people. Let us grant the partial truth of this observation, and its political significance. Nationalism, without question, is an extremely powerful motive among the people of Poland, in every class. And there are strong historical reasons for this. For centuries, the Poles lived in a country divided between three great emperors: the Prussian (later German), the Russian and the Austro-Hungarian. For a brief period, between the wars, Poland was an independent state, which (as Polish nationalism often plays down or ‘forgets’) suffered a military coup under Pilsudski and was organised for most of this period as a highly oligarchic dictatorship. In 1939, Hitler and Stalin partitioned Poland between them. Millions died in the struggle to free Poland from Nazi rule. After the war any hopes of Polish independence were snuffed out as Poland was incorporated into the ‘Russian bloc’. Socialists have to be very clear in their attitude: we have to support the rights of the Poles to national independence, as Marx and Lenin both argued strongly. Socialism is internationalist, certainly; but the only condition for a genuine internationalism is that it be based on free agreement among peoples, not on imposition by a great power on a weaker and oppressed nation.
However, to attribute the problem of Poland to the problem of Moscow will not, by itself, do. For two reasons. First, the ruling class in Poland is Polish. (The December 1981 military coup may have helped dispel illusions about this among Polish workers.) Second, even if it were true – which it isn’t – that Poland is nothing but a province of Russia, we should still be left with the problem of explaining why the system operates as it does. After all, the same fundamental drives are found in Russian production, and in all the other East European economies; all experience the same symptoms of exploitation and crisis.
So, the question becomes – on a slightly larger canvas – how are these ‘communist’ societies organised, and why do they all have this same tendency to social and economic crisis?
And in order to answer this, we have to make a leap beyond the conceptual limits of nationalism. We have to recognise that what happens in any modern country is not simply a function of the social relations within that country taken in isolation, but also of the whole world system of which that country is a part. That means that there is a sense in which, when we talk about something like ‘Polish society’ or ‘the Polish economy’, we are talking nonsense. The geographical boundaries of Poland are not the limits of ‘society’ or ‘the economy’. This is perhaps obvious to any Pole facing East, but less obvious when he or she looks West.
Yet we can only understand the phenomena of crisis, the systematic exploitation of the workers and peasants, and the tendency to ‘excessive accumulation’ when we grasp that what happens is Poland is a function of Poland’s place in the whole world economy.
It has been one of civilisation’s achievements over the last few centuries to join together the various discrete societies across the globe into one world society. Today there is no part of the world that is not affected by what happens elsewhere. We live in a single-world society, of which the different nations, states, corporations, classes and the like are ‘parts’. ‘Society’ and ‘economy’ cannot be properly understood as nationally bounded units.
Of course, this one, universal world economy and society in which we live is riven with internal conflicts and contradictions, is characterised by division and disunity, by the rivalry of states and capitals, by domination of the strong over the weak, and by competition in the military, economic and political spheres between contesting imperialisms; but this fact does not make this any less a single system of social interaction and production. Rather, these phenomena define the kind of social relations that characterise the world system. They shape the forces operating within every one of the various ‘national parts’, both the advanced and the backward, the dominant and the subordinate.
Only in this context can we explain why there is such an excessive rate of accumulation within the Polish economy. The cause of this is the pattern of relationships between the Polish state and the rest of the world. Poland, for example, has the eighth largest military budget in the world. Why? Not simply to contain its domestic population, but also because it is the second industrial power within the ‘Warsaw Pact.’ And the Pact, as a whole, imposes an immense burden on the peoples of Eastern Europe, taking their sons off into the armed services, sucking taxes out of them, demanding that a high proportion of their productive effort be devoted to the manufacture and maintenance of modern weapons systems. Again, why? Not simply to control the people of Eastern Europe, but also because of the Warsaw Pact’s relations with the rest of the world. And what characterises that relationship – above all the relationship with the Nato powers – is a permanent condition of escalating competition in the economic and the military spheres. On the other side, the peoples of ‘western democracy’ have to suffer similar military burdens, in order that ‘their’ states may also compete. The Cold War defines the situation in Poland in crucial respects, as it defines a central aspect of the world system since the war.
The key aim of Poland’s rulers is the same aim that all the ‘communist’ rulers share. Stalin formulated it in stark terms in the very period when he was forcing an excessive rate of accumulation on the Russian people and robbing the peasantry of their land in the ‘collectivisation of agriculture’. The aim was to ‘catch up and overtake’ the West. In imposing that aim onto Russian production, Stalin imposed the same logic onto Russian society that Marx identified as the mainspring of capitalism: accumulation for the sake of accumulation, production for the sake of production. The same aim is the ‘class goal’ of Poland’s rulers today.
All the ‘communist’ regimes began as relatively backward countries, faced as long as the world capitalist system survived with a choice: either to submit to the terms of the stronger capitalist powers, or to develop in competition with them. This choice is not one that was limited only to regimes calling themselves ‘communist’. The same dilemma faced Japan in the mid-19th century, and there a revolution in favour of rapid industrialisation was carried out, not by any ‘communist’ regime, but by ‘feudal’ samurai, a military regime that developed a mostly nationalised industry by squeezing the peasants and the workers much as Bierut, Gomulka and Gierek were to do in Poland. The former samurai also achieved astonishing economic growth rates, rivalling in the 1930s those of Stalin’s Russia.
Some writers, both in Eastern Europe and in the West, have treated the system in Eastern Europe as a ‘second world’ diverging from capitalism. They have invented various terms to try to describe it: ‘statism’, ‘bureaucratic collectivism’, ‘state collectivism’, ‘actually existing socialism’ and the like. All, however, have failed to explain the Eastern European path of development, denying that its relationships with the rest of world capitalism – those aspects which precisely make Poland etc. part of a ‘single world’ – shape its internal workings. [31] Yet nothing except the pressure to develop competitively can explain what we find.
If the military drain on Poland and similar countries is, proportionately, greater than in the Nato countries, the reason is above all the more backward character of the Warsaw Pact economies, which must try to match tank for tank and missile for missile with their richer military competitors. If the planners demand a higher rate of accumulation in the East than obtains in the West, and a still stricter consumption regime, the same applies: competition – the effort to ‘catch up and overtake’ – demands it. Thus it is external relations which set the parameters of the accumulation rate – and hence of the crisis tendency – within the economies of Comecon.
It is sometimes imagined that there is some incompatibility between ‘planning’ and competition in these countries. This is to misunderstand the real character and purpose of ‘planning’. Just as large Western capitalist corporations and nation-states have increasingly turned towards ‘planning’ in the postwar world, in response to sharpening competitive pressures, the same is fundamentally true within Poland. The activities of the ‘planners’ are not an alternative to competition: they are shaped by it, and directed towards it. Planning is undertaken in order to compete.
Those who ‘plan’, who exploit the workers of Polish industry and of the countryside and who accumulate and re-invest the surpluses sucked out of their labour, play the same objective function within Poland as those who head the capitalist corporations of the West. The main difference is that in the West there is – because of the ‘private’ character of much productive property – a greater division of labour and function among the ruling class: the state in the West controls domestic repression and exploitation more autonomously from those who direct the industrial accumulation and exploitation process. But that is the main difference, and a difference moreover which is tending to reduce over time, as western nation-states also become increasingly embroiled in direct economic management, in direct state ownership of productive industry, etc.
Two general theoretical implications should be quickly noted. The first is that we can not understand the modern state – as much of Marxist theory tends to attempt – simply as a mechanism of ‘internal’ control, when it is also simultaneously a mechanism of ‘external’ competition. Janus-like, the state faces inwards at exploited society and outwards at other states and capitals. It is this dual role of the state, much under-emphasised in most theorising about the state, which precisely makes it suited in the modern period to play the part of ‘capital personified’. [32]
The second implication is that the Marxist notion of ‘class’, and especially of the ‘capitalist class’, needs to be rescued from an ever more inappropriate restriction, according to which what matters is the ‘private pocket-book’ interest of the capitalist. Legal private property is not the core of Marx’s understanding of capitalism; if anything, for Marx, it was not so much that people own capital as that, in order to retain their power, capitalists must continue to act as capital personified. Capital, Marx insisted, is not a ‘thing’ (which can be ‘owned’) but is a ‘social production relation’, which constrains those it possesses into permanent accumulation drives. Those who do not understand this can no more grasp the functioning of nationalised industries in Britain, or of ‘salaried management’ in large corporations, than they can the workings of East European economies. ‘Personal’ interests are secondary matters in capitalism’s workings.
We can thus answer our question. The reason why the Polish and similar ‘planners’ act ‘irrationally’ is that world competition forces Poland’s rulers to act in this way. They aim at the highest possible rate of growth, at the highest achievable level of accumulation, in pursuit of their class goal: production for the sake of accumulation. Production for the sake of consumption – the interest of the working class – threatens the Polish rulers’ class existence. For them, truly, consumption is a cost of production, never its purpose. The same relations, the same drives, that force those who head the capitalist concerns of the West to the over-production of capital also motivate them; the same factors push them to steer their economies into crisis.
In a competitive world, every unit – if it is to ‘survive’ – must follow the same general rules. The ‘game’ is called capitalist production. It is anarchic in character, its path of progress is ridden with crisis. So why not just opt out? Why not, instead, develop a national economy in Poland – or elsewhere – based on the goal of consumption? Because the ‘game’ is played across a competitive world, in which those who try to play by different rules lose out to those who pursue the accumulation of capital. Those who win get strong and dominate the weak. Thus every national ‘system’ is compelled to struggle for its ‘survival’ – and, for the survival of its competing bloc.
Theoretically and practically, it is possible to develop an economy based on different principles, moving on ‘an equilibrium growth path’, geared to production for the sake of consumption (i.e. for human need), developing without ‘excessive accumulation’. But only on two conditions. The first is that the majority class in society, the working class, actually rules over production, politics, etc. – and that requires that the power of the existing ruling class, together with all the institutions of its rule, be destroyed. The second is that, in place of the competition of capitals (private, corporate, state, it makes no difference), those who produce develop a world economy based on mutual cooperation. The two conditions are otherwise known as international socialism.
 
Expanding the crisis: the 1970s
The new regime under Gierek decided to attempt to break out of the vicious cycle of growing stagnation and backwardness, and to get away from the social conflict engendered by Gomulka’s regime, by turning towards the West.
The long-term effect of this policy was the reverse of that intended: instead of overcoming the crisis, it became amplified. All the forces and symptoms of crisis noted above were, within a few years, to return to Poland, in a greatly magnified form.
One commentator described the new policy as follows:
Industry would have to be modernised. Technology would have to be encouraged to play a more active part in economic growth. The means of achieving this would be to develop links with what must have been perceived as the powerhouse of technological progress – modern capitalism. Since hard currency was not available to pay for the import of modern machinery, equipment loans would have to be obtained or other arrangements, such as buy-back agreements, made. The economy would therefore become more open in terms of international relationships. While the first few years of this policy would be years of debt accumulation, it was hoped that later the newly modernised Polish industry would be able to compete successfully with capitalist firms for markets in the West. Presumably it was hoped that the Polish economy would continue to expand its international links in the future. [33]
If economic growth was the general intention, then the Polish bureaucrats were partially successful. The growth rate doubled. By 1973, Poland was said to have the third fastest growth rate in the world [34] The ‘opening to the West’ seemed to be pulling the Polish economy up from its downward growth path. By comparison, Russia, which only marginally modified its ‘autarchic’ development path, continued to experience declining growth rates. But the growth rate was not what was ‘planned’: Polish national income grew one and a half times faster than the plan had allowed for in the first half decade, with wages rising faster than planned and investment running at double the plan-rate. [35] In the pursuit of ‘economic reform’, investment decisions were partly decentralised, into the hands of ‘giant economic enterprises’ (WOGs), who borrowed and invested at phenomenal rates. The bureaucracy went on a prolonged growth spree, for which the whole society had to pay dearly within a few years.
According to the official figures, money wages rose by 56% from 1971 to 1975, and real wages by 40%. As before, the official figures overstate the rise. [36] Nonetheless, living standards did rise, and much more rapidly than they had in the 1960s. Official figures for meat consumption suggest that the average Pole ate 56 kg of meat in 1971 and 70 kg in 1975. [37] On the other hand, in relative terms the housing situation became even worse than it had been: new housing construction’s share of total national investment fell from around 20% in the early 1960s to 16% in 1970 and only 13% in 1975. [38]
Already, in the ‘boom’ period, the tendency to inflation was becoming more pronounced. Between 1966 and 1970, the official price level rose by 4½%, but from 1971 to 1975 it rose by 13%. The gap between official and ‘free market’ prices widened sharply: in the 1960s the two sectors had moved more or less in step, but while state prices in the first half of the 1970s rose 3.5% free market prices rose by almost 37%. [39] The Polish workers and peasants experienced growing shortages, and a growing need to queue for necessities. Workers’ and peasants’ incomes rose faster than the supply of goods to meet their needs, and as a result the ‘monetary balances’ in their hands grew much faster than their earnings. A situation of ‘excess demand’ was thus generated.
Another source of inflation was the new giant firms into which industry was reorganised in the early 1970s. These giant firms were required to sell existing goods at controlled prices, but could set their own prices on new products. ‘Production in Poland was in the hands of monopoly producers, who were now given full opportunity to exploit their market power. Moreover, they faced markets characterised by excess demand. Neither competitive forces nor the level of excess demand placed an effective brake on price increases. Existing goods began to disappear from the markets, to reappear thinly disguised as new products by minor changes in design specification or packaging. These factors played an important part in the emergence of more open inflationary pressures from 1973 onwards.’ [40]
The burdens of the peasantry were also lightened somewhat. The compulsory delivery system was abolished in 1973, and peasants were admitted to the national health service. Peasant incomes rose. So did agricultural output – though the rise was short-lived. [41]
But, if consumption levels rose, the previous priorities of the system were maintained and indeed reinforced. If the official statisticians claimed a seven per cent rise in annual consumption, they recorded a growth in accumulation of 20% a year. The share of accumulation in the national income rose to an incredible 35.6% in 1975; this was the highest ratio of investment of national income in the whole of Eastern Europe. [42] The investment drive reached extraordinary proportions. In the 1960s, Poland spent an average $100m a year on imports of Western machinery. By 1972, seven times that amount was being spent, and by 1974 19 times. [43] Looking back from the vantage point of 1980, Nuti commented:
The prime cause of the Polish crisis seems to be the overambitious and unchecked policies of accumulation followed under Gomulka and accelerated by Gierek especially in his first five years, which brought up the share of accumulation in the national income distributed from 25.4% in 1969 to the record levels of 35.6% in 1974 and 35.2% in 1975. [44]
The features that Kuron and Modzelewski had noted in the 1960s were exaggerated still more:
If we compare the decades 1961–70 and 1971–80 we find that the share of investment devoted to agriculture fell from 16.5 to 15.7 per cent; investment in social consumption (hospitals, schools, etc.) fell from 28.3 to 23 per cent; while the share of industrial investment rose from 37.8 to 41 per cent. [45]
The full effects of this neglect of consumption for accumulation were appalling. The health service was starved of funds. In 1981, Polish hospitals found themselves lacking supplies even of bandages and plaster of paris. Industry too was developed with little care for the environmental effects: the Katowice industrial region, where the fastest development occurred, is now the worst area of the country in terms of diseases of the circulation, cancers and respiratory diseases. It pours filth into the atmosphere at an incredible rate. Downwind from Katowice is the ancient city of Krakow, where acid rain falls at nine times the official acceptable national limit. [46] The women of the Lodz textile industry have the highest still-birth rate in Europe. [47]
In the heady rush for smart new foreign technology, investment in the modernisation of existing plant and equipment was neglected, taking up only 20–25 per cent of investment funds (compared with 60–70% in East Germany and Czechoslovakia). [48] This imbalance in investment was further exaggerated by vast regional disparities: 16% of the total investment outlay was poured into just one area, Gierek’s party stronghold of Katowice, producing excessive strains in transport investment. [49]
Nor did the ‘boom’ lead to improvements in quality commensurate with the growth in national income. The heads of enterprises faced a domestic market where demand was rising fast, and where there were no effective mechanisms to enforce improved quality. While the theory was that enlarged exports of manufactured goods, especially machinery, to the West would help to pay off the mounting debts, in practice this did not happen: machinery’s share of total exports remained at the low level of 13% in 1975. [50] In practice, Polish industry could not produce at sufficiently high quality to compete in Western markets. Indeed, the level of industrial rejects rose. [51] Some of the reported growth in output was dubious, due to price manipulation by the giant enterprises. And a growing proportion was of poor quality, destined to lie unwanted in warehouses. A Silesian worker told Polityka that much of the coal output was ‘fiction’; in one mine, the director ordered the construction of a machine to mix stones in with the coal – ‘it was tonnage which was dug, not coal’. [52] Towards the end of the boom, stocks were growing faster than sales. [53]
As a result of the failure to export more machinery, Poland instead had to rely increasingly on exporting raw materials and semi-finished goods, which (a) were needed in Poland itself, (b) were less profitable as exports and (c) worsened the shortages and the inflation tendency within Poland itself. [54]
On the other hand, there were distinct benefits from some of the Western imports. The long Polish investment cycle could, in some important cases, be drastically shortened: for example, ‘Two American-produced refrigerated warehouses were built in Lublin and Lagisza within a twelve-month period, while previous Polish projects of this sort had taken between twenty-four and thirty-two months to complete.’ [55]
The pattern of Polish trade altered sharply. The share of the developed Western capitalist countries in Polish foreign trade turnover rose from 27% in 1970 to over 40% in 1975. But there was a major imbalance in this growth: exports to the West rose 2½ times between 1971 and 1975, but imports rose nearly 4½ times. [56] Export to the West rose, as a share of total exports, from 28% to 31%, but Western imports grew from 25% to 50%. [57] Poland’s trade with the capitalist West thus developed a massive imbalance.
Thus, the unusual combination – for an East European economy – of simultaneously rising consumption and rising accumulation was due to Poland ‘living beyond its means’. What Polish statisticians call ‘national income distributed’ grew faster than ‘national income produced’. [58] The gap was provided by Western credits. Polish debts to Western banks and governments piled up inexorably. In the period of ‘autarchic’ development in the 1960s, Poland’s cumulative debt to the West amounted to $303 million; by 1976, at the end of the ‘boom’, it was $11,200 million. [59] And the trade deficit with the West had worsened enormously.
The opening of the Polish economy to the West was, of course, not simply the result of Gierek’s search for a way out of domestic crisis. Western capital was looking East for investment opportunities in an increasingly crisis-ridden world economy. Investment in the ‘communist’ bloc appeared quite attractive to western multinationals:
... from the point of view of the international investor, there is much to be said for involvement in communist countries, where costs and particularly wages are relatively lower than in the west, industrial relations are strictly controlled from the centre, independent workers’ organisations and strikes are for the most part illegal, and the embarrassment of the political elite concerning its dependence on expatriate capital leads to the suppression of information that has proved harmful to the image of corporate capital elsewhere. [60]
Nor was Poland alone in looking to the West for imported machinery and technology. The whole Comecon debt to the West grew rapidly in the 1970s, from $13 billion in 1974 to $55 billion in 1978. 60% of this debt was held by western banks, which had plenty of money ready for lending thanks to the depressed levels of investment in the West and the floods of petrodollars they were recycling. Indeed according to the Wall Street Journal:
Foreign bankers are as happy to lend to the communist government as to a family business. Happier. They’ve found in governments like Poland – and many others, incidentally – borrowers who will pay at rates Western industrial powers would scorn. And some bankers boast privately that even if they were forced to write off their Polish loans now they might show a profit on their loans to the nation over the past decade, so lucrative have been these deals. [61]
Another Western authority has commented recently:
The west itself was not merely a passive observer, but actively encouraged Poland to take its credits and plant and equipment exports. The major commercial banks took the initiative with Poland, while, among governments, the French pursued an especially aggressive export-credit policy. The financing urged upon Poland did not facilitate adjustment to foreign-sector problems but rather generated them; the machinery exports it sold created employment in the west, but much now sits at least partly unemployed in Poland. [62]

Notes
25. Oldrich Kyn, Wolfram Schrettl and Jiri Slama, Growth Cycles in Centrally Planned Economies: an empirical test, in Kyn and Schrettl, eds., On the Stability of Contemporary Economic Systems, Gottingen 1979, p. 120.
26. Op. cit.
27. The phenomena of the crisis cycle were clearly noted by East European economists by the mid-1960s at the latest. See for instance the bibliography to Kyn et al., op. cit., p. 131.
28. Kuron and Modzelewski, op. cit., p. 34.
29. Janusz G. Zielinski, Economic Reforms in Polish Industry, London 1973, cited in Bogdan Mieczkowicz, The relationship between changes in consumption and politics in Poland, Soviet Studies XXX, 2, April 1978, p. 267.
30. The theorists of the Fourth International appear to inhabit a dream-world. Not only do they leave the dynamic of these economies unexplained, they seem not even to notice that they have dynamics. Mandel, for example, felt able to refer, in italics, to ‘the stable markets that are assured by the planning in the workers’ states’ – despite the fact that his own article provided contrary data and that he was writing at a time when they had never been so unstable (The impact of the world capitalist recession on Eastern Europe, Intercontinental Press, 14 July 1980). Peter Green, who does describe the reality of Poland very well, gets round the problem of explanation by vagueness and imprecision: ‘In an economy whose basic regulative principle involves political bargaining over every aspect of productive activity, the exclusion of the direct producers from the political process is a formula for economic stagnation and waste.’ (op. cit., p. 106).
31. Rudolf Bahro, at times, comes close to grasping the point, though he never integrates his real insights into his theory. For example, ‘The measure of accumulation needed for socialism is not determined within the system itself, but rather in so-called competition with capitalism’. The Alternative in Eastern Europe, London 1978, p. 134. For a general critique of these theories, see Peter Binns and Mike Haynes, International Socialism, winter 1980; Colin Barker, Theories of Russia, mimeo 1981.
32. Cf. Colin Barker, A note on the theory of capitalist states, Capital and Class 4, spring 1978. The importance of the external relationships of states is also explored well in Theda Skocpol, States and Social Revolutions, Cambridge 1978.
33. Blazyca, op. cit., p. 103.
34. Neal Ascherson, The Polish August, Harmondsworth 1981, p. 107.
35. Harman, IS 94; Nuti, 1980.
36. Green, op. cit., p. 80; Shapiro, op. cit., p. 458; Harman IS 94, p. 26.
37. P.G. Hare and P.T. Wanless, Polish and Hungarian Economic Reforms – A Comparison, Soviet Studies XXXIII, 4, October 1981, p. 492. (The authors note that in Britain, over the same period, meat consumption fell from 50.4 to 46.2 kg per head, as prices rose sharply.)
38. Stanislaw Gomulka, Poland’s Economic Situation in the Second Half of the 1970s, Osteuropa Wirtschaft 24, 1, 1979, p. 16. In the West, the share of housing construction in total investment is typically around 20–30%. In Poland, the number of households exceeds the number of dwellings by some 1.4 million, in a population of 35 millions. The average size of dwellings is ‘among the lowest in Europe’. Writing in 1979, Gomulka thought no real improvement in Polish housing likely till the late 1980s – a projection that now seems over-optimistic.
39. Computed from Hare and Wanless, op. cit., p. 493.
40. Hare and Wanless, op. cit., p. 502; also Mieczkowicz.
41. Harman, IS 94, p. 27; Nuti, 1981, Table 1, p. 106.
42. P.T. Wanless, Economic Reforms in Poland 1973–79, Soviet Studies XXXII, 1, January 1980, p. 39. Blazyca (op. cit., p. 105) provides the following table for the annual growth rate of investment:



 


1971


1972


1973


1974


1975


1976




Whole economy


  7.5


23.6


25.0


22.5


14.2


2.5




Industry


10.4


34.6


26.7


22.2


17.0


3.2




Construction


−4.5


38.5


79.6


26.9


  7.4


3.5




Agriculture


  4.4


14.9


17.2


18.0


16.5


3.7



43. Ascherson. op. cit., p. 109.
44. Nuti, 1980, p. 23.
45. Nuti. 1981, p. 119. See above for the fall in housing’s share of investment. See also L. Frances Millard, The Health of the Polish Health Service, and KOR, The state of the hospital system, Critique 15, 1981.
46. Lloyd Timberlake, Poland – the most polluted country in the world?, New Scientist, 22 October 1981.
47. KOR, Biuletyn Informacyjny, nr 4/38, year 5, June 1980.
48. Nuti, 1981, p. 119. According to Zauberman (Problems of Communism, Mar.–Apr. 1978, p. 65) by 1976 no less than half of Poland’s industrial capacities represented equipment installed during the single quinquennium 1971–75.
49. Nuti, 1981, p. 119.
50. Green, op. cit., p. 92.
51. Ibid., table 9, p. 92.
52. Polityka (Warsaw), nr. 51, 27 December 1980.
53. Blazyca, op. cit., p. 106:



Annual Average Rates of Growth (%)




 


1973


1974


1975


1975




Global sales


  8.1


11.4


18.7


15.3




Stocks of finished goods


10.1


  6.3


11.7


25.6



54. Gomulka, op. cit., p. 18.
55. Green, op. cit., p. 18.
56. Computed from Nuti, 1981, table 2, p. 108.
57. Wanless, op. cit., p. 40. Green, op. cit., pp. 80–81 gives slightly different figures, though the trend is the same.
58. Blazyca, op. cit., p. 105:



Annual growth rates of national income (%)




 


Produced


Distributed




1971


  8.1


  9.8




1972


10.6


12.7




1973


10.8


14.3




1974


10.4


12.1




1975


  9.0


10.9




1976


  7.9


  7.2



59. Nuti, 1981, pp. 107, 108.
60. Shapiro, op. cit., p. 484. For an extended discussion, cf. Charles Levinson, Vodka-Cola, 1980.
61. Wall Street Journal, 7 December 1981.
62. Professor Richard Portes, cited in Euromoney, August 1981, p. 14.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (2-8. Chronic problems)




Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

II. ‘Accumulate! Accumulate!’ –
Polish state capitalism in crisis
8. Chronic problems

That the Polish economy is in a major crisis, which has been maturing for the past five or six years, is obvious. It is also obvious both that the economic crisis lies behind the growth of the massive workers’ movement from 1980-81, and that it played a significant role in the situation leading up to the military coup of 13 December.
What this part seeks to do is to explain the Polish economic crisis, up to the summer of 1980. [1]
The Polish crisis is not new. Nor is it simply a result of Poland’s massive debts to the West. The presence of crisis-tendencies was already apparent in the 1960s, in the period when the Polish economy was among the most autarchic [2] – self-sufficient, especially in terms of Western trade – of the Eastern European countries. Indeed, the same fundamental causes shaped the crisis of the 1960s as shaped that of the late 1970s and early 1980s.
The most obvious indicator of the maturing crisis in Poland before 1970 was the fall in the growth rate. The compound annual growth rate of national income was 8.6% in 1950–55, 6.6% in 1955–60, 5.9% in 1960–65 and nearer 5.0% in 1966–70. The same tendency to falling growth rates was equally marked in other East European economies. [3]
In the first postwar decade, when the Communist regime in Poland was first established, growth rates were very high. A massive programme of rapid industrialisation was undertaken by a highly repressive bureaucratic regime. In this period – much as in Stalin’s Russia in the 1930s – the highly centralised, administered economy proved capable of a forced, ‘primitive’ accumulation of capital. The living standards of the population were kept down, and unemployed or underemployed labour was sucked out of the countryside into the rapidly expanded industries and new towns. Although the official ‘plans’ spoke of rising real wages, the disparity between plan and reality was immense: in the period 1950–55 real wages were planned to rise by 40%, but the actual rise was only 4%. [4] Not until the strike movements of 1956 was the wage freeze broken, for a period.
The East European economies, as many commentators have noted, did not prove capable of maintaining their early growth rates. Where they were most effective was in sucking up and turning to productive use extensive supplies of spare labour and other resources in the economy. In the Polish case, despite the highly authoritarian character of the regime, the rapid rate of urban and industrial expansion provided millions of people with the experience of major social mobility and improvement, as peasants moved to the towns and construction sites to become workers, as mass basic education programmes were expanded, and as former workers found many openings for promotion to white-collar and bureaucratic positions. This whole process provided the regime with a degree of popular legitimacy, for a period, which should not be underestimated. [5] However, spare capacity is not infinite. Further growth, after the initial industrialisation drive, depended not so much on expanding the mass of exploitable labour as on raising the rate of labour’s exploitation and increasing the rate of investment.
Certainly, in the late 1950s and the 1960s, the investment rate did rise. The share of accumulation in the national income increased markedly. But the rising rate of accumulation was associated with a decline in the effectiveness of investment. In the period 1951–54, national income grew by 0.373 units for every unit of additional investment. But in 1955–58 the ‘growth: investment’ ratio fell to 0.335 per unit, and in 1959–63 to only 0.201 per unit. [6] Kuron and Modzelewski, commenting on similar figures, remarked, ‘This means that with a growing investment one gets a decreased growth rate of the national income. A similar phenomenon can be observed in other countries under bureaucratic dictatorship with a similar share of industry in producing the national income (Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary and probably also the USSR) as was emphasised in the sensational article by a Czech economist, Josef Goldman.’ [7]
The response of the regime to this declining effectiveness of investment was to step up the rate of investment overall – at the cost of workers’ living standards. Over the whole period from the war to 1970, the only significant increase in wages occurred as a direct result of the strikes and riots of 1956. [8] The claimed growth in real wages, in the official statistics, was as follows: 1956–58, 7.7% per annum; 1959–67 1.9%; 1968–70 1.62%. These figures, however, are partly over-optimistic, for they are based on a retail price index for commodities that, in practice, were often physically unavailable in the shops, and which therefore had either to be bought on the black market at high prices or replaced with more expensive substitutes. [9] ‘It must be stated quite clearly,’ admitted the new Politburo installed after the 1970–71 strikes, ‘that during the years 1966–70, Poland had the lowest rate of increase in wages of all the countries of Comecon ... There were some groups of workers which actually suffered a decline in their real wages.’ [10]
The plans spoke of raising the levels of popular consumption, but the reality was quite different. While the 1966–70 Plan, as was typical of all East European regime plans, placed more emphasis on the expansion of producer goods than of consumer goods, the actual results were still more unfavourable to the workers:



Planned and Actual Increases in Producer and Consumer Goods Output,
1966–70 [11]




 


Planned Increase
in Output


Actual Increase
in Output


Percentage
Deviation
from Plan




Producer goods


47.1%


55%


+11.5%




Consumer goods


36.5%


33%


–  9    %



Plans were regularly over-fulfilled for sectors producing means of production and under-fulfilled for sectors producing means of consumption. Thus the real priorities of the economy of Poland – as of other Comecon regimes – were to subordinate the growth of consumption to production even more markedly than indicated in the official Plans themselves.
The difference between what the planners suggested should happen, and the actual out-turn, is sufficiently marked to throw considerable doubt on the description of the Polish economy as genuinely planned. The same is also true of other Comecon economies. [12] Such large-scale over- and under-fulfilment of targets suggests the very opposite of planned growth.
Like the other East European economies, the Polish regime demonstrated a marked tendency to cyclical ups and downs. The path of growth was one of ‘stop-go’ along a generally downward Movement in the rate of growth. ‘Polish economic growth of the last 25 years,’ remarked one commentator, ‘shows marked cycles, with 3 strong stepping up of the rate of growth in every alternate plan. [13] There were a number of features in the economic regime which Promoted this cyclical pattern – well before, it should be noted, Poland’s ‘opening to the West’ in the 1970s.
At the root of the problem was the ‘excessive accumulation’ tendency [14] of the economy. The Polish bosses – like their confrères in Russia and Eastern Europe – constantly tended to push the economy towards ‘over-investment’, in the sense that the investment plans they enforced were beyond the real capacities of the economy. Especially, they favoured huge industrial projects. This tendency to over-ambitious investment plans became more marked, the more that the overall proportions of resources devoted to accumulation rose, as happened in Poland in the 1960s. A larger scale of capital investment was initiated than could be practically sustained.
Such a policy could not help but push the economy up against a series of ‘barriers’, identified by Kuron and Modzelewski and others, which then enforced a slow-down in the rate of growth and created massive distortions in the economy.
The first of these was the ‘raw materials barrier’. Physical resources prove to be insufficient to complete the investment projects that have been started. The plan begins to fall apart, as balanced growth can no longer be maintained. Some of the investment projects then have to be treated as priorities, while others are left in a state of incompletion. The second group is ‘frozen’, and often depreciates in value as they rot in an unfinished state. The result is considerable waste: capital accumulated from the exploited labour of the workers is not even brought into productive use.
Typically, the planners have already built certain preferences into the project of economic growth. Production of means of production is favoured, in the original plans, over production of means of consumption. With the onset of the crisis, these preferences are reinforced. Choices have to be made by the regime as to which investment projects to pursue, and which to ‘freeze’; resources must be switched from the ‘frozen’ projects to ‘priority’ projects. The regular tendency is for the projects in the field of producers’ goods to be favoured over consumers’ goods projects: hence the disparity between ‘plan’ and reality noted in the table above. (To be more exact, the first priority is often given to goods with a military application: certainly, ‘guns before butter’ is an operative slogan for the ‘communist’ regimes.) The producers’ goods sector, however, tends to use up more raw materials and fuels than the consumer goods sector, exaggerating the tendency to high consumption of fuels and raw materials in the whole economy. This, in turn, involves the state in further heavy investments in raw materials and fuel production – amounting in the early 1960s to some 45% of total industrial investment. [15]
The uneven process of growth, in which some investments are continued while others stagnate, produces a situation in which the completed plants cannot function properly, because the investments required to produce their inputs, or to work with their outputs, have not yet been finished. Unfinished and unusable goods pile up. factories work below capacity for want of needed parts or expected demand. The whole economy staggers.
The response of the central bureaucrats in this kind of situation is, in effect, to sabotage their own ‘plans’ further. They resort to what are politely known as ‘administrative interventions’: they issue new instructions, often contradictory in tone, to factory managements, ordering them to switch production suddenly, to ‘rush’ production in one moment and to ‘slow down’ in another. An element of administratively-induced chaos is introduced into the working of the economy. [16] Factory managers become accustomed to this kind of arbitrariness from the centre. One response they typically make to the situation is to hoard resources: both because they can’t be sure they will get the resources they need when they want them, and because they may need them if the ‘plan’ suddenly changes. Raw materials, machinery, spare parts and skilled labour are all hoarded in just this way. The result is both additional waste, and a situation where the central planners have very little idea what the real national resources and productive potential of the economy really is. To speak of planning in such an economy is quite laughable. That the economies are centrally administered is certainly true, but ‘planning’ implies something rather more.
The tendency to crisis is not simply one of growing stagnation, but is cyclical: eventually frozen investments are completed, even if behind schedule and at a greater cost than was planned. The economy begins to move forward again more rapidly, releasing resources for other investments to be completed. For a period, a high growth rate can again be achieved, until once again the same pattern of crisis sets in.
However, this cyclical movement itself produces other undesirable side-effects. Among these – quite apart from cynicism and dissatisfaction – are inflation, difficulties in raising productivity, balance of payments problems, and waste. Finally agricultural production and the food supply tend to remain in a chronic situation.
Inflation first. The tendency to pursue high investment in new Plant construction and the like involves an expansion of the labour force. Up till now, the key source of such increases in the working class has been the Polish countryside. The new workers have to be paid wages. The assumption is that the present and future growth of he economy will generate goods on which these wages can be spent. And funds are borrowed from the banking system to finance increased investments, again on the assumption that these funds will be repaid by the revenues from expanded production. But, because of the crisis, neither of these two assumptions can be properly fulfilled. Workers have wages which they can’t spend, and enterprises have borrowed funds which, in practice, are not being turned into marketable goods. Here we have two classic causes of inflation. The situation is, if anything, only exaggerated by the planners’ tendency to give priority to completing military and producers’ goods projects.
Workers find themselves with wages in their pockets, but no goods – at least through official channels – that they want to buy. Numbers of commentators have noted the tendency for workers ‘savings’ to rise as a proportion of their incomes. Where prices are controlled by the state, the inflation appears in a ‘suppressed’ form, as queueing, general shortages, etc. And the conditions exist for the development of black markets, where prices rise far above the official level, and where people who have access to wanted goods can make a private income for themselves by creaming off the unspendable wages of the workers. Thus the system promotes corruption.
These conditions are known as a ‘sellers’ market’, and are especially unfavourable conditions in which to induce either managers or workers to raise the quality or the quantity of production. Managers face a set of consumers who have little power to determine the pattern of production, for they lack both political power to make planners and enterprises meet their needs and the ‘market’ power to buy competing products. There is no incentive, therefore, for the enterprise to meet demand. Workers too are not easily persuaded either to produce better quality goods or to raise their productivity, since there is little inducement in extra wages which can’t easily be spent. The social relations in which both sides of industry find themselves are such that both quality and productivity improvements are difficult to obtain. This is one factor contributing to the falling growth rate.
In Poland in the mid 1960s it became clear that ‘efficiency factors were contributing very little to output growth compared to the contribution made by larger and larger doses of inputs of capital and labour’:



Annual Average Rates of Outputs and Inputs
in Polish Industry (%) [17]




 


1950–52 to
1958–60


1956–60 to
1967–69




Output (value added)


9.4


8.3




Employment


4.0


3.5




Fixed capital stock


3.1


7.0




Output per person employed


5.2


4.6



Thirdly, in such conditions, the economy runs into problems with its foreign trade. Given the difficulty in completing investments, one solution might be to import machinery from technologically more advanced countries. But such imports must be paid for. Ideally the planners would like to expand their exports of finished products – machinery, manufactured consumer goods, etc. But, firstly, the supply of these goods for export does not rise fast enough and secondly, the quality problem is a major barrier to their export at world prices. If the balance of payments is to be kept in rough trim, then the only solution is to fall back onto exporting raw materials, agricultural products and the like – exports which are least profitable and which cause the biggest drain on the domestic economy where they are also needed. Exporting raw materials and foodstuffs tends, again, to push the economy against the raw materials and inflation barriers.
Fourthly, the economy tends to be wasteful in its operation, as illustrated by several phenomena: under-use of existing productive capacity, accumulation of unnecessary stocks of unwanted or unusable goods, and the production of ‘rejects’ – goods of such low quality that no one wants them. Kuron and Modzelewski provided examples of all three:-

the electro-mechanical industry, whose productive potential was only being used to 58% of its capacity in the 1960s (at a cost to the economy of some 18 billion zlotys a year;
 
increased stocks and reserves, which in 1960 absorbed 28.2 billion zlotys (or 7.4% of the national income), 32.9 billion in 1961 (8.1%), 21.4 billion in 1962 (5.1%) and 32.3 billion in 1963 (7.3%); and
 
the production of ‘rejects’, which absorb raw materials and labour which are simply wasted, costing an uncountable amount, ‘tens of billions of zlotys’. [18]

Finally, agriculture. The regime’s attitude to the farm sector is shaped by its stress on accumulation at the expense of production. Poland is unique in one respect among the East European countries, in that in 1970 83 per cent of the land was in the hands of private peasant farmers. The four million farms in the private sector are mostly very small (averaging below 12 acres); and to them must be added several million allotment-sized plots. [19] This difference aside, however, the problems of Polish agriculture are fundamentally similar to those in Russia and the rest of the Comecon bloc.
The farmers’ standard of living, and the resources available to them for developing their farms, are both very low. In the 1960s, the peasants were subjected to several forms of state exploitation. First, they were subjected to a high level of direct taxation, with only a minimal return in the form of state services. Second, the state in the 1960s bought the peasant’s produce through a system of compulsory deliveries at about half the free market price level. Kuron and Modzelewski estimated that these two methods took away some 15.4% of the average peasant farm income. Thirdly, the state used its position as a monopoly supplier of needed commodities to force the peasants to enter into ‘contracts’, whereby the peasants sold their produce to the state cheaply, in return for access to crucial industrial goods such as coal, cement, breeze blocks, bricks, timber, tractors and parts, etc.
Agriculture was kept in a state of backwardness, through underinvestment, bullying of peasants by state officials, and plain robbery. Rural living conditions remained low, and a vicious circle of agricultural stagnation resulted, in which low farming standards and low peasant incomes mutually reinforced each other. The result was a continual drain of labour away from the countryside, with younger and more energetic people especially prone to quit, and the remaining labour force tending to grow older and less effective. Many rural-dwellers became ‘worker-peasants’, commuting to the towns as industrial workers and scratching a partial living on their tiny plots in their limited spare time. [20]
The poverty-stricken farm sector produced the familiar ‘communist’ phenomenon: urban food-shortages. Clearly it is not the ‘private’ form of farming in Poland, per se, which led to this result: collectivised agriculture in Russia and elsewhere has the same problems. The exploitation of the rural population, and the state’s systematic neglect of agriculture, most certainly did not however benefit the working class in the cities and industries. As Kuron and Modzelewski emphasised, the situation is explicable only in the light of the overall purposes of the party planners. Low wages for workers are a necessity for high accumulation, and are partly achieved at the cost of the peasants’ standard of living. ‘The exploitation of the peasant is insuperably bound to the production relationships obtaining in industry’. [21] It is small wonder that in 1980–81 the peasants should have identified with the workers’ struggles and organisations: their interests, and their enemy, were in many respects the same.
All the forces referred to above were operating in the Polish economy in the 1960s. Growth was increasingly stalling. There were fewer unused reserves available for mobilisation. A stagnant agriculture could not release very much more by way of labour reserves; nor could it supply much more in the way of food for the working class or for export. If further accumulation were to occur, it could only be at the price of further squeezes on the living standards of the workers. Otherwise the ‘plan’ would be impossible to achieve. [22]
In the mid-1960s Kuron and Modzelewski predicted that the bureaucracy must attack living standards since ‘The system does not have, today, any considerable reserves.’ Gierek admitted as much to the Szczecin workers in January 1971:
We voted (at the party congress) for increasing living standards. These were ignored because it was not wished to annul certain decisions on investments which were very drawn out and had to be completed ... Whether you believe me or not is your affair, but we have not the least reserves which will allow us to carry through a more rapid increase in the standard of living. [23]
Waste had reached astonishing proportions as the crisis matured:
Mountains of unwanted and unsaleable goods were moving from factory to warehouse at twice the rate of retail sales by the end of the sixties. In the second half of 1970, total inventories had reached the gigantic figure of 500,000 million zlotys – half Poland’s estimated gross national product for the year. [24]
The crisis provoked the Gomulka regime into pushing up food prices against a background in which wages were stagnant. The result was the desperate resistance in December 1970 of the Baltic Coast workers, and the fall of Gomulka. In January, especially in Szczecin, the workers again erupted and Gierek’s new regime negotiated with them; it took the strikes of women textile workers in Lodz in February 1971 to force the state, finally, to give up its price increases.
The path to ‘reform’ via price increases was thus blocked by working-class militancy. If the accumulation drive were to persist, some other solution must be found. As it was to turn out, that ‘solution’ was to provoke, in turn, a massive crash.
The form that crisis takes in Poland and other Comecon countries, we noted, is cyclical. The pattern is not simply one of ever-increasing stagnation, but – as in the West – of alternate ‘boom’ and ‘recession’. After the worst of the crisis, the economy does again pick up and expand faster. In time, however, the same problems recur. New programmes of over-investment are devised by the planners, on the basis of the new growth-levels, and the economy again begins to move into a new crisis cycle.
This is precisely what happened in the 1970s, under Gierek. Only there was an important difference: this time the regime attempted to break out of its long-term tendency to stagnation by turning to the western capitalist market. The results were two-fold: on the one hand, the growth rate turned quite sharply upwards; on the other hand, the scale of the subsequent crisis was much more severe-with all the symptoms of crisis to which we have referred returning in magnified form.

Notes
1. Two major intellectual debts must be acknowledged here, as they will be in the text. The first is to the brilliant analysis of Jacek Kuron and Karol Modzelewski’s Open Letter to the Party of the mid-1960’s (International Socialism, n.d.). Despite the fact that its authors have since rejected their own work, this remains the most impressive Marxist analysis yet produced from within Eastern Europe. Re-reading it in the light of the events of 1980–81 is a tragic experience. The second is to Chris Harman’s two-part article, Poland: the crisis of state capitalism, International Socialism (1st series), nos. 93 and 94, Nov.–Dec. 1976 and January 1977. The depth of our debt will be obvious to anyone who reads these pieces.
2. 1950–70 Poland’s total share of world output grew from 1% to 2.5% but its share of world trade remained stagnant (up by only 0.1 %) The ratio between Poland’s share in world trade and its share in world output fell from 1% in 1950 to 0.55% in 1957 and 0.5% in 1970: ‘a more rapid and extensive decline than in other CEMA countries’. Ian Shapiro, Fiscal Crisis of the Polish State Theory and Society 10, 4, July 1981, p. 447.
3. Chris Harman, Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe, London 1974, p. 255; Shapiro, op. cit., p. 474.
4. Jadwiga Staniszkis, On some contraditions of socialist society: the case of Poland, Soviet Studies, XXXI, 2, April 1979, p. 76. However, see also note (9) below.
5. Harman, Bureaucracy ..., Part One; W.D. Connor, Social Change in Eastern Europe, Problems of Communism, Nov.–Dec. 1977.
6. Harman, Bureaucracy ..., p. 245.
7. Kuron and Modzelewski, p. 29.
8. Staniszkis, op. cit., p. 176.
9. Shapiro, op. cit., p. 474. Harman, quoting the Polish labour economist Lidia Kiskid, gives the following figures for wages: 1950–55. a fall of around 10%; 1956–59 a rise of 17%; 1960. a fall of 1½% and then a gradual rise of about 1% a year in the 1960s. (IS 93, p. 25).
10. Cited in Peter Green, The third round in Poland, New Left Review 101–2, February–April 1977, p. 77. Also George Blazyca, An assessment of Polish Economic Development in the 1970s, European Economic Review 14, 1980, p. 102.
11. Adapted from Staniszkis, op. cit., p. 170.
12. See for instance, K. Fitzlyon, Plan and Prediction, Soviet Studies, 1970.
13. Janusz Zielinski, New Polish reform proposals, Soviet Studies, XXXIII, 1, January 1980, p. 10.
14. Domenico Mario Nuti, The contradictions of socialist economies: a Marxian interpretation, Socialist Register 1979; Industrial enterprises in Poland, 1973–1980, CREES Discussion Papers, Series RC/B 14, University of Birmingham, 1980; The Polish Crisis: Economic Factors and Constraints, Socialist Register 1981.
15. Kuron and Modzelewski. op. cit., p. 30.
16. There are many descriptive accounts of this kind of pattern. See for instance Michael Ellman, Lessons of the Soviet Economic Reform, Socialist Register 1968; Moshe Lewin, Political Undercurrents in Soviet Economic Debates, London 1975; various articles in Critique; etc.
17. Blazyca, op. cit., pp. 101–2.
18. Kuron and Modzelewski, op. cit., pp. 30–31.
19. Shapiro, op. cit., p. 478.
20. Edmund Baluka told us that one inducement to work in the Szczecin shipyard was the availability, through the shipyard shops, of bread and potatoes at controlled prices, which could be used to fatten pigs ...
21. Kuron and Modzelewski, op. cit., p. 40.
22. The Plan for 1966–70 envisaged, not only greater provision for consumption, but also a switch to ‘intensive’ rather than ‘extensive’ growth, through greater efficiency in the use of resources, etc. But to finance the re-tooling to achieve intensive growth, it proved ‘necessary’ to raise the share of accumulation in the national income still further. The outcome was opposite to what was ‘planned’: further reliance on ‘extensive’ growth, and a continued fall in the rate of output growth. The rate of accumulation was much higher than in the Stalinist period, and the consumption squeeze as severe. Shapiro, op. cit., p. 474.
23. Harman, IS 94, p. 26.
24. Green, op. cit., p. 77, citing Trybuna Ludu, 13 May 1971.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (1-6. Reformism in Poland)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

Part I: Sixteen months of Solidarity
6. Reformism in Poland

In our tracing of the sixteen months of Solidarity we have tried to show how the set of ideas which dominated its leaders almost to the end proved increasingly inadequate for the advance of the movement, and were, in the final analysis, its undoing. We will now look more closely at these ideas.
They were, in their main outline, the product of ‘reform’ circles both within and outside the Party.
We have already referred to the damning indictment of Gierek’s Poland produced by the ‘Experience and Future Discussion Group’ (DiP). This discussion group, was drawn from the liberal wings of the PUWP and the Church, and involved professional economists, media personnel, sociologists and other intellectuals. They had, at first, unofficial sponsorship from leading members of the Party, including Olszowski – later a ‘hardliner’. Its first two reports, published in the year before the birth of Solidarity were sufficiently radical for state sponsorship to be withdrawn, but they reconvened and produced a third report in the spring of 1981.
Alongside their impressive description of the state of Polish society the DiP reports presented a virtual programme for renewal, whose general framework was widely accepted. In particular it provided the set of ideas within which the leadership of Solidarity tried to frame the union and its activities.
But what the DiP group represented – despite the fact that the regime, in fact, repudiated it – was a kind of ‘loyal opposition’ within the regime. They proposed a set of measures which would, on the one hand, reform the workings of Polish politics, economy and society, while not, on the other hand, directly challenging the ruling class’s monopoly of state power. They defined certain unassailable limits for any movement for change. The place of Poland in the Warsaw Pact was one. Another was the ‘leading role of the Party’. Any challenge to either of these assumptions could only bring the weight of the Russian army crashing down on Polish heads. A ‘middle way’ must therefore be found between the threat of immediate and growing stagnation and corruption in Polish life, and the danger of violent disturbances. And, fundamentally, that ‘middle way’ depended on somehow persuading the bureaucracy to give up part of its power and control over society. The effect of such a concession, it was assumed, would be to gain the regime additional, and real, support from the rest of society. Reforms must be instituted, to make the state more acceptable: ‘an independent civic and public opinion must undertake to provide and nurture conditions in which a partnership consensus can be instituted between the powers-that-be and society, in which, moreover, it would be possible to restore trust in the authorities.’ [95]
What was wrong with Poland, the DiP argued, was ‘the lack of acceptable compromises’. A new ‘historic compromise’ was needed, whereby corruption would be eliminated, inequalities lessened, economic reform instituted, managerial positions made more open to talent, much greater freedom of discussion permitted, and so forth. The difficulty was the ‘false style of government’ which was ‘the source and the cause of the present crisis’. [96] The bureaucracy had to be persuaded, fundamentally, to change its ‘style’. Discussing its proposals for reform, the DiP group wrote; ‘The proposed principles are meant to ground a philosophy of wielding power in Poland on something that might be called a “package of safeguards” for the system. In other words, the authorities are guaranteed a certain basic security (majorities in the central and local legislative bodies, a controlling influence over appointments to leading posts in the government, to top-level positions in the economy, and to the higher courts, influence over planning and supervisory agencies, and its own press). On the other hand, these proposals aim at satisfying the most urgently felt social needs, which might be described as “the craving for respect” (the craving for partnership), “the craving for the rule of law”, “the craving for democracy”, and “the craving for guarantees” ...’ [97]
Thus, if the DiP’s diagnosis of the ills of Polish society was quite radical, in terms of what it described, its proposals were – as the first report noted – ‘modest’. [98]
The reports themselves failed in one crucial respect: they never developed any adequate account of how the situation they described in Poland came about. Referring to the tendency to put all the weight of investment into heavy industry, they attributed this to ‘a dogma whose anachronism has been proved and even acknowledged many times over’. [99] A seemingly radical reference to conflict being due to ‘the fundamental opposition of interests between members of the establishment and other social groups’ ended with a reference merely to the bureaucracy’s ‘inefficiency’. [100] Neither the high rate of accumulation, the over-development of heavy industry nor the underdevelopment of production for social and individual consumption was ever explained. The causes of the ‘fundamental opposition of interests’ between the coyly labelled ‘social groups’ were never explored. In short, the DiP never reached behind the issues of freedom of expression and organisation, of ‘style of government’ and the rest, to consider the social relations of production in a scientific fashion. For, to do so would, in logic, be to throw into doubt the basic political programme of the DiP – it would suggest that the whole project of appealing to the authorities to reform society was utopian, and that the central problem of Polish society was not simply that it was ‘irrational’ but that it was divided into opposed classes, whose equal co-existence and ‘compromise’ was an impossibility. To recognise that would be to recognise the impossibility of reform-from-above, and indeed, of ‘reform’ at all.
When Solidarity emerged, the DiP’s orientation did not alter in any fundamental way. The third report welcomed the rise of Solidarity, and the role played by the Catholic Church, as two forces which could play a role in the same fundamental game – compromise: ‘A realistic chance of the Polish “historic compromise” is emerging in outline, a compromise based on the comprehension of the historical and social realities by both sides ... In all societies conflicting aims and interests exist. The point is not to eliminate all conflicts from social life, but to find forms for their peaceful resolution, or at least to minimise the damage resulting from the clash of groups with conflicting interests, in particular conflicts between the community and the government.’ [101]
No other method of resolving social conflicts was possible. ‘In our geographic location all other roads carry the risk of mass suicide.’ As ever, the DiP addressed itself to the bureaucracy: ‘Both the authorities and the people must learn political culture, but we expect more of the former.’ The state had ‘a learned habit’ of mistrust towards autonomous organisations like Solidarity, and it would take a long time – in effect – to re-educate those in power, thereby ‘socialising the government.’ And so on.
And so on. In essence, this style of thinking was characteristic of the great Majority of ‘educated Polish society’. [102] If, as the more acute among them half-recognised, the whole position was flawed, still there was no other way out, as a Polish sociology professor explained to us, than’ hope’ ...
The circles within which this reformist analysis was developed were those of the Polish liberal intelligentsia. They played, in the events of Poland, a role not unlike that played, in the revolutions of 1848, by the representatives of ‘democracy’ that Marx and Engels excoriated. Like the ‘petty bourgeoisie’ of 19th century France and Germany, the liberal intelligentsia of Poland stand between the major protagonists: the central political bureaucracy on the one hand and the workers and peasants on the other. Their standpoint is also that of those sections of the middle bureaucracy who are not hopelessly corrupted. Looking both up at the exploiters and down at the exploited, they dream of reconciliation and ‘historic compromises.’ In normal, everyday life, they supervise the lives of the Polish masses, as minor apparatchiks, as media personnel, as economists and sociologists. [103] They are, generally, little disposed to see in the working class the subject of history, though the extraordinary role of the workers in Poland itself makes them partly aware of their creative role there. If they look outside Poland, their eyes are not fixed on the possibilities of international working-class action, but on maintaining the stability of nation-state alliances.
It is difficult to see how such a stratum could develop any other kind of reform proposals than those emanating from the DiP group: an attempt to find a point of reconciliation between irreconcilable forces.
The importance of this social layer – which in practice extended to the Catholic liberal intelligentsia, as a result of an earlier ‘historic compromise’ between Church and state – is that they defined a political agenda for Solidarity, from the start. Jadwiga Staniszkis, a Warsaw sociologist, was one of the ‘experts’ recruited by Walesa to help the Gdansk MKZ in its negotiations with Jagielski in August 1980. Much of the detailed negotiation of the ‘21 points’ was done, behind the scenes, by the union’s and the regime’s ‘experts’. She describes the tone of the negotiations between the two groups of ‘experts’:
During the first meeting of the working group a peculiar half-relaxed atmosphere and gentle, ironic tones predominated. One of the reasons was that the experts on both sides ... were more or less members of the same Warsaw society: the government experts as somewhat critical but still loyal professionals, we as perhaps more openly critical, but still accepted in Gierek’s “window dressing” liberalisation pattern. In a way we could very easily have changed places (if only our political attitudes were taken into account). This atmosphere made the negotiations easier: elements of trust existed already ...’ [104]
This same group played a key role in getting the workers’ negotiating committee to accept the phrase about ‘the leading role of the Party’ in the final agreement, effectively – Staniszkis suggests – by misleading the workers as to its significance: ‘the majority of the experts tried to convince members of the praesidium that such a political formula “did not mean anything”, so “let us use their double-talk”. Laziness, fatigue, articulation problems and – last but not least – some workers’ trust in the experts and others’ fear of the consequences of their own principled attitudes were decisive.’ [105]
The ‘experts’ knew very well how significant the ‘formula’ was. It was, indeed, a key formula of their whole politics: while reform was desirable, it must not threaten the basics of the state.
The position of ‘the experts’, those ‘members of the same Warsaw society’, did not change. Their advice to Solidarity remained the same: be moderate, do not threaten the bureaucracy too much, or the result will be ‘a tragedy for the nation’. The voice of moderation was far from being simply that of the Catholic hierarchy (which had a tendency to be so ‘moderate’ that it shocked and angered sections of the workers – as in its attack on KOR); it was a unified voice of ‘educated opinion’.
The voice of caution was always a strong one. It appears in extreme form in the DiP second report, in one respondent’s ‘doubt concerning the advisability of society’s exerting any pressure on the authorities’: ‘I am not at all sure that it is true that the greater and broader the mobilisation of the public for direct involvement in political matters, the easier it will be to escape the present situation. Granted, the authorities should be subject to some pressure and control by society if they are to govern effectively; they cannot, however, govern effectively if they are backed up to the wall by a politically exasperated society.’ [106]
The dilemma voiced here was to plague the ‘experts’ and those in Solidarity who agreed with them: how far should the bureaucracy be pushed, and at what point should the pushing stop? For the existence of the ruling class itself, and the need to avoid pushing it too far, were unquestioned assumptions for the whole reformist tendency.
 
KOR
People who might have challenged these ideas were among the small group who formed the Committee for the Defence of Workers (KOR) after the 1976 strikes – Jacek Kuron, author (with Karol Modzelewski) of the revolutionary Open Letter to the Party of the 1960s, former radical student activists of the 1960s such as Jan Litynski and Adam Michnik, radicals of an older generation, and left Catholics. KOR played an important role in Polish working-class politics, which requires critical examination.
KOR performed a vital service for the workers’ movement in the years leading up to the 1980 strikes. The group publicly challenged the regime over its treatment of workers arrested in Radom and elsewhere, and produced open publicity in their defence. Despite being perpetually hounded by the authorities [107], they continued with their work. KOR insisted on doing all its activities openly, and won significant gains from the authorities. The bravery of the individual KOR members was considerable.
It was around KOR, too, that the small groups of workers first gathered to publish the Robotnik (Worker) newspapers, and to formulate the demand for free trade unions. Many of those who were to emerge in the leadership of Solidarity in 1980 had gained their political ideas and experience within these groups.
KOR demonstrated what a small but dedicated and convinced group of people – intellectuals and workers – could do in preparing the way for a mass movement that would confront the entire basis of the regime. It is doubtful whether, without the four years’ difficult and dangerous work of laying the seeds of workers’ organisation in the main industrial centres, the movement of July and August 1980 would have developed as fast and as confidently as it did. That background, too, contributed to the speed with which the workers’ movement took up the demand for free trade unions and – even more significantly – insisted on the release of the KOR members as the final condition for a settlement.
KOR’s contribution to the development of the workers’ movement in Poland was thus immensely positive. Up to, that is, August 1980. Thereafter, KOR became an impediment to further advance. For the ideas of KOR were, in essence, the same ideas that we find in the DiP reports. The KOR members represented the radical wing of that same milieu. Although marked off from the rest by their courage, and by their willingness and eagerness to make contacts with militant workers in the shipyards, mines and factories, KOR shared the belief that the workers’ movement must limit itself to the pursuit of reform, and that the basic framework of the state and the party’s leading role must be treated as sacrosanct.
The KOR group developed its ideas in the period before 1980. Polish society, they argued, required radical alteration, and alteration from below. As their Appeal to Society of 1978 explained, in 1970 and 1976 concessions won through ‘social pressure’ by the workers had been short-lived: ‘In no time at all, the authorities took back from the disintegrated community what it had obtained. Only steady, broad and organised pressure can counteract this.’ [108]
So, KOR looked to the emergence of organised, permanent countervailing forces within society, and especially within the working class, as a solution to Poland’s ills. Yet, at the same time, the ‘social movements’ they hoped to see springing up in Poland would need to limit themselves. For, as Kuron once remarked, in Poland’s position it is better to stop one step short than to go one step too far ... The reason why the movement must limit its aspirations was – as for the DiP group – the threat from Russia. The experience of Hungary in 1956, and of Czechoslovakia in 1968, showed that the workers’ movement must not directly challenge for state power, and that the party’s structure and power should not be undermined. [109] Adam Michnik explained the position in 1978:
We don’t want to overthrow the system ... We realise that in Poland today the Communist Party must rule, and that Poland must stay in the Soviet bloc ... we just want them to rule more justly. We want a dialogue with the Party, not a clash. [110]
In November 1980, giving a ‘Flying University’ lecture in Warsaw, Michnik argued that the same position still obtained, despite the emergence of Solidarity:
The only representatives and the only partners that the Soviet Union takes seriously are the Communists. Today our movement must control and constrain this power to make concessions to democratic liberties. But we must not seek to eliminate this power. These remarks will not earn me much popularity, but it is my moral duty to express them. [111]
Just as, in a sense, the Church had won itself a kind of compromise relationship with the state after 1956, so too the workers might win the same position for Solidarity. This would make a major contribution to opening up Polish society into a ‘Poland of social movements’, a society whose originally monolithic politics would now become ‘pluralist’. The workers’ movement must, however, never directly threaten the state or the party, for the consequences would be dire.
Hence, in one phrase that became quite popular, the Solidarity movement represented – and must represent – a ‘self-limiting revolution’. Ideally, Poland’s international aspiration should be to become like Finland: a semi-independent state on the borders of Russia, relatively free internally, but careful never to overstep the limits imposed by its ‘geopolitical situation’ by offending the Kremlin.
Through its members’ close relations with leading members within Solidarity, KOR became an intellectual bridge across which, in practice, the ideas of the ‘Warsaw society’ were transmitted into the leadership of the workers’ movement. (It was not the only such bridge, of course: the Church also provided its own intellectual links, independently of, and in partial hostility to KOR. But KOR’s voice was the radical voice, while the Church’s never was.) In this way, KOR played an important role, almost to the end, in restraining Solidarity. It did this, above all, by defining the limits beyond which the workers’ movement ought not to go.
The ideas of KOR, and indeed of the entire liberal opposition in Poland, bore a strong resemblance to those of a definite current within the western labour movement – ‘Eurocommunism’. It was Enrico Berlinguer, leader of the Italian Communist Party, who had devised the formula of a ‘historic compromise’ between the workers’ movement and the bourgeoisie; a similar strategy was pursued, and elaborately defended in the book, ‘Eurocommunism’ and the State, by Santiago Carrillo of the Spanish Communist Party. [112] Both these parties, and to a much lesser extent their French and British counterparts were prepared openly to criticize repression in the Eastern bloc.
This combination of timid reformism and tepid anti-Stalinism recommended itself in the late 1970s to many dissident Eastern European intellectuals, disillusioned by the failure of the bureaucracy to reform itself yet sceptical of the working class’s capacity to transform society – a perspective developed at length from a quasi-Marxist perspective by Rudolf Bahro in his book, The Alternative, which made much of Eurocommunism. The Italian and Spanish Communists’ strategy, and their willingness to support Eastern European dissidents, seem to have had some impact on KOR. Adam Michnik paid specific tribute to the Eurocommunists’ intervention after the 1976 strikes, when they had ‘helped to free many Polish workers from prison’, and had reinforced the hope that ‘it is possible to create “socialism with a human face” in Poland and the rest of Eastern Europe’. [113]
Eurocommunist influence no doubt encouraged KOR in their belief that the interests of the bureaucracy and of the working class could somehow be reconciled. But much more important in shaping the ideology of reform was their own experience. Intellectuals such as Kuron, Modzelewski and some of those involved in the student movement who had developed a revolutionary socialist perspective in the 1960s had by 1976 experienced a succession of defeats. The Gdansk riots had been bloodily crushed, the Szczezin workers hoodwinked and their leaders picked off; elsewhere in Eastern Europe there was the bleak end of the Prague spring, strangled by Brezhnev; in the USSR itself the dissident movement was being slowly destroyed, and the strike wave of the 1960s had trailed off. There was also the memory of other defeats – the workers’ revolts of Berlin in 1953, and Hungary in 1956 crushed by Russian tanks. Kuron and his co-thinkers concluded that the road to revolution was therefore closed by the Kremlin’s military might. Pursuit of a ‘historic compromise’ using workers’ economic muscle to squeeze political reforms from the bureaucracy, might succeed. After all, the Church’s ideological power had gained it a certain independence of the regime, and even some influence over its decisions.
The evolution of Kuron and other KOR leaders resembled that of many western leftists, who believed after 1968 that revolution was just around the corner. When they discovered that it wasn’t, that overthrowing capitalism would be a long and difficult process, they rejected the objective of revolution completely. One short cut having failed them, they took another – reformism. [114] Similarly, in somewhat different circumstances, KOR adopted the panacea of compromise with the bureaucracy, a strategy which could only end, as it did, in disaster.
 
Reformism and Solidarity
Reformism, in practice, was a deadly trap for the Polish workers. The idea that some kind of ‘historic compromise’ might have been possible in Poland rests upon a fundamental theoretical failure on the part of the Polish left. They never explained, or came to terms with, the basis of the ‘fundamental opposition of interests between social groups’ to which the DiP report referred. The opposition between the bureaucracy and the majority of Poland’s citizens, the workers and peasants, is a class opposition, founded on the exploitation of the working class through the state. Kuron and Modzelewski, in the 1960s, had come to an almost totally correct account of this. [115] But they seem then to have ‘forgotten’ their own analysis.
To recognise the existence of class opposition in Poland, and its systematic basis, is to recognise that there is no room for ‘compromise’ between the regime and a movement like Solidarity. If the regime accommodated with Solidarity for a period, it was because it was itself temporarily immobilised by its internal disarray. There was, however, no basis for its acceptance of any long-term ‘compromise’ on the basis proposed by the DiP group, the party reformers, the Church or KOR. That hope of compromise was a miasma. The real situation in Poland was an unstable equilibrium of forces that could only be resolved by an armed confrontation. The issue, from the beginning, was simple: either the workers must destroy the existing state and replace it with their own state, or they must be conquered. [116]
If Solidarity and its intellectual advisors did not recognise this, those at the centre of the state always did. Andrzej Zabinski, for example, a member of the Politbureau and first Party secretary in Katowice, gave a secret speech to members of the police and state security forces, in which he spelled out a strategy for undermining Solidarity. It included proposals for getting Party members to hold dual membership of Solidarity and the CRZZ (the old state ‘unions’); isolating Solidarity from KOR; attacking the regional basis of Solidarity organization, and substituting industrial organisation; using the law against Solidarity; complicating everything to the point of confusion; and using perks to corrupt the movement’s leaders. [117]
Of course, it is possible – in circumstances different from those of Poland – that a ‘compromise’ might have been achieved, short of the use of armed force by, or against the state. After all, this was the outcome in Portugal after the revolution of 1974–5. Could such a ‘compromise’ have been achieved in Poland, however, the price would have been the bureaucratisation of Solidarity, and the incorporation of its leadership into the structures of the state, in itself a major defeat for the workers which would have left the state-capitalist relations of exploitation intact.
In any case, such an outcome was never very likely. For one thing, in the state-capitalist countries, ‘politics’ and ‘economics’ are institutionally bound closely together, lacking the ‘separation of spheres’ which enables the trade-union bureaucracy to pursue and sometimes to win reforms without threatening capitalist relations of production in ‘liberal’ western regimes. More important, however, are two other considerations. The first is that the scale of the economic crisis was such that no point of equilibrium could be found that would even minimally satisfy both sides – and some degree of satisfaction for each side is a necessary element in any compromise. And, secondly, a connected feature: the workers’ movement was anyway too insurgent in spirit to be so easily disciplined and contained by processes of internal bureaucratization. There did not exist in Poland the equivalent of the Portuguese Communist Party, a mass reformist organization which had earned the disciplined loyalty of the strongest sections of the class over years of struggle, and could therefore deliver a compromise which left capitalism intact.
For a period of over a year, therefore, the stand-off between the two classes continued. The bureaucracy was in crisis, its authority over society crumbling into ruins – although the armed forces, the ultimate defence of its power, survived. The ruling class could not accept a compromise, because independent workers’ organizations would prevent a solution of the crisis at the working class’s expense. Because of the crisis, the workers could not accept the framework of compromise either. Their needs were too urgent, and too radically distinct from anything that the ruling class could offer. And the workers had a sense of their own immense strength.
In this unstable situation, the two forces – the bureaucracy and Solidarity – stood opposed to each other; each blocked the other’s aims and activity. Those who argued for ‘compromise’ and ‘pluralism’ merely obfuscated the situation. To the degree that they had influence on either side, they weakened it. The Party was weakened by its own internal reform movement, as the state’s civil government apparatus was weakened by the spread of Solidarity ideas and membership among its middle ranks. Its ideological control system was similarly weakened by the phenomenal spread of sympathy with Solidarity. [118] In the same way, Solidarity was weakened constantly by the predominant influence in its leadership of these ideas of reform and compromise. In such a situation, one side or other would have to clear its decks of ‘reformism’ and proceed to smash the other.
In the meantime, the crisis was felt within Solidarity. As we have seen over and over again, the leadership would act in line with the predominant conception of its own role and tasks urged on it by the ‘experts’. It would rush around, trying to cool things down so that ‘negotiation’ and ‘discussion’ with the state might proceed. The rank-and-file membership, less ideologically constrained, would then erupt into angry action over some particular grievance, generating in the process new demands – or expanding old ones – in ways that would again shove Solidarity into action, and push its relationship with the state to the point of crisis. Instinctively, sections of the leadership would then collide with the more ‘moderate’ sections, rowing over ‘union democracy’, ‘Walesa’s dictatorship’, the composition of the ‘expert’ teams, etc. The issues of democracy and personnel were of course important, but there was more at stake than only these questions. The reality that Borusewicz and Kuron reported (see above) – and which many workers’ representatives also noted – was that the rank and file membership was more ready, eager even, to go further in the battle with the Polish state than were their advisers. [119]

Notes
95. DiP Report, op. cit., p. 9.
96. Ibid., p. 158.
97. Ibid., p. 117.
98. Ibid., p. 119.
99. Ibid., p. 42.
100. Ibid., p. 66.
101. Kultura (Paris) May 1981.
102. See. for further examples, the various articles contributed to the special Polish issue of Telos, no. 47, spring 1981, by Nauman, Michnik, Pomian, Mazowiecki, Kuron, Wojcicki and Swidlicki. Similar viewpoints are also expressed, for Hungary, by Hegedus and Engelmann, and for both Hungary and Czechoslovakia in interview collections. The whole issue of this journal provides useful insights into this intellectual world.
103. Marek Tarniewski offers a nice image of this layer: ‘A porcupine turned upside down may serve as a model of the psychology of apparatchiki: it is soft on top, and prickly from below.’ The New Regime, Survey, Spring 1981.
104. Jadwiga Staniszkis, The evolution of forms of working-class protest in Poland: sociological reflections on the Gdansk-Szczecin case, August 1980, Soviet Studies XXXIII, 2 April 1981, pp. 213–4.
105. Ibid., p. 216.
106. DiP Report, op. cit., p. 213.
107. As well as the continual arrest and harassment of its members, a student sympathiser of KOR, Stanislaw Lyjas, was almost certainly murdered by the security organs in 1977.
108. Cited in Problems of Communism, January–February 1980, p. 12.
109. Hence the worry expressed by Litynski and Kuron at the prospect of the Party reform movement – see above.
110. Sunday Times, 9 April 1978. Kuron had expressed similar ideas in his 1976 essay, Thoughts on the programme of action in Ruch Oporu (Paris), 1977
111. Telos 47, Spring 1981, p. 69.
112. For two clear statements of ‘right’ and ‘left’ and Eurocommunism respectively see S. Carrillo, ‘Eurocommunism’ and the State (London 1977), and N. Poulantzas, State, Power, Socialism (London 1978). For critiques of these works, see C. Harman, Eurocommunism, the State and Revolution, IS 101, September 1977, and C. Barker, A New Reformism?, IS 2 : 4, Spring 1979.
113. Interview with L’Espresso (Rome), 5 December 1976, cited in Problems of Communism, March–April 1978, p. 49.
114. See C. Harman, The Crisis of the European Revolutionary Left, IS 2 : 4, Spring 1979, for an analysis of this process.
115. There is a slight ambiguity in their Open Letter to the Party, in that they only hint at the state’s motive for exploitation and accumulation, in a single reference to the bureaucracy’s ‘international position (very important for a class organised as a group identifying itself with the state)’ (p. 17). The issue is discussed further in Colin Barker, Theories of Russia, mimeo, 1981.
116. In their Open Letter ..., Kuron and Modzelewski described how the new Gomulka regime had to win popular confidence before they could ensure the power apparatus its repressive strength and control over society. The ‘October Left’, of that period, failed miserably:
‘The only chance of expanding the revolution was to propose working class program and to organise a movement around it opposed to the rule of the liberal bureaucracy. At this decisive moment, the Left not only failed to put forward such a programme and organise itself into a party, but it lent support to the liberal bureaucracy, the chief anti-revolutionary force. All the great authority which the activists of the Left enjoyed in their arenas was passed on to the new leadership. In this way, the Left contributed to maintaining the power of the bureaucracy, and by the same token, it prepared its own political death and the defeat of the revolution.’ (p. 46)
Alas, with only small modifications these words could stand for a political epitaph on KOR.
117. The text of the secretly taped talk was published in Der Spiegel, 6 April 1981, and is summarised in the editors’ footnote in Telos 47, Spring 1981, p. 98.
118. One example. One of the autumn 1980 issues of Polityka ran a feature article by a hospital doctor on her experiences at the time of the August strikes. Her working-class patients had suddenly become well, and discharged themselves from hospital to join in the workers’ movement. Shortly after, the wards filled up again, this time with ‘sick’ apparatchiks. She described her ethical dilemma: should she try to make the party apparatchiks well again?! This, remember, in a Party newspaper.
119. In the 1st August issue of Robotnik, Zbigniew Bujak, chairman of Warsaw Solidarity, recounted how he had reported to his members on the ‘self-management’ discussions. Their reaction was apathetic, until he told them that the self-management movement could lead to their taking power, a which point only did they express interest.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (1-1. The August revolt)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

Part I: Sixteen months of Solidarity
1. The August revolt

Introduction
Polish workers have a long tradition of militant struggle. It was they who initiated the strike wave that led to the 1905 Russian Revolution. They organised a general strike in November 1923, in the course of which the Krakow workers took over the city, disarmed a battalion of infantry and defeated a cavalry attack; only the intervention of the Polish Socialist Party persuaded them to lay down their arms. In 1931 they originated the tactic of the occupation-strike, a form long known simply as the ‘Polish strike’ and introduced into America by Polish émigrés at the outset of the great wave of ‘sit-in strikes’ in the 1930s. In 1936, as many as 85% of the industrial workforce took part in strikes.
This tradition has continued in the years since the Second World War. Solidarity was born in the fourth great wave of strikes which have brought the workers of Poland into direct confrontation with their state bosses.
In June 1956 the workers of Poznan struck work and rioted, initiating the crisis from which Gomulka emerged to head the party and state machine. Dozens of workers were killed by the security forces. Out of the shake-up of the regime the workers won workers’ councils, as well as economic improvements. The state’s grip over political life was relaxed for a period, with students and intellectuals publishing powerful demands for a new and freer social order. Later the workers’ gains were taken back, as the Gomulka regime consolidated its position. The main beneficiary of the events of 1956 was the Church, which won a new space for itself in return for its backing of the regime, and the peasants, whose individual holdings were strengthened.
The same issues – wages, prices, production norms – which provoked the 1956 revolt on Poznan exploded again in the winter of 1970–71. In December 1970, the workers of the seaboard cities of Gdansk and Gdynia, and then of Szczecin, erupted on to the streets in protest at price rises. The regional party offices in Gdansk and Szczecin were set on fire; the Gdansk rioters attempted to open the local prison. The authorities’ response was savage. Hundreds – far more than the regime has ever publicly admitted – were shot down by the police and army. In the aftermath, Gomulka fell, to be replaced by Gierek. In January 1971 after lying reports in the local media about workers’ support for the new regime, the Szczecin shipyard erupted again. This time, instead of going onto the streets, the workers occupied the Warski shipyards, forcing Gierek to come and negotiate with them on their own ground. And in February, the women textile workers of Lodz struck and finally forced the state to withdraw its attempted price increases.
But in the period following the Szczecin occupation, the rank and file leaders who had formed the strike committee were gradually isolated, and then subjected to individual repression.
In June 1976, the government announced a new round of food price rises: meat up by an average of 69%, butter by more than half. Within hours of the announcement, strikes again erupted, this time in Warsaw, Radom and Plock. Workers from the Ursus tractor factory near Warsaw blocked and ripped up the Paris-Warsaw railway line. At Radom, they sacked the Party offices. Within 24 hours, the price rises were withdrawn. But thousands of workers were sacked, harassed or beaten by the police in an orgy of brutal state revenge, in the course of which an estimated eleven workers died.
In 1956, 1970–71 and 1976, workers’ protests started more or less totally spontaneously, without any apparent background of previous organisation. After 1976, however, the first beginnings of independent organisation were made, and some ground was prepared for the stormy struggles of 1980. A tiny group of dissidents grouped around KOR (Committee for the Defence of Workers) began to publish news of the state repression of workers, together with discussions of conditions in factories and state services. This grouping, perpetually harassed but not effectively repressed by the Gierek regime, made contacts with a few small groups of workers in a number of centres. Out of this link emerged two unofficial news sheets, Robotnik (Worker) and later Robotnik Wybrzeza (Coastal Worker). These news sheets began to elaborate demands for free trade unions. Many of those involved in these unofficial activities were to play a leading role in the strikes of the summer of 1980 and in the development of Solidarity.
In July 1980, again, the government tried to push through price rises. Again it was met with a series of rolling strikes. This time the state – following a pattern that had already partly developed over the previous three or four years – attempted to head off protests by granting wage increases to offset the price rises in each factory that struck in turn. In spite of the usual wall of silence in the official press the regime was unable to isolate the movement.
But the strikes did spread. And in August they reached Gdansk. The Lenin shipyard was occupied following the sacking of Anna Walentynowicz, a Coastal Worker activist in the yard. The plant management conceded to the workers’ demands, and the occupation-strike very nearly came to a halt. But the Lenin shipyard action had galvanised many other local workplaces into similar activity and urgent pressure from the militants in the shipyard persuaded the shipyard workers to continue in solidarity with the rest of Gdansk. An Inter-Factory Committee (MKZ) for the whole of Gdansk was established, centred in the shipyard. The strikes and occupations continued to spread across the industrial areas, now drawing in the mines and steelworks of the South for the first time. The government was forced to negotiate an unprecedented agreement (the ‘21 points’) at Gdansk, granting the right to ‘independent self-governing trade unions’ and a host of social, economic, cultural, religious and political reforms. MKZs sprang up across the length and breadth of Poland, uniting themselves into a single national body in September. Solidarnosc (Solidarity) was born.



Hard-won lessons
The summer of 1980 showed what Polish workers had learned from their previous battles.
In 1956, in 1970, and partially in 1976, the workers’ struggle erupted onto the streets. The immediate form of struggle adopted was that of the ‘riot’. In 1956 in Poznan, in 1970 in Gdansk and Szczecin, workers fought pitched battles in the streets with the forces of state repression. They burned down the regional party offices. In 1976, the Ursus workers invaded and ripped up the railway tracks. The costs of this form of struggle were tremendous: estimates of workers killed in Poznan vary from 54 to 80; in the northern coastal cities the dead were numbered in hundreds. The riot, after all, is a relatively ‘primitive’ form of struggle: while its temper may often be insurrectionary, it lacks organisation, and is conducted on ground that the state – however brutally – can master with relative ease. It is difficult to consolidate a riot, and difficult to spread it. Permanent organisation, and the testing of organisational forms and leaders, is not easily achieved by this means. While the ‘riot’ lays bare, in the starkest possible fashion, the revolutionary anger of the participants, and while it is a form through which the immense courage and solidarity of workers is also revealed, it does not enable workers to shape political developments directly. Historically, riots have certainly been the signal for political change, for state reforms and concessions; but these changes have commonly been won at a remove from the workers themselves.’ [1]
The workers of Poland learned this – in action. After the street battles of December 1970, the Warski shipyard workers were about to go out onto the streets of Sczcecin again the following January. A small group of men jumped on to the roof of a snack-kiosk by the yard gates where the workers were gathering. One of them, Edmund Baluka, managed to make himself heard through an improvised megaphone. If we go out on the streets, he urged, we’ll manage to burn down a few buildings, but the cops and the army will get back at us. Let’s, instead, occupy the shipyard and force the government to come to talk to us. The ‘Polish strike’ returned to its birthplace. Gierek, Jarusoszewicz and Jaruzelski were forced to come to meet the workers on their own ground. Out of the Szczecin occupation, the workers won the right to maintain their strike committee and to supervise new elections to the workers’ council and trade union groups in the shipyard and – to the horror of the party officials – of the shipyard party branch itself. [2]
In 1980, this was taken one step further with the whole movement being characterised by the wave of factory occupations. No workers died, and the level of workers’ self-organisation expanded a thousand fold.
In 1956 and in 1970, the workers’ struggles provoked changes in the top leadership of the state. Gomulka came to power in the wake of Poznan; Gierek in the wake of Gdansk. In 1956, the workers identified quite strongly – for a period – with the Gomulka regime. In 1971, Gierek was partly successful in appealing for workers’ support. Anna Walentynowicz, in 1980, recalled how ‘when the government fell in January 1971 and Gierek became the first secretary I was one of the delegates to meet him. The events of that year are well known, but you should also know that we invested a great deal of trust in him, in Gierek himself. That was the time of the famous slogan, “If you help us, we will help you”. He disappointed us terribly. He came to the shipyard several times. But the last time he came, in 1978, he completely distanced himself from the workers, and had become just the same as his predecessor.’ [3]
By the late 1970s, Polish workers were circulating one of their innumerable political jokes: ‘Question: What is the difference between Gierek and Gomulka? Answer: Nothing – only Gierek doesn’t know it yet...’ In 1980, change at the top of the party and the state did not impress the workers at all: they wanted, and won, their own institutions. Neither Kania’s replacement of Gierek, nor Jaruzelski’s of Kania, made any significant difference to the workers’ movement. You can fool all of the people once, and most of them twice, but it’s difficult to fool them a third time. And after 1980, all over Poland local Solidarity branches began – often successfully – naming and demanding the removal of corrupt officials.
In 1971, and again in 1976, workers’ movements won immediate victories over the government on the issues that brought them into battle. In particular, food prices were held down, wages were raised, and production norms kept under control. But after both sets of events, the state exacted revenge. In Szczecin, once the mass feeling among workers had subsided, the rank-and-file leaders who had led the occupation and the later Workers’ Commission were gradually isolated. One was murdered, and an attempt was made on the life of another. Others found themselves victimised and thrown out of their shipyard jobs, and Edmund Baluka – first ‘promoted’ to an official union position, to be sacked six weeks later – had to flee the country. In Radom, at Ursus, and elsewhere, in the aftermath of the 1976 strikes, many workers were victimised, some by arrest, some by loss of job. Some were beaten up on the streets at night. Some died. Commenting on the 1976 repression, Edmund Baluka remarked: ‘The Communist Party is doing its best to prevent a self-conscious organised working class from coming into being. Until workers understand that every man removed from their ranks weakens them, until they can defend their organisations, they cannot be a true class ... The Polish workers are not yet a class, but they will become a class.’ [4]
One of the activities around which the Coastal Worker group began to organise in the late 1970s was the memory of the workers killed in 1970. The KOR-KSS grouping spread information about the authorities’ treatment of individual workers. In 1980, these various activities bore fruit: the issue over which the Gdansk occupation began was the sacking of Anna Walentynowicz. And in the negotiations with the government at the end of August, the final point on which the Inter-factory Committee in Gdansk refused to budge, when all their other demands had been granted, was the freeing from prison of the dissidents – Jacek Kuron and others – who had worked to assist them in the run-up to the strike. Anna Walentynowicz again:
... the Government signed all our demands except the fourth. But surely that was the most important point! If we don’t defend the political prisoners today, then tomorrow our agreements are worthless for we are all political, and they will call us that, and simply lock us all up. So we refused to agree.
We demanded an adjournment. We turned to our community, to the crowd in the hall, to the people occupying the shipyard, to the people standing outside the shipyard gates. They told us we could strike for another week, for another two even, but all 21 demands had to be met. We returned to the hall, and Jagielski [the government negotiator] says he can’t agree. In that case we break off the talks. He then had a private conversation with Andrzej Gwiazda [one of the strike leaders] in which he agreed, but wouldn’t give us a date for the freeing of the prisoners. Again we refused to deal. Finally he said that by tomorrow at noon all the people on our list would be freed ... And that was our victory. [5]
There is no doubt that this readiness of workers to extend their defence beyond their own ranks was crucial in swinging the overwhelming majority of the people of Poland behind them. From its beginnings, Solidarity was more than ‘a trade union’: it was a workers’ movement for justice and freedom, and as such it was capable of much more radical and extensive development than a narrower trade union movement could be. As a result, too, crucial divisions began from the past were now overcome. In 1968, the students and intellectuals had faced a battering from the regime, in the course of which the most cynical anti-semitism had been brought into play by the Party leadership. That year the students and intellectuals had stood alone – indeed, a student meeting at Warsaw University had been viciously broken up by ‘angry workers’ acting as Party stooges. In 1970, the Gdansk workers had approached the students of the local Polytechnic. But now it was the students who stayed indoors while the workers were slaughtered on the streets. In 1980-81, however, the expansiveness of Solidarity, its identification with the general cause of freedom drew every oppressed, downtrodden and exploited section of Polish society behind its banner. Though few of the participants might have recognised the source, Marx’s idea that the working class must assume the leadership of the whole nation was on the way to being realised.
The condition for this, of course, was that Solidarity developed as an organisation representing the whole working class. There were several aspects that should be noted. The first is the way that, beginning in Gdansk, the form of organisation adopted by the workers expanded from the shipyard strike committee to the Inter-Factory Committee (MKZ) [6], a body which brought together the strength of the shipyards with the weaker groups in neighbouring workplaces. The MKZ form was the one that spread across Poland, and it was though the federation of MKZs that the national Solidarity organisation developed. The second is the refusal of the new organisations to adopt the form of the discredited ‘branch’ unions (the CRZZ), which organised on an ‘industrial’ basis. Solidarity was a union of all workers, and thus much less prone to the risks of sectionalism. The strongest and the weakest workers were bound together into one organisational framework of mutual aid. The third is the form in which Solidarity developed its wage demands. Although there was some weakness in the negotiation of this point, which was to present problems later [7], the form in which the wage demands were presented was such as to reduce wage differentials.
Lastly, Solidarity was, from the beginning, characterised by a recognition of, and a permanent demand for extreme openness and accountability. In 1971, at the Szczecin shipyard, the talks with Gierek had been hooked up to the shipyard tannoy system, enabling the entire workforce to hear what was said. This was developed still further in 1980 and 1981. The talks with Jagielski were broadcast over the tannoy, from a room with large windows through which workers outside could make their feelings apparent at every juncture. When, later, Walesa took part in secret talks behind closed doors, he was subjected to sharp criticism by sections of the leadership and the membership. After years of atomisation, of political discussion hampered by lack of honest information. Solidarity’s demand for massive restrictions on censorship, for freedom of access to the media and the like were immensely liberating. They were, quite literally, a condition for the success of the movement, for the practical unification of the whole working class. The importance of these issues, in the suffocating political atmosphere of East European societies, can hardly be exaggerated. Hence the significance of the workers’ demands for public monuments to their dead, even though – especially in the case of the Gdansk monument – they cost immense sums from the workers’ funds. The demand for openness in negotiations went so far that, at Bielsko-Biala in January 1981, negotiations were hooked into the national telephone network so that workers with access to telephones in other towns could eavesdrop! Just how many of the trade-union bureaucrats in the USA and Western Europe who proclaimed their support for Solidarity so loudly would be prepared to allow their own unions to follow such democratic practices, one wonders?
One final point: in 1956, the workers’ movement fought for workers’ councils in the factories. In 1980, such demands were relatively unimportant. To revolutionaries, for whom the demand for workers’ self-management in production has always been an important issue, this may seem at first sight a step backwards. But it was not. Firstly, the 1956 workers’ councils were limited to issues within the individual factory. As such they were relatively easily atomised; while they were useful to Gomulka as he consolidated his position, the workers’ councils were tolerated; when Gomulka had no further use for them, they were quite easily neutralised and wound up. The workers’ councils had never succeeded in getting beyond what Kuron and Modzelewski, in their Open Letter to the Party in the 1960s, called the ‘technocratic’ vision. Lacking any means of breaking out of the limits of the individual enterprise, their role was restricted to that of advising the management on how to fulfil the Plans, which were formulated by the central state apparatus, but whose content remained totally out of their control. Secondly, the workers’ councils of 1956 were associated with a belief – or perhaps a hope – among many workers that they really were in some sense the collective owners of the means of production. The definite emergence of the demand for free trade unions in the late 1970s, and their mass organisation in 1980, represent the practical aspect of a process of ideological clarification, a recognition by the Polish working class that their interests as a class are different from, and opposed to, the interests of the ruling class and its state. Thus, though it appears paradoxical at first, the shift from the demand for “workers’ councils” to the demand for “free trade unions”, represented in the Polish context, a general raising of the level of class consciousness and class combativity.
The creation and the growth of Solidarity thus represented a magnificent, and unprecedented, achievement by the Polish working class. In its development were crystallised a whole series of important lessons that the Polish workers had learned, collectively, for themselves, out of their own previous experiences of struggle.
However, Solidarity was also, from the beginning, a movement with serious weaknesses. Its leaders and advisers seem to have operated, initially, with serious illusions about the situation they faced and the possibilities open to them. It took a long time, and much internal turmoil, before those illusions even began to dissipate – and it was in this period that the state was preparing the brutal reply it was to give to Solidarity’s hopes.

Notes
1. For a discussion of riots, focused on British and American experience, see Socialist Review, May–June 1981 and Chris Harman, The summer of 1981: a post-riot analysis, International Socialism 2 : 14, autumn 1981.
2. For the Szczecin events, cf. Edmund Baluka and Ewa Barker, Workers’ struggles in Poland, International Socialism (1st series) 94, January 1977.
3. Women’s Voice 46, November 1980.
4. Interview with Socialist Worker, October 1976.
5. Women’s Voice, op. cit.
6. The Inter-Factory Committee was a feature of the 1970 struggle in Szczecin.
7. For discussion of this point, see Neal Ascherson, The Polish August, Harmondsworth 1981, p. 176.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (1-4. The crisis in Solidarity)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

Part I: Sixteen months of Solidarity
4. The crisis in Solidarity

Paralysis in Solidarity’s Leadership
It was not only the regime which, in the months after the Bydgoszcz incident, seemed paralysed. So did Solidarity. One sympathetic observer remarked in July, ‘Since March the only offensive action by the union has been the self-management movement’ (on which see below). [57]
The problem facing the union leadership was that its perspective of pressing the regime for reforms came to make less and less sense, given both the ever-deepening economic crisis and the inability of the Party to act decisively. Even if the authorities had been serious about implementing the already agreed reforms, they were quite incapable of doing so. They would, under pressure, grant wage increases – but they could not or would not ensure that there were goods in the shops on which the wage packets could be spent. They would promise freedom for the union to organise – but their local hardline apparatchiks and managers would seize every opportunity to harass and victimise union activists. They would claim to see the ‘moderate’ wing of Solidarity as a ‘responsible social partner’ – while the army daily newspaper denounced the union leadership in the most scurrilous manner.
Logically, there were two ways forward for the union – even if this was not clear to the activists. One (untried) road would have involved breaking out of the reformist ruling assumptions, and treating workers struggles as something to be spread and deepened, to be directed towards the base of the state apparatus itself in an effort to draw rank-and-file soldiers and police away from strict obedience to their officers. Such an approach would have involved the adoption of a clear revolutionary perspective. To go down the other path was to try to restrain workers’ struggles, in the interests of helping the supposedly moderate wing of the regime – Kania and above all Jaruzelski – to strengthen their position. A strengthened ‘moderate’ wing in the ruling class, it was believed, would be able to force its functionaries to honour agreements with Solidarity.
This latter view was represented, above all, by Lech Walesa. The militant leader of August 1980 was, within nine months, acting as if he were the most hardened trade-union bureaucrat from the West. Proudly assuming the role of ‘fireman’, Walesa saw his task, from December 1980 to the beginning of December 1981, as being to stop, or contain, spontaneous strikes, not to encourage and lead them. He spent a large part of his time touring the country, urging one group of workers after another (not always successfully) to return to work.
His famous remark ‘We are Poles first, and trade unionists second’ encapsulated his belief that only a solution of ‘national unity’, i.e. class collaboration, could get Poland out of its mess. The extent of the economic crisis, something the workers never fully appreciated in the euphoric days of the August strikes, was being spelled out to them by their own economic advisors. On January 20th Ryszard Bugaj told the National Co-ordinating Commission that Poland was ‘on the brink of economic catastrophe’. This too, in the reformist framework, constituted a powerful argument for ‘responsible’ action and co-operation with the state.
As a gesture towards the authorities (there could hardly be any other reason) Walesa announced in mid-January that Solidarity no longer needed the help of KOR – the renewed harassment by the authorities of KOR activists in February can hardly be unconnected with this. Walesa then left for a visit to Rome where he insulted his hosts, the Italian trade unionists, saying that he hadn’t come to see them but the Pope. The Pope, in a speech of welcome which was published all over Poland in a hundred and one local Solidarity gazettes, stressed: “The effort of the autumn weeks was not directed against anyone and the effort, the enormous effort, which still stands before you is also not directed against anyone. It is directed exclusively for the common good.” [58] (Pope’s emphasis) He urged the union to continue to seek this common good by the method of dialogue and reasoned argument with the representatives of the state, shunning the road of force and violence which, he maintained, did not spare the lives of innocent people.
As soon as Walesa returned from Rome he went straight to a tour-hour discussion with the then premier Pinkowski, before going on to the National Commission meeting in Gdansk, where he did his best to persuade the union to compromise on the free Saturday issue and dismantle the strike due to take place on the following ‘working Saturday’. He was outvoted, and severely criticised for his priorities in seeing the prime minister before he had been to see his own comrades in the union. Reuter’s correspondent, Karol Cwinarowicz, said the meeting was the most ‘confused and recriminatory’ [59] since Solidarity’s formation.
Nevertheless, the moderates continued to do as they wished. In particular they tried to suppress regional autonomy in the union. By the end of January the National Commission had issued a statement that “the random continuation of strikes called by individual Solidarity branches would deepen social and economic chaos and would simultaneously dissipate the union’s forces.” [60] It suggested that all its forces should be united into a single, nation-wide campaign. Two and a half weeks later the union was putting this same line more strongly and warning that any industrial action taken without prior consultation with the head office would be disavowed by the union leadership. “The plethora of local and regional strikes pursuing disparate aims without the consent of the National Co-ordinating Commission, often against its advice, not only have made little impact; they have sometimes been provoked by advocates of confrontation amongst those in authority as a means to disrupt our unity.” [61]
Walesa’s action in calling off the general strike over the Bydgoszcz attack reinforced the trend toward ‘moderation’. At the end of May the Guardian reported “The Government and Solidarity have begun to collaborate. Seven joint commissions have been set up to study law reform, the release of political prisoners (of whom, it may be a surprise to know there are only eight), miners’ issues, the press, the economy, Solidarity’s international activity, and ways of institutionalising Solidarity’s contact with the Government.” [62]
The January to March upsurge of local strikes had died down. The strike rate dropped enormously in April, May and June. In June Solidarity suspended or replaced its bulletin editors in Krakow, Lublin, and Torun, apparently for being too sympathetic to KOR. Warsaw’s bulletin also stopped reporting dissident activities. Not that any of the dissidents were against collaboration and the ‘normalising’ of the union’s relationship with the government. As before the suspension was more in the nature of a token of good-will in the collaboration game, a proof that the union was distancing itself from the ‘anti-socialist elements’ about whom the government was constantly screaming.
But the result was the opposite of what the national leadership of the union expected. Far from placating the authorities, it merely encouraged them to take a harder line against union activists.
Andrzej Gwiazda – a leader of the Gdansk occupation who was now one of Solidarity’s best known national figures – described the situation later in the summer:
Our union is confronting growing attacks on the part of the authorities ... A year ago the General Prosecutor’s office would not have dared to launch so many investigations against independent publications and the union press. In this respect we have not achieved progress, but have gone backwards instead.
This has happened because we did not respond to minor attacks which were meant to find out if we would concede. At that time we called these actions phony conflicts, but they are not phony conflicts any more, considering that 200 court cases have been brought against the activists of our union and the editorial offices. [63]
The regime could not take more advantage of the situation inside Solidarity because it too was internally divided and paralysed. But the outlook for Poland’s workers was ever more ominous. The economic chaos was deepening. As the food shortages became more acute, so the food-queues lengthened, and workers’ tempers shortened. Yet Solidarity, born the previous summer with so much hope, seemed no longer able to offer a way forward.
By July and August those who had been most prominent in articulating the reformist strategy the summer before, the KOR activists who had talked about the need for a ‘self-limiting revolution’, were expressing open doubts as to what to do.
Litynski, the driving force behind KOR’s working class agitation before the birth of Solidarity, expressed the dilemma:
We have arrived at a situation which seems to have no way out. The economy and the state are disintegrating. We can discuss pointlessly whether this decomposition results from conscious or semi-conscious sabotage by the apparatus of power or from the impotence of the power apparatus after the events of August 1980 ... Solidarity has accelerated this paralysing decomposition of the organs of power in a certain sense. The strategy that consists in standing aside to see how the regime moves and in making compromises with it seems ineffective. Solidarity loses its point and deludes itself. [64]
Bujak, the Ursus factory activist who chaired the Warsaw region of Solidarity used a graphic metaphor to sum up the difficulty Solidarity faced if it continued to regard itself just as a movement to win economic concessions for workers: ‘If we consider ourselves merely as a trade union, as the government expects us to, then we must think of ourselves as a trade union of seamen on a sinking ship.’ [65]
Shortly afterwards he spelt out the impact on the mass of workers of the union’s inability to pose clearly answers to the crisis – and he hinted at what the answer might be:
Our movement is weakening. At the beginning it was based on an implacable hatred for the regime and against the Party. But today that is not enough. Completely new motivations are necessary. The members of the union do not understand the tactics of the leadership... The protest strikes and the local struggles do not succeed in uniting into a coherent plan. People were wary of me in a mass meeting at Ursus. Only when I explained that this self-management leads to a taking of power did people understand and agree with me ... In this phase people want a clear programme. It doesn’t matter too much whether they understand it, as long as they see it was a way out of the crisis. [66]
Yet the option hinted at here – ‘a taking of power’ – was one that the union leadership still refused to consider. Thus, at a time when the mass of Polish workers were looking for a new way out of the crisis more desperately than ever, the paralysed regime was still faced by a paralysed union.
The fact that, at this point, neither the regime nor the Solidarity leadership had a clear view of what to do did not halt all movement. Within and outside Solidarity, people began to search for new alternatives. The summer of 1981 saw four new developments: the growth of the ‘radical’ current within the union; the rise of the ‘self-management’ movement based on the biggest enterprises; a growing interest among some sections of the population in oppositional parties outside Solidarity and in ‘political’ solutions; and a new wave of local workers’ struggles erupting from below.
 
The Solidarity radicals
As the implications of ‘moderation’ began to become clearer, a number of leading union activists began to distance themselves from Walesa and his activities. The arguments which had already begun to surface at the time of his visit to Rome in January became especially intense after he unilaterally called off the general strike over Bydgoszcz. What enraged many Solidarity members was that union democracy had been trampled on. Since the National Commission had called the strike, surely it alone was entitled to call it off? Walesa’s private chats with Jaruzelski seemed to be in shocking contrast with the openness of negotiations in Gdansk in the previous summer. Suspicion and hostility spilled over onto Tadeusz Mazowiecki, the Catholic journalist who was to become editor of the union’s own weekly paper, and Professor Bronislaw Geremek, a historian who also acted as a regular union adviser. Some members demanded that union advisers should in future be excluded from actual negotiations.
The arguments became especially acrimonious in Gdansk. There, as we saw, Anna Walentynowicz lost her union position for refusing to bend to Walesa’s line. And Andrzej Gwiazda, another veteran of the small network of activists who had struggled to build the Coastal Worker in the years before August 1980, also moved into an increasingly oppositional stance within Solidarity. He wrote an open letter to Walesa: “Internal democracy is a need of our union. The anti-democratic environment, the external threat, the constant battles and tensions, all these result in tendencies appearing throughout our union, from top to bottom, which depart from democratic principles. If, however, the union fights by using the methods employed by its adversaries, it must lose.” [67]
Gwiazda became the centre of an opposition faction (nicknamed ‘the constellation’ after the Polish meaning – ‘star’ – of Gwiazda). One of the chief platforms from which he attacked the Walesa faction was this one of union democracy. He pointed out the function of rank-and-file activity in maintaining strength of organisation: ‘A dictatorship in the union is an essential (and sufficient) condition for the absorption of Solidarity by the system, returning us back to square one.’ [68]
In July, after regional elections had taken place in Solidarity he commented bitterly, “The membership has, by a large majority (in our region at any rate) declared itself in favour of dictatorship in the union. Walesa stressed repeatedly that he wanted to be a general and he has become one.” He then went on to describe the consequences of operating a moderate, reformist policy which ignores the development of the strength of the rank and file:
A dictator who does not have a police force or any army at his disposal is reduced to maintaining his popularity and his good relationship with the authorities. In order not to risk his position he has to pursue the politics of co-operation and move towards ever greater concessions, until a rebellious reaction and insubordination appears among the workforce. Then, in order not to lose popularity and to maintain his dictatorship, he has to turn about and lead the rebellion. This results in politics catastrophic for both the union and the country. Necessarily, it is a chaotic politics, lurching from one extreme to the other. It is much more erratic than the politics conducted by a democratic organisation, a politics which can change with the rhythm of fluctuating influences of fractions and differing groups. [69]
In the spring of 1981, Walesa and the praesidium had been able to beat off the challenge to their strategy: it was those who opposed Walesa’s handling of the Bydgoszcz affair who resigned or lost their positions. By the summer, however, the balance of forces within the union began to change, as the paralysis within Solidarity became more evident. By the time of the union’s congress in September, the ‘radicals’ predominated in many of Solidarity’s regional organisations.
The Congress was held in two parts. At the first, which concerned itself with framing general policies, ‘radicals’ tended to dominate the proceedings. Resolutions were passed calling for free elections, appealing to workers in other East European countries to follow the Polish workers’ example and form their own free trade unions, calling for Solidarity to set up its own ‘people’s tribunal’ if the regime did not bring to court the former leaders responsible for the economic crisis. Walesa was censured for coming to a compromise agreement with the government over self-management (below), though the agreement itself was reluctantly accepted.
Yet the question of state power was still studiously avoided. Krzysztof Wyszkowski, secretary of the Solidarity Weekly editorial board, actually delivered a hostile attack on those who might dare to raise it. In a short article, ‘Extremists and stupid children’, he was as scathing against ‘one of the experts to the National Commission who wrote that the party had already been deprived of power and we should be looking around for something to replace it’ as he was against Party hardliners who were calling for the de-legalisation of Solidarity. The union’s role, he claimed, included that of defending the interests of the nation as a whole; so, if the good of the nation demanded it, the union should be prepared to drop some of its demands, however justified they might be. To this the ‘radicals’ made no reply. Most of the delegates preferred to ignore the question of power altogether. Asked whether the union should proceed cautiously or do whatever it pleased, one delegate replied that it should go carefully but do what it pleased anyway ... Nonetheless, premier Rakowski complained that the ‘radical factions of Solidarity’ had ‘hegemonised’ the first stage of the conference.
The impact of the radicals was again shown in the second part of the Congress. Three of the ‘radical’ regional leaders – Gwiazda from Gdansk, Jurczyk from Szczecin and Rulewski from Bydgoszcz – stood against Walesa for the union presidency, getting 45% of the vote between them. A number of Catholic ‘experts’ closely associated with the ‘moderate’ policy of the preceding months were knocked off the union’s national commission. One western socialist journalist reported that: ‘The radical current of the union has decisively oriented the second phase of the Congress, conceding to the moderate wing which practically ran the union over the last year the presidency of Walesa only. Solidarity has a National Commission majority independent of the Church ... and a radical programme.’ [70]
Yet things were not quite as simple as that. For the Congress allowed Walesa to handpick the day to day leadership of the union, the praesidium, even if it was nominally to be under the control of a more radical national commission.
And on a crucial issue that exploded in the middle of the second part of the Congress – that of the doubling of the price of cigarettes – Solidarity failed to take any concrete action. Jan Rulewski tried to insist that there be some discussion on how to respond to price increases: ‘We must discuss the issue of food. Otherwise we will look ridiculous. The whole world will say we are ignoring the main issue.’ Yet the union was soon to go back on its opposition to the cigarette price increases and merely to beg that the increased government revenue go on welfare payments to the lower paid. Despite the radical tone of the Congress, the union leadership was to continue, as before, to follow a path of discussions with the government and of urging an end to strikes, rather than of making any preparation for confrontation.
Part at least of the reason why this could happen was that the ‘radicals’ in the union were not yet clear what they themselves wanted. They too had accepted the view of the union as reformist the year before and were still far from abandoning that view. They wanted more radical action in order to force concessions from the regime, but it was still concessions they wanted, not the overthrow of the regime. None of them raised in their election addresses in any sense the idea of Solidarity forming an alternative to the regime.
A brief look at what was said by the three candidates who opposed Walesa shows how limited the perspective of the radicals still was.
Marian Jurczyk was the most popular runner-up in the election, achieving nearly three times as many votes as his nearest rival. When asked whether he was in favour of a government of national salvation he replied:
I’ve never been a politician. I’m a trade union activist. I want to defend the working people. I want them to get decent wages for their work and I want them to live a decent life. That’s my aim. [71]
It would be unfair to say that this sadly naive response summed up all of Jurczyk’s politics. He wanted to insist on rank and file control over the union leadership. He wanted a more militant line taken by the union, with fewer compromises and retreats. He wanted free elections to the Polish parliament and a government subordinated to it. However, he shared such views with the other candidates. It was his ‘honest Joe’ image, contrasting with the image of the other candidates as radicals and politicos, which seems to have accounted tor his popularity.
Jan Rulewski, severely beaten up by the police in Bydgoszcz, afterwards gained a reputation as a radical. His most interesting contribution to the pre-election discussion was an anti-Russian speech. It cost him many votes and he came bottom of the poll, but it was much more than an anti-Russian speech. He placed the Polish state in the international context and although he concentrated on Poland’s relationship with Russian imperialism, what he said could easily be extended to her relationship with her western imperial creditors:
The mass media will argue that I have gone beyond the limits of union activity. Ladies and gentlemen, the problems of the union have to be seen in a wider perspective. We have to examine foreign policy and no one can lawfully deny us the right to express opinions in this, as foreign policy is connected to economic matters and arms production. It is easy to prove that our activity, our control and formation of public opinion on foreign policy issues mean the control of state budgets, of how much is spent on armaments, and how much on minimum benefits for the seven million Poles who are starving. [72]
The third ‘radical’ candidate was Andrzej Gwiazda. We have already seen the very clear way he not only attacked the lack of union democracy, but at the same time drew the link between collaborationist policies and the bureaucratisation of the union. He concluded: ‘I think it is a mistake to think that it is possible to pacify the authorities by making concessions ... We will not avoid conflict by retreating, concessions can only lead us closer to the ultimate conflict.’
Yet in spite of this correct prognostication his position suffered a number of crucial weaknesses. In urging workers to ‘take control’ he was referring to the management of the economy rather than political control. As we shall see, without the latter this was ultimately a recipe for the incorporation of the workers’ movement into the existing bureaucratic state. Just as important was his inability to organise within the union, an inability that flowed at least in part from a view that implied that there was no need to do so. As he put it himself:
I believe that if ten million people decide for some reason not to overthrow the government, then a thousand leaders, however bloodthirsty, will not be able to do anything about it. Conversely, if ten million people want to overthrow the system then even the most collaborationist leaders will be unable to prevent it. [73]
Formally this was quite correct. But in the context of the desperate need for an alternative leadership in Solidarity it amounted, quite simply, to a refusal to give it. Just how desperate this need was, was revealed by Walesa’s tired and bewildered defeatism:
I am worried that we badly underestimate our partner. We have too much self-confidence and at the same time fail to notice problems, troubles and methods by which we can be defeated.
I mean that we should remember that winter is coming, they can exert pressure on us, and very cunningly so. Simply turn off the taps if we don’t show proper respect for them.
Our problem is that we do not talk often enough amongst ourselves, that we do not look at the partner who is well equipped, who tactically, step by step and in an organised way is attacking our credibility and society’s trust in us. This is a deliberate action leading to victory, but not our victory.
The radicals in Solidarity sensed, more and more clearly, that something was going wrong. But they could not understand exactly what. Hence, all their arguments and solutions were partial attacks on the problem. Lacking a revolutionary perspective, they were in the position of blindfolded people in a locked room, groping wildly for a way out. As they stumbled and argued, desperately aware that ‘moderation’ was producing more and more problems, the union as a whole was moving closer to disaster.
 
Reactions to paralysis: the self-management movement
Ideas about the control of the economy by workers had been expressed since the early days of Solidarity. For example in November 1980 the Szczecin paper Jednosc argued: ‘State ownership and social ownership of the means of production are two completely different concepts which should never be confused. The means of production may be owned by the state, but this does not mean that they are thereby the social property of the working class.’ [74] The struggle, it said, was for the transformation of the state ownership of the means of production into social ownership.
The Jednosc team were not typical of the movement. But this formulation of aspirations in the economic sphere came to be generally accepted. Solidarity had begun, for reasons we have explained, by being suspicious of workers’ self-management councils. But as the economic crisis intensified in the summer of 1981 the pressure grew, not so much to share responsibility for the economy, but for the workers to do something about the economy simply because no one else would.
The ‘Network’ organisation, linking the largest factories, sprang up to promote ideas of self-management. A meeting held in July attracted a thousand plant representatives. At that time there were self-management founding committees in 17 major factories. By the end of August the movement had spread to 3,000 workplaces and was putting considerable pressure on Solidarity to adopt its ideas.
One idea which was accepted very easily was that of electing the enterprise director. Had not the Polish workers already got rid of thousands of corrupt and inefficient state functionaries? It was an easy step into new struggles. The most famous of these was the strike on the state airways, LOT. The workers rejected the government appointee and elected their own. The government, in its turn, rejected the workers’ choice, offering them a selection between two air force generals. It claimed that LOT was part of the military defence establishment. In the light of the military attack upon the Polish people which was to follow, this statement acquires a sinister meaning. The issue went to a prolonged strike after which a not very satisfactory compromise was reached. During the strike posters appeared all over Warsaw saying “Self-management is the last chance for our economy. Support LOT workers.”
Other factories took up the same demand. An office equipment factory voted to sack its manager in mid-July. So did the giant Huta Katowice a little later. At Wroclaw the workers at an engineering plant employing 1500 decided to go about it systematically. They got the local polytechnic to devise a battery of tests (intelligence, speed of reaction, association and co-ordination, ability to make rapid decisions under pressure – the academics must have had fun). Candidates had an additional day being grilled by a panel of worker representatives. They were quite surprised, hardly anyone could do their tests! [75] Of course, when it came to it the director of the combine, who had given his consent to the exercise, withdrew it. It took a national uproar and the threat of a strike throughout the region to get the workers’ choice accepted.
But beyond the demand for workers to elect their own manager the ideas of the self-management movement became more confused. A good illustration of this confusion can be seen in the following selections from a discussion on self-management held in late May 1981 which included a number of members of the Warsaw leadership of Solidarity. [76]
Here is Zbigniew Bujak, Warsaw region chairman speaking:
The authorities could have set quite considerable social forces into motion, which could have carried out the social reform program independently from the union. But the authorities did not do this – counting, I don’t know – on stifling the movement perhaps, on being able to return to the old track? Hence the union, whether it likes it or not, must take on this task. It has to do it because the existence of the union is simply impossible without certain unavoidable, essential changes.
Jadwiga Staniszkis, a regional ‘expert’ was also present. She outlined a possible future scenario which such changes would make possible.
It seems to me that at present the confrontation is much more dramatic than it was in August. At this point we can really talk about revolution. Suppose that several provincial committees, say Legnica, Wroclaw, Krakow, informed the workplaces before a proposed general strike, that they will not hamper communications, that they will assist the smooth delivery of food supplies, that they will not obstruct the conduct of the strike. If 80% of the Party organisations and the youth organisations – they’re mostly Solidarity members – sympathise with us, then it’s a much more serious confrontation for the government than the events of August. Yet the consolidation process in society is still continuing. You have to remember that actually all revolutions in history lasted for a dozen or more years. Many different forms emerged along the way. I think that we are in the process of a profound change of the system, and that this is an irreversible process.
Bujak again: “We have a situation of very deep crisis. So here the union must put forward a strong case for, say, the minimum wage, while on the other hand the self-management must put forward a strong case for solving the crisis. The unions must say ‘we must give to our people and our members’. The self-management must say ‘we won’t give because we haven’t got it. We must rebuild the economy first.” Seweryn Jaworski, another member of the Solidarity leadership agreed. “I can only see a solution which works by the friction between these two forces, the self-management and the union ... It’s well known that without reforming the government, and the self-management will be the actual government, we cannot achieve the goals of the union. Because if we don’t have at our disposal considerable economic achievements, men the fulfilment of the union’s material aims is also quite out of the question. Wages will not be able to be raised, there will be no improvements in maternity pay, pensions, etc. And we’ll never force it out of the government, it’ll never be capable of fulfilling these aims because it has quite lost credibility.”
The discussion ranged widely. The NTO editor remarked, for example, how the continued existence of the union is dependent on the existence of self-management councils. At present the union was getting buried in negotiations which went on and on. “And we have already arrived at the conclusion that the defence of workers’ interests is completely impossible without a change of the whole economic structure. We can continue to defend workers’ interests only on the basis of a totally different system, whose axis and nucleus will be the self-management councils.”
Maciej Madeyski, another representative of the regional leadership, also saw the problem of the relationship between the self-management council and the state clearly, but drew quite a different conclusion:- “But you are leaving the state out of your view of the crisis, the fact that the banks belong to the state. But the enterprise economy cannot do without the bank and the role of the bank. The bank can easily refuse you credit and you lose all your perspectives. Because you have to reshape the whole economy and create a system of connecting vessels and the circle has to be closed. And the circle unfortunately can only be closed by the representatives of the self-management councils, i.e. the national councils and the Sejm, the government and so on back again. Then the self-management council is unnecessary because the Sejm is the self-management. I would refrain from calling on self-management councils to form.”
Madeyski went on to outline how for him, the problem was not so much the existence of the self-management council, but the freeing of the director from state control, from all that interference. The others persuaded him that the only way of doing this was to make him responsible only to the self-management council, because otherwise he’d obey the centre anyway. Madeyski was reluctant to accept this because he did not want the director to become “the creature of the workforce either”. His job would be to maximise the enterprise funds, while the workers council’s job would be to divide “that part of the fund earmarked for wages.” Madeyski did not say who would do the earmarking. The others mocked him gently for this, but he just got back into the discussion for long enough to mention the mixed economy, competition and buying capital and technology from the West.
Jaworski made an important point about the mood of the workers. “We have to realise that this reform is unavoidable,” he said, “and the administration won’t do it in a month of Sundays. Besides, there is absolutely no one who can enforce an order to make the workers really start working reliably. Only a self-management council can do it. You have to realise, the workers today don’t believe any more that their effort will really produce results. They know how often it has been wasted in the past, and today they are incapable of believing it unless they have ordered it themselves. Only then will they be able to accept the state of affairs.”
Even these glimpses indicate a fascinating discussion. They show workers grappling with desperately real problems. But there are two crucial gaps. Several of the participants approach the question of state power, but none of them grasps the nettle. And nowhere is there any account of why the state’s economic functioning has failed to meet up to the workers’ needs. Everyone recognised the problem, but no one recognised that however efficient the state, its goals and those of the workers are fundamentally opposed.
These gaps were to lead to serious problems both in the practice of self management and in the self management programme that the Solidarity Congress was to adopt in the autumn.
The problems in practice are shown by the issue of voluntary Saturday working. In mid-August Solidarity’s National Commission issued an appeal for workers to give up eight free Saturdays voluntarily to help solve the crisis. It was a proposal that got a lot of stick from the workers. One miner at a meeting in Silesia told representatives of the National Commission, ‘You dare to call on people to work their free Saturdays because the government has to be propped up. But who says we have to prop it up?’ [77] It was indeed a concession by Solidarity. But they only got workers to take it up by the promise that the destination of the coal produced on the voluntary Saturdays would be controlled by the self-management committees and the union. Under their control it would go to farmers, to the food manufacturing industry, to winter reserves, towards the purchase of drugs.
The same contradictions were to be embodied in the Solidarity programme adopted at the union’s congress in the autumn. The self-management scheme, complete with proposals for a second Sejm chamber and rural council reform, was proposed as something to exist alongside a state where the “leading role of the Party” was still sacrosanct. To make the picture a little less incongruous, electoral reforms were also proposed.
Section VI of the Solidarity program is devoted to ‘the self-managing republic’. Thesis 20 states “Genuine workers’ self-management will be the basis for a self-governing republic. The system which binds together political and economic power and is rounded on continual interference of Party activists in the functioning of economic enterprises, is the main cause of the crisis in which our economy finds itself. It is also the cause of an absence of equality of opportunity in professional life. The Party ‘nomenclature’ system makes any rational staffing policy impossible, and makes millions of non-Party personnel into second class workers. Today, the only possible way of changing this situation is the creation of genuine workers’ self-management councils, which would make each workforce into an authentic manager of the enterprise ... Our union demands that the co-operatives have their self-governing character returned to them. It is essential to create new laws guaranteeing the freedom of co-ops from government interference.”
Thesis 21 states: “Territorial self-governing councils, which must be legally, organisationally and financially independent, must be the genuine representatives of local communities.” The amplification of this point discusses free elections to local government, with complete freedom of social organisations or groups of citizens to put forward candidates. In order to achieve this, by the end of the year a draft of a new electoral law, constructed in consultation with Solidarity members should be put before the Sejm. The local self-management council is to have jurisdiction over the ‘totality of local affairs’ and is to have the power to act economically.
Thesis 22 states:- “Self-governing bodies and organisations should gain representation at the highest levels of government.” It goes on to say that the Sejm should have the role of the highest authority in the state returned to it and, by changes in the electoral law, regain a genuinely representational character. The creation of a second chamber of the Sejm is suggested whose job would be the supervision of the economic reform program.
Part of section III, on the crisis and the economic reform, outlines in detail what this means. The basic economic unit in Poland would be the ‘social enterprise’ run by a director hired and fired by the workers council. He would be free to act both at home and abroad in a free market on the basis of ‘balanced economic accounting’. Prices, except for certain very basic essentials, would be controlled by supply and demand but there must be anti-monopoly and consumer protection legislation.
The state would influence the activity of the enterprise by economic directives and mechanisms – prices, taxes, interest rates, exchange rates etc. Finally “The central plan must mirror the aims of society and be accepted by society. Hence public debate about the central plan is essential ... This requires the establishment of social control over the central planning office.” [78]
With the confusions embodied in this programme Solidarity had, in a sense, got the worst of both worlds.
On the one hand, the programme amounted to a direct challenge to the leading role of the Party. If workers’ self-management were to become a reality, then workers would have to determine the overall goal of production. The programme actually says it: ‘the central plan must mirror the aims of society’. But if workers tried to control the purposes of production, they would immediately come into sharp conflict with both the Warsaw Pact and the western bankers.
Yet, on the other hand, the programme is hopeless when it considers questions of power. In a classic reformist manner, the union wanted to separate economic from political questions, and to institutionalise each in a separate chamber of the Polish Parliament. Behind this mistake lies a failure in understanding. Solidarity treats the crisis as if the problem is that political and economic power are fused, and hence need to be separated; when the real problem is that both political and economic power are in the hands of a ruling class, standing over society and imposing its own goals into production.
There are also elements in the programme of so-called ‘market socialism’ (on the Yugoslav model): ‘Self-managed’ enterprises are to compete, with the inevitable consequences of bankruptcy, unemployment and so on. But the key weakness is the continuing failure to face up to the question of state power, without which self-management would be a caricature. So, for all its creativeness, the self-management movement still remained trapped in the reformist perspective.
 
Reactions to paralysis: parties and politics
The inability of either Solidarity or the self-management movement to offer an immediate, positive way out of the crisis promoted a third phenomenon of note – a sudden growth of interest in the idea of forming political parties, and of reforming Polish political institutions.
The first group to gain from this was a small grouping of extreme nationalists, the Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN). A tiny insignificant group before August 1980, the KPN offered little but an uncompromising anti-Russian stance and – like the regime’s hardliners – anti-semitism. Nonetheless, the paralysis in Solidarity caused a number of people to begin to take an interest in the KPN, especially when the government held a few of its leaders as political prisoners. Solidarity, while firmly dissociating itself from the KPN’s politics, felt it should support the campaigns for the political prisoners. Already, in Easter 1981, we received reports of growing KPN influence in rural areas. By July, Jan Litynski of KOR was complaining of its growth. [79]
One thing that helped the KPN grow was the fact that 36 years of Stalinist rule had blurred memories of the pre-war independent Poland to which the KPN harked back. Many Solidarity offices sported portraits of Marshall Pilsudski, whom people remembered only as the man who had led the Polish national independence struggle before 1918. Forgotten were his later actions as dictator, suppressing strikes as viciously as the post-war Stalinist regime and gaoling political opponents in his concentration camp at Bereza. Forgotten too were the still more brutal anti-working-class policies of the National Democrats, fore-runners of the KPN.
The KPN’s chief attraction was its militant anti-Russianism and its seeming readiness to contemplate total struggle against the regime. This allowed the KPN to influence some members of Solidarity, because it was the only grouping linking opposition to the regime with a more general political perspective. Revolutionary Marxism could have met these activists’ aspirations, pulling them away from the KPN’s anti-semitic or anti-gypsy filth.
Despite its growth, the KPN was never a force capable of initiating any action or directing popular energies into any real struggle against the regime. But its rabid nationalism and militaristic undertones did have one important side-effect: it helped focus people’s attention on the Russians as the only enemy, and strengthened the illusion that the Polish army could not possibly threaten the Polish workers’ movement. In the end, it was Jaruzelski who reaped where the KPN had sown.
Partly in reaction to the paralysis in Solidarity, and partly also in response to the KPN’s growth, the idea of ‘political parties’ began to gain popularity. Jacel Kuron told a meeting of the Solidarity National Commission in July, ‘The awareness of the necessity for a transformation is extraordinarily strong. Wherever we turn there is the call for a party. I’ve already heard this demand several times in this hall. “Let’s form a party”.’
In the autumn interest in ‘political’ solutions took official form in Solidarity’s programme, published after the Congress. There, as we have seen, proposals for parliamentary and local government reform were integrated with the union’s proposals for self-management. The ideas for political reform were also taken up by workers in the autumn. In mid-September the Warsaw Solidarity bulletin, Niezaleznosc (Independence) demanded that the union have the right to introduce legislation to the Sejm, simultaneously pointing out the undemocratic procedures for Sejm elections: ‘Nothing gives you, the deputies of 1980,’ it warned, ‘any basis to consider yourselves the nation’s elected ones.’ A few days later Solidarity announced that its price for cooperation with the regime in resolving the economic crisis was free elections and workers’ self-management.
After the Congress, some workers took the union’s programme seriously. In October a construction machinery plant in Wroclaw held a referendum on the ‘leading role of the Party’. At Braniewo workers set up an ‘initiative group’ to discuss proposed changes in the electoral law and to form an electoral team to ‘concern itself with conducting the elections to the National Councils’. A similar group in Krakow prepared to put forward candidates and campaign for them. In Wysokie Mazowieckie the local Solidarity branch demanded that it be involved in the selection of candidates for the prefectural leadership.
Outside the union, other moves were made. Kuron, with a few prominent Solidarity activists, announced on 22nd November the ‘Clubs for a Self-Governing Republic’. The founding document called for ‘socio-political formations’ which could be nuclei of political parties in a democratic state. The ‘Clubs’ should be formed at places of work or residence with a view to creating the proper conditions for ‘unrestricted exchange of social and political ideas’, ‘putting the idea of a Self-Governing Poland into practice’, and ‘undertaking actions on behalf of the humanisation of law as well as work.’
In one sense, the step was important: overt political organisation was being announced. But the timid formulations and beating around the bush (Clubs not a party) contrasted sharply with the urgent needs of the time, and with the rather bolder moves already taken in some regional sections of Solidarity. The founding document was hopelessly soggy. While it maintained that ‘a self-governing republic means a social order in which everyone acts as a subject, has his part in creating and distributing resources, in shaping political life’, it also said ‘the central authority should be, as much as possible, circumscribed (our emphasis) by organs of workers’ and territorial self-government, by organs of cooperative movements and consumers associations’.
The vision is still utterly reformist, blind to the class nature of the state. Workers and local self-management bodies are not to own the state, just to circumscribe it. In a way, Kuron’s vision sums up Solidarity’s real dilemma: nowhere in the world was there a workers’ movement that circumscribed its state half as well as Solidarity did after August 1980- yet, because the state was never theirs, they could not impose their own goals and needs onto society.
It may be that another attempt to form a party began in Szczecin. The day before Jaruzelski’s coup, Moscow radio complained that Solidarity representatives in the shipyard there were recruiting to a ‘Polish Workers Party’.
By itself, the attempt to form parties did not help the workers resolve the crisis in their movement. They saw parties as something to exist outside of Solidarity. Their purpose, to echo what Borusewicz had said so many months earlier, was to ‘remove people’s social expectations from the shoulders of Solidarity’ and allow it to act as the leaders had always wanted – as a pure, reformist trade union. Parties were to institutionalise the reformist distinction between Political’ and ‘economic’ questions.
Just as, discussing self-management, Solidarity sought workers’ control of production as if this could be separated from control of the state, so the reverse of the same coin appears with parties. Had they succeeded, the effect would have been to uncouple the organised power of workers to change society from organisations seeking that change – demobilising the political potential of the workers’ movement.
At no point have we evidence of any attempt to form a party which saw its task as acting within Solidarity to argue that the strength of workers in the factories and localities must be directed at replacing bureaucratic power with workers’ power.
If the idea of parties attracted politicised activists, it had far less impact among the mass of rank-and-file workers. In July Litynski reported that attempts to build parties had been unsuccessful, and Bujak said that in the Ursus factory in Warsaw there was a lack of interest in the idea. [80]
The fact that the idea of parties emerged at all shows that people wanted solutions to larger problems than could be answered by a mere trade union, committed to winning reforms for workers. But the idea could not take off seriously without the presence of revolutionary socialists working to develop a party as a centre of ferment inside the mass organisation of the working class, not as a fifth wheel that would not disturb the functioning of a reformist union.
 
Hunger marches and revolts from below
The impasse in Solidarity’s national leadership, especially after the general strike over Bydgoszcz was called off, was matched by a sharp drop in the level of strike activity from April until mid-July 1981. But the lull could not last. The economic crisis was simply too serious. Rising prices and continual shortages of food meant growing hardship for workers and their families. The old, the sick and young children suffered worst. Workers’ hearts broke as even providing the next meal for their children became an insoluble problem. The strain on family life became unbearable. Women were queueing all night – in one case, for 36 hours – just to get their ration allowances.
In mid-July the regime announced plans for food and fuel price rises of up to 400%, and a cut of one fifth in the August and September meat ration. From then on, strikes and hunger marches became a daily feature. Only, this time they were often called despite the opposition of the union’s praesidium. In the workplaces, rank-and-file activity revived. From mid-July to mid-August there were strikes in at least a dozen centres, and over a wide range of issues. Among the most notable were those in the Polish airline, LOT, where workers struck over the choice of manager, in Gdynia where dockers refused to load food for export, in Olsztyn and Krakow where printers closed the papers in protest at TV ‘slanders’ against Solidarity, in Bydgoszcz where the transport workers demanded the manager be kicked out for corruption, in Radom where again the demand for an inquiry into the repression of 1976 was raised.
And new forms of spectacular action, the hunger marches, exploded onto the streets. In Lodz, the protests lasted for three days: ‘The 15 buses taking part ... were bedecked with huge banners bearing the word ‘hunger’. They drove in slow procession down the street and stopped for two minutes outside the headquarters of the local mayor who has said that his pleas for additional meat supplies have fallen on deaf ears.’ Two days later thousands of women marched down the same streets.
In Warsaw, a similar motorcade of public service vehicles was stopped by police and prevented from filing past the Central Committee offices. The demonstration refused to disperse and blocked the centre of Warsaw for two days, showing in the most literal sense how workers could still paralyse the regime.
The crisis, of course, fed on itself. A senior government official declared, ‘One third of the country’s work force at any time is actually standing in a queue.’ An official trade union paper reported, ‘Because of under-nourishment six to eight miners now have to do the work that previously two could manage.’ [81]
At the root lay the hard currency famine, which crippled industry and took away every incentive for peasants to take their produce to the state markets. What was the point, they asked, when you can buy nothing with the money, no coal, no fertiliser, no farm machinery spares?
In these circumstances, workers’ privations grew, and with them the intensity of their protests. Tensions rose again to levels not seen since the Bydgoszcz affair. Kania began threatening the use of the police against street protests. Russian manoeuvres began again, this time around the Baltic. Archbishop Glemp declared that ‘Polish people are being guided by undesirable emotions’ and urged them to work ‘for the good of the country.’
The Solidarity leadership responded to this rise in activity by the rank and file by trying to cool things down. At Czestochowa, on strike alert over food rations, they said, ‘We want action to be as moderate as possible. We do not want people to take to the streets.’ The Financial Times reported that Walesa was battling to prevent radicals taking action over food shortages which might deliver a crippling blow to the Warsaw government. He appealed for an end to the protests. Solidarity, in an effort to head off the pressure from below, announced a boycott of the August ration cards in response to the reduced allowance. The call was widely supported. It caused little additional hardship, for most people had ample spare coupons left from previous months that they had been unable to spend. What, they asked, is a Polish sandwich? Why, a meat coupon between two bread coupons.
Solidarity’s appeals for an end to the protests did have some effect: the level of protest died down a little, though never entirely. The tension between the leadership and the memberships in the regions, however, simmered on. ‘Solidarity officials,’ reported the Financial Times, ‘in the regions and factories are openly critical of Lech Walesa for not moving in now to fill the power vacuum created by the communist party’s loss of authority.’ [82]
Hardly had one section of workers been talked back to work than other groups started coming out on strike. Workers were tying issues together, shifting from economic demands to others, as the crisis bore down on them. The union began linking questions of ‘fundamental reform’ to the question of handling the crisis, demanding its own commissions to control food production, distribution and sale. At Krosno, a rally started out with ration demands and proceeded to agitate, additionally, for ‘greater factory worker autonomy.’
The crisis had spread to engulf every commodity. Petrol queues were a mile long or more, and Poles now joined any queue whether they needed the goods or not. Customers in shoeshops would buy any size going, without bothering to try them on: they would come in handy for bartering later. The issue of supplies forced workers into a host of local strikes. Ignoring the leadership’s calls for a halt, the towns of Piotr Trybunalski, Tomaszow Mazowiecki, Niewiadow and Zyrardow struck. Many of these ‘local’ strikes were very large: 180,000 joined a one-hour general strike at Jelenia Gora; and 14,000 women textile workers at Zyrardow occupied the mills, ‘openly weeping, saying they had no food for their children’. Those women were to stay in occupation for three weeks, despite Walesa’s pleas and a convoy of Russian military vehicles that rumbled past their windows for a whole intimidating day. [83] At one point in late September something like two thirds of Poland’s provinces were affected by strikes. The issues in the strikes varied, and changed, from urgent demands for food to national political and economic issues. At Koszolin workers proclaimed a strike alert in support of ‘a social council to supervise production and distribution’; near the Russian border they threatened to halt coal trains headed for the USSR if the food situation did not improve.
In the third week of October, the Guardian reported: ‘Strikes and threats of strikes continue to dominate Poland, despite earlier promises by Solidarity that they would try to avoid a possible showdown.’ And, a week later, ‘the growing strike wave appears to be the most serious since Solidarity was formed in August 1980.’
While the workers, all across Poland, were raising implicit and explicit demands that Solidarity act, Walesa and the praesidium did everything possible to pursue appeasement with the regime. But it was not only the Walesa group who saw the strikes and demonstrations as a threat to the possibility of compromise. So too did some of the old KOR activists who had developed the theory of the ‘self-limiting revolution’ the previous year. Litynski saw the hunger movement as a totally negative phenomenon, describing it as ‘a danger the union has not known how to avoid’ which ‘risks degenerating into unofficial strikes’. Even the radical Szczecin delegation to the Solidarity Congress suggested, when criticising Walesa for doing nothing about food price increases, that the union should offer to accept the rises in return for access to the media.
Many of the ‘politicos’ in Solidarity just failed to understand that the union’s strength came from its ability to provide a focus for people who were beginning, for the first time ever, to struggle to control their own circumstances, however clumsy their endeavours. In repudiating these struggles, they were undercutting the very process of radicalisation that provided their sole support. Their disdain for ‘economism’ was a disdain for the very processes by which masses of workers, often the most oppressed, were becoming open to political ideas. In struggle, workers shift rapidly from ‘economic’ to ‘political’ demands, and back: the condition for that leaping, forward movement is the mass struggle.
The wave of marches, strikes, demonstrations and occupations of the summer and autumn could have been a source of massive new power and life for Solidarity. But that could only occur to the extent that a nationwide tendency developed within the union – a party, in effect – prepared to give support to each separate struggle, despite the praesidium’s opposition, and willing to draw them all together mto a single movement challenging the state power and the praesidium’s compliance with that power.
But ‘spontaneity’ alone is not sufficient, nor anger, nor desperate need. Without such a centralising effort, the wave of struggle was bound to die down, in disappointment and exhaustion. Wage rises could not supply food: if the food stores were empty, the queues just became longer. The problem was not simply to get bread, it was the bakery the workers needed – and that was beyond their control, and was beyond Solidarity’s ambitions to take it.
The government argued day in and day out that the strikes were worsening the supply situation. At first people refused to listen. Those involved in the strike wave knew they had no choice but to fight. But, as sections began to return to work, some of them began to believe the regime, and to criticise those still on strike. And why not? After all, Solidarity’s own praesidium was saying, in effect, much the same as the regime. Within Solidarity’s own ranks, the signs of confusion and demoralisation began to appear. The strike wave reached its peak at the end of October, and then declined quite rapidly. Five weeks later, one representative told a national delegate meeting that, whereas previously no one had believed the regime’s lies, now a third of all workers counted Solidarity, as well as the government, as being to blame for the crisis. Karol Modzelewski argued ‘The union is not as strong as it was. It is weaker, and every activist knows it.’ On November 8th, a poll reported that only 30% of people were ready to participate in a general strike.
In turning their backs on the ‘narrow’, ‘spontaneous’, ‘economistic’ movements of their rank and file members against plain material privation, the Solidarity leaders had also ensured that some at least of these workers turned away from the union in disappointment. Yet the National Commission never seems to have recognised the realities of the situation. It developed in November a tremendous series of plans, whereby every plant and region was to form a Union Winter Aid Committee to coordinate efforts to get the population through the miseries of the coming winter. The plans were brilliant – on paper. [84] To carry them into effect, the union needed only one thing: state power. And it had rejected the possibilities its own members had given it, through their struggles, to move towards that necessity.

Notes
57. Robotnik 1, August 1981.
58. Gdansk Solidarnosc, Biuletyn Informacyjny, nr: 4/33/81, 30 February 1981.
59. Guardian, 22 January 1981.
60. Guardian, 29 January 1981.
61. Guardian, 19 February 1981.
62. Guardian, 25 May 1981.
63. Solidarnosc, Congress Post, 1 October 1981.
64. Robotnik, op. cit.
65. Speaking to the Warsaw region of the union, quoted by Kuron in Robotnik, ibid.
66. Robotnik, ibid.
67. Gdynia Solidarnosc, Biuletyn Informcyjny, 16 April 1981.
68. Servis magazine, published by Gdansk Polytechnic, 24 July 1981.
69. Ibid.
70. Il Manifesto, 20 October 1981. The praesidium was in fact chosen with little regard for democracy. Solidarnosc described the election as an invitation by Walesa for volunteers who would be ready to ‘live in Gdansk and put up with me’. One eye-witness reports ‘our leader’ as hand-picking his team and vetoing several nominations by announcing that he would not work with them.
71. Quoted in Socialist Review, December 1981.
72. Ibid.
73. Ibid.
74. Cited in Labour Focus on Eastern Europe IV, 4–6.
75. Odrodzenie (Rebirth), nr. 10/11, 11–18 September 1981.
76. NTO monthly (Warsaw) 7/19, 1 June 1981.
77. Solidarnosc, nr. 22, 28 August 1981. One miner said, ‘Before August, as I went into the mine, there was always some appeal hanging by the entrance from the management or the Party, urging us to work. Now this appeal might as well hang in the same display case. What guarantees have we got that this coal will go to the farmers?’
78. Program NSZZ Solidarnosc, published as a supplement in Solidarnosc, nr. 29, 16 October 1981.
79. Robotnik, op. cit.
80. Solidarnosc, nr. 35, 27 November 1981; Solidarnosc, nr. 34, 20 November 1981; Robotnik, op. cit.
81. Cited Guardian, 4 August 1981.
82. Guardian, 29 July 1981; Financial Times, 14 August 1981.
83. Solidarnosc, nr. 22, 28 August 1981.
84. References from Solidarnosc, nr. 32, 6 November 1981; Guardian, 21 and 27 October 1981; Robotnik, op. cit.; and Bulletin (Information Centre for Polish Affairs, London), no. 18/81.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (2-10. The crisis deepens)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

II. ‘Accumulate! Accumulate!’ –
Polish state capitalism in crisis
10. The crisis deepens

What the Gierek regime had hoped was that by the mid-1970s the Polish economy would begin to pay off its debts and maintain its new growth rates through an expansion of manufactured exports. [63] The actual outcome was quite different: the crisis re-asserted itself with a vengeance. ‘External’ and ‘internal’ causes combined to turn Poland’s boom into a massive crash. First, the world economy, after a brief and hectic boom from 1971 to 1973, went into its deepest postwar recession. It thus became harder for Poland to sell its exports. In some cases, Western nations adopted protectionist policies against Polish goods: in 1974, for instance, Italy banned imports of Polish livestock and beef and tightened up on other Polish goods, pushing Polish trade with Italy into deficit. [64]
The world recession was combined with an upturn in the inflationary spiral: Poland got less goods in return for its hard currency borrowings. Rising world interest rates raised the cost of servicing Poland’s mounting debts to the West: by 1976, debt-service costs to the West had already risen to 42% of the value of Polish exports, and the percentage was to keep rising. [65]
But it was not only its relationships with the West, on which most commentators have focussed, that caused problems. Russia is Poland’s chief oil supplier; from 1975, Russia began to raise the price of its oil exports to other Comecon countries towards OPEC levels. Data on trade relations between Poland and Russia are hard to come by, but it appears that the Russian renegotiated the terms of trade between themselves and their satellites in ways that were very advantageous to themselves. Chris Harman quotes sources suggesting that Russia raised its oil prices to its allies by 130% in 1975, and that price rises on Russian raw materials to the rest of the Warsaw Pact cost them as much as one third of their planned growth in national income. [66] Recently, Kultura published the text of a speech by Marian Rajski, a delegate to the PUWP Gdynia City Conference on 16 May 1981, in which the speaker went so far as to attribute the entire Polish crisis to Russian robbery-through-trade. He cited figures to suggest that Polish exports to Russia increased in the period 1976–80 by 22% a year, or nearly four times the growth of Polish production. A high proportion of Polish manufactures, he suggested, flowed straight from Polish factories and shipyards across the Russian border at very disadvantageous prices in transferable rubles. Since much of Polish industrial production embodies hard-currency imports from the West, the Russians were thereby obtaining ‘semi-Western goods’ at no cost to their foreign currency balances, and offsetting tendencies to crisis in their domestic economy at Poland’s expense. In the absence of more information, Rajski’s important article is difficult to evaluate: most probably, he exaggerates, in blaming the whole crisis on Russian price-imperialism, yet it was nonetheless a significant factor. [67]
It is not – as some Polish official apologists claim [68] – that Poland was simply the victim of externally induced crisis: the Polish regime was an active participant in the very processes that produced world stagflation. Poland’s unrestrained rush for growth helped push up the world price of oil and other raw materials, as its massive borrowings helped shove up interest rates. Its cutbacks in machinery imports etc. in the later 1970s added to the world recession.
As the world economy turned downwards, however, the government’s expectations remained daftly optimistic. The Prime Minister, Jaroszewicz, announced in December 1975 that the share of Polish industrial output destined for exports on all markets could rise from 14.4% to at least 18%, implying an annual increase in real terms of around 12%. (The actual growth in 1976 was 5% and in 1977 8%.) The share of exports in total industrial output actually rose hardly at all. [69] The same Jaroszewicz also opined that the world oil crisis was only a minor passing ripple in the development of world economy and trade. [70] Blindly, the government persisted in its policies long after the danger-signals were apparent.
When the planners finally came to formulate the goals for 1976-80, they were forced to cut back the growth targets. However, if in the first half of the decade the problem was over-fulfilment of the ‘plans’, in the second half the problem was the reverse. [71] The whole economy spiralled downwards into chaos and crisis.
The most immediate problem was the rapidly mounting foreign debt, and the associated deficit in foreign trade. The answer seemed to be to raise exports and cut imports. But neither task was as simple as might appear.
Exports were raised from 1976–79, but the export growth rate fell by comparison with the first half of the 1970s. World markets were tightening, and the persistent problem of the quality of engineering goods (of which so much had been hoped) only made things worse. As the crisis deepened, in any case it became difficult to maintain production schedules in export industries. In 1980 exports at constant prices fell (although dollar receipts, due to inflation, rose). [72] In an effort to earn hard currency, Poland had to step up its exports of fuels, raw materials, and foodstuffs – all goods that were badly needed in the domestic economy, and whose growing shortage was to worsen the economic crisis.
Imports were not easily reduced. In terms of constant prices, the regime managed to achieve very small reductions in imports in 1977, 1979 and 1980. But in the real world, prices were not constant: only in 1977 was there a small reduction (of $300m) in hard currency spending on imports. Import spending rose again in 1978 to the level of 1976, and rose again in 1979. [73] In the one year that a 0.3 billion dollar reduction in the import bill was achieved, the cost of debt servicing rose by a full billion dollars, and total debt to the West rose by $3.1 billions.
Western capital had permitted the Polish bureaucrats to indulge their ‘propensity to excessive investment’ to the hilt. Now the result was an exaggerated form of the crisis-cycle noted earlier. There were still more unfinished plants, whose completion depended on further imports from the West. The ‘broadening of the investment front’ in the early 1970s now appeared as a broadening of the crisis-tendency. The shortages due to both increasing stringency in imports and the growing failures in domestic supplies meant that it took longer to complete investments that had been started: the average ‘gestation period’ for completed projects rose by a third between 1975 and 1980. In 1975, 37% of completed investments in the state sector had taken longer than planned to reach completion; in 1980 the proportion was 61% (and in the building industry it was 84%). [74]
Huge resources were tied up in monster projects, some of them undertaken in conjunction with western multinationals. At Katowice, a massive steel complex was begun in 1974, its siting determined by the personal whim of Gierek. The cost over-run on the project was 500%. By 1980 Huta Katowice contained 8.8 billion zlotys worth of unused machinery. The second stage of the project had to be cancelled. [75] The Ursus Tractor factory in Warsaw began a huge development plan in 1974, in conjunction with Massey-Ferguson and Perkins Diesels. The plan was that Ursus should, by 1981, produce 75,000 tractors and 90,000 engines, at a projected cost of $400m. By 1981 the project had already cost $840m, and was expected to take at least another four years to complete. By 1979, much of the expensive machinery for the project had been imported, but was standing around in crates because the floors had not been built. Because the plant was not built on time, such tractors as were produced depended heavily on imported forgings and castings and other components, involving an import cost of $4,000 per tractor. [76] The Berliet bus plant at Jelezansk only produced one fifth of its intended output in 1980; each bus produced cost $6,000 in imported parts, and was anyway unsuitable for the Polish roads and climate. The big PVC plant at Wloclawek, due for completion in 1979, was still unfinished in 1981; this involved massive waste at the Plock ethylene project, built by Japanese capital and completed on time, which depended on Wloclawek to take its output. [77]
Much of the investment development has taken the form of purchase of licenses from western capitalist concerns. Many of these were very import intensive; and 20% – though paid for – were never in fact used. In any case, the benefits of much of the imported technologies and machinery proved illusory: ‘Apart from disappointments with diffusion and post-license developments it also appears to be the case that not enough exports are being generated in licensed activity to pay for total license costs. Revenues covered 59% of costs in transactions with capitalist economies in 1977.’ [78] Failures in agriculture (see below) forced the regime into large food and fodder imports.
In these circumstances, Poland’s debts to the West continued to mount. The cost of servicing the debts rose very sharply, as Poland was forced to rely more and more on short-term, high interest borrowings from banks:



Gross Debt as Percentage of Exports (US dollars millions) [79]




 


1971


1975


1976


1977


1978


1979




Gross Debt


1,138


8,014


11,483


13,967


17,844


21,100




Net Debt (Gross Debt
less Commercial Assets)


   764


7,381


10,680


13,352


16,972


20,000




Gross Debt as %
of Exports


–


194


259


286


324


333




Debt Service as %
of Exports


–


  30


  42


  59


  79


  92



Debt servicing costs grew by more than 20 times over the decade 1971–80. The trade balance, in deficit from 1972, stayed in the red The rate of investment fell, in a series of abrupt and crisis, enhancing steps. In 1975 it had grown by 14.2%, but the following year it rose by only 2.5%. It then declined further. As a percentage of national income, accumulation fell from 34.1 % in 1976 to 31.5% in 1977 to 30.8% in 1978. The cut in 1979 was more drastic (26.2%) and again in 1980 (20.2%). These investment cuts ‘were not planned beforehand; they were imposed by bottlenecks in construction and installation, and by the reduced important capacity of the Polish economy’. [80]
The result was a growth in the proportion of ‘frozen’ resources in the Polish economy. Total investment outlays over the whole decade 1971–80 amounted to 4,834 billion zlotys, but at the end of 1980 over a sixth (821 billion) were tied up in unfinished projects, whose completion costs were estimated at a further 1,500 billion zlotys. This involved a vast waste of capital resources, much of it actually rusting in crates in the warehouses. The whole process has involved an immense destruction of capital, extracted by the bureaucracy from the labours of the workers and peasants of Poland and incapable of being used. A relatively timid Polish commentator wrote in 1979:
Our “great leap forward” in the early years of the present decade has left in its wake greater distortions between the various sectors and branches of our economy than existed before. This is a great burden. The resulting bottlenecks prevent us from making proper use of our expanded and considerably modernised economic potential. What is more, we have no chance to fill the existing gaps in supply by increasing our imports. Quite the opposite – the present growth in imports must be arrested. This is the result of our taking foreign loans without considering the export potential of our economy and investing those monies in branches of the economy that were import intensive. The consequence is the prospect of a long-term balance-of-payments problem. The disproportions have lowered the overall efficiency of the economy, and blatant signs of wastefulness in our economy have rampantly increased. [81]
In these circumstances, the productivity of fixed capital fell sharply, beginning its fall in 1975, and falling faster and faster in each subsequent year. [82] The declining efficiency of the economy meant that in the first quarter of 1978 three times as many enterprises as in the same period of 1977 were not managing to achieve their planned tasks, often through lack of needed inputs-Under these conditions, further falls in the quality of production were registered, and managers and workers became more and more cynical. [83] Shortages led to ‘chain’ losses of output, in a steepening vicious circle.
The outcome was finally registered in 1981, when the Polish economy had nose-dived into slump and bankruptcy:
Hundreds of projects, due for completion or starting this year, have now been abandoned, more than 40 of them very substantial. A company has now been set up in Warsaw whose sole responsibility is to sell or lease whatever it can of the expensive but unused equipment that had been bought in specially for these shelved projects. [84]
The Sunday Times reported, on the day of the military coup:
In and around Warsaw stand dozens of half-finished or under-used factories, like the $400 million colour TV plant built by RCA and Corning Glass, financed with a $75 million credit from the US Exim Bank. It is at present operating at 20 per cent capacity because there is no hard currency to pay for imported components and raw material. [85]
The so-called ‘planned economy’ of Poland was in chaos. The exiled Polish economist, Brus, wrote in 1979 that the economy seemed ‘ever more strongly to be drifting under the influence of uncontrolled processes, controlled by neither plan nor market’. The economic boom had become a monster that no one could control till it began, in the words of a Polish sociologist, ‘to suffocate itself because of the bottlenecks in its structure’. [86] Reviewing the whole period, George Blazyca commented, ‘The mechanism of adjustment from one policy to another is evidently usually economic and social crisis.’ [87] The economic ‘planners’ found that the economy was less and less ‘steerable’. The old methods for resolving crises were less and less appropriate: it became harder to designate a small number of projects as ‘priority’ sectors and to put all the emphasis on completing these. The more the economy was ‘modernised’, the greater the number of candidates for ‘priority’ status, to the point where the very notion of ‘priorities’ became meaningless:
The irreconcilable claims of different economic agents and the overambitious conflicting targets set for the economy led to the practical disintegration of economic control. There was a proliferation of “priorities” (exports, essential consumption goods, completion of half-finished investment projects, modernisation, motorisation, housing, armaments) ... [88]
Faced with this chaos, enterprise managers added their own contributions: given the growing shortages of supplies, especially imported inputs, they developed their tendency to hoarding: in 1979, industrial inventories rose three times as fast as production. [89]
Hardly surprisingly, the growth rate fell. The average growth per annum of national income in 1970–75 had been 9%; the target for 1975–80 was 7.3% a year, but the actual results were 6.8% in 1975, 5% in 1977 and 3% in 1978. In 1979 national income produced actually fell by 2.3% – an event previously unparalleled in the postwar history of Poland. The fall continued in 1980. The estimate for 1981 is at least a 15% drop in production.
The growing crisis in production was, of course, paralleled in the sphere of consumption. The growth in real wages of the first half of the 1970s first slowed down, and then went into reverse. In 1978 money wages rose by 5.7% on average, but the cost of living – on official figures – rose by 8.5%. Real wages, on the official index, thus fell by 2.6% (against a planned rise of 1.8%). [90] The fall continued into 1979 and 1980. The ‘monetary balances’ (unspendable wages) in the hands of the population continued to grow (on average, over the decade 1971–80, they grew by 16.2% a year).
One thing that the workers’ struggles of 1970–71 had impressed on the government was the danger of tampering with food prices. This was one reason why the growth policy of the early 1970s had not involved any significant element of reform of Poland’s chaotic prices system. Official food prices were controlled, but at the cost to the state of a huge and rising burden of subsidies, amounting by the late 1970s to almost 40% of the state budget. Faced with the growing crisis in the mid-1970s, the state attempted to force through a massive series of price rises, announced in July 1976. Meat was supposed to rise by an average of 69%, sugar by 100%, butter and cheese by more than a third; in all, the rises were reckoned to add some 16% to the cost of living. But the reply by the workers at Radom, Ursus, Plock and elsewhere was instantaneous: there were strikes and riots, and within 24 hours the regime withdrew the rises. As a result, the subsidy programme was maintained, and further expanded: by the summer of 1980, subsidies were costing the state almost 21 times what they had in 1971.
In a further effort to overcome this problem, and to shift the costs of the crisis onto the workers, the state began in 1977 to move meat supplies into the ‘commercial shops’, where prices were three or four times those in the normal stores. The ‘commercial shops’ sold 8% of the meat supplies in 1978, and 18% in 1979. In July 1980, moves to shift still more meat into the ‘commercial’ network – in effect, to raise prices again – provoked the first of the series of strikes that led in August, to the formation of Solidarity.
In reality, the fall in real living standards was greater than suggested by the official figures, for shortages of all manner of consumer goods became chronic. Getting hold of wanted goods came to depend on queuing, luck, corruption and ‘connections’. Some goods could only be obtained on the ‘internal export’ market, in exchange for hard currency. The black market flourished. Inequalities in income were now matched by other, much resented, inequalities in access to goods and services, which de facto became available chiefly to the privileged and the powerful. The stink of corruption in Polish society – portrayed in Wajda’s film, Wodzirej – became apparent to all.
It was by no means only in the industrial sector that the crisis made itself felt. The food supply system also ran up against the internal barriers identified earlier. In 1979–80 meat consumption rose by 1.6%, but the weight of cattle butchered in Poland fell by 3.6%. In the same period, despite its falling domestic meat supplies, Poland stepped up its exports of animals and meat products by 6.4% – covering the gap only through a 562.6% rise in its imports of meat, meat products and fats (from 9,100 to 60,300 tons). [91]
Polish agricultural performance had improved somewhat up to 1976, but then declined:



Poland’s Agricultural Performance [92]




 


1970


1976


1979


1980




Vegetable output (bn zl.,
1976–77 prices)


  315.7  


  363.4  


  342.3  


  290.4  




Mineral fertilisers
(kg per hectare)


  123.6  


  193.3  


  188.9  


  192.9  




Production of vegetables per
hectare in grain units


    25.5  


  31.2  


  28.6  


  24.2  




Use of pesticides (kg per ha)


      0.39


    0.68
(1977)


    0.50


    0.49




Import of grain (000 tons)
(from the west)


2504     
1348     


6092     
5701     


7250     
6575     


7718     
7278     




Import of animal feed (000 tons)


  439     


1128     


1444     


1445     




Value of total grain and animal feed
import in ‘currency zlotys’ (mn)


  824     


3596     


4295     


5456     



The worsening agricultural situation placed more strain on the balance of payments. Behind the agricultural crisis lay official neglect if, and actual destructive policies towards, farm production. After some small liberalising moves towards the peasantry in the early 1970s, the state began to reassert its old policies. Most of the investment in agricultural production (around 75% of the total) was directed into the state farm and cooperative sector (amounting at most to about 25% of the farm system), while the larger private peasant sector received only 25% of agricultural investment. [93]
Government policy, which has always been relatively hostile to the peasant sector, was to shift land to the state and cooperative sectors, despite the fact that these are actually less efficient. [94] The industrial boom pulled many peasant farmers out of the countryside, reducing private agricultural employment over the decade from 4.4m to 3.3m (in the ‘socialised’ sector, employment rose by 0.3m). The industrial crisis involved shortages, not only of pesticides, but also of spare parts of agricultural machinery (17% of tractors and 20% of trailers were out of action for this reason in 1980); and the supply of essentials like coal, cement, breeze-blocks etc. to farmers became more and more difficult. On top of that, an inappropriate pricing policy led peasants to switch from animal to vegetable production while the state farms – least suited to animal production – shifted in the opposite direction. The big meat imports at the end of the decade were a direct result.
No real agricultural development occurred. It was reported in the middle of 1981 that Polish peasants were having difficulty with the harvest for lack of 150,000 scythes – implements of the 19th rather than the 20th century. Other factors in the food crisis were the low prices paid to peasants for their produce, inefficient distribution and refrigeration systems, and the generally low quality of products. All, ultimately, could be reduced to the manic drive for accumulation at the expense of consumption.
That drive is connected with a further phenomenon in the state capitalist regimes: a ‘gigantomania’ which favours enormous plants and farms (despite the dubious benefits in terms of efficiency) and looks with disfavour on small enterprises. This is particularly strongly marked in Poland: enterprises with fewer than 100 workers account for only 11.3% of the total number of enterprises in Poland, compared with 51.4% in East Germany and 88% in West Germany. [95] The economy is therefore very much more ‘rigid’ in its movements, and far less productive than it might be with greater flexibility.
While the crisis was, on the one hand, wiping out substantial parts of the investments procured at so much cost to the Polish population, the regime’s real priorities did not change at all: ‘Above-plan investments continued to be an endemic feature of the Polish economy in the second half of the seventies, and the investment emphasis fell still more sharply on production goods, since it was in this area that delays were greatest; there was a low incidence of projects oriented towards either exports or the internal consumption market, or technically advanced products.’ [96]
The scale of the crisis was finally admitted by Gierek at the end of 1979. Once again, only this time much more seriously than ever before, the Polish economy faced a crisis in which ‘reserves’ were totally lacking: ‘Some factors contributing to the high growth rates in the 1970s – including a large labour reserve, the possibilities of increasing investment outlays, the obtaining of suitable loans from abroad and the purchase of cheap raw materials and cheap fuels- all these have been exhausted.’ [97]
If the Polish economy always had ‘stop-go’ tendencies, it had now come to a shuddering halt. Looking back from the vantage point of 1981, a senior Polish planning official declared, bluntly, ‘The Gierek years destroyed the economy more effectively than a war.’ [98]
At the February 1980 Party Congress, there were calls for and vague promises of reform. In May 1980, 84 directors of enterprises in the building sector were sacked ‘for gross neglect of their responsibilities’, along with 61 directors of other state and collective enterprises. (After August 1980, many thousands more were to be sacked for misconduct, corruption and the like.) But the problem went deeper than individual failures: at the root of the crisis was the ‘class goal’ of the ruling bodies. When the working class erupted into organised activity in the summer of 1980, the central issue became stark in its simplicity: would the ruling class succeed, somehow, in holding on to its power and in re-imposing its goals on to Polish society, or would the Polish workers, drawing all the exploited and oppressed of Poland behind them, rise to the task of smashing the ruling institutions and re-ordering totally the economic and social priorities of Polish production? The answer to that question would be fateful for Poland, the rest of Eastern Europe, Russia and the whole world.

Notes
63. According to Zauberman, (op. cit., p. 65), the regime had hoped to raise the level of investment spending still further in the second half of the decade, by 40% over the 1971–75 level.
64. Green, op. cit., p. 91.
65. Financial Times, 10 February 1981.
66. Harman, IS 94, p. 27.
67. Marian Rajski, Wspolpraca gospodarcza Polska – ZZSR, Kultura (Paris), no. 11/14, Nov. 1981. For data on the Russian economic robbery of Poland in the postwar period, cf. Ygael Gluckstein, Stalin’s Satellites in Eastern Europe, London 1952.
68. Blazyca’s wry comment is apt: ‘For understandable reasons the official explanation of why things went wrong rests mainly on external factors such as poor weather and recession in the West. (It seems not to be of any concern to the authorities that one might infer from this that good economic results are due mainly to good weather and a healthy capitalist economy).’
69. Gomulka, op. cit., p. 18. The author comments mordantly, ‘The 5-year plan appears to have been unrealistic.’
70. Nuti, 1981, p. 116. Cf Harman, IS 94, p. 27 for other examples of wild optimism.
71.



Average annual rate of growth (%)




 


1976–80
Plan


1976–79
Actual




National income produced


7–7.3


4.2




National income distributed


  4.8


2.9




Industrial production


8.2–8.5


6.8




Agricultural production


3–3.5


3.3




Exports


11.8


9.4




Imports


  4.7


6.4




Real wages


3–3.4


1.2




(Source: Blazyca, op. cit., p. 112)



72. Data from Nuti, 1981, tables 1 and 2, pp. 106, 108.
73. Ibid.
74. Ibid.
75. Ibid., p. 119; Guardian, 22 May 1981; Financial Times, 24 July 1981.
76. Financial Times, 10 March 1981 and 24 July 1981; Nuti, 1981, p. 119.
77. Nuti, 1981, p. 119.
78. Blazyca, op. cit., p. 112.
79. Financial Times, 10 February 1981.
80. Nuti, 1981, p. 116.
81. Poland: The State of the Republic – two reports by the ‘Experience and Future’ (DiP) discussion group of Warsaw, London 1981, p. 44.
82. Nuti. 1981,Table l, p. 106.



Economic effectiveness (% rise over previous year)




 


1971


1972


1973


1974


1975


1976


1977


1978


1979


1980




Productivity of
fixed capital


  1.8


  3.8


  3.0


  1.0


–1.1


–2.6


–4.3


–5.6


  –9.6


–11




A. Labour
Productivity


  6.9


  8.6


  9.0


  8.2


  8.3


  7.7


  5.0


  3.3


  –1.4


  –4




B. Fixed capital
per man


  4.9


  4.6


  5.9


  7.1


  9.4


10.6


  9.7


  9.5


  8.9


    8




Difference between
growth of A. and B.


+2.0


+4.0


+3.1


+1.1


–1.1


–2.9


–4.7


–6.2


–10.4


–12



83. Blazyca, op. cit., p. 114.
84. Guardian, 14 August 1981.
85. Sunday Times, 13 December 1981.
86. Jadwiga Staniszkis, On Remodelling of the Polish Economic System, Soviet Studies, XXX, 4, October 1978.
87. Blazyca, op. cit., p. 107.
88. Nuti. 1980, p. 13. It might be added that the chaotic pricing system in Poland made sensible choices by the authorities much more difficult. Before August 1980, coal at one mine cost 1,000 zlotys a ton to produce, but it sold at 550–800 zlotys a ton (FT, 7.7.81). Steel, once sold, is worth less than the coal used to smelt it. Bread was being sold at a price below that of the cheapest animal feed – and was therefore being used as such (Nuti, 1981, p. 135). The irrational price structure has been noted by many writers; it made it more difficult for planners to determine which investments would, and which would not, pay for themselves (Shapiro, op. cit., p. 492).
89. Nuti, 1980, p. 21.
90. Blazyca, op. cit., p. 104.
91. Nuti, 1981, p. 123.
92. Ibid., adapted from tables 4 and 5, p. 114.
93. Michael Ashton, Economic Crisis and Economic Reform in Poland, Critique 14, 1981; John Taylor, Five Months With Solidarity, Wildwood House, 1981, p. 48, gives slightly different figures, but the direction is the same.
94. Poland: The State of the Republic, pp. 192–3.
95. Ibid., p. 197.
96. Nuti, 1980, p. 11; 1981, p. 119.
97. Speech at Katowice, 13 Dec. 1979, cited in Problems of Communism, Mar.–Apr. 1980.
98. Financial Times, 24 July 1981.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (Foreword)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

Foreword

In the aftermath of the military coup in Poland, two voices have been heard loudly in the West.
The first has been the voice of hypocrisy. Ronald Reagan. Margaret Thatcher and a host of others have trumpeted their support for democracy and free trade unions in Poland. Their protestations are best measured against their continuing support for the official butchery of the people of El Salvador, or Reagan’s hope – expressed within weeks of the Polish military action – for improved relations with the brutal military regime in Turkey. Reagan and Thatcher have consistently been hostile to trade unionism in their own countries. Their ‘support’ for Polish workers is mere opportunism, motivated by Cold War interests rather than concern for the Polish people.
The second, more pervasive and insidious voice has been that of ‘moderation’. The problem, it is said, is that Solidarity ‘went too far’, thereby provoking the coup. Chancellor Kreisky of Austria has even suggested that the Polish Catholic Church (!) was the key agent of political ‘extremism’.
We have nothing in common with these views. For us, the Polish regime deserves the hatred and opposition of workers everywhere tor the same reasons, at root, that Reagan’s or Thatcher’s or any other ruling-class regime deserves hatred and opposition. We see no difference in principle between Solidarity members jailed by Jaruzelski and air traffic controllers jailed by Reagan. We support Polish workers for the same reasons that we support unofficial strikers in Britain, or those who continue resistance against dictatorship in El Salvador or Turkey.
Nor can we have any truck with those who accuse Solidarity of going too far”. Theirs is an argument for perpetual subordination and obedience by the exploited and oppressed of the world.
The two essays which follow were written hastily in the weeks following Jaruzelski’s coup. Their argument may be summed up as follows: first, the Polish workers were defeated because they did not – for reasons we try to explain – ‘go far enough’; second, there is no difference in principle between the Polish regime they opposed so inspiringly and the variety of exploiting regimes across the globe, both East and West, against which we must all, in our billions, continue to struggle.



 


Colin Barker, Kara Weber [1]
January 1982





Note
1. The first draft of this article was written in great haste in the three weeks following Jaruzelski’s coup of 13 December 1981. It then passed into the critical hands of Peter Binns, Alex Callinicos, Peter Goodwin and Chris Harman, who set about it with abandon. After their additions, deletions, reorganisations, amendments arguments, taking of liberties and general mayhem, we then did our own reconstructions. We hope that the end product will give them some pleasure and not too much pain. Our special thanks to them, anyway, for their various contributions.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (1-2. After Gdansk)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

Part I: Sixteen months of Solidarity
2. After Gdansk

Two contradictory powers
The Gdansk agreement, though a great victory, was but the starting point of further struggle. Nearly every one of the ‘21 points’ agreed on at Gdansk was to become the focus of further conflicts which led the movement on.
In the months that followed, the power of the regime was increasingly paralysed by a new power that had arisen in opposition to it, in a way that characterises every serious pre-revolutionary condition. Two irreconcilable forces were locked in combat. On the one hand stood Solidarity, an extraordinary channel for the expression of workers’ aspirations and grievances, expanding rapidly and drawing behind itself virtually every other section of the oppressed and exploited in Polish society. Against it stood the regime, forced to make concessions of a vast and unprecedented character, and thrown into internal confusion. Solidarity was the organised expression of a popular movement from below, whose demands were to grow and to flow across the boundaries separating the ‘economic’ from the ‘political’ and the ‘cultural’. The state it faced had, if it were to maintain its central purpose, to force down living standards, yet it had temporarily lost a large part of its power of initiative.
The scale of the economic crisis pressed on both sides, demanding a rapid solution. The state was under increasing pressure both from the Russians and from the western banks to cut living standards so as to pay off debts and restore economic expansion. Yet the same state was forced by the workers’ movement to grant massive economic concessions, in terms of wages, food supplies, health service demands, etc., which were ‘impossible’. Every failure by the state to make good its promises raised the temperature further, strengthening the power of Solidarity’s demands. If it were to conquer the crisis, the state must undergo a major process of internal reform in its personnel and procedures, yet the effect of the workers’ movement on it was to throw the state’s forces into chaos, to undermine its hold over its own personnel. Reform was thrust on to the state from below, as the population stepped up its demands for the sacking and punishment of the state bureaucracy who had committed uncounted crimes of corruption and repression in the previous decade.
The very existence of the state was threatened by the logic of the workers’ movement, for Solidarity’s demands went far beyond simple economic improvements towards generalised aspirations for democracy and popular control, which, if realised, must mean the end of the whole existing state machine. Every demand raised by Solidarity, nationally and in its varied and manifold local sections, was in this situation genuinely ‘transitional’. For every demand was ‘impossible’, yet behind it stood a rising mass of workers and their popular allies pushing to enforce it.
As the two sides grappled with each other, the economic crisis turned into economic collapse. Before the eyes of the participants two urgent outside menaces lurked, the western banks and the Russian army, each threatening to intervene and further alter the terms of the conflict.
Neither side, as it stood, could survive the the existence of the other. The state, with its political and economic machinery crumbling around it, could not hope to re-establish control over Polish life without the destruction of Solidarity. For the existence of Solidarity, that flooding river of popular aspirations, was incompatible with the continued existence of the bureaucratic structure. To nine-tenths of the population Solidarity represented an alternative set of political, social, economic and moral principles from those of the old state power.
Solidarity was, in effect, a potential alternative government. The survival of the state was incompatible with its continued existence. The key question, throughout the year and more after the Gdansk agreement, was the question of power. No stability could be achieved unless and until one or other side reorganised itself to assume full control – through the elimination of the rival power centre.
While those who headed the Polish state realised the real character of the situation, they were, for a whole period, powerless to control it. The then head of the regime, Kania, told his party officials on 15 January 1981, ‘There is no room for two power centres in this country. Double power has never been and could never be a system of organisation in public life. History knows of no such thing ...’ [8]
Kania might denounce, yet he could not prevent. The Polish tragedy is rooted in the fact that those who led the workers’ movement did not, in practice, recognise the logic of the position. Or, they began to realise it too late.
What, Lenin asked once, is a revolutionary situation? Two elements fundamentally characterise it: the ruling class is no longer able to rule in the old way, and the exploited classes are no longer willing to be ruled as before. Those two elements existed, in full measure, in Poland from August 1980 to December 1981. But, as revolutionaries have long known, there are two possible outcomes to every revolutionary situation: either revolution, or counter-revolution. For the former to occur, the movement from below must go far beyond its starting point to challenge directly for power; for the latter, the state must find a new way to rule, at the expense of the working people.
Those who led the Polish workers’ movement never faced this issue directly. They sought a point of equilibrium in a situation that was inherently unstable, in a society that lurched from crisis to crisis and in which their own existence was itself a potent cause of unbalance. The point of equilibrium they sought did not exist. The movement they led was too big, too urgent, too democratic ever to accommodate straightforwardly with the regime. It had either to conquer or be destroyed.
 
A Society in Crisis
No one could have predicted the sudden emergence of Solidarity in the late summer of 1980, or the paralysis which it induced in the regime. The movement took by surprise even those most involved in creating it. Yet the events of August 1980 did not occur in a historical vacuum: they occurred as the product of a growing economic, social and ideological crisis whose outlines were visible long before.
Late in 1978, a group of academics, experts, journalists and managers came together in the ‘Experience and Future’ (DiP) group. They met, initially under the auspices of the regime, to produce a report of the condition of Polish society. Their conclusions were dramatic: they wrote of ‘a crisis that has now appeared in various forms and in various areas of social life’, ‘an alarming situation that will inevitably grow worse’, ‘the state of extreme moral and physical exhaustion of Polish society’, ‘the progressive atrophy of any honest public life’, ‘growing moods of opposition in the country’, ‘an atmosphere of mounting criticism’, retreats, resentments and grudges that have accumulated and clotted in the public mind’, ‘the unbridgeable gap that exists between aspirations and the real opportunities to meet them’. [9]
The crisis in Polish life which they described was in part economic. The relatively high growth-rates of the early and mid-1970s had given way to stagnation and the beginnings of economic contraction and recession; the regime’s need to pay mounting interest on a huge accumulation of foreign debts was pushing it to exert growing pressure on the living standards of the workers and peasants.
We consider the economic crisis in more detail in the article that follows. Here, it is important to note how the economic crisis was intertwined with an escalating political and ideological crisis.
In the early 1970s, the government under Edward Gierek had ruled with a high degree of self-assurance and its own confidence had rubbed off onto other sections of society. Managers saw the enterprises under their control expanding, workers and peasants experienced limited but real improvements in their living standards, journalists and intellectuals did not find it too difficult to articulate an image of Poland as a society able to satisfy people’s needs. Economic stagnation and contraction, however, reduced the government’s self-confidence. Not only did the regime have to go back on its previous promises to workers and peasants, it could not even provide assurance to those closest to it. At the bottom of the Polish social pile, cynicism and despondency grew, while nearer the top the crudest careerism and corruption became more and more endemic. The regime began to splinter into factions: only, these were not factions offering different programmes for the resolution of society’s problems, but rather cliques and cabals based on temporary alignments of individuals out to feather their own private nests. In the words of the DiP group:
‘As ideological motivations waned, power and its attendant benefits became overwhelming motivations. Conflicts within the party became more acrimonious ... Many extremely important decisions have been made not on the basis of real needs ... but as a result of a momentary constellation of forces or the purely egotistical interests of particular groups within the party.’ [10]
The regime’s legitimacy, in the eyes of those directly below them, waned; belief was corrupted. Government officials issued documents they knew to be full of lies, journalists wrote stories they did not believe, TV interviewers had to listen uncritically to official spokesmen they knew to be uttering mere fabrications and dreams. If the immediate servants of the regime had lost belief, the situation was much more serious among the mass of the population: there, an almost total scepticism to any statements by the regime reigned, ‘with an indifference towards almost everything that has to do with the state politically and economically’. [11]
More and more, the real links holding society together were not those of shared values and ideas, whether these be false or true, but self-serving clientism and corruption on an immense scale. Bribery became an accepted means for ensuring needed or valued goods and services: a hospital bed, a university place for a child, a particularly desired job. If not bribery, ‘influence’ – knowing someone who would do you a favour in return for past or future reciprocal favours – became the basis of a massive network of corruption and ‘pull’ that linked together factory managers, school administrators, doctors, housing officials, foreign trade representatives, local police chiefs, materials suppliers and that bound them to those above. A sense of moral disgust pervaded official society.
If the crisis was a crisis of the whole national society, it was not experienced in the same way at every level. In the world of the ‘deal’ and the ‘fixer’, which was grafted on to an already existing system of classes, inequalities multiplied. This is often misunderstood. From 1981 onwards, Solidarity was to pose a huge threat to the whole system of rule throughout the entire Russian bloc, and this led many commentators to see the demand for repression in Poland as an exclusive product of pressure from the Kremlin. But such a view is quite wrong. Within Poland itself, the very period in which the crisis became aggravated and in which the regime exerted increased downward pressure on the living standards of the mass of the population was also a period of unprecedented expansion of privilege. The indigenous Polish ruling class experienced a rise in its living standards at the same time that life became more difficult for the majority.
The DiP report pinpointed this trend:
The seventies were a decade in which incomes rose most quickly in the highest income brackets, the end result being a widening of the income differential to a ratio of 1 : 20 ... Income privileges acquire political overtones for the rest of society. It is well-known that 80 per cent of factory directors are members of the Polish United Workers Party, and that 60 per cent hold influential party positions at various levels ... Members of the active political core of the party, its allied political groupings and the administrative apparatus enjoy a privileged position in society. Their privileges extend to almost all spheres of life: access to status positions, real incomes, easier shopping, health, education, foreign travel ... The 1970s saw the inheritance of privilege ... There is an increasing tendency to fill posts with ‘one’s own people’ from the younger generation. [12]
The growth of privilege and official corruption also tied members of the apparatus with other groups who – through various legal and illegal private activities – were also creaming off the means to a higher living standard. A whole stratum thus developed within Polish society – within and without the official mechanisms of the regime – whose positions depended on the maintenance of the various abuses. They had done very well out of the system.
The result, as the DiP group commented, was that ‘In Poland today there is a relatively large army of people who have a lot to lose and are capable of doing anything to preserve their privileges’. To such people, the growth of Solidarity represented a great threat. And for such people, too, the ‘home grown’ military takeover of December 1981 will have come as a great relief: they were indeed ‘capable of doing anything to preserve their privileges.’
If, in the 1970s, the class differences became so pronounced that no manner of official coverup could conceal them, they did not start then. Their roots lay in the foundations of the regime, in the period after the Second World War. The Polish regime was created under the Russian occupation of the country at the end of the Second World War. Roosevelt and Churchill had agreed to Russian domination of the country, at the Yalta conference, in return for a free hand for themselves in Greece, Italy and France. Stalin imposed on Poland a political system to safeguard Russian interests. By and large the old ruling class was destroyed; the old mass organisations of workers and peasants were purged until all that remained were those elements from their apparatuses that were willing to work with the Russians. Industry was placed under the control of a new bureaucratic structure, managed on principles derived from Russia’s need to develop, in its bloc, an economic and military potential to match the American bloc.
Yet this new system was more than just a foreign transplant. It also fitted Polish circumstances in a certain sense. Poland had been an overwhelmingly backward, agricultural country, but the postwar regime – with its state control of industry, elimination of the former ruling class, destruction of former workers’ and peasants’ organisations, enforced accumulation under the control of a highly centralised bureaucracy – made possible the country’s extensive industrial development. Such industrial development had been attempted by Poland’s ruling class in the inter-war period – and had provoked bitter and sometimes bloody class struggle with the workers and peasants.
As Kuron and Modzelewski, authors of the pioneering Marxist analysis of the regime, put it in 1964:
the effective realisation of such a process of industrialisation required all classes and social strata to be deprived of the means of defining their differing interests and fighting for their implementation or in their defence. It required that the whole of political decision-making and the power over means of production and the social product be concentrated exclusively in the hands of the new elite. It required, finally, that production be made independent of the regulating influence of the market and that the economic initiative of the working class, of the technocracy and of the peasantry be limited to the greatest possible degree ... It may be said that the nature of the task of industrialising a backward country called to life as a ruling class a bureaucracy that was able to achieve this task, since it alone, through its class interests, represented the interest of industrialisation under such conditions – production for the sake of production. [13]
The social grouping who took control in the postwar years became – through their identification with the goal of accumulating means of production at the expense of the workers – themselves a class opposed to the working class. Kuron and Modzelewski called them the ‘central political bureaucracy’, describing them also as ‘the party-state power elite, free of any social control’. [14] As a grouping, these men – those who head the hierarchies of the state, the economic administration and the party – are quite small in number. They and their families together cannot number more than a few score thousand.
In a period of economic expansion, the small size of a ruling class does not matter very much. It is strengthened by its own ability to permit, at least to some extent, the satisfaction of the aspirations of other strata within society. But periods of sharp economic crisis can leave it dangerously isolated, cut off from significant support in the society it rules, and facing extensive popular opposition.
Such an outcome threatened Poland’s ruling class in the regime’s first great crisis, in 1956. The workers’ uprising in Poznan initiated a period of social turmoil which brought Poland to the brink of revolution, at a time when a full-blooded social revolution was breakout out in neighbouring Hungary. In a desperate bid to avert is own downfall, the central political bureaucracy turned to one of its former leaders, Wladyslaw Gomulka. Gomulka enjoyed a certain popularity, partly because he had been imprisoned for a period only a few years before, and under his leadership the regime carried through a series of reforms, improving workers’ living standards, lifting numbers of restrictions on the peasantry, and allowing greater freedom to intellectuals. It did a deal with the Church hierarchy, in return for Church support, and won a measure of general popularity by making a number of nationalist noises directed against the Russians. Above all, the ruling group – the central political bureaucracy – sought to overcome its isolation by tying to itself the layer of the administration immediately beneath, within the various hierarchies of industry, government, police, army, etc. For this layer – variously estimated at between 300,000 and 800,000 petty functionaries – it created new privileges. [15] This larger group – sometimes termed the ‘technocrats’ [16] – had tended in the mid-1950s to identify with the workers and the ‘creative intelligentsia’ in their opposition to the regime. In the 1960s and 1970s, on the other hand, they were to form a quite significant pool of people who would defend the status quo, more out of cynical self-interest than from any clear ideological agreement with the regime’s aims.
One of the DiP group described this layer as follows:
What might be called the socialist middle classes or the socialist petty bourgeoisie ... have an unquestionable influence on the party and the government apparatuses, the greater part of which are manned by these middle classes. Do they have any interests in common with the working classes? Absolutely not. They grow richer and richer, but they are still not as rich as they would like to be. [17]
This layer has proved to be especially amenable to a certain kind of nationalism, often of a very unpleasant character. In the crisis of the late 1960s, it was this layer that served as a transmission belt between the regime and some wider sections of society. The Minister of the Interior, General Moczar, had for some time been cementing his relations with some of the older nationalist sections from the former generation. Faced with student demonstrations in 1968, he launched a vicious campaign of anti-semitism, with the dual aim of laying the blame for the system’s faults on a traditional scapegoat and at the same time enhancing his personal career. Polish Jewry amounted to no more than some 25,000 people out of a population of over 30 million Poles, for it had been almost destroyed by the Nazis; yet the sections of the state and the party influenced by Moczar blamed them for both the crimes of Stalinism and the student demonstrations. The student leaders were said to be Jewish (in point of fact, very few were) and thousands of Jewish people who had nothing to do with the demonstrations were forced into exile.
In 1970-71, the change of leadership forced on the regime by the workers’ revolt in the coastal cities was effected without major crisis because of continuing loyalty of the ‘middle layers’. And when, in the late 1970s, crisis again enveloped Polish economy and society, the privileges and ties of corruption that bound the ‘technocratic’ middle layers to the regime became still more important. Even before the rise of Solidarity, two of the regime’s leading figures, Grabski and Olszowski, attempted to mobilise these layers behind a policy that combined a sort of technocratic anti-bureaucratic demagogy (tinged at times with anti-semitism) with the demand for a hard line against dissidents and workers. Further attempts at such mobilisation were made after the rise of Solidarity: within the party through an organisation calling itself the Katowice Forum; in the armed forces through the propagation of a nationalist, anti-dissident line in the army newspaper, Zolnierz Wolnosci (Soldier of Freedom); and among the population at large by attempting to develop a nationalistic, anti-semitic organisation, sponsored by the regime – the Grunwald Patriotic Union.
In the long term, the central bureaucracy’s alliance with this layer of corrupted and cynical functionaries may have helped it solidify the state machine sufficiently to be able to turn it against Solidarity. But, in the short run, its alliance had a very different, and de-stabilising effect. The workers knew – and hated – the local bullies, the corrupt officials and managers, much better than they knew those who formed and ran the central bureaucracy. As a result, time and again the regime would manage to win some kind of provisional agreement with Solidarity nationally, only to have local struggles breaking out against the local bureaucrats. And this popular hatred and resistance only intensified the fear and hatred with which the ‘middle layer’ – the regime’s only certain base – looked upon Solidarity.
Thus, in the autumn of 1980, it was not only the ‘external’ pressures deriving from Moscow and the Western Banks that were bound to disrupt the various attempts at ‘peaceful co-existence’ or ‘historic compromise’ between Solidarity and the regime: the dynamics of the internal struggle between classes in Poland also continually undermined all such attempts.
 
Consolidation and registration
The early autumn of 1980 was a period of consolidation for the workers. Their decision to form one national organisation, made at a meeting of national delegates on September 17th, was a major advance for the movement. One way out for the government – namely, the possibility of playing off regions or craft sections against each other – was cut off. ‘Divide and rule’ was a weapon which the government had used often before, and its effects were familiar, especially to Silesian workers. Andrzej Rozplochowski, chairman of the Solidarity region at Katowice, when questioned about the special needs of Silesia as opposed to Gdansk, replied: ‘That mentality, separatism, is especially encouraged by the government. It’s the special domain of Messrs Gierek and Grudzien [first party secretary in Katowice], a division into Silesia and the rest. Especially perfidious is the way people were bribed via their stomachs, because this was the only region where you could buy a piece of sausage or other goods. We want to smash this barrier, it does not exist and never will.’ [18]
Within a national organisation every demand becomes a national demand, everyone has a national organisation to join, and the choice between joining it or remaining in the old, sectionalised unions is much clearer than it would have been had the movement consisted of many small, local unions.
The rate at which Solidarity grew was phenomenal. By the end of September the total membership was in the region of 10 million, a figure which most western correspondents refused to believe for a good month afterwards. As workers flooded into the organisation the deadline for the fulfilment of the Gdansk agreements, the last day of September, approached. The tide swept all before it, although some managements and some old state union organisations did their best to be obstructive. The new membership was very impatient. The union called its first one-hour strike, ostensibly against the sluggish fulfilment of the Gdansk agreements but, above all, because the Gdansk leadership realised that if they did not call a strike at this point their new recruits would come out any way. They were anxious to demonstrate their nation-wide support, but it was to be a test of union discipline too. They were anxious that the strikes throughout Poland should not only start on time but also stop on time.
Solidarity’s first national strike call was more than 100% effective: the centre’s strike plan was ‘over-fulfilled’, thanks to the efforts of local managements who tried to prevent those not called out showing their support by sounding sirens and displaying flags. It also demonstrated Solidarity’s penetration into every corner of Poland.
By late October the new union was engaged in its first major battle with the government over the legal registration of its statutes. The grounds on which the statutes had been rejected upon their first submission revealed that the state too, was aware of the advantages a national organisation would give the workers; it was at that time anxious to keep open the option of incorporating the union to its own structures. Apart from objecting to the national character of Solidarity and wishing ‘the leading role of the party’ to be written into the main body of the statutes, the state objected to the rule that those who held office in management or in senior party levels could not hold office in the union. It was, they said, a denial of management civil rights! Had the state succeeded in its aims, the road might have been open to the undermining of Solidarity.
The registration crisis ended in victory for the workers. But it had involved uproar throughout the country, several successive threats of a national strike, visits by party leader Kania and premier Pinkowski to Moscow and the closing of Poland’s borders with East Germany and Czechoslovakia. Moreover, Polish workers had been treated to a demonstration of the judiciary’s role as a tool of the regime. One judge attempted to write the leading role of the party, and a clause limiting the right to strike, into the statutes as a condition of registration. Then the supreme court was used as a mouthpiece to announce the deal forced on Pinkowski by the threat of a strike. While insisting that Solidarity confine itself to a pure trade union role, the state was unwittingly encouraging workers to look beyond, demonstrating vividly the links between the economic, the political and the judicial systems.
It was the new union’s first serious confrontation. Its victory resulted in a feeling of confidence and set a militant tone for the weeks which followed. The state, on the other hand, was thrown into further disarray. This new period, from late autumn of 1980 through the spring of 1981 was one of local strikes, which broke out in one place after another, like fire crackers on a string.
 
Battles and a ceremony
Health workers in Gdansk occupied a room in the prefecture for eleven days. Workers in Czestochowa demanded the prefect and most of his assistants be sacked. (They were.) So did the Solidarity members of Bielsko-Biala. By mid-November a third of the district first secretaries and prefects had been replaced. Strikes occurred on the railways to force the government to pay greater pay increases to the lower paid. Textile workers struck in Lodz, and sugar-beet processors in Pruszcz Gdanski. All in all, by mid October strikes had occurred in 4800 separate enterprises and the number was constantly growing. Production losses in October alone were estimated at around $650 million.
The party and administrative apparatus was in retreat, desperately trying to re-orient itself in the face of the workers’ onslaught. Inevitably, participation in struggle educated people, they began to seek removal of, not just symptoms, but also causes. In the process new demands began to appear, notably the demand to sack local officials, and to investigate suspected corruption.
Perhaps the most notable of the strikes in the autumn of 1980 was the affair triggered by the arrest of Narozniak, a volunteer printer for Solidarity, and Sapielo, a clerk from the public prosecutor’s office accused of leaking a secret document on how to deal with dissidents. At the time ferment in the party and the government was gathering momentum, the word ‘renewal’ was heard more and more often, in ruling circles, and the hawks in the apparatus were losing ground. Kania had asked Walesa for discussions on joining the official committee drafting the new trade union law. The document leaked by Sapielo revealed that, at the very least, the section of the Gdansk agreement which promised ‘to institute full liberty of expression in public and professional life’ had not been accepted at all. Harassment of political opponents of the regime by the judiciary and the police was to continue as before.
The affair resulted in a major confrontation. Once again workers did not stop at the demand to free the two arrested men but looked beyond the surface phenomena at the cause of the outrage. They demanded a commission to investigate the methods of the security police and the public prosecutor plus safeguards against unjust police harassment; they demanded cuts in the police budget and punishment of those responsible for the lawless police brutalities of 1976; and they reiterated the demand for the release of political prisoners. Bujak, chairman of Warsaw Solidarity, threatened a general strike in the entire region.
The temperature rose. Ursus, Huta Warszawa and at least four other large enterprises had stopped work. Trams and buses began to carry ‘Free Narozniak’ posters. On the borders the Soviet tanks stirred and rumbled once again. Liberals within the party, including Stefan Bratkowski (a prominent reformer and leading light in the DiP group) rushed to Kania and negotiated a settlement. Narozniak and Sapielo were released but there was a hitch in the timing of the promised talks on the rest of the demands. The workers of Huta Warszawa smelled a rat and refused to resume work.
Bujak and Bratkowski pleaded and argued. The long-time dissident Jacek Kuron was brought in to speak to the workers. Walesa was flown in from Gdansk. It took 24 hours of frantic, non-stop remonstration to persuade them to go back to work.
They had won the release of the prisoners, they had won a public promise on TV of talks on an enquiry into police methods. But the workers were right to be so mistrustful. No kind of enquiry was ever initiated, no curbs on police powers, police budgets, police privileges or judicial shenanigans were ever seriously contemplated.
The arguments within the union that arose over this incident highlighted what was going to be a growing problem in the months ahead. At the time of the founding of the union, virtually all activists were agreed on one thing – the union should be a way of organising workers to extract concessions from the existing regime, it should not try to overthrow or displace that regime. We will look later at the arguments put forward for this perspective. For the moment it suffices to note that the activists’ perspective was one of reform not revolution.
Yet the growing momentum of the movement from below made it increasingly clear, even to the participants themselves, that it was impossible to maintain the assertion that Solidarity was nothing more than a trade union. Ascherson describes how: ‘A few days before at Szczecin, after addressing a mass rally, the national Solidarity leaders had been chilled by the questions the audience threw at them: When would the Communist leaders who had brought Poland so low be punished? When would the union become a political party? Was it true that a new mass grave had been discovered in Katyn forest?’ [19]
The Gdansk KOR activist, Bogdan Borusewicz put it this way:
At this moment, people expect more of us than we can possibly do. Normally, society focuses on the party. In Poland nowadays, however, society gathers round the free trade unions. That’s a bad thing. Thus there is an increasing necessity to formulate a political programme. It would be good if the party took the lead and removed people’s social expectations from our shoulders. But will it do so now? In the eyes of the people the new trade unions should do everything: they should fill the role of trade unions, participate in the administration of the country, be a political party and act as a militia, that is confine drunkards and thieves, they should teach morals – and that’s a great problem for us. [20]
Even in its very early stage the movement was outstripping mere trade unionism, however much the leadership, with one eye on possible Russian intervention, wished it were otherwise. Jacek Kuron also describes the implicit revolutionary mood of the workers. ‘The main difficulty is that the people’s attitude towards the government under which they have had to live for three and a half decades is characterised by frustration and increasing antipathy in all areas. The result is that when any conflict arises between Solidarity and the government, no matter on what question, we always get tremendous support. On the other hand, any understanding, however favourable to the union it may be, arouses dissatisfaction, or – to use perhaps a better word – disappointment among the people.’ [21]
These statements were honest testaments to the great potential of the movement and its revolutionary nature, but they also reveal the great weakness that was to play a decisive role in the struggle. Kuron considers this mood of the workers as a ‘difficulty’. To Borusewicz the fact that the workers want to ‘do everything’ is ‘a great problem for us’. He correctly recognises the need for a political programme, but suggests, without hope, that the PUWP, that instrument of ruling class control, should formulate one for the workers!
Thus the great strength of the movement, the generalisation of the struggle from the economic to the political, this willingness to take on board every aspect of every grievance, in effect a readiness to rule; all this, according to two men who were among the most radical of Solidarity’s advisors, becomes a ‘bad thing’, something to be deflected and contained.
In a sense, these remarks by Borusewicz and Kuron encapsulate the entire contradictions of Solidarity, as events were to reveal. If the union was to continue to operate within its initial reformist frame of reference, then it increasingly must attempt to hold workers back from struggle, for these struggles were spontaneously breaking out of that frame. The path of ‘reform’ came to mean, for the union, helping the state to remain intact, helping it to solve its crisis, so as to be able to negotiate with it. Either Solidarity must remain no more than a trade union, and deliberately attempt to prevent the movement getting ‘out of hand’, (i.e. getting too strong) or the reformist ideas must be abandoned in favour of a revolutionary perspective.
For the day to day national leadership of the union, its ‘praesidium’, the reformist perspective was inviolable. There were various reasons for this – the influence of the Catholic church, the prejudice inculcated by existing society that workers are incapable collectively of controlling society (Walesa several times insisted that for the workers to take control of Poland would merely ensure a new dictatorship), fear of provoking the Russians. But regardless of the reasons for the reformism, its impact was to make the leadership try to prevent the rank and file from struggling.
Within two days of his discussions with Kania over the Narozniak-Sapielo arrests, Walesa was saying that now that the union was legal there should be an end to ‘wildcat’ strikes. “It may indeed appear that unrest is rampant in the country, with stoppages here, sit-ins there, and hunger strikes somewhere else ... Even when there is just cause, there are other ways to settle our grievances without striking.” [22]
The struggle over Narozniak and Sapielo had given the moderates in Solidarity a bad fright. In the aftermath the Warsaw Solidarity branch stopped the distribution of posters and leaflets throughout the capital and issued a statement that “Our country and Solidarity require peace, organisational work, an atmosphere that permits the rebuilding of the economy and the consolidation of the gains that have been made.” [23]
Although, as we shall see, the new ‘moderation’ was not accepted by all the union’s activists, the basic reformist assumptions did remain inviolate. No group emerged to challenge the ruling definition of the situation within Solidarity, to point out that the two forces – Solidarity and the regime – were incapable of co-existing for lone, and that one must crush the other. Solidarity, in short, never developed a revolutionary marxist current. So the whole movement was beguiled by the illusion that some new agreement, some ‘social contract’ was possible between the union and a ‘moderate’ wing in the regime. Among those who propagated this illusion were the intellectual ‘experts’ who advised the Solidarity leaders. Some of these came from the DiP grouping mentioned earlier. In its third report, which was being drafted at about this time, the DiP argued:
The battle lines in this struggle will by no means lie along the old demarcations, which set those who direct against those who are directed, nor on that other plane – those within against those outside the party. On either side of the old division we find supporters of change who are conscious of the opportunities change presents side by side with people who are passive, incapable of adapting to the new conditions, or interested in maintaining the old order. The success of the reforms depends on the mobilisation of all progressive forces, on a broad coalition of all forces seeking change and ready to bring them into life in an effective manner. [24]
Clearly, such a perspective of agreed compromise cannot be realised if an unending series of confrontations forces each side to adopt ever more militant postures and harden its positions.
Kuron was less blind than the DiP to the fundamentally opposed interests of ‘those who direct and those who are directed’; nevertheless he too, was for skinning the tiger claw by claw. Asked whether he regarded the Party not only as an opponent, but also as a tactical ally, he replied:
In so far as we – that’s how I picture it – build up this pluralist structure in stages and gradually dismantle totalitarianism, step by step. Very slowly. The goals of the government and of the democratic movement are completely opposite. But the struggle between the two tendencies, the totalitarian and the democratic one, are to be fought exclusively by peaceful means. The observation of this rule by the government will determine the degree of partnership you mentioned. [25]
The high point of those whose hopes rested on a ‘pluralist’ compromise resolution to the conflicts (there were few in Poland who consciously hoped for any other, better, resolution) was the commemoration, in December, of the workers who died in Gdansk ten years previously. It was the occasion when the 140 foot high monument in chrome steel paid for and erected by the workers was unveiled.
Attended by 150,000 people, staged by Andrzej Wajda, the Polish film director, it was a solemn and dramatic moment. Paradoxically, the commemoration of struggle and the slaughter of workers in conflict with the state was turned into a symbol of national unity. Heads of state and party, ministers, generals and admirals stood side by side with workers’ leaders and archbishops.
The workers’ victory was, of course, a condition that such an event could become an occasion to look forward in hope rather than backward in anguish. But, for those who had eyes to see, it was also a sign that the workers’ victory had not been complete. The bitter confirmation of that fact came a year later when, on the eleventh anniversary of the ‘December events’, there were once more tanks on the streets of Gdansk and more martyrs to the workers’ cause.
This seems a suitable point to interrupt our narrative of the struggle, and examine the nature of the third partner in the Gdansk ceremony – the Catholic Church.
 
The role of the Church
The emergence of a moderate line within the workers’ movement was aided and shaped by the close links between many activists and the Catholic Church, whose complex and contradictory role is rooted in Polish history.
From the late 18th century until the end of the first world war Poland was partitioned between Russia, Prussia (Germany) and Austria. Poles were divided from their conquerors not only by nationality and language, but also by religion. The Russian Church was Orthodox, the Prussian Church Lutheran. Thus the Polish Catholic Church, not unlike its counterpart in Northern Ireland, was oppressed and became associated with the struggle for independence and, in consequence, the struggle for civil rights.
In the struggle against the Nazi occupation the role of the Church again served as a symbol of the fight against national oppression. Many priests were among those who perished in the resistance movement. After the war, during the terrors of Stalinist economic expansion, the Church, while subject to a degree of repression (the primate, Wyszynski, was under house arrest in the early 1950s) maintained and expanded its influence in society. The regime and the economic system were seen above all as an alien importation from the East, and the Church, as before, became identified with aspirations of national independence. Its oppression became a symbol to many Poles of their own oppression. It was, classically, the heart of a heartless world, the opium of the people. The harsher the conditions, the more closely did they cling to it. Its influence was therefore greater than before the war, when it was identified with the state. Catholicism became virtually the only way in which opposition to the state could be expressed, while, conversely, atheism became identified with careerism and support for the system.
Thus, when Cardinal Wojtyla became Pope John Paul II it was not merely that the national pride of Poles received a boost. It also seemed that resistance to the Polish regime was being given a greater than ever international legitimacy.
According to Jan Litynski of KOR: “The Pope created through his visit here a new idea of the nation, a nation without chauvinism, a nation as a community. It was on that basis that Solidarity grew. The Pope’s role was, if you like, revolutionary.” [26]
And when they flooded onto the streets in uncountable numbers to greet the Pope on his 1979 visit to Poland the event became, for the people, a demonstration of their own strength. One Polish worker told us: “It made us realise: we are so many and they are so few.”
The police stayed away from these occasions. The state, affecting an attitude between polite friendliness and indifference, provided helicopters and other equipment, but the stewarding was done entirely by non-state personnel. Thus the Papal visit became a festival of self-reliance, of independence from state control.
When the strikes erupted a year later it was not surprising that the church provided the strikers with many of their symbols. Shipyard gates festooned with the Pope’s picture, crucifixes in every Solidarity headquarters and effigies of the Madonna worn conspicuously in the lapel of the workers’ leader, threw western correspondents of all kinds into confusion. The right were convinced that the protest was against communism and atheism, while many leftists, unable to step outside the canons of their own dogma, could not see that the content of the Poles’ support for the Church was precisely the opposite: their aspirations against an exploitative state and against Russian imperialism.
The Church support for the 1980 strikes was not simply sham. In Silesia, as in many other parts, local priests were involved in organising food supplies for workers locked in the mines and were trusted to act as their banker when financial support flooded in. The religious activities inside occupied factories also had a Psychologically supportive effect. Tadeusz Jedynak, a leader of the Jastrzembie region, told us how, in particular when priests toured mines with an effigy of St. Barbara, patron saint of miners, it had a calming effect on the strikers. It turned frenzy into determination, gave miners the forbearance to persist in the face of intolerable tension.
Workers occupying shipyards and mines were thus very keen to receive the priests and often pressurised them into visiting the occupations. But this did not mean that workers were passively manipulated by the bishops, far from it. They turned the religious symbolism to their own ends – often despite opposition from the bishops. Father Jankowski, the Gdansk parish priest, was due to celebrate Mass at the Lenin shipyard, but called it off under instruction from his bishop when a first ‘agreement’ between strikers and management had been reached. When the strike was restarted, the militants realised the importance of getting the Mass inside the gates to take place as originally planned. Desperate negotiations between the bishop and the strikers took place, with the workers even contemplating kidnapping the priest, should the bishop still fail to give his blessing. Jankowski was, with some reluctance, eventually persuaded to say Mass and bless the cross which had been raised outside the gates, drawing many workers who had left the occupation back inside the shipyard.
This incident reveals the ambiguity in the Church’s attitude to the popular movement. For although many individual priests sincerely supported the struggles of their worker and peasant parishioners, the hierarchy of the Church had other ends in view. They regarded it as their duty to build up the Church as a powerful independent institution in Polish society, and to this end were prepared to do all sorts of deals with the state. They regarded the support the Church received through being a symbol of the struggle against oppression as being a bargaining counter for these deals. Once the bishops had concluded such deals with the state, they would be prepared to forget much of their talk of ‘human rights’.
This is shown by any serious examination of the history of the Polish Church. Unfortunately, very few of the activists in Solidarity seem to have been prepared to look at that history. Thus even Kuron – himself hardly a blind follower of the Church – has asserted that in the inter-war period when the Church enjoyed full recognition from the state, it had put individual liberty as its ‘supreme value’. A more thorough and honest examination would have shown that the Church then showed no interest in civil liberties when these conflicted with its doctrines or its alliance with the groups who controlled the state. Between the wars the Church was itself a big landowner and its sympathies lay with other landowners and industrialists. Its closest political links were with the right-wing oppositional National Democratic party. It was only in 1950, when it lost all its lands, that these alliances were largely forgotten and the Church could reinforce its position over the population as an ideological force.
Whatever its political allegiances may have been, the Church did not hesitate to play its part as a bulwark of Pilsudzki’s inter-war dictatorship against the workers and peasants. It used its position to deny the right of men and women to divorce, and made no protests at all in 1931 when the army shot down miners or in 1937 when military force was used against peasant strikes.
On the question of anti-semitism too, the Church played a role quite out of keeping with its mythical reputation as a defender of justice and human dignity. We have space for one example only, a case which Solidarity Weekly featured as part of the compulsive re-examination of Polish history which the upsurge brought forth. [27] In 1946 even after all the horrors of the war, incredibly, a classic pogrom occurred in the town of Kielce. 41 Jews were slaughtered after the circulation of rumours of Jews killing Polish children. The event was triggered by the organised abduction of a child who was returned to his parents after three days with a carefully rehearsed story. It was clearly a provocation. The then regime accused elements from the non-Communist wartime resistance, but the balance of the evidence presented in the Solidarity article points to the Stalinists themselves. What was the reaction of the Church at the time? It deplored the event of course, but instead of attacking the Stalinists for provoking the outrage, the primate Cardinal Hlond went on to point the finger at the racial composition of the state authorities, thus blaming Jews for anti-semitism in the classic racist way: ‘The fact that these [anti-semitic] conditions are growing worse must in a large measure be blamed on the Jews, who occupy leading positions in the Polish government today and attempt to introduce a ruling structure which is rejected by the majority of the nation.’
It was perhaps not surprising that when General Moczar in 1968 unleashed another anti-semitic campaign in order to purge dissident academics and students, the Church once again kept its head down. Moczar was, after all, only playing the same card, if for different purposes, as Hlond had done 22 years previously.
When the events of 1956 brought Gomulka to power, one of his first acts was to remove many of the previous restrictions on the Church. It remained in opposition, but it was a loyal opposition which amply repaid Gomulka’s gesture by helping him consolidate his position in the months which followed. As the fighting continued in Hungary, Wyszynski’s voice joined Gomulka’s in calling on Poles not to behave ‘rashly’: “Poles know how to die magnificently but, Beloved, Poles need to know how to work magnificently.” [28] In the relatively free elections of early 1957, the Church urged people to vote for Gomulka’s list of candidates. And when students demonstrated against the closure of the radical Po Prostu magazine later that year, Wyszynski condemned demonstrations and appealed for calm.
This pattern of behaviour was repeated more than once. In 1970, for example, the Church played its part in supporting the Szczecin shipyard sit-ins, but in Gdansk it was quick to capitalise on the situation. As the rioting and demonstrations in that city got out of hand, the state turned to Father Jankowski for help, begging him to issue an appeal which would get the workers off the streets. At that time Jankowski was without a church, since none had been built to replace the devastation of the war. “And where is the pulpit from which I am to deliver my sermon?” he asked. A bargain was struck: Jankowski made his appeal for calm and got his church.
This then is the paradoxical role of the Church in Polish affairs. A bureaucratic organisation, in many ways parallel to the Party, with its own international links and its own centre abroad, it provides limited, verbal support for certain protests against the regime, but is careful to safeguard its own position. It relies on its powerful symbolism to obscure its unreliable and potentially traitorous nature in the struggle for workers’ rights.
For a brief moment in August 1980 the diverse aims of Church and workers were laid bare. At the height of the strikes Wyszynski made a speech implying that workers should abandon their occupation. The Church, he said, understood their grievances but was critical of their methods. He warned, “Prolonged stoppages, possible disturbances and fraternal bloodletting are against the good of society.” A Church supporter who talked with the Cardinal some three days before recounted how reluctant the Cardinal had been to make it. He had decided however, to yield to the pressure of the state authorities, because otherwise he would lose his place in the corridors of power and be unable to use his influence there on behalf of the workers ...
The reaction of many workers was one of shock followed by embarrassment: the Cardinal was old, he was entitled to make mistakes. Walesa politely told the Church not to interfere and to confine itself to looking after its own affairs.
However this was not enough to alert the workers to the dangers of too close an alliance with the Church. In spite of their declaration, very early, that Solidarity was entirely secular in nature, the Church view was prominent in the development of a moderate line within Solidarity. These ideas were taken up by a large section of the union leadership, notably Walesa, and the Church itself was able to back up these ideas by providing a mediation and conciliation service acceptable to both sides. Thus in the local dispute at Bielsko Biala in February 1981, when local government authorities had reneged on a settlement, it was Bishop Dabrowski who, beating his breast, persuaded the now sceptical workers that the renegotiated settlement with central government was genuine and that they, the bishops, would vouchsafe for the government’s honesty and sincerity. After the horrors of the military coup which was to follow in less than a year, these assurances can be seen for what they are: shabby compromises to safeguard the bishop’s own position in the power structure.
The position they were safeguarding was certainly by then one of considerable influence. In September 1980, when the government was looking for a new prime minister in one of its several cabinet reshuffles, the Church was consulted and intimated that Grabski would not do because of earlier anti-clerical remarks. Pinkowski was appointed instead.
It is also clear that while the Church will protest about offences against ‘human rights and dignity’ (which of course includes the human rights of the Church), it is not only unwilling to challenge the regime’s right to rule but is, in practice, anxious to preserve that right in some circumstances. Thus as early as December 1980 a bishops conference issued a statement giving amazing support to the Kama government. In the assessment of Neal Ascherson, “it was the closest the Church had ever come to full recognition of the Communist state since 1944. It gave powerful endorsement to Kama’s policy of renewal and appealed for co-operation with the state authorities.” [29] This was followed, two days later, by a further statement which attacked KOR by name and Jacek Kuron in particular. This, it must be said, went too far on the road to collaboration. A bitter dispute followed, both in Solidarity and within the ranks of the Church itself. Nevertheless it was an attitude which persisted to the end within some sections of the Church. Even as the world watched, horrified, at the Polish movement being crushed under Jaruzelski’s military boot heel, Polish priests preaching to emigrd Poles in London attacked KOR once again and blamed the catastrophe on the fact that Solidarity had gone ‘too far.’
The Church in Poland opposes militant struggle even for reforms which it supports. In the context of the class struggle in Poland it was asking Solidarity to do the impossible. It supported workers’ demands while opposing any fight which had a realistic chance of achieving them. its proposed policy, that Solidarity should join it in a compromise with he regime was always pie in the sky. For an organisation like the Church compromise with a hostile state is a realistic proposition. Concessions to the Church do not endanger the state’s existence and concessions gained from the Church can be very useful to the state. [30] It is quite another matter for a working class to compromise. Its aspirations can only be achieved by destroying the economic and social goals of the ruling class.

Notes
8. Cited by Chris Harman, Poland: the truce that couldn’t last, Socialist Review, 21 March–18 April 1981, p. 25.
9. Poland, The State of the Republic: Two Reports of the Experience and Future Discussion Group, ed. M. Vale, London 1981 (Henceforth referred to as the DiP Report), pp. 5–7.
10. Ibid., p. 17.
11. Ibid., p. 25.
12. Ibid., p. 55.
13. J Kuron & K Modzelewski, An Open Letter to the Party, London n.d. (1965), pp. 26–27.
14. Ibid., p. 7.
15. The figures are given in an analysis by Marek Tarniewski, translated in Survey, Spring 1981.
16. The term is Kuron & Modzelewski’s.
17. DiP Report, op. cit., p. 65.
18. Labour Focus on Eastern Europe IV, 4–6.
19. Ascherson, op. cit., p. 205. The Katyn forest was the site of a massacre of Polish officers in World War II, believed to be the Russians’ work.
20. Labour Focus on Eastern Europe IV, 4–6, p. 15.
21. Not to lure the wolves out of the woods: an interview with Jacek Kuron, Der Spiegel, 15 December 1980, translated in Telos 47, Spring 1981, p. 94.
22. Ascherson, op. cit., p. 204.
23. Ibid., p. 208.
24. Kultura (Paris), nr. 5/404, May 1981. See below for discussion of the DiP group.
25. Telos, pp. 95–6.
26. Guardian, 27 May 1981.
27. Solidarnosc nr 36.
28. Cited in Chris Harman. Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe, London 1974, p. 112.
29. Ascherson, op. cit., p. 222.
30. “The Church’s traditional commitment to nationalism, to the preservation of a patriarchal family structure and to the values of hard work and social humility, accorded excellently with the political need of the state to maintain a fragmented and politically docile population. Indeed, it has often been useful for official propaganda to have a ‘non-Marxist’ source of authority to voice ideas which are awkward to express in Marxist terminology.” Michael Szkolny, London Review of Books.
 

n Barker/Kara Weber: Solidarnosc (1-3. The road to Bydgoszcz)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Solidarność

Colin Barker & Kara Weber
Solidarność:
From Gdansk to Military Repression

Part I: Sixteen months of Solidarity
3. The road to Bydgoszcz

Advance – and retreat
The ceremony at Gdansk, and the Christmas truce that followed it fed the hopes of the ‘moderates’ that a permanent agreement with the regime was possible; but the truce did not last. In January the government reneged on a key part of the Gdansk agreement – free Saturdays. These, it claimed, were not possible in view of the economic crisis. Solidarity responded by calling for workers to stay at home on the Saturdays in January which the government said they should work. Virtually every large factory was empty, buses and trains operated a Sunday service, many shops announced Saturday closing in future, and workers in essential services wore the by then customary red and white armbands as a gesture of support.
A new feeling of combativity was widespread by the end of the month when the union ‘moderates’ managed to push through an agreement to work one Saturday in each month. Local conflicts flared up again with greater than ever vigour. The Bielsko-Biala region went into indefinite general strike for the removal of those in charge of the local power structure – a goal achieved after about a week. Strikers at Jelenia Gora demanded not only the dismissal of corrupt personnel but also that a special luxury hospital reserved for the police be turned over to the health service and that a huge tract of specially reserved prime hunting land be turned over to the community. There were other strikes in Bydgoszcz, Gdansk, Czestochowa, Kutno, Poznan, Legnica, Kielce. In desperation one ‘moderate’ in the Solidarity leadership complained: ‘We want to stop these anti-corruption strikes. Otherwise the whole country would have to go on strike’.
The revolt began spreading to other sections of Polish society, most importantly the small independent farmers. At their first demonstration on December 14th they had raised the demand to form their own independent union. In January sit-ins took place at Rzeszow and Ustrzyki Dolne (from which they were to be evicted by police in gas masks) in support of the demand. The government objected: they were not employed workers so how could they possibly form a union?
Workers in their turn began to apply pressure in support of the peasants. They were quite right to do so. The peasants in Poland are not an exploiting class. Although 80% of Polish agriculture is based on ‘private property’, the reality of the situation is that in many cases ownership is almost a formality. In their appeal to the workers sent to Gdansk in late August 1980, the peasant farmers described some of the conditions under which they live:
The head of the commune and the secretary of the PUWP have an unlimited power over us. At any moment they can take our land away from us, expropriate us, transfer our children to a distant school, forbid us to finish building a house, conscript our sons into the army in order to send them to work on a state farm. The head of the commune, not we, decides what we should grow, when we should harvest, without worrying about our profit. Often he sends us state machines to gather our harvest when it isn’t yet ripe. In some regions our lands are being taken away and we are being given new ones. We are dependent on the whims of the head of the commune even when we buy a sack of cement, a three foot plank or other materials ... In practice there is no way of controlling the head, no way of appealing against his decision. He may be capable of ruining the commune in a year, but we can’t complain. [31]
Other sections of society which joined in the unrest of this period were students and prisoners. The students at Lodz University began their sit-in in January in support of their own independent union, the NZS, and to protest about Party interference in university curricula. Within a month this protest was to spread to sit-ins and protests in academic institutions all over the country.
In Warsaw 2000 prisoners began a protest demanding ‘as much rood as police dogs’. In the course of the following 10 months, riots occurred in 109 out of 146 penal establishments existing in Poland, according to the November issue of Polityka. Evidence collected by Solidarity investigators into some of these revealed incredible conditions, amounting to punishment by torture in some cases. [32]
An attempt was made to stop this developing pattern of conflict. Jaruzelski replaced Pinkowski as prime minister, and there was a further appeal for a 90-day truce from the strikes. This time the regime offered concessions to buy time. They accepted the demands of the workers at Jelenia Gora and Bielsko-Biala, reached a compromise settlement with the students and somehow managed to end the farmers sit-in at Rzeszow without conceding the registration of Rural Solidarity.
This truce, however, stood no better chance than the last one. Within days conflict had broken out again. The tide of protest was to climax in the greatest confrontation between the workers and the regime in the whole 16-month period.
The events which led up to that incident included elements of the old pattern, with workers in various localities impatient to ‘clean everything up’. The issue of privilege raised in Jelenia Gora in January, especially the provision of special ‘Ministry of the Interior’ hospitals, was now taken up in Lodz, Radom and other places. In Lodz the sacking of five Solidarity activists from one of these hospitals resulted in a one-hour general strike throughout the city. In Radom, where workers had been subjected to incredible brutality in 1976, the hospitals demand was part of a comprehensive package aimed at settling old scores with both the police and the judiciary.
In Warsaw, a demonstration was held to commemorate the student unrest of March 1968, again as part of a desire to right the wrongs of the past and to point the finger at Moczar, now back in the Politburo.
We can perhaps allow the nauseous, allegedly ‘liberal’ deputy premier, Mieczyslaw Rakowski, to summarise the rest of the period in the tirade he delivered to the Solidarity delegation during the negotiations in the aftermath of the Bydgoszcz incident:
In Kalisz there has been a strike alert and a threatened strike. In Suwalki, a threatened strike on account of some personnel in leading positions in the province.
In Katowice, the interfactory committee has put forward political demands. It demanded the speeding up of the legislative work of the Sejm [the Polish parliament] and abundant food supplies for the country. The ultimatum says that, should the Government not agree to it, of course there will be a strike.
In Radom there have been demands for the dismissal of members of the provincial and the central authorities, and many other demands connected with events of 1976. We have come to a preliminary agreement with Radom Solidarity. In Bielsko Biala, despite the fact that we had already concluded an agreement, local Solidarity demanded the elimination of more people from leading posts ...
In Nowy Sacz there is conflict against the background of various local issues and in connection with demands to change the use some buildings are put to. In Szczecin, Solidarity of municipal workers threatened to strike if their pay and other demands were not met. In Cracow, Solidarity of employees in institutes of higher education have demanded personnel changes at Government level, and trade unionists from colleges of education have submitted a number of demands of a political nature. In Lublin there was a strike alert at the post office, connected with paper deliveries.
A particularly large-scale propaganda attack was conducted by Solidarity in 33 provinces against the militia and the security services. All this – I stress – happened before the Bydgoszcz events ... This is what Solidarity’s reply to General Jaruzelski’s appeal for 90 peaceful days really looked like ... During the few weeks since I took office I have not worked as a deputy prime minister, but only as a fireman, putting out small or large fires ...
I cannot help feeling that an ever-growing number of Solidarity groups are being transformed into political parties. The country is flooded with leaflets, placards, gazettes of an anti-Communist nature. I have seen a leaflet showing a gallows with an explanation of who is going to hang from it. One factory paper wrote: ‘ninety days of Jaruzelski’s government – 90 gallows for 90 leaders of the party’. It is difficult to call this ‘partnership’. [33]
Indeed it was! But the aggro was not only coming from below, from the exploited classes unwilling to be ruled in the old way. Many of the ruling class and the petty functionaries who depended on it for their privileges were also bitterly opposed to any notion of an agreement. It was all right for their more far-sighted representatives to tell them that Solidarity was too powerful still to be crushed except at immense cost and that attempts had to be made to buy time; meanwhile their privileges were being threatened from one end of the country to the other. Some sections used the parts of the state apparatus under their control to try to get their revenge on Solidarity – regardless of the agreements their political leaders had made.
Solidarity complained in a policy statement after Jaruzelski’s appointment as prime minister, arguing that ‘recent weeks have brought a resurgence of official arrogance and malicious propaganda, and attempts to confront society and our union with faits accomplis. Work on preparing the new laws on trade unions, on censorship and on workers participation has been blocked, a number of activists of independent organisations have been arrested with the intention of staging political trials in violation of clause 4 of the Gdansk agreement’. [34]
Jaruzelski told Lech Walesa that no further action against KOR was contemplated. But both Kuron and Michnik were harassed by the police within a few days. Kuron was arrested in early March, held for six hours, told to report to the police regularly and warned that proceedings were being prepared against him. Similar actions against Michnik were foiled in Wroclaw by a ‘workers guard’ organised by Solidarity, which formed itself round him and prevented the arrest taking place. Nonetheless Michnik’s movements were also hampered as police assured him that his liberty was only provisional.
A section of the regime turned to methods they had used, with varying degrees of success, in 1957 and 1968 – they tried to play on the anti-semitic tradition of the peasantry and the old middle class. A secret letter, issued by the party headquarters in Wroclaw, suggested that party activists in the union should discredit Karol Modzelewski, at that time chief union spokesman, by accusing him of being a Jew brought up by Christian parents. At the same time as the regime was supporting the extreme nationalist Grunwald Patriotic Union, anti-semitic leaflets were circulating among the peasants. In March, while students commemorated the dissident demonstration of 1968, this organisation attracted a thousand people to a counter-demonstration, supporting the anti-semitic purges of that year and attacking ‘dissidents’ and ‘Jews’ inside Solidarity.
Worst of all was the physical violence against Solidarity members which probably emanated from the same source. ‘86 year old Antoni Pajdak, a leading member of the Socialist Party before the war, a minister in the underground government and a founder member of KOR, was attacked by an unknown assailant and suffered a fractured pelvis. Stanislaw Kliga, a former resistance fighter and chairman of Solidarity at a factory at Nowy Sacz was found, apparently hanged, shortly after being detained by the police for 24 hours. (This is presumably what Rakowski meant by ‘various local issues’ at Nowy Sacz – CB/KW). At Starograd Szczecinski, a member of Solidarity was arrested in the street and told he was being taken to police headquarters. On the way he was dragged into a cellar and severely beaten up. [35]
The final provocation that detonated near-total political crisis came on 19 March in Bydgoszcz. [36]
A number of Solidarity members had been occupying an office in support of the demand for the legalisation of Rural Solidarity. On that day they went to the local prefecture for negotiations with the regional council and a deputy premier, Stanislaw Mach. When the negotiations broke down, the Solidarity activists refused to leave the room, and some members of the regional council stayed with them. After six hours it seemed that there was going to be a peaceful resolution to this row, and an agreed statement was signed. Then, suddenly, a force of 200 armed police broke into the room, wielding clubs.
The occupiers were systematically beaten up, with 27 of them receiving injuries. Among those hospitalised was a national leader of Solidarity, Jan Rulewski.
The next day there was a half-million-strong protest strike in the Bydgoszcz area, and thousands of union members crowded outside the local union headquarters to protect it from attack.
Posters showing wounded and bleeding Solidarity activists were pasted up all over Poland. By the time the union held a national 300-strong delegate meeting three days later, pressure for a national strike in protest at the provocation was overwhelming. The ‘moderate’ line of the union praesidium was under the most severe pressure yet from outraged local activists and at one point Walesa staged an angry walk out as his opposition to an all-out general strike was ignored.
In the end, however, it was agreed to call a four-hour warning strike and then to allow the authorities four days in which to punish those to blame for the Bydgoszcz attack, recognise Rural Solidarity, release political prisoners, drop judicial proceedings against oppositionists and give full pay to strikers. If these demands were not conceded there was to be an unlimited all-out strike.
The following days were ones of mounting tension. The four hour strike was an overwhelming success and the union issued guidelines for the projected general strike. The union’s members were to effectively take control of the country’s workplaces by occupying them and by denying access to anyone not authorised by the union. Each factory was to be a citadel, with the local union committees operating from the inside so as to avoid harassment from the forces of the state.
From the side of the regime preparations also seemed to be afoot for an all-out confrontation. Massive numbers of police were drafted into the Bydgoszcz area. The politbureau broadcast a statement denouncing Solidarity for ‘political activities’ and for creating a state of anarchy’. Government spokesmen went out of their way to emphasise that Warsaw Pact exercises taking place in the country were being extended ‘owing to the seriousness of the situation’. They went on to say that the government was prepared, if necessary, to endure a 30-day general strike.
Yet in these days of growing tension, one incident revealed that the regime was not at all sure it would win in any confrontation. The majority of the politbureau were for declaring a state of emergency and turning the police and the army against the union. But Jaruzelski threatened to resign as premier and head of the armed forces if this were done. [37] At the time many people ascribed this to his moderation. Events since have shown that he was quite prepared to use troops and police to impose a dictatorship when he thought he could get away with it. If he did not do this in March, it was because he could see that the momentum of the workers’ movement was still growing and that to attempt to put the armed forces in its path might smash the armed forces. He preferred to bide his time.
Pressure was applied to Solidarity not only from those who wanted it smashed, but also from those who preached conciliation between the rival classes. On 28 March Walesa had an hour-long meeting with Cardinal Wyszynski, and the next day the Pope declared that Polish workers wanted to ‘work not strike’.
The day to day leadership of the union bent under these combined pressures. At the last minute Walesa announced that the strike had been called off. The government agreed to suspend certain officials involved in the Bydgoszcz attack, and to ‘study’ the problem of Rural Solidarity and the imprisoned dissidents. In return, the union ‘accepts that there was some justification for police interference in Bydgoszcz because of a climate of tension in the city’.
The majority of union activists accepted the deal. But a quite large minority were bitterly angry. From their hospital beds the injured Bydgoszcz officials denounced it. Karol Modzelewski resigned his position as union spokesman because of the leadership’s ‘undemocratic’ behaviour. And in Gdansk Anna Walentynowicz’s outspoken opposition to the deal led to her being replaced as a union delegate.
It was from this moment that the currents were born inside the union that became known as the ‘radicals’. Their significance was to increase in the months that followed.
They were motivated by a double feeling of distrust. On the one hand, they felt that Walesa and the praesidium were increasingly behaving in an autocratic, bureaucratic manner, not bothering to consult the members – a feeling which received confirmation as Walesa argued for the need for ‘a dictatorship’ inside the union. On the other, they felt that by failing to respond to government provocations the union leadership were allowing the regime to regroup its battered forces for further assaults upon the positions the workers had won.
In both respects the radicals were proved right by events. Walesa was increasingly to use use his position of authority to stop strikes, not to build the support that would gain them success. And, as was proved later [38], March was the month in which Jaruzelski began the long drawn out preparations that were to culminate in the military takeover of 13 December.
What would have happened, had Solidarity gone ahead with the general strike? No one can say. Yet what is certain is that the regime, in March, was in nothing like the shape it was to be in eight months later, when it chose to move.
 
Crisis in the party
The outcome of the Bydgoszcz confrontation was decisive in providing a framework within which the events of the next six months took place. The regime had discovered it was by no means strong enough to smash Solidarity. But the Solidarity praesidium had shown that it had no intention of leading the workers forward with a perspective of smashing the regime. The result was a condition of mutual paralysis, an equilibrium between roughly equal forces.
The apostles of conciliation interpreted this as meaning that a long-term agreement between Solidarity and the regime was possible, that ‘the moderates on both sides’ would be able to get together and spell out the terms of a new ‘social contract’.
It was with this perspective that enormous hopes were placed in the special Party Congress of the summer by the western press, by the moderates in Solidarity, by Eurocommunists and even by some western ‘Trotskyists’. [39] It was believed that ‘reformers’ in the Party would win control of the Congress and carry through a rupture with the old methods of the regime, enabling a ‘renewal of socialism’ on the basis of an agreement with the union.
These hopes were fundamentally misplaced. They did not understand the character of the PUWP or the depth of the Polish crisis.
One of the repeated formulae that Solidarity was asked to respect was ‘the leading role of the Party’. The formula suggests, as is widely thought, that the Party rules in Poland and the other ‘communist’ countries. In reality, the issue is rather more complex.
In ‘normal’ times, the one-Party monopoly is certainly very real. The workers are not allowed to organise in any other political party, nor to struggle for the realisation of any other programme for Polish society than that of the single ‘leading’ party. This monopoly is strictly enforced by police methods.
The Polish Party had a membership of some three millions. It would be absurd to imagine that these three million Poles ruled Roland, or ruled the Party they had joined. Within the Party, all factions and platforms were strictly forbidden. No rank-and-file member had any right to fight for his or her own independent ideas within the Party. As Kuron and Modzelewski wrote in the 1960s:
Exercising political initiative in society demands organisation, but in any attempt to exert influence on the decisions of the “top”, the mass of rank-and-file Party members is deprived of organisation, atomised, therefore powerless. The only source of political initiative can be – in the nature of things – organised bodies, i.e. the (Party) apparatus. Like every great apparatus, it is organised hierarchically; information flows upward, while decisions and orders are handed down from above. As in every hierarchical apparatus, the fountainhead of orders is the elite, the group of people who occupy conspicuous positions in the hierarchy and who collectively make basic decisions. [40]
What then is the role of the Party? Fundamentally, it is a branch of the state machine, though not the only one, nor necessarily always the most important. [41] Those who head the Party, together with the heads of the other major apparatuses of the state – the army, police, judiciary, planning bodies, economic ministries, cultural control systems etc. – together form the state decision- making apparatus, the real core of the ruling class. It is in this top circle that the fundamental class goals of Polish society are formulated, here that major policy decisions are taken. The Party is a mechanism through which the ‘central political bureaucracy’ (Kuron and Modzelewski’s phrase) exerts its rule over society. It is not the only mechanism of such rule: the security police, the army, the censorship, the media, the industrial management system and the official trade unions are also important. The ordinary member of the Party no more rules than does a private in the army.
The Party is, normally, a mechanism by which the state organises support in society for its goals. It reaches into all the various workplace and community organisations. If offers various kinds of rewards and satisfactions to its members. Party members generally get better access to such facilities as nursery and college places for their children, holiday resorts, sanitoria and hospitals, etc. Through Party meetings, they get access to ‘inside dope’ (an important commodity in a society whose media are so tightly controlled). Membership brings with it the chance to meet important people, to ‘be someone’. The Party is an important avenue of social mobility and promotion. It is, also, of course, the only place where anyone interested in ‘politics’ in the conventional sense can find his or her interests satisfied; and it attracts people, not only on the basis of self-interest, but also on grounds of commitment.
Party membership among workers is probably less stable or significant than among the ‘middle layers’. It matters more in those sectors of society between the ruling authorities and the mass of workers and peasants, in jobs where some degree of initiative and the exercise of judgement is required. Party membership is typically higher, in proportional terms, among such people as managers and foremen, journalists, teachers, TV personnel, army and police officers, than among rank-and-file workers and (especially) peasants. Fewer than half the Party members are workers despite its name.
In ‘normal’ circumstances, the Party functions as a hierarchical mechanism through which the ruling group fills significant positions in the overall command structure. It also motivates people to urge their fellows to work for and support the main goals of their rulers. Those who fill the top positions select their subordinates, who control entry to Party membership. The lower level officials select delegates to official functions like regional and national congresses, where they are advised whom to vote for to bodies like the Central Committee. Normally only one list of candidates is possible, so that the election of the ‘recommended’ people is assured. The Central Committee thus ‘elected’ then selects the Politbureau from its own ranks. At the same time, through the so-called ‘Nomenklatura’ system, the Party leadership controls access to key positions in the other hierarchies of the state.
In normal times this mechanism of rule works fairly well for the ruling class. But in crisis situations it can fall into disarray. There is a serious breakdown in the whole Party’s functioning. This happened in Poland in the crisis of 1956 and again in 1981.
There were already difficulties before Solidarity erupted onto the scene. In the run-up to the February 1980 Congress, the economic crisis found an echo in strained relations within the Party. Sections of the membership were ‘increasingly exasperated’: ‘In factories, meetings often turned into unruly protests that concentrated on the chaotic food supply, the growth of corrupt privilege in official life, the infuriating effect of official “success propaganda” on working-class families and the lack of effective workers’ representation in the plants.’ [42] But the Party rank-and-file might voice their grievances: they could not alter the Party regime. It was not within their power to initiate new reform proposals. They had to be satisfied with the sacking of Jaroszewicz, the Prime Minister, and an anodyne speech on ‘socialist democracy’ by Gierek that promised nothing concrete.
The great mass of workers were excluded even from this degree of participation. But in July 1980, when the strikes began, the workers’ movement forced considerable changes inside the Party. At Lublin in July, after the first strike wave there, many party workers were elected to the works councils – but not one single candidate who’d been nominated by the Party. [43] The challenge was to broaden out immensely from August 1980 onwards.
The impact of Solidarity on the inner workings of the Party was immense. It threw it into disarray, as it was also to throw into disarray other sections of the Polish state apparatus (though not all). The turmoil inside Poland was rapidly reflected in the changes in Party leadership. In September 1980, Gierek became ‘ill’ and was replaced by Kania. Shortly after, the new regime began to talk about the Gierek leadership’s ‘errors’, which had previously not been directly admitted. Party morale was affected by this and subsequent changes at the top, and by the growing wave of open revelations of corruption and mismanagement. Quite a large number of members quit the party voluntarily: by late April 1981, the numbers were officially reported to be 136,000 and the drain continued. [44] The Party’s credibility was thrown into serious question by everything that happened, and it became more unpopular than it had ever been. The official public opinion research bureau reported in June 1981 on a survey among Poles, in which they were asked which institution in Polish society inspired most confidence in them: the Catholic Church came top, followed by Solidarity, the army, the council of state, the government – and the Party came bottom. [45]
The pressure of Solidarity on the Party was also felt much more directly, in that many Party members – and especially members in the factories and other workplaces – joined the new movement. The Party was no longer the single focus of organisation and politics. Solidarity was new and exciting, offering more than the Party’s increasingly tired rhetoric about working-class organisation and justice.
The new movement broadened the aspirations and the imagination of hundreds of thousands of rank-and-file Party members. Estimates of how many Party members joined Solidarity vary from three quarters of a million to two millions. The more that the state and party leadership were forced to make concessions to workers’ demands, the more the appeal of Solidarity increased. Jan Labecki, first secretary of the Party in the Gdansk shipyard, and himself a Solidarity sympathiser, reported: ‘In our shipyard Solidarity and the party are organically intertwined. Eighty per cent of the party’s members also belong to Solidarity.’ [46] These members’ primary loyalties were by no means to the Party: when the regime tried to persuade its Party members to turn up for work on the free Saturdays, the response was poor; even more seriously, when the Party tried to persuade its own members to break the four-hour protest strike on 27 March 1981 they failed miserably. The Party as a mechanism of control had broken down. Party members with leading positions in Solidarity were soon either to be expelled like Bogdan Lis of Gdansk, or to leave like Andrzej Slowick from Lodz (now serving a three and a half year sentence for calling a strike).
One effect was the radicalisation of whole sections of the Party’s membership. One notable development was the emergence of a ‘rank and file’ movement inside the Party, beginning in Torun. A radical alliance was formed between a local Party secretary, Iwanow, and the university Party group. In October 1980 this group organised a ‘horizontal’ meeting between members in eight local factories, followed the next month with a larger meeting. In February Iwanow was expelled from the Party for this breach of Party rules, but his members promptly re-elected him. The ‘horizontal’ conferences called for an emergency Party Congress, for free and secret elections to all posts and committees in the Party, for new laws of the kind Solidarity wanted: on trade unions, censorship, electoral procedures, the separation of Party and state. They seem to have wanted the Party to stop being an apparatus of the state, and to become a force fighting genuinely for its ideas among workers. They favoured a new pluralism in Polish political life.
Twenty ‘horizontal’ structures held a conference at Torun on 15 April 1981, where they put forward a whole series of demands, including the removal of compromised officials, a reformed and renewed PUWP, rights of opposition and tendency within the Party, and so on. Their ideal was a genuinely democratic Party which could formulate, and argue for, a real programme of national reform and renewal, alongside Solidarity. Although this conference was held in formal breach of the Party’s statutes, it was attended by quite senior Party personnel, and the Party daily reported quite favourably on it. [47]
The more that the leadership of the Party had to make concessions to Solidarity, and the more it appeared divided and irresolute in the crisis, the greater the space for the membership to begin to assert its own wishes and ideas: one rank-and-file member declared: ‘We decided we could not get sound advice from the leadership. After August the leadership simply was not in charge. It was split. Some members of the leadership were strongly opposed to a political solution to the crisis. This prevented the Politburo from taking a more vigorous line, which in a way was a good thing. It gave the rank and file a chance to play a more active role.’ [48]
Another element in the situation that weakened the Party was that many of its middle layers had to be driven out, under the Pressure of strikes and demands for a clean-up. Some 70,000 members were expelled by late April for corruption and other offences, and the process continued thereafter. Local officials, business directors, former ministers and the like were purged, and still the popular demands came for more. The Guardian reported ‘Rank and file pressures are still growing for the punishment of those leaders who caused the present crisis, and there is no sign that the Central Committee is prepared to resist them ... Since the reform movement began last August, about two thirds of the provincial Party secretaries have been replaced. The demand for further changes is strong.’ [49]
The Party leadership had no choice but to bow before this popular pressure. Particularly after the February Plenum of the Central Committee (when General Jaruzelski, the Defence Minister, also became Prime Minister), it attempted to lead and legitimate the reform movement inside the Party, in the hope of heading it off and controlling it. It identified itself with the anti-corruption movement. One Central Committee member suggested, after Jaruzelski’s assumption of the premiership, ‘This is the blackest day in the lives of many incompetent government officials’. [50] Jarulzelski was also expected to push back some of the concessions that his predecessor, Pinkowski, had made to Solidarity.
The new leadership was treading a difficult course: it wanted to contain Solidarity, but it was as yet without the resources for any kind of head-on confrontation. Kania, as Party secretary, had to attempt to limit his own hard-liners: ‘There are people in the Party,’ he declared, ‘who fail to understand that there is a new situation’. [51]The Party leadership must manoeuvre carefully to regain control over the situation, re-groupings its forces and attempting to re-build the shattered mechanism of transmission between itself and its own ; base. In early March, the Central Committee’s press spokesman, Josef Klasa, admitted publicly that the Party’s ideas were inadequate: ‘It is arguments that we lack most.... All views should be ventilated, in the Party press, provided we have sufficient ammunition to defend the Party line.’ And ammunition was lacking: the Party had debated with Jacek Kuron, ‘... but our polemics lacked sufficiently good arguments.’ [52] The third report of the ‘Experience and Future’ group (the DiP) appeared in the spring of 1981, and commented:
In the conditions of the Polish system, the development of the situation in the PUWP is a key issue. As a consequence of geopolitical necessity and historical conditioning [i.e., because of Russia! – CB/KW] its key role in society is beyond discussion, although there is still little clarity about how this role could and should be fulfilled in the much changed social situation. The peculiarity of this situation is that the leading role of the Party is recognised as a fundamental principle of the system without the belief that it is capable of playing such a role. Arguments put forward in favour of recognising this fundamental principle very seldom refer to the actual good qualities or achievement of the PUWP ... [53]
Yet, despite its growth, the ‘horizontal movement’ could not succeed in taking over the Party. For it to have done so, there would have had to be a clear split between a Party rank and file opposed to the regime and a leadership that supported it. But in practice a very large chunk of lower-level Party activists themselves shared in the privileges the regime granted to those who defended its rule. They saw that Solidarity represented a challenge to all privilege, and so identified either with the existing Party leadership or with the right wing authoritarian ruling-class ‘opposition’ of Grabski and Olszowski.
Paradoxically, this was revealed the moment the Party leadership conceded the most prominent of the horizontal movement’s demands – that for a special Party Congress based upon free and secret election of delegates from the different Party districts. What resulted was not a workers’ democracy of delegates elected by those who were exploited and oppressed in Polish society, but a version of what Lenin used to call a ‘slave owners democracy’ – an assembly made up in the main of representatives of those who gained privilege from exploitation and those who were engaged in oppression.
In the months running up to the Congress in July a different sort of horizontal movement appeared in opposition to the Torun movement – the so-called Katowice Forum made up of hardline opponents of any sort of concessions to Solidarity. In a sense this was just as authentic a representation of rank and file Party members as the Torun movement – one represented the sections of the rank and file from the working class and the intelligentsia, the other from the ranks of state functionaries and the ‘technocracy’.
Under these circumstances arguments in the Party meetings that elected delegates were intense indeed. The censorship intervened to prevent publication by the press of some of the discussions. ‘The Party’s demands are at times too radical for the censor.’ [54]
The result of the polarisation in the Party was that the delegates to the Congress were overwhelmingly new people. 80% had never been to a Congress before. It also meant that in locality after locality one side or the other was able to get enough support to get rid of old activists it disliked: only 40 of the 143 members of the old Central Committee were elected as delegates. Yet this did not mean that either of the ‘extreme’ groups in the Party could enjoy success for itself – neither the Torun movement nor the Katowice Forum got more than a small proportion of delegates. Nor did it mean a change in the basic character of the Congress as representing those sections of the middle layers who identified with the regime sufficiently to join its Party. Only 20% of delegates were workers – and of those, a quarter were foremen. 60% of the delegates were white collar. The Congress was chiefly made up of ‘middle aged, middle class intellectuals’ [55] and was 95% male.
These delegates were prepared to throw out many of the old Party leaders: only four of the old 11-strong politbureau made it to the new Central Committee. But the delegates were not prepared to push a new political line to go along with the new personnel. Jaruzelski and Kania who were the mistakenly identified as wanting some sort of reform were elected, but so was Olszowski, the sponsor of the hardliners.
In practice, nothing came from the Congress of value either for the regime or for the opposition to it. Even a new constitution that was supposed to subordinate the politbureau to the Central Committee was only approved in a ‘draft’ form – it had to be endorsed by the Central Committee.
In the months that followed the Party was no more able than it had been before to play its ‘leading role’ – to institutionalise the hegemony of the small bureaucratic ruling class over wider social layers. Its leadership remained a hotch potch of factions, based not on perspectives for getting out of the crisis, but on opportunistic alignments based on crude career calculations. The result was that the leadership of the regime was paralysed, unable to follow a clear cut policy either of attacking Solidarity or of making concessions to it.
The complete bankruptcy of the attempt to ‘renovate’ the Party via the Congress was shown in October. One of the ‘great’ ‘democratic’ reforms of the Congress was supposed to have been the election of the Party secretary by secret ballot. Kania came top in this ballot and continued to hold the position. But a ‘coup’ within the Central Committee in October overturned this ‘democratic’ decision and handed the job to Jaruzelski, who was already head of the armed forces and premier. There were few complaints when the ‘democracy’ of the Party Congress gave way to a greater than ever concentration of power in one person – for everyone could see that the Party was drifting as much as ever, unable to solve the regime’s problems and certainly incapable of fulfilling the hopes placed in it in the early summer. By that time nothing seemed more absurd than the optimism of a typical western ‘socialist’ D.M. Nuti, back in the summer: ‘The Party has ridden the storm, and come out of the experience considerably strengthened and with greater authority.’ [56]
In reality, the Party proved quite incapable of coping with the task of holding society together in the face of the challenge to the ruling class’s power. Even at its top, it no longer functioned as an arena in which cohesion could be produced among the rival groups within the ruling class.
This was to be proved, dramatically, in December when a different state organisation had to take the levers of power into its own hands and to push the Party – at least for a time – out of the power system of the so-called ‘one-party state’. The Party will not be allowed to resume its ‘leading role’ till it has been thoroughly purged and re-disciplined. Meantime, the ‘Communist’ regime is, in effect, doing without a communist party.

Notes
31. Labour Focus on Eastern Europe IV, 1–3.
32. After a prisoners’ revolt in Bydgoszcz in early September Solidarnosc (nr. 25, 18th Sept.) carried a report, based on evidence gathered by local regional Solidarity officers from prison inmates.
‘... prisoners referred repeatedly to the so called “belter”: a device used to punish insubordinate elements. What I saw surpassed my worst expectations. It is housed in a room of about 7-8 sq. metres, with a double door and a thick plexiglass window. The thick walls and the porch are there to ensure that the room is soundproof. A wooden platform about the size of a large bed stands in the centre, equipped with six metal loops to which belts are fastened. The prisoners relate that the condemned man is laid on the platform, his legs, arms and chest are bound in such a way that his shoulder-blades touch. The gaoler crushes the prisoners’ chest with his knees in order to make him exhale and tightens the belt to the maximum extent. He slides a matchbox or a cake of soap under the backbone. The constraint is painful and the soap causes additional burns. The prisoner is kept in this position for 6, 12 or even 24 hours. Even after six hours he is incapable of holding anything in his hands for the next fortnight. One of the prisoners, who had undergone this punishment 30 times demonstrated thick scars on his shoulders and armpits. It looked as if his arms were stitched on.
‘The decision to use the belts rests with the prison Governor, while the prison doctor certifies that the prisoner’s state of health is sufficiently sound to permit it. The prisoners complained that the representative of the prison health service treated both sick and healthy men alike in this respect. One of the prisoners showed us scars on his wrists. He had slashed them in order to evade the belts, but did not succeed ...
‘The most cruel punishment – those belts – was, until recently applied in the full majesty of the law. After the hunger strike in Grudziac prison, it was forbidden. The Governor of the Bydgoszcz establishment maintains that it is not used. Prisoners who were interviewed, both in the prison and in the town, consistently said that this was not true.’
33. Guardian, 28 March 1981.
34. Guardian, 19 February 1981.
35. J. Taylor, Five Months with Solidarity, London 1981, p. 19.
36. For a translation of the internal debate within Solidarity that the Bydgoszcz events triggered, see Dissent 1981.
37. Financial Times, 26 March 1981.
38. See the Insight team’s report in the Sunday Times, December 20th 1981.
39. See for instance the various articles that appeared in Intercontinental Press in this period.
40. Open Letter to the Party, p. 7.
41. Under Stalin, for example, the secret police were the most important branch of the state machine.
42. Ascherson, op. cit., pp. 126–7.
43. Ibid., p. 180.
44. Press reports at the end of 1981 suggested that as many as one and a half million members had been lost.
45. Guardian, 22 June 1981.
46. Guardian, 8 May 1981.
47. Guardian, 16 April 1981; Sunday Times, 19 April 1981.
48. Guardian, 8 May 1981.
49. Guardian, 29 April 1981. In May, Radio Warsaw reported that 13 Ministers, 40 Deputy Ministers, 18 Provincial Governors, 26 Deputy Governors, 72 Provincial Party Secretaries, 7 Heads of Central Departments and 14 Directors of Industrial Groups had been ‘recalled from top posts’. Denis McShane, New Socialist, September 1981.
50. Sunday Times, 15 February 1981.
51. Guardian, 4 February 1981.
52. Sunday Times, 8 March 1981.
53. Kultura (Paris), nr. 5/404, May 1981.
54. Guardian, 21 June 1981.
55. Guardian, 13 July 1981.
56. D.M. Nuti, The Polish Crisis: Economic Factors and Constraints, Socialist Register 1987, p. 127.
 






This month Bookmarks are reprinting Jacek Kuron and Karol Modzelewski’s famous Open Letter to the Party, under the title of Solidarnosc: the Missing Link. Colin Barker examines its arguments.



If, as this series suggests, ‘books are weapons’, then Kuron and Modzelewski’s Open Letter to the Party (1965) is a gun that has remained buttoned in its holster. It has still to be fired.
Yet what a weapon. The Open Letter to the Party is by far the most impressive Marxist document produced from within Eastern Europe (or Russia for that matter) since the 1920s. It is, analytically and politically, much superior to its obvious rival, Leon Trotsky’s The Revolution Betrayed.
The circumstances of its production were dramatic. Jacek Kuron and Karol Modzelewski, its joint authors, were young academics at Warsaw University, and members of the University branch of the Polish United Workers Party (Polish CP). They had participated in the student movement that emerged in the course of the 1956 events in Poland, through which the old party regime was shaken near to destruction by a mass upsurge of worker and popular protest. Looking at Poland in the aftermath of 1956–57 they concluded that the popular movement had gained virtually nothing.
The ‘October Left’ of 1956 had permitted itself to be sucked into the orbit of the re-shaped bureaucracy and had thereby failed to give a proper socialist lead to the working class. As a result, the Polish ruling class had re-established its grip on Polish society. The path of ‘reform’ and ‘renewal’ to which the progressive wing of the Polish intelligentsia had looked in 1956 had, in reality, proved to be a path to the reconsolidation of the ruling bureaucracy’s grip on Polish workers.
The conclusion these two young writers drew was that what was needed in Poland was a working-class, socialist revolution, to overthrow the ruling bureaucracy and establish workers’ power. For this purpose, a new revolutionary socialist party was needed.
The Polish authorities moved swiftly and brutally to deal with two such dangerous young dissidents. They were arrested and expelled from the PUWP for possessing an unfinished typescript outlining their views, and – when they attempted to explain their arguments to their former comrades in Warsaw University branch by means of the Open Letter – they were arrested and charged with aiming to overthrow the state with force. For this ‘crime’ Kuron and Modzelewski were brought in chains to court, and sentenced to three years and to three and a half years in prison. In line with a long and honourable socialist tradition, they defended their writings in court, and – when sentence was announced – joined with a section of the spectators in singing The Internationale from the dock.
Fortunately for the world socialist movement, a copy of their Open Letter reached the West, and was translated into numbers of languages. In 1968, copies were circulated in Czechoslovakia. It rapidly became apparent why the Polish regime had responded with such ferocity: Kuron and Modzelewski had written the most far-reaching Marxist critique of a ‘communist’ regime yet produced by its own subjects.
The real power in Poland, the authors insisted, is the monopolistic property of those who head the State and Party. The great majority of Poles, the workers and peasants, have no direct way of influencing their rulers. Democracy does not exist in any meaningful sense. The rulers of Poland are ‘the central political bureaucracy’.
As Marxists, Kuron and Modzelewski insisted that it was not sufficient to analyse the political relationships in Poland – the only matter considered by Western political scientists. What is decisive is the form that the relations of production take.
Unlike previous Marxist critics of ‘communist’ regimes, such as Trotsky, Kuron and Modzelewski denied that state property had any necessary connection with socialism. In Poland and the rest of the Warsaw Pact countries, indeed, state ownership is the particular legal form through which class exploitation is organised.
The working class, they showed, receives in Poland no more than is necessary for their basic subsistence. (Indeed, some workers barely receive this.) There is no meaningful sense in which the workers can be said to ‘own’ the means of production in Poland. Rather, they are in the same position as the workers in western capitalist countries, in that they are forced to sell their labour-power to the real owners of the means of production – the central political bureaucracy. The actual labour the workers perform, and the product of their labour, belong to their rulers.
 
Central class goal
To the objection that the bureaucracy cannot be a class, they responded by pointing out that all the contrary arguments merely proved that the property of the bureaucracy is not individual property but ‘the collective property of an elite which identifies itself with the state’.
‘Since the state finds itself in the hands of a central political bureaucracy – the collective owner of the means of production and the exploiter of the working class – all means of production and maintenance have become one centralised national “capital”.’
And it is as a capital that the bureaucracy owns and directs the productive resources of Polish industry. It enforces into Polish production the same ‘class goal’ that is also found in western capitalist production: accumulation for the sake of accumulation, production for the sake of production. The central aim of the bureaucracy is to force the workers to produce the means whereby its national capital may be increased. On this basis the ruling bureaucracy seeks to enlarge the basis of its own rule, and maintain its own international position as against the rest of the capitalist world.
Given its central class goal, the bureaucracy seeks to hold down the share of national income passing to the workers to the historically necessary minimum, and to devote the maximum resources to expanding the national means of production. The aim of production in Poland is not the satisfaction of the population’s rising wants, but ‘production for the sake of production’.
Like the western capitalist class, Kuron and Modzelewski suggest, the Polish central political bureaucracy once played an initially progressive role, in the period after the war, in dragging the backward Polish economy forwards through forced industrialisation. This was achieved, as in the West, by expanding industrial employment and enlarging the. working class on the basis of a fiercely applied series of controls over the population, and the strict limiting of their consumption standards.
‘The nature of the task of industrialising a backward country called to life as a ruling class a bureaucracy which was able to achieve this task, since it alone, through its class interest, represented the interest of industrialisation under such conditions – production for the sake of production.’
However, by the mid-1950s, the main elements in that process of forced industrialisation had been achieved. Thereafter, the very existence of the bureaucracy and its rule became an increasing impediment to the further economic development of Poland. The bureaucracy’s class goal, and its monopolistic rule, became a fetter on society’s productive development. What further development required was a sharp shift in social and economic priorities, towards an emphasis on raising living standards and the level of popular consumption generally. But that need was not met: rather, the bureaucracy continued to exert its power to pursue its own class goal.
Just as Marxists in the West argue that the existing relations of production hold back the development of productive forces, so in Poland. The most obvious sign of this contradiction, suggested Kuron and Modzelewski, is the growing evidence of economic crisis in Poland. Growth rates were falling in the 1960s, and the economy was running into a number of ‘barriers’ to its further development: inflation, raw materials shortages, wasteful misuse of resources, difficulties in raising productivity, balance of payments problems. These signs of crisis were not accidental, but were the direct result of the exploitative social relations at the heart of Polish society, and the ruling class’s continuous drive to expand production for the sake of production.
The only solution to this impasse, they suggested, was revolution:
‘Production relations based on bureaucratic ownership have become chains hampering the country’s productive forces; with every day this continues, the crisis deepens. Therefore, the solution of the economic crisis requires the overthrow of these productive relations and the elimination of the class rule of the bureaucracy.’
It was not only the workers, but also the peasantry, who must benefit from such a social revolution. For the peasantry, too, is required to bear the costs of the bureaucracy’s class rule. Agriculture is stagnant, for it produces predominantly means of consumption for the workers, and the ruling class has no systematic interest in its development. The peasants are exploited, and peasant life is kept backward and underdeveloped.
The first major political manifestation of the crisis in Polish society occurred in the period 1956–57, in what the authors term ‘the first anti-bureaucratic revolution’. The revolution failed – principally because the Polish ‘October Left’ failed to meet the challenge of the period, in that it failed to put forward a working-class programme for the reconstruction of Polish society and failed to organise a movement around such a programme opposed to the rule of the liberal wing of the bureaucracy. As a result, the liberal wing of the bureaucracy was able to consolidate its position and push back such gains as the popular movement had achieved.
 
What kind of revolution?
The defeat of the 1956–57 movement, however, had solved nothing. The crisis was now general. Almost every section of Polish society – the workers, the peasants, the young people, the creative intelligentsia, etc. – was forced into opposition to the rule of the bureaucracy. ‘Revolution,’ declared the two writers, ‘is inevitable’.
What kind of revolution did Kuron and Modzelewski foresee and propose? Quite simply, their programme was a classic re-statement of the main arguments of revolutionary Marxism. The revolution must be internationalist in its perspectives, for the crisis is experienced throughout the Warsaw bloc, and in the West as well. The authors offer no utopian schemes for ‘socialism in one country’, but raise again the traditional socialist slogan ‘proletarians of all countries, unite!’
Central to their proposals is the argument for workers’ power, at factory level and at national level, organised through a system of Councils of Workers’ Delegates. They thus revive, at the heart of their programme, the idea that Marx celebrated in the Paris Commune and which took the name of ‘soviets’ in the period from 1917. For them, as for the whole of the genuine Marxist tradition, socialism begins with the direct exercise of power by the working class. The only way in which a majority class like the working class can exercise its rule is by the fullest democracy, hence the authors call for a multi-party system. Hence too, they reject the ‘parliamentary system’ – it offers no guarantee against dictatorship, and crucially, ‘it is not a form of people’s power‘. The whole system of parliamentary elections and government is a sham democracy, through which citizens lose their power to control politics.
Trade unions must be completely independent of the state, providing workers with the means to self-defence. The working week must be reduced, to allow workers time to educate themselves and participate in political life fully. The regular army must be replaced by a democratic workers’ militia, for ‘as long as it is maintained, a clique of generals may always proves stronger than all the parties and councils’ – sadly prophetic words, in the light of what happened in December 1981! The peasantry must have full political rights, and have the means to develop their farms properly – without forcible collectivisation, which is a method alien to socialism and suitable only for police dictatorships.
Only the working class can provide the social force capable to bringing down the dictatorship of the bureaucracy, and of providing a decisive lead to the rest of exploited and oppressed Polish society.
In one respect, Kuron and Modzelewski’s Open Letter has been fully validated. Their argument that Polish society was being driven towards crisis was proved correct in 1970, as the leading figures in the bureaucracy admitted. In the 1970s, under Gierek, the Polish bureaucracy attempted to overcome the growing tendency to stagnation by borrowing capital on the western market in staggering amounts, only to see the crisis return in the late 1970s with redoubled strength. In 1970, also, the working class revolted – especially in the coastal areas. In 1976, again, in Radom, Warsaw and elsewhere, workers’ strikes and demonstrations rocked the regime. And, in 1980 and 1981, working class resistance to the Polish bureaucracy reached altogether new heights in the formation and development of Solidarity. The fundamental correctness of Kuron and Modzelewski’s argument was proven in practice.
 
Abandoning their best ideas
But, what of their programme for social revolution? They themselves, back in 1965, concluded their discussion of the needed programme for a workers’ revolution by asking if it would be realised. They stated, absolutely correctly,
‘That depends on the degree of ideological and organisational preparation of the working class in a revolutionary crisis and therefore also depends on the present activities of those who identify with workers’ democracy.’
Unfortunately, in the intervening years between their own writing of the Open Letter and the upsurge of Solidarity in the summer of 1980, Kuron and Modzelewski themselves had abandoned their own best ideas. They did not attempt to put into practice their ideas of 1965. Space does not permit a full discussion of the reasons for their change of heart (see Colin Barker and Kara Weber, Solidarnosc: from Gdansk to Military Repression for this). Suffice it to say that, ultimately, they made the same tragic error as many reformists before them: they urged the workers not to go ‘too far’ and in the process contributed to the very strengthening of the Polish state which permitted Jaruzelski to smash Solidarity with a military coup in December 1981.
Now, once again, Jacek Kuron and Karol Modzelewski are in jail, along with thousands of the finest militants of the Polish working class. The worst aspect of the tragedy is that, fifteen years earlier, they had a better perception of the realities of Polish class society.
Even in their terrible hour of defeat, Polish workers will be thinking and learning. When next they rise – as they most certainly will – they could not be better armed than with the ideas of Kuron and Modzelewski’s Open Letter to the Party.
 



Chris Harman’s stated aim in his article Base and Superstructure, International Socialism 2:32, is a non-mechanistic and non-voluntaristic version of historical materialism, with adequate room for political action and organisation. The aim is fine, how about the argument?
I find much of his argument (up to page 24) unsatisfactory, but space permits only a focus on one issue: his treatment of the forces and relations of production.
What does Chris mean by productive forces, and by social relations of production? Alex Callinicos was wrong, he suggests, in treating production relations as ‘the independent variable’. Chris reserves that role for the forces of production.
I find both positions unhelpful. To treat either as ‘independent variable’ implies a sharp distinction between the two notions, such that the relation between them is one of external causality. Thus Chris treats the productive forces as a ‘first mover’, with changes in the social relations of production always as an ‘effect’ of changed productive forces.
This conception won’t do. [1] To sustain the position, productive forces must be thought of as being quite distinct from social relations. Yet, for Marx, it is clear that some social relations were themselves ‘forces of production’. One obvious example is human productive cooperation, which is simultaneously a productive force and a form of social relations. [2]
Chris is correct: Marx’s conception of human society and its development is centred on a key idea: production. But in Marx this idea is not limited to ‘the action of human beings on their environment to get a living for themselves’ (Harman, p. 17). Human production involves not only interaction with nature, but also the making of social relations and human character. Marx’s brief formulation in the Preface – ‘men enter into definite relations’ – is much better developed in Capital, where he emphasises how workers, in producing things, also reproduce the social relations of property and exploitation. The argument is an important one for Marxism: the very possibility of socialist revolution depends on the idea that the working class is the key force producing and reproducing the social relations of capitalist exploitation. What it makes in one way it can also remake and change.
Marx’s starting point in Capital is not the production of things, but immediately socially constructed things: commodities. Certainly a commodity has to be a use-value, but its exchange-value (a predominantly social aspect) is not caused by or reducible to its use-value. The relation between them is one of mutual entailment or presupposition, not ‘cause’. Value relations between commodities express the social relations between producers in their relations with the world of things they need: they entail ‘private property’.
Chris’s account of the ‘social relations of production’ is underdeveloped: they include not simply the immediate relations within which human beings actually work on nature’s resources and forces [3], but also all those social relations which are necessarily entailed by the whole mode of production. In the case of capitalism, for example, competition is part of the relations of production (hence Marx begins Capital with the commodity), along with a developed division of labour and property, and the means to guarantee those divisions. Some form of state is an inherent necessity for capitalist (reproduction to take place, and enters into the definition of the ‘mode of production’.
Is ‘base and superstructure’ such a necessary distinction? It is not a metaphor that Marx uses much in Capital, the mature version of his Critique of Political Economy. (Let’s remember that it is a metaphor, by the way.) Marx deployed a whole series of linguistic distinctions at different times, in an effort to point to and discuss a key problem in his theory. He writes of ‘essence and appearance’, of the ‘esoteric and exoteric’, ‘abstract’ and ‘concerete’, ‘general’ and ‘particular’, ‘innermost secret’ and ‘surface form’, etc. In the Introduction to the Grundrisse he writes:
In all forms of society there is one specific kind of production which predominates over the rest, whose relations thus assign rank and influence to the others. It is a general illumination which bathes all the other colours and modifies their particularity. It is a specific ether which determines the specific gravity of every being which has materialised within it. [4]
What Marx is getting at, in these different ways, is that there is a core set of social relations which characterise a particular epoch in human production, and to which reference must constantly be made if we want to understand any particular aspect of that form of society. The character of that ‘core’ is often concealed from view, appearing quite differently, and it is the work of Marxist science to reveal it.
Is this ‘core’ a direct causal result of the development of the productive forces, in the narrow technical sense in which Chris seems to want to use the term? This seems very dubious. On the ‘basis’ of essentially the same productive forces, different core sets of social relations of production – modes of production – have developed historically. A whole variety of pre-capitalist class societies are known to us, all resting on the achievements of the neolithic revolution: settled agriculture, towns, trade. [5] Similarly, the socialist project assumes that human beings can develop a quite different core set of social relations of production on the ‘basis’ of a technology developed essentially within capitalism.
Do the narrowly conceived productive forces, then, not ‘determine’ the relations of production? Of course they do – as long as we don’t try to pack too much into ‘determination’. It is surely better to see ‘determination’ as the setting of limits to possibility of variation. Class society and the state could not be consolidated and develop unless and until settled agriculture and urban development occurred. The collective democratic rule of the associated producers across the globe – socialism – cannot be achieved without the huge extension of productive forces that has occurred over the past few centuries. [6]
To make his argument work, Chris has to treat the development of the productive forces as an inevitable process, an ultimate cause. And he has to link this to the rise and ultimate victory or defeat of a ‘new class’. But is he really so sure that the decline of Mayan civilisation in central America was due to the Mayan ruling class’s suppression of a ‘new class’? It seems equally possible that the direct producers resisted exploitation (ran away? fought civil wars? who knows?) and made the civilisation unviable. All pre-capitalist class societies – in different ways – seem to have gone through cycles of development and crisis; no very significant process of ‘repression of new technology’ seems central to the history of most of them. Relative stagnation of the productive forces, rather that some regular crushing of technological advance and of an associated ‘new class’, seems quite as plausible an hypothesis.
There have, after all, not been that many technical revolutions in human history. One was the shift to settled agriculture, which permitted the growth of class society. Its merely ‘permissive’ character is indicated, perhaps, by the fact that the archaeological record seems to suggest that a period of some 60 centuries intervened between the first emergence of settled villages in the Middle East (c. 9250 BC) and the first clear evidence of state formation (3300 BC). On the very broad ‘basis’ of settled agriculture, there emerged a whole variety of pre-capitalist ‘modes of production’, which are best characterised by their specific forms of social relations rather than simply their different technologies. (This is not to deny that technological innovations did occur, but very slowly, and hardly in a way that adequately explains very much.)
Human history might have continued to be the record of the rise and fall of different agrarian civilisations, from ancient Sumeria to Rome, from the Mayan to the Aztec states of the Americas, without any fundamental alterations in human technology. Except that, in Europe, yet another form of agrarian civilisation emerged out of the decline of the Roman empire and through ‘fusion’ with the ‘barbarian’ peoples immigrating from the East. European feudalism was not so much distinguished by its specific technology as by the fact that its social relations of production gave it a peculiar capacity for development, which went beyond both previous and other contemporaneous agrarian civilisations. Feudal Europe was a single civilisation without an effective central state, in which new kinds of towns and new kinds of trade could develop, along with certain kinds of ‘freedom’. When feudalism ran into crisis in the late medieval period, it proved capable of providing the launching pad for an entirely new kind of class society, world capitalism.
The agents of that transition were not simply Chris’s new class of ‘burgers’. [7] It is curious, indeed, how little part Chris’s historical account allows for the class struggle between the ‘old’ exploited and exploiting classes. The emphasis – apart from the last and best part, with which I have no serious quarrels – falls on conflicts between ‘old’ and ‘new’ classes. Yet the peasantry and their struggles against serfdom were at least as significant in the break-up of feudal relations. Particularly in England, the outcome of the feudal crisis was a new pattern of rural social relations based on legally free labour which proved capable of developing in an entirely new direction.
Capitalism developed first in Europe because of the social rather than the technological peculiarities of feudalism. And it was the rise of capitalist social relations, as Marx spelled out at length, which promoted the enormous expansion of the productive forces which has marked the past few centuries. That development has now made possible a new social system resting on the abolition of exploitation. In turn, that new possibility depends on the development of a new productive force: the cooperative activity of the working class. Isn’t that what historical materialism is all about?

Notes
1. Let’s remember Engels: ‘What these gentlemen all lack is dialectics. They always see only here cause, there effect. That this is a hollow abstraction ... that here everything is relative and nothing absolute – this they never begin to see. Letter to C. Schmidt, 27 October 1890, Selected Correspondence, p. 425.
2. And there’s Engels again: ‘Force (that is, state power) is also an economic power!’ op. cit., p. 424.
3. This narrow reading characterises a writer like Laclau.
4. Marx, Grundrisse, pp. 106–7.
5. Marx’s 1859 Preface mentions only two, ‘ancient’ and ‘feudal’, which is far too restrictive.
6. There is a stronger sense, of course, in which we can suggest that socialism will involve the predominance of different productive forces. But when we suggest this we are no longer excluding social relations from our conception of productive forces. Thus, for example, we can suggest that socialist production will permit cooperative rather than competitive production to flourish, that human social powers will develop, etc.
7. Does the Harmanic terminology here reflect an obsession with more rapid subsistence production (‘fast food’)?
 



Russia 1905–07: Revolution as a Moment of Truth
Teodor Shanin
Macmillan £9.95
EVERY GREAT revolution changes the map of the world. For it always contains much that is new. The 1905–7 revolution was more than a rehearsal for 1917: that metaphor suggests merely practicing a given role. 1905–7 occasioned enormous revisions in Marxist theory and practice.
Why? Because the 1905–7 experience did not conform to the evolutionist theory of stages into which Marxism had become perverted. Real social forces refused to play the parts allotted to them by theory. The workers invented the Soviet, a form of proletarian rule in a backward country. The bourgeoisie refused to play a progressive role. The peasantry demonstrated enormous independent revolutionary capacity. Russia turned out less capitalist than all the Marxists had supposed, and more ripe for socialism too!
This is Shanin’s subject-matter. He is less interesting on the workers than on the peasantry. But never mind: his two large chapters on peasant movements, organisation and consciousness in revolutionary Russia are brilliant and thrilling. Shanin helped me understand, as never before, why Lenin, almost alone among the Bolsheviks, wanted to participate in the Duma alongside the peasant delegates, and why he fundamentally revised the Bolshevik agrarian programme.
The latter part of the book asks, who learned what from 1905–7? Some, including Mensheviks, Kadets, nobility, learning nothing, proved irrelevant. Others learned, and transformed their practice. One such was the brutal Stolypin, the Tsar’s minister, whose programme for reconstruction of Russia from above was defeated by the conservative stupidity of the very forces he tried to save.
Among the revolutionaries, two figures are especially important: Trotsky, whose experience led him to formulate the theory of permanent revolution; and of course Lenin, who reshaped the whole Bolshevik strategy and whose re-learning was more complex and deeper than Trotsky’s. (Another was Luxemburg, with her brilliant account of the mass strike, but Shanin misses her.)
There are several things to quarrel with in this book – a touch of soft Maoism, insufficient consideration of Trotsky’s theory of combined and uneven development. But overall this book is rich, bold, controversial and properly committed. I enjoyed it.
 



The Affluent Worker: Industrial Attitudes and Behaviour
John H. Goldthorpe, David Lockwood, Frank Bechofer, Jennifer Platt
Cambridge, 40s
The Affluent Worker: Political Attitudes and Behaviour
John H. Goldthorpe et al.
Cambridge, 30s
These two volumes offer an extensive and minutely detailed account of a study carried out in three Luton firms (Vauxhall, Laporte Chemicals, Skefco Ball-bearings) in the period before the 1964 Election. The overall aim of the study was to test the then current ‘theory’ that significant sections of the British working class, as a consequence of a relatively high standard of living, had adopted ‘middle-class’ aspirations, ideas and patterns of life. At the time of the 1959 Election, this ‘theory’ was given a certain prominence as an ‘explanation’ of Labour’s defeat.
At one level, that of simple refutation of the Crosland-Zweig-Abrams thesis of ‘bourgeoisification’, the study is a success. Confining themselves deliberately to younger married workers with above average weekly incomes (for manual workers) – a group, especially in Luton, very likely to show ‘bourgeois’ patterns of life and thought if any group does – the authors demonstrate that the great majority still vote Labour, belong to unions, want more wages, and see the social world as fundamentally articulated in class terms (‘them’ and ‘us’).
At the same time, they suggest, the ‘new’ working class does manifest certain changes in its style of life by contrast with the ‘traditional’ working class (miners, dockers, etc.). Work involvement is very low. The sole point of ‘attachment’ of the worker to his employer is the cash nexus. The worker expects no intrinsic satisfactions from his work, either as pleasure in his job or as social rewards. There is no ‘traditional’ working-class sense of community. These are the ‘privatised’ workers, for whom workmates are never friends outside work. ‘Life’ is for them something lived entirely outside work, work a means simply to win wages for a life outside. Their attitude to work is ‘instrumental’ rather than ‘expressive’ – in no sense does work appear to the Luton workers as an expression of themselves.
This ‘instrumentalism’ is carried over into their trade unionism and politics. They rarely attend their union branches, rarely vote in branch elections (except where they’re held on the shop floor) but do involve themselves in immediate shop-floor unionism (shop steward elections, etc) insofar as these are seen as relevant to their instrumental interests. Their interest in the ‘wider ideas and objectives of the Labour Movement’ is minimal. Their support for the Labour Party (69 per cent in one volume, 79 per cent in the other ...) is similarly ‘instrumental’ – that is, these workers expect more material advantage from a Labour than a Tory Government – rather than ‘solidaristic’ (whatever precisely that means).
Apart from certain semi-technical objections to the authors’ interpretation of their own results (of five groups of workers studied, only the semi-skilled Vauxhall assembly workers really conform to their type of the ‘instrumental worker’), two objections must be raised.
First, the dichotomy they propose between a ‘traditional’ and a ‘new’ working class is highly dubious. To suppose there is no ‘instrumentalism’ (assessment of unionism and Labour Party in terms of their advantages for workers) in the attitudes of, say, miners and dockers to their trade unions and political parties, either in the past or today, is somewhat surprising. The authors seem to have confused a communalism characteristic, possibly, of ‘traditional’ working-class leisure culture with a solidarity born out of work experiences. If the former has tended to decline, the evidence (strike statistics, etc) does not suggest a decline of the latter. What is true is that the forms of expression of working-class solidarity and the issues on which it’s expressed have tended to change (more unofficial strikes, more strikes on issues of work-place control, by comparison with pre-war Britain).
Second, given that Goldthorpe et al. wanted to carry out a ‘full investigation of the industrial lives of the workers we studied’, their research methods (interview schedules only) seem very inadequate. There is no account of actual interaction at work, of the patterns of action and relationships that foster and maintain class awareness. Thus the sources and developments of worker-management are never really revealed. The ambiguities and instability in workers’ attitudes to management do not emerge. What we are given is an account of a fundamentally stable situation. Given that the major plant studied was a car factory, this is especially surprising, given the well-known pattern of instability in the motor trade. The workers (and the employers, who hardly appear in the book) exist in isolation from capitalist society. Thus the 1966 strikes, despite their protestations to the contrary, came as a surprise to the research team.
All in all, these two volumes (two more are promised) are not half as interesting as they might have been. Despite the wealth of material, those looking for a serious contribution from professional sociology to an understanding of the contemporary British working class must keep looking.



Measure for Measure: Reforming the Unions
Stephen Fay
Chatto & Windus/Charles Knight, 10s
‘My scheme is liberal reformist in intent,’ declares the Sunday Times labour correspondent. His plan for ‘union reform’ is designed to ‘fit into and assist the mixed economy’ and is ‘in the best liberal tradition: it is design to avoid chaos’.
Fay presents the outlines of an increasingly orthodox view of post-war industrial relations: the shift to shop-floor bargaining; fragmentation of teh trade union movement qua movement;inter-union squabbles as alternatives to employer-bashing; ossification of official organisation; increasing ‘disorder’ in industry; etc. A liberal, it used to be said, is a Tory with a conscience. Fay’s book reveals how contradictory that contemporary ‘conscience’ is. He wants ‘stronger’ unions, and proposes Government intervention to strengthen them – despite noting that union-knocking can be electorally profitable and despite a chapter on Strikes: Power Abused. He laments the jack of responsiveness by union leaderships to the rank and file, and proposes more control over them by the leadership. Union members are apathetic, a weakness in the unions; yet he cites with horror the following statement by an AEF official: ‘I am paid by my members to serve my members, and my job is to satisfy them, not for them to satisfy me.’ The AEF suffers, in Fay’s view, from too many elections and from the relatively low pay its officials get; yet the NUGMW, the reverse case, has a static low-paid membership that ‘lacks independence, guts even’.
His case is curious. He wants the unions to recover a sense of purpose, and castigates the TUC General Council for its lack of support for strikes by weaker unions. In the name of stronger, more purposeful trade unionism he proposes the legalisation of contracts (after the manner of the Tory plan, Fair Deal At Work) with penalty clauses leading to instant dismissal without protection for unofficial strikers; legally backed shoves towards industrial unionism; higher union dues; more full-time officials; full-time stewards to police contracts UAW-style. In short, he wants a legal framework to force union leaders to control their members better. Contracts should link pay and productivity, thereby forcing unions to concern themselves with the efficiency of enterprises – perhaps like the American UMW, whose concern with mining efficiency seems not unconnected with the Yablonski murders?
Legal changes of the type proposed by Fay, however modified, may well be brought in by Tories or Labour in the next couple of years. The assault by employers and Government, whatever its precise form, will open up possibilities for a real recreation of a purposeful working-class movement. Fay’s book reveals one thing: ‘liberal reformism’ will have no place in that.

 Barker: A study in African resistance (Autumn 2008)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Colin Barker
A study in African resistance
(Autumn 2008)

From International Socialism 2 : 120, Autumn 2008.
Copyright © International Socialism.
Copied with thanks from the International Socialism Website.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Leo Zeilig
Revolt and Protest: Student Politics and Activism in Sub-Saharan Africa
Tauris, 2007, £47.50
The revolutions in “Third World” countries in the three
decades after 1945 posed some problems for Marxist theory. Leadership
in those revolutions did not come from the “traditional”
bourgeoisie. It proved quite as politically incapable as the
bourgeoisies of Germany or Russia, whose behaviour in 1848, 1905 and
1917 provoked the initial formulations of the theory of “permanent
revolution”, first by Karl Marx and then by Leon Trotsky. The
bourgeoisie’s lack of revolutionary leadership was not unexpected.
The age of the “classic” bourgeois revolution had ended before 1848.
What permanent revolution proposed, as policy and theory, was that
the struggle for political emancipation – including national
emancipation from imperial control – should and could be taken up
and led by working class forces. By asserting their own independent
interests and developing their own specific political forms (from
workers’ parties and militia to soviets) organised workers could,
even while still a minority within underdeveloped capitalist
formations, assert their political leadership over peasants and
artisans, and so begin the process of socialist reconstruction of
society under their own direct control.
However, no such scenario fitted the experience of the post-war
revolutions in “backward countries”. Certainly there were cases
in which workers participated in the struggle for national
independence. For example, in Nigeria, Senegal, Zimbabwe and Zambia
general strikes preceded the actual struggle for the transfer of
power from colonial authorities. But nowhere was the actual
revolutionary process marked by the assertion of independent working
class power and organisation. In many cases, indeed, the
revolutionary transfer of power occurred without any significant
working class involvement, as Tony Cliff recorded in his examination
of the revolutions in China, Algeria and Cuba (see the article
Deflected Permanent Revolution, available from
www.marxists.org).
Writing in 1963, Cliff offered a characterisation of the wave of
Third World revolutions, offering the term “deflected permanent
revolution”. Given the weakness of independent working class
organisation, leadership of a whole series of revolutions had fallen
to a social force previously unexpected to play this role. A radical
urban petty-bourgeois intelligentsia took the political initiative
and set out to impose its own vision of societal development.
In sub-Saharan Africa, the focus of Leo Zeilig’s study, this
national intelligentsia was recruited from the small ranks of
university educated graduates (many of them getting their degrees in
the metropolitan centres, for the colonising powers had held back
university development across Africa), from civil servants working in
the colonial administrations and from the trade union bureaucracy.
According to Zeilig, this group, mostly ex-students, came to see
themselves as “the liberators of Africa and as uniquely
representing the emergent nation” (p. 31).
If, commonly, they adopted a rhetoric of “socialism”, theirs
was a “socialism from above” marked by a concern to use the state
as an agency of essentially national development. Cliff characterised
their politics sharply:
“They are great believers in efficiency ... They hope
for reform from above and would dearly love to hand the new world
over to a grateful people, rather than see the liberating struggle of
a self-conscious and freely associated people result in a new world themselves.”
Or, as Mahmood Mamdani was to write later,
“Intellectuals ... saw the state and not the class
struggle as the motive force of development ... socialism was turned
into a strategy for economic development, and no more ... From this
perspective, it was difficult even to glimpse the possibility of
working people in Africa becoming a creative force capable of making
history. Rather, history was seen as something to be made outside
this force, in lieu of this force and ultimately to be imposed on it”
(cited by Zeilig, p. 33).
Across sub-Saharan Africa the situation after independence was
ambiguous in its effects on students. They were commonly seen, and
saw themselves, as the crucial bearers of a vision of national
development. However, the expected benefits of independence were slow
to arrive for the majority of the population. The regimes that
emerged were commonly authoritarian and the gradually expanding
university sector became an important setting for political struggle.
As with student movements elsewhere in the 1960s and early 1970s,
student politics was often explosive yet transitory and still marked
by elitism.
Zeilig’s study is focused chiefly on student movements in Africa
in the subsequent period. From the mid-1970s the whole economic,
political and social environment changed quite rapidly for the worse.
The world recession had an especially catastrophic effect on Africa.
States that relied chiefly for export income on a few primary
products saw their prices collapse as the cost of their imports rose.
Visions of national state-led capitalist development imploded as
state debts rocketed. Compelled to turn to the IMF and World Bank,
they were to adopt “structural adjustment policies” involving
varying degrees of economic liberalisation and privatisation. These,
if they benefited international capital, did little or nothing to
improve the lot of the majority of sub-Saharan Africa’s peoples.
Those majorities bore the brunt of “adjustment” in rising food
prices and falling employment.
Those popular majorities provided the social basis for a wave of
“street demonstrations, marches, strikes and other forms of public
action” during the late 1970s and 1980s. These rocked the regimes
and provided an important precursor to the anti-globalisation
movement today (p. 52).
In the early 1990s the scale and extent of popular protest
activity expanded rapidly, compelling many governments to introduce
reforms and to hold democratic elections. Though insufficiently
noticed, African countries played a key part in the wave of
“democratic transitions” that, of course, included those in
Eastern Europe and the former USSR. But the democracy produced has
been weakly developed, not least because popular resistance to state
policies of “economic liberalisation” has remained powerful:
“While the demand for economic liberalisation may have
weakened formal democratic structures, in some cases it created an
extraordinarily explosive cocktail of social forces” (p. 58).
That cocktail included African students. If in the immediate
aftermath of independence students were an actual or aspiring elite,
the same world capitalist forces that drove down popular living and
working standards across the continent also pulled them down. Zeilig
provides a graphic account of the problems afflicting Africa’s
higher education institutions, from physical decay of buildings to
the slashing of library book and journal stocks, from spiralling
student fees and living costs to overcrowded classrooms and
inadequate teaching. Behind these developments lie World Bank
policies, themselves close to what one critic termed “academic
exterminism”. In the process “university students have seen their
status collapse, along with every other social class. These are
general processes that have seen the decimation of classes previously
regarded as privileged – teachers, university lecturers, civil
servants and white collar workers” (p. 78).
It is this changed context of social breakdown that makes Zeilig’s
account of recent student activism across Africa so interesting.
Given the variety of conditions across the continent, any
generalisation must be very provisional. Yet it is clear that
students regularly played a significant role in democratisation
processes. To that we must add that they were most effective when
their own activism succeeded in forcing a wider political opening up,
even where they themselves lacked a clear alternative strategy. As
Mamdani commented, “Its possibilities depended far more on the
character of forces that student action succeeded in mobilising than
its own internal energies” (cited, p. 90). That conclusion, of
course, fits the French events of May 1968 quite as much as it fits
modern Africa.
From being an elite group, set apart from and “over” society,
students – and the unemployed graduates that many go on to become –
have become an important part of the popular classes themselves. Here
too there are significant parallels with the “proletarianisation”
of students that recent European commentators have recorded. No
longer a tiny “transitory” group awaiting jobs in government,
African students have at once expanded their numbers but have also
been “pauperised, converging more and more with the wider urban
poor – the social groups they historically saw as their
responsibility to liberate” (p. 91).
This is not to say that student politics have been purged of all
elements of elitism, but now they are tempered by the realities of
campus poverty. African students, however, retain the ability, noted
in other parts of the world, to mobilise and organise more quickly
and effectively than many other social groups. If they cannot by
themselves remake politics, they can and do play a specific
energising role in oppositional politics which has regularly brought
them into conflict with their various regimes.
At the core of Zeilig’s book are two substantial chapters based
on extensive interviews detailing student activism in Zimbabwe and
Senegal. In 1991 in Zimbabwe Robert Mugabe’s government introduced
its first full structural adjustment programme, producing a rapid
rise in unemployment accompanied by a cut in exports and growing
inflation. Although it took several years for organised resistance to
mobilise large-scale forces, by the mid-1990s mass strikes, student
demonstrations and food riots began to coalesce against a notoriously
brutal police regime.
There were growing calls on the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions,
led by Morgan Tsvangirai, to form a labour party. But these calls
were soon joined by other, middle class voices. In 1999 the Movement
for Democratic Change (MDC) emerged, but rapidly dissociated itself
from its labour base by supporting further privatisation, with the
union leadership acting to contain and stifle widespread protest activity.
From the second half of the 1990s Zimbabwean students’ formerly
privileged economic position was speedily reduced under a second wave
of structural adjustment policies that slashed grants, expanded loans
and privatised food and accommodation just as prices were soaring.
Student economic demands now coalesced with demands for political
reform, drawing them into links with the trade unions and the
formation of the MDC.
The contradictions and tensions were considerable. Students were
fighting the privatisation of education at the same time that the
MDC, the party they supported, was advocating more of the same. It
was in this context that the small International Socialist
Organisation worked to develop some ideological and practical
clarity, as Zeilig documents at some length. Zimbabwe’s campuses
were rocked by protests, to which the regime responded with brutal force.
As Zeilig shows, however, a new force now entered the scene, in
the shape of international NGOs, who poured in money to the
opposition, producing what activists termed the “commodification of
resistance”, funding expensive conferences and scholarships, and
distorting the structures of indigenous opposition. Students found
themselves isolated and subjected to violent assaults when they
demonstrated on the campus. Zeilig’s whole chapter is invaluable
for anyone trying to make sense of the current situation in Zimbabwe.
Students in Senegal had their own, less known, “May events” in
1968 when student protests coincided with widespread strikes. As
their material situation worsened, economic and political issues also
became intertwined with their waves of protest action. Their most
notable recent role in Senegalese politics occurred in the years 2000
and 2001. To many observers, Senegal after independence had looked
like a one-party state under Senghor and his nominated successor
Diouf. In 2000, however, Abdoulaye Wade, himself a former student
activist, succeeded in capturing the levers of state power in a hotly
contested election. In that election, conducted under the slogan Sopi
(change), students played an indispensable role, fanning out across
the country to mobilise the vote in their towns and villages of origin.
Wade, like the MDC in Zimbabwe, saw his role as continuing
“structural adjustment” policies. Within a year those policies
brought him into sharp conflict with the very students who had
campaigned for him in 2000. A student campaign of strikes and
demonstrations, which involved the death of a law student, compelled
Wade to reverse his previous support for World Bank sponsored
cutbacks in university spending. Wade’s regime, having conceded,
then broke the back of the student movement by buying off its leaders
with overseas scholarships in a local variant of “commodification
of resistance”.
If in the countries of advanced capitalism the distinct status of
students has declined, making them a “student mass” (Stathis
Kouvelakis) within the workers’ movement rather than a distinct
class, across most of Africa students are still a much smaller
proportion of the population. If many of their previous material
privilege have withered, Zeilig suggests they retain some privileged
autonomy as political actors. Their concentration on the campus and
their unique social situation between two very different social
worlds give them a degree of freedom to act collectively (and be
beaten up!) when other sections of the oppressed are shackled.
Nonetheless, the international collapse of the old post-colonial
project of state development and the dominance of structural
adjustment programmes have converted them into “more modest agents
of social change” (p. 239). Their autonomous role as agents of
transformation often appears in the early stages of popular
mobilisation, but is accompanied by their inability, alone, to carry
through significant social and political transitions. Student
militancy appears most effective when it is directly connected with
struggles by unions and other popular movements – a process that
reduces students’ special significance.
The collapse of state development projects, along with the
ideological certainties that the Stalinist regimes used to provide,
has generated widespread uncertainty in the realm of radical ideas.
There is a significant dialectic at work here. In Senegal, where
student resistance was less connected than in Zimbabwe to vibrant
popular movements, the level of political analysis among students was
also less developed (p. 243). Across sub-Saharan Africa, as in
the rest of the world, the left is struggling to develop new
theoretical accounts of the world and new forms of political practice
that can pose real alternatives to the failures of both state
capitalism and global marketisation. Leo Zeilig’s book helps
capture many of the dilemmas and possibilities that are emerging.
 



The Making of Marx’s Critical Theory: A Bibliographical Analysis
Allen Oakley
Routledge & Kegan Paul £4.95
Marx’s Critique of Political Economy: Intellectual Sources and Evolution. Vol. 2
Allen Oakley
Routledge & Regan Paul £16.95
FROM around 1844, Marx set himself a vast task which he never came near to completing. His aim was to produce a complete critical theoretical, account of the workings of capitalist society. His work was interrupted by the 1848 revolutions, by the demands of political activity, by ill-health, by the need to earn a living through journalism, by his defence of the Paris Commune. His progress went in fits and starts.
Sometimes he would put the work aside for several years. At other times, he ‘worked like mad’ at it. He was always overly optimistic (especially to publishers!) about bis progress. Quite apart from the inherent difficulty of his task, Marx faced huge problems of presentation. An enormous mass of material must be put into a proper order, presented as ‘an artistic whole’, and written in a way which would make it accessible to communist workers. In the end, when he died in 1883, only Volume I of Capital had actually been published. Marx twice worked over this, in an effort to make it more comprehensible.
His friend and comrade, Frederick Engels, spent the next decade labouring over the mass of manuscripts and notebooks Marx had left behind. From these he produced what we know today as Capital Vols. II and III.
In The Making of Marx’s Critical Theory, Allen Oakley has traced the complex development of Marx’s ideas, indicating in the process what an unfinished work Capital really is. Indeed, as he emphasises, we cannot be sure, finally, even what it is that is unfinished, for Marx kept changing his own mind about the scope and scale of his great project. There is a good case for seeing Capital, as we have it, as only a small fraction of Marx’s intended project.
 
Labours
As part of his immense labours, Marx produced, between 1861 and 1863, a huge manuscript in 23 notebooks (in total some 3,000 printed pages). Ten of these notebooks, together with extracts from five others, were published by Karl Kautsky as Capital Vol. IV. They have been re-edited in Moscow as the Theories of Surplus Value (TSV). These are the subject of the second volume of Oakley’s study of the development of Marx’s ideas.
As he shows, the TSV should not be read as Capital Vol. IV. They are not even the draft form of a work intended for publication. Rather, they are a huge set of extended notes Marx made for his own purposes. He had already, in the Grundrisse notebooks of the late 1850s, worked out the main basis of his own theory of the economic functioning of capitalist society.
What he was doing in the TSV notebooks was to clarify and develop his own theories, by confronting the ideas of Smith, Ricardo, Malthus and others. Thus, the TSV are not Marx’s ‘history of political economy’, for Marx was reading the great (and not-so-great) political economists of previous generations with particular purposes in mind. He did not deal with all the relevant writers, nor with all the topics they raised.
He focussed chiefly on how they treated the question he himself had labelled the production of surplus value. Additionally, he was concerned with sorting put the contribution political economy had made to understanding the dynamics of capitalism – an aspect of the problem Marx had not previously taken very far.
Oakley focusses on this actual process of self-clarification, as it proceeds in Marx’s notebooks. He thus provides a fascinating insight into the labours going on within Marx’s own workshop.
Oakley’s books are models of scholarship. His exposition of the ideas both of Marx and of previous political economists is exceptionally clear. Taken together, these are a most useful addition to our understanding of the Marxist critique of political economy. Every half-decent library should be persuaded to buy them.
 



MY ARTICLE What Do We Mean by the State? in March SWR got a bit mangled in editing. An argument I think important disappeared.
Lenin’s formal definition of the state is insufficient. There is more to the state than ‘armed bodies of men’ etc. We shouldn’t define the state by a characteristic means it employs: violence.
States do useful things. The pensioner going to the Post Office doesn’t view the state as ‘organised violence’. Nor does the NHS patient, or the consumer of water. The modern state’s ‘useful functions’ strengthen it by making it seem inevitable.
Reformists, who take the state for granted, assume only ‘trained experts’, ‘managers’, etc. can organise key social activities. Their ‘socialism’ is always ‘from above’.
Marxists, by contrast, insist society must reclaim control over all its own necessities and functions. This argument applies equally to policing, production, distribution, welfare.
To define the state, we must follow Marx’s method, and begin with social relations. So, where to start? With the fact, surely, that every state involves one class monopolising key processes of rule-making and rule-enforcement. A society with a state is, by definition, a class-divided society. Those who comprise the state are a class. The existence of a state is an immediate sign of society’s alienated character. People are still reproducing the means of their own domination.
Every state is an impediment to popular self-government. Certainly, every state protects its monopoly by organised violence; but the monopoly itself, not the violence, is the centre of the evil.
This is as true of the ‘welfare state’ as it is of the police, army, judiciary, etc. To put the matter extremely, revolutionaries must aim to ‘smash the welfare state’. Lest some daft eejit seek to misunderstand me, of course we don’t oppose public welfare. But welfare does need to be ‘de-statised’, i.e., made directly subject to popular democratic control. Demands for just such democratisation of all state insitutions – health services, schools, law and order, etc. – have played a crucial role in all modern movements with any revolutionary potential. Look at France in 1968, Portugal in 1975, Poland in 1980!
What of a ‘workers’ state’ (Letters, SWR, April)? Certainly the working class has to establish its own democratic state power. But a ‘workers’ state’ has meaning only as what Lenin brilliantly termed a ‘semi-state’, a state whose democratic form permits its dissolution or ‘withering away’. What makes it still a state is that, in some respects, some parts of the population are excluded, in some measure, from control over the running of society. So long as the term ‘state’ still fits the situation, there is still hierarchy and subordination in social life.
Marx was an implacable enemy of all forms of ‘statism’ – and not only in respect of ‘capitalist’ stages. Socialism is the struggle for the destruction of the state, in all its manifestations and forms. The ‘subordination of the state to society’ is not the final goal; our ultimate aim is the removal of all forms of monopolisation of social functions and thus the end of the state in toto, without qualification.



 


Colin Barker
Manchester



 



THE question of the state has been one of the great causes of division in the socialist movement throughout this century. World War One split socialists into reformist and revolutionary wings over the issue of support for capitalist states in their imperialist rivalries. The same question still haunts people calling themselves socialists today: witness the failure of the Labour Party to attack the Tories over the Falklands.
The 1917 Russian Revolution, when a revolutionary workers’ movement destroyed the capitalist state, occasioned an organisational split within world socialism, with the founding of the Third International. In turn, the subsequent degeneration of the Russian Revolution posed issues for socialists directly centring on the state: should they support a ‘socialist’ state which attacked its workers and peasants, depriving them of all control over society? How should the regime of Stalin and his heirs, for whom the safety of the state was the supreme law, be understood? Those who upheld the banner of revolutionary Marxism in the world found themselves splitting again.
 
The State Illusion
Most people who call themselves socialists are still dominated by the idea that socialism is about expanding the sphere of activity of the state. For them, the key criterion of socialism is the nationalisation of property. The more militant their socialism, they assume, the more they must favour state property. A distinguishing mark of the Labour Left is its avowal of extensive nationalisation.
Similarly, judgements about the ‘socialist’ character of various regimes are based on the degree to which the means of productionare in state ownership. On this issue, Labourites, Stalinists and ‘orthodox Trotskyists’ are in broad agreement.
 
Surprises in Marx and Engels
Given this apparently widespread agreement among 20th century socialists, it is a refreshing shock to read Marx and Engels on this question. In 1916, Lenin experienced this shock: the young Bolshevik Bukharin had argued that Marxists should aim to destroy the state, a view Lenin associated with anarchism. To defeat Bukharin, Lenin systematically read what Marx and Engels had to say on the question – and discovered how correct Bukharin was. The outcome of his researches was the brilliant pamphlet, The State and Revolution.
Marx and Engels did not identify socialism with nationalisation of property.
Their attitude to the state was one of unremitting hostility. Far from wishing to expand its activities, they sought to do away with it. In 1844, Marx declared that the most useful thing the state could do for society was to commit suicide. The following year, he and Engels declared ‘... if the proletarians wish to assert themselves as individuals, they must overthrow the state.’
Marx celebrated the Paris Commune of 1871 on the grounds that it was ‘a Revolution against the State itself’. And in 1884, Engels looked forward to the day when the state would end its life ‘in the Museum of Antiquities, by the side of the spinning wheel and the bronze axe’. What a pleasant vision: all the pomp and glory of the state, finally reduced to an object for the amusement of children on wet afternoons!
 
The Nature of the State
A right-wing version of these ideas appears in what passes for Marxism today. What is wrong with the state, it is alleged, is that it supports the ruling class, capitalism and private property. This idea, though not untrue, leaves the door open to all manner of reformist ideas. For if the whole case against the state is that it supports capitalism, the possibility remains that the state can be won to other, socialist purposes. Much of ‘fashionable Marxism’, indeed, turns out to be of this type: at its heart is a deep opposition to smashing the state.
This was not Marx’s view. The problem is not simply that the state is an accessory to capitalism. It is an enemy in its own right; its existence is nothing but a barrier to socialism.
The state is an historical phenomenon. For the overwhelming majority of human history, our species managed without states. The real history of the state, as a specific social institution, is little more than 10,000 years old.
Stateless societies did not lack social regulation; life within them could be orderly, and remarkably affluent. We can begin to grasp how people in these societies managed, they lives if we consider aspects of our own existence that are outside state regulation. In many areas of our social life, we live by our own moral rules. We put pressure on each other to live by these rules: to remember relatives’ birthdays, to ‘stand our round’ in the pub, not to pick our noses in public. If we break these rules, no policeman arrests us, no judge fines or imprisons us. We keep each other ‘in line’ by various forms of moral pressure, including occasional small-scale violence. A lot of the time, we hardly even notice these rules: yet they are the real basis of social order.
Marx defines the state in terms of social relations. Here, the state is an organised body of people with a monopoly of crucial social functions, including that of making and enforcing rules. The state’s very existence necessarily involves the loss, by the majority of society, of the power to govern their own lives. The power of the state equals and parallels the powerlessness of its subjects. The state, which steals the function of government, ‘stands over’ the society it robs.
The emergence of states is associated above all with the development of settled agriculture and the peasant village. The peasantry is one of the two great exploited classes of history, the other is the working class. In both cases, although for different reasons, the state’s continuance rests ultimately on division and powerlessness among the exploited.
Even a casual analysis of states, from ancient Sumeria to the present, reveals immediately that the state everywhere is an exploiter of society. Those who compose the state depend on the direct producers to feed, house and clothe them. The relation of ruler and ruled is also, immediately, a relation of exploiter and exploited. Who says ‘state’ also says exploitation. It is probable that the first form of class society to emerge historically Out of pre-class communal societies was that in which the state itself was the sole ruling class. In later social development, above all with the growth of capitalism, the composition of the ruling class became more complex and divided. But the state remains, in its own right an exploiter, adjusting the forms of its surplus-extraction to the prevailing mode of production.
This aspect of the state is all too often missing from modern ‘Marxist’ accounts of the state. It was taken for granted by Marx and Engels.
Marx insisted that the state is in no sense a sphere of the ‘general interest’. It is a private interest, held as a monopoly against society, and defended by means of violence that are themselves based on exploitation, tax and conscription.
The political implications are of course obvious: those who oppose class exploitation must, necessarily, oppose the state. This is not simply because the state supports exploitation, but because it is itself directly a form of exploitation. Socialists who wish to maintain the existing state are simply not serious.
 
State Organisation and State Functions
The typical organisational form of the state is bureaucracy, with a centralised power and a hierarchy of state servants: army, police, judiciary, civil servants. Its form is significant: it is organised so that its personnel are dependent for the rules that control their actions on those above them, rather than on the people. It of course needs armed force as part of its structure, to protect its monopoly: no state could survive without its ‘armed bodies of men’.
None of this is to deny that states can and do perform ‘useful functions’ for society. They do, in their fashion, preserve ‘law and order’, redistribute resources within society, provide valuable services from water supply and roads to hospitals. Even if banditry is every state’s real relation to society, it must, to survive, be more than a mere bandit: it must perform services to seem indispensable.
But, always, states exact a price for their services: their own existence. We can find state power lurking behind the very phrases that deny it: ‘equality before the law’, for instance, places us all in a situation of equal powerlessness before the state.
State services – often valuable in themselves – have multiplied within modern capitalist countries, often because workers have fought for them. But every one of them has two crucial features which diminishes its real value: first, they all involve subordination to the state (education, welfare, law); second, they involve the division and atomisation of the population (competition in schools, health and welfare services for individualised ‘patients’ and ‘clients’).
Hence the ambiguity of the ‘victories’ won by workers through nationalisation of industries, or the expansion of state welfare. Class rule has been modified, but in no sense fundamentally challenged.
On the other hand, the fact that the state has been the mechanism through which workers have won significant concessions and improvements in their material and civil rights, is the real basis of the illusions of modern reformism.
The state formulates and maintains rules to maintain its place above society: there are special rules and procedures for making complaints against its officers difficult; there are rules of ‘official’ secrecy; certain offences ‘against the state’ attract the highest punishments; to give voice to the widespread ‘contempt’ people feel for its courts is a punishable matter.
 
Parliamentarism
Does modern ‘parliamentary democracy’ give us real control over the state? Hardly. In elections we vote as atomised individuals for representatives over whom we have no subsequent control by way of mandate or right of recall. Compared with the MP, the worst shop steward is the height of democracy! Parliament itself does not rule the whole state. Police, army, judiciary, secret service, civil service (even the DHSS) maintain their areas of ‘autonomy’ from parliamentary scrutiny and control. By far the largest part of the state is not subject to election, nor to direct control by any agency outside itself. This applies to the entire massive ‘executive’ of the state, which includes the army and police branches.
As the tragedy of Chile revealed yet again, the elected, parliamentary element in the rule of the state can be dispensed with by the ruling class if it threatens the class monopoly.
Rosa Luxemburg was correct: those who want to preserve the existing state machinery in the struggle for socialism are not simply arguing for a different road to socialism; they are arguing against socialism itself. The heart of the socialist idea is self-government in every sphere of life, including production. And the state, in its very, essence, is nothing but a series of massive impediments to that self-rule.
In practice, those who defend the ‘parliamentary road’ are, in the most exact meaning of the term, counter-revolutionary. As a long and bitter history in many different countries has shown, they prepare and even organise the defeats of workers’ movements aiming for socialism.
The aim of all those who want working class self-emancipation has to be the destruction of the capitalist state. Its existence is incompatible with the development of socialism.
The struggle for socialism is necessarily revolutionary. It involves a war between two opposed forms of organisation: on one hand, the centuries-old system of state exploitation; on the other, developing counter-institutions, led by workers but embracing all the exploited and oppressed of society, and based on the principles of the most complete democracy possible. Marx first identified these democratic principles in the brief explosion of the Paris Commune in 1871. They have re-appeared time and again in the 20th century, in the workers’ councils that have characterised every genuine revolutionary workers’ movement, from Russia in 1905 to Gdansk in 1980.
The development of socialism will only begin when such democratic organisations as these succeed in unifying their forces to break up the state power, replacing it with their own democratic and popular rule.
 







Socialism has always had two opposing traditions: the reformist tradition of socialism from above and the revolutionary tradition of socialism from below. The latest volume of Hal Draper’s Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution examines the rivals to Marx and is reviewed here by Colin Barker.





Hal Draper
Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution. Volume IV: Critique of Other Socialisms
Monthly Review Press. £11.95 (available from Bookmarks £9.50).
SOME THINGS we read stay with us for the rest of our lives. For me, one formative influence was an article in the winter 1962 issue of International Socialism by Hal Draper, an American Marxist. It had the unpromising title The Two Souls of Socialism. That article was a knockout.
Draper’s theme was simple: the word ‘socialism’ has two, utterly opposed, meanings.
One – he called it ‘Socialism From Above’ – is vile. Socialism from above says: the way to change things is to rely on great leaders to do it for you. It proposes that wise people should reorganise the world for its own good. The best the rest of us can do is admire and support the wise in their work of regenerating human society.
Socialism from above is a vision impregnated with all the assumptions of class society. It is elitist and bureaucratic. It leaves the exploited majority in the same position as before.
With the rise of the working class, socialism from above entered into our movement. It is the shape of the reformist socialism of the Labour Party, but also – since the Russian Revolution degenerated – of the Communist Party.
Opposed to that tradition is another: ‘Socialism From Below’. Its most important thinker was Karl Marx. Socialism from below stands on entirely different grounds. It grows out of the actual struggles of the oppressed and the exploited, and above all out of the battles of the modern working class. Its rallying cry is the first sentence of the Rules of the First Workers’ International, drafted by Marx in 1864: ‘The emancipation of the working class must be conquered by the workers themselves.’
Socialism from below can only be achieved if working people themselves inspire it, create, develop and strengthen it. Their own consciousness and self organisation is the only possible basis for socialism. Such a socialism must be, in its essence, democratic, involving the mass of workers in taking over and running society in their own interests, under their own control.
Socialism from below is the only socialism worth fighting for. It is necessarily revolutionary. And, of course, it is the only realistic socialism.
In the 1970s, the same Hal Draper set out to write a monumental work: a multi-volume account of what Marx really said about socialism. This is the fourth and, alas, the final volume of what grew into a projected five part work since Hal Draper died in 1990. Hal Draper’s whole political life was lived as a revolutionary Marxist and his death was a serious loss to the socialist movement.
His work was not without its flaws – most strongly revealed, perhaps, in a book he published in 1987 on ‘The Dictatorship of the Proletariat’ from Marx to Lenin. Draper never accepted the view that Stalinist Russia was state capitalist. He held to the unsatisfactory theory of ‘bureaucratic collectivism’. And he never seems to have fully grasped the significance of the new forms of working class organisation developed by workers themselves in the great revolutionary movements of the 20th century: the workers’ councils or Soviets.
But those weaknesses in his thought do not significantly mar this, his last book.
His theme is really an elaboration of his brilliant old article. During their lifetimes, Marx and Engels had to confront a whole series of rival ‘socialisms’ – all of them in one form or another versions of socialism from above.
Draper takes us through these, one at a time, revealing both what their principles were, and how Marx and Engels combatted them. In the process he lays into the legion of ‘Marx scholars’ who have twisted and perverted the ideas of Marx and Engels. His book is full of humorous and quirky footnotes and appendices, in which he flays the sloppy scholarship and outright lies of several generations of Marx’s critics.
 
THE BULK OF Draper’s book is concerned with various direct forms of socialism from above. Some socialists from above – like Louis Blanc in France or Lassalle in Germany – openly proclaimed themselves as such. Blanc asked, how do we get to socialism? and replied ‘by intervention of the government.’ That, as Draper remarks, ‘was putting it as flatfootedly as you can.’
There was no doubt, either, that Blanc meant the existing government. In 1848, he led the French workers’ Labour Parliament, but when in June 1848 and again in 1871 the Parisian workers actually fought to create their own more democratic state form, he denounced them and supported their bloody crushing by the government.
Why this dependence on the existing state? Because the government represented, for Blanc, the concentration of intelligence in society. Like so many other thinkers of this kind, he glorified the state. This meant ignoring the ruling class character of the existing state power. It also meant keeping that ‘intelligence’ concentrated at the top and not, instead, developing the practical intelligence of the workers, their organisational and fighting capacity and their theoretical understanding.
Lassalle sought to tie the rising workers’ movement to, of all things, the German monarchy. Proclaiming that the workers’ main enemy was the liberal bourgeoisie, he suggested to the Chancellor, Bismarck, that since the monarchy also mistrusted the bourgeoisie, the socialists should join forces with the king! He kept this correspondence secret, of course: he had enough sense to know that it would cause a howl of outrage in the socialist movement.
Marx and Engels only gradually came to realise what a pernicious influence Lassalle and his ideas were having inside the German socialist movement; when they did, they attacked.
Socialism, they made clear, has a straightforward attitude to the existing state, which is a state of the exploiting class. It must be smashed, not worshipped. In their time, as now, there were thinkers a-plenty who saw socialism as simply the extension of state power. But not Marx and Engels. The whole existing apparatus of the state was a massive impediment, not an aid, to the struggle for democratic, working class power. Those who make a cult of the state accept and identify with its reverse: the ‘helplessness’ of the workers.
A weak working class looks to the state and preserves its own passivity and flaccidity; a strong workers’ movement aspires to break the existing power and to put its own in place. ‘State socialism’ is the very negation of the principle of self-emancipation. It denies the very possibility that the workers can organise themselves and looks to an agency outside and above them – the existing state – to solve their problems for them.
 
AFTER LASSALLE’S DEATH, another form of socialism from above was to infect the German socialist movement: an uncritical attitude to nationalisation and state economic intervention. Bismarck’s government statified the main railway system and introduced elements of a welfare state. The right wing asked, is this not a step towards socialism? The whole notion, said Engels, was nonsense:
‘To be sure, if the statification of the tobacco business is socialistic, then Napoleon and Metternich are to be numbered among the founders of socialism.’
Capitalism itself was compelled, in its own development, towards a form of ‘socialisation’ of production. But this is the antithesis of socialism. The workers remain, as they were before, the objects of exploitation. Statification in itself does not equal socialism. What determines whether a statification is socialist in tendency or not is a simple question: do the workers expand their power? The question, always, for Marx and Engels posed itself in terms of class power.
But Marx and Engels did not just have to contend with open state worshippers. In some ways more insidious were the anarchists, who sounded very revolutionary: they were, they said, against all ‘authority’ and every form of state.
The anarchists’ problem is that they do not really understand the state. And what you cannot understand you cannot ‘abolish’. They declared that the state was a mere excrescence or cancer on society. So why does it exist? The fact is that the state plays a necessary function in existing society. It cannot be ‘abolished’ until society finds ways of performing those necessary functions – with different social institutions.
 
MARX AND ENGELS insisted not on a fantasy about ‘abolition of the state’, but on a realistic and democratic solution: the existing ruling class state, whose essence is hierarchy and bureaucracy, must be swept away and replaced by a new state, a workers’ state, under the direct, democratic control of the producers.
Anarchism proper rejects all ‘authority’ in the name of the total freedom of the sovereign individual (a figure it takes over from liberalism). But this means, as Draper suggests, that anarchism cannot answer the question: ‘What do you do when people disagree?’
There is a consistent socialist answer to the question: democratic decision will provide the solutions. But that, of course, requires that the minority accept the ‘authority’ of the majority. The socialist answer to the problem of authority in society is to democratise it, to control it ‘from below’, and thus demystify it. But anarchism, rejecting all ‘authority’, also rejects this – and is thus incoherent.
In practice, anarchism must smuggle ‘authority’ back in. One of the most notorious anarchist smugglers was Bakunin, a man of incredible duplicity. Bakunin – who claimed to want to do away with all states and all authority – actually set out to subordinate all movements to a single authority: himself, and a tightly knit secret group of co-conspirators.
In the name of the abolition of authority, he demanded total submission to his fantasies. He abolished the state in one breath, to reinvent it in the next. He and his co-conspirators (who were always falling out among themselves) sought to take over the First International or, failing that, to wreck it.
Draper’s demolition job on Bakunin – a racist, reformist, Tsar-loving rat – is one of the pleasures of this book.
Alas, because of Draper’s death, we shall not get his fifth and final volume, which promised to cover the question of reform versus revolution. But he has left us, anyway, with a marvellously rich and beautifully documented legacy. We should use his writings: they’re a weapon for us.
 







What did Karl Marx really say? Colin Barker cuts through the lies and myths to find the real vibrancy of Marx’s life and ideas. Far from being dead, Marx’s revolutionary tradition can now breathe a new lease of life, no longer tainted by the icons which deadened his thought.





FOR DECADES, the regime in the USSR used the name – and hosts of statues and portraits – of Karl Marx like a magic talisman. They turned this atheistic and very human Victorian revolutionary into the unreal symbol of a state religion – much as Japan’s rulers claimed its Emperors were divine.
Every student was required to study his ideas – or so it seemed. On closer inspection, their textbooks had turned poor old Marx’s ideas upside down and converted them into props for the ruling class. And the students knew if they wanted to pass their course, they had to repeat the lies.
Marx thought that, under socialism, the state would wither away. Stalin declared the state must become stronger. Marx saw the theft of the peasants’ lands as the birthmark of capitalism. Stalin stole the peasants’ lands, and called it communism. Marx opposed slavery, and chose as his favourite hero Spartacus, leader of the slaves’ revolt. Stalin condemned millions to slave labour camps. Marx thought socialism must be international. The Stalinists added a footnote to Marx’s The German Ideology stating this was no longer true. Marx was a critic of religion. They turned him into a Saint. Marx thought freedom for oppressed nations was a condition of freedom for all. Stalin turned the Baltic countries and Eastern Europe into colonies. Marx thought workers’ domination and the accumulation of capital was the very hallmark of alienation. That only applied in the West, Komrade ...
So why, since on every point they utterly opposed Marx’s ideas, did the Stalinist rulers bother with the poor fellow? Because briefly in 1917 there had been a glorious attempt to begin world socialist revolution in Russia. And that attempt was inspired by genuine Marxist ideas. In 1917, the workers created their own new democratic power. Alas, because the Russian Revolution was isolated and (even worse) was embattled in a backward country where workers were only a small minority, they could not keep the new power they’d created in their own hands.
The revolution, in short, degenerated – and within a dozen years was completely overturned. Its defeat produced, under Joseph Stalin, one of the most vicious anti working class regimes known to 20th century history.
Stalin himself, like some of his associates, had once been a rather minor figure in the revolution; he did not now declare himself chief of a counter revolution. Instead, his regime developed to the nth degree the art not just of murder, but also of lying. And one of the Stalinist lies was that their regime represented the ideas of Karl Marx.
Russian socialists who challenged the lies were vilified as ‘fascists’ and slaughtered. Across the world, isolated groups of socialists – predominantly the best of the Trotskyists – also fought to keep the truth about Marx alive.
But what did the rulers of the West say? Yes, they said, Stalin’s lies were true! How convenient for them that words like ‘socialism’, ‘communism’, ‘Marxism’ – words that originally reflected the finest struggles for human freedom – should be associated in the minds of workers with totalitarianism! The Daily Express or the Six O’ Clock News was hardly going to urge people to discover the real Marx behind the lies! Exposing untruths, after all, was not their forte.
If corpses did have attitudes, then for more than half a century old Karl Marx, in his underground opposition in Highgate Cemetery, could only turn and mutter curses.
Now though, things are changing. Marx’s cadaver can chuckle. After more than six decades of nightmare, his real ideas can come to the light of day.
 
WHO WAS HE, this bearded old fellow? For a start, surprise, he wasn’t always bearded or old. Marx was a radical student and journalist in Germany, on the extreme left of the democratic movement. From the beginning of his career, he was in trouble with the authorities, for attacking state censorship. From the start, he was a committed democrat, and remained so for the whole of his life.
In the early 1840s, young Karl Marx became a communist. This did not mean that he abandoned democratic ideals; rather it meant that he deepened them a hundred-fold. It’s not enough, he argued, to fight for ‘political emancipation’, to win the vote and citizenship rights for all. The real roots of human oppression and alienation lie deeper, in the very way that society itself is organised. Changing the constitution is useful, but limited: real freedom for humankind can only come, not by replacing Monarchy with Republic, but by overthrowing private property, competition and exploitation.
In a democratic republic – the US, or hopefully the nations of the USSR, today – everyone is ‘equal before the law’. But misery and poverty continue. Slavery is abolished: but only outside the workplace. Deliberately using the language of politics, Marx insisted that capitalists have ‘despotic’ power over workers at work, and called the workers ‘wage slaves’.
But the problems of capitalism go deeper. A divided social system across the globe, driven by competition between rival capitalists and rival states, is a system out of all control. It is subject to immense convulsions and crises, which alternately promote mad expansions of exploitation and even more lunatic slumps, when workers are cast on the scrapheap.
Workers, Marx explained, are alienated in every sphere of their life. The whole social world rests on the labour of working people, but it is out of our control. The very thing that distinguishes us from the rest of the animal world is our human power to work creatively and gain mastery over production, but capitalism systematically takes this from us. We are a social species, all of us are inextricably dependent on millions of other people; but capitalism sets us against each other, in competition and war.
Humanity needs to take back, collectively and democratically, its own power to shape the world. To do that, it must destroy the power of the ruling classes.
 
MARX WAS NOT the first communist. What distinguished his thought from previous communist thinkers was his terrific sense of history, together with an equally powerful sense of ‘realism’ about the struggle for a communist society.
He argued, against a host of utopian critics of capitalism, that it’s no good just wishing for a different world, or drawing up hair brained schemes for social regeneration. Communism only becomes really possible on two conditions.
The first condition is that human productivity should have developed sufficiently to make communism practicable. A poverty-stricken world, where men and women can barely produce enough for their own needs, could not sustain a genuinely democratic society: everyone would be at each others throats.
Anyone reading the Communist Manifesto for the first time always gets a surprise: Marx starts by praising the achievements of the bourgeoisie! It was capitalism’s historic achievement, he argued, that now, for the first time in history, the material conditions for communism were created. Only in the modern world has human mastery of nature developed to the point where everyone can have enough to eat, adequate clothing and housing, and plenty of free time. However, the methods by which the capitalist class developed humanity’s productive forces were barbarous and irrational in the extreme. Nonetheless, in past history recurrent famines were an inescapable part of human fate; today everyone knows that not a child needs to starve, that not a single sick person needs to lack medical care. In the past the only solution to basic human misery seemed to be prayer; today, thanks to capitalism’s achievements, we know the problem is political.
The second condition is connected with the first. For communism to be more than a dream, there must be a real social force to bring it into being. And this too was capitalism’s achievement: as Marx put it, ‘What the bourgeoisie above all produces are its own gravediggers’. Capitalism developed the modern working class.
Why this emphasis? Workers are unlike previous exploited and oppressed classes in history. Capitalism itself shoves them together, in cities and workplaces, endowing them with collective power; capitalism forces them to cooperate with each other; capitalism, precisely in order to exploit workers better, must educate them and raise their cultural level – far above, indeed, the level of previous ruling classes. And capitalism compels them into a life of permanent struggle, whether they like it or not.
What distinguishes the working class, therefore, from all previous exploited classes is not its misery. Indeed, although workers are more alienated than peasants, they live on average better and longer lives. But crucially, the working class has immense power and capacities. It is the first class in history which is capable of overthrowing class society entirely.
And the more that capitalism develops, the bigger and potentially stronger the working class becomes across the globe. In 1848, when Marx wrote the Communist Manifesto, the working class was still tiny: it formed a majority of the population only in Britain and perhaps one or two other countries. Even in England at that time, most workers were still employed in very small workplaces. Today, the working class – those who live by selling their labour power – is for the first time in history a majority of the world’s population.
And the potential power of the working class today is immeasurably greater than in Marx’s own time.
The other side of the coin is that capitalism, as part of its very method of development, is also convulsed by crises. The difference between Marx’s time and ours is not, as some bourgeois thinkers and even some fake socialists have argued, that capitalism has overcome its tendency to crisis: rather, the crises of the 20th century have been on a larger and more terrible scale. Now therefore, the stakes in the class struggle are much higher. When workers’ movements are defeated, the price they pay is on a scale that Marx could not have imagined in his worst nightmares: world wars, fascism, the Gulag and the Holocaust, the threat of nuclear Armageddon.
Marx once wrote that the choice for humanity was between socialism and barbarism: the truth of that observation is more obvious and chilling today.
 
MARX WAS NOT an Ivory Tower intellectual, but was actively involved in the revolutionary movements of his own time. Expelled from Germany for political activity, he returned to Cologne on the outbreak of revolution in 1848 to edit a radical paper and play a leading part in the popular movement. The defeat of the German revolution saw him exiled once more, this time to England.
Every great revolutionary learns from the experience of both victories and defeats. From 1848 to 1852, Marx wrote a series of brilliant articles and pamphlets, analysing the course of the 1848 revolutions. The sharp conclusions that he drew remain all too relevant to the situation in the USSR today.
In future, he warned, the workers must learn organised mistrust of the middle class democrats, who will betray them at every turn. They must develop their own independent demands and their own organisations, and always be ready to act independently. Whenever the middle class democrats show any sign of fighting the authorities or defending democracy from attack, the workers must always join their side in a united front. But, he insisted, the workers should never forget that those same democrats still want them to remain as exploited workers, and can therefore never be trusted. The workers need their own parties, their own armed militia, and above all their own ideas.
How relevant to the situation of workers in Russia today! When the August coup against Gorbachev began, it was in workers’ direct interest to defeat it. If the coup had succeeded, workers would have lost all union rights, all freedom of speech and organisation. But their attitude to Yeltsin and his supporters needed to be deeply mistrustful: for these same ‘defenders of democracy’ want to impose the ‘free market’, which will mean misery and unemployment for many millions of workers, and will in turn weaken the fighting capacity of the whole working class. Yeltsin and Co only support workers’ rights when it suits them. Socialists in the USSR need to argue, today, for exactly the kinds of practical lessons that Marx drew after 1848.
Of course, 1991 is very different from 1848. The 1850s witnessed a period of huge expansions of capitalism worldwide, and the whole level of the class struggle receded. The prospects for workers today are of years of continuing crisis, and terrible difficulties. The level of the class struggle will rise, not diminish. No socialist in the 1990s will be able to do as Marx did, and retire for a decade from direct political activity.
 
IN THE 1860s, there was again a revival of the workers’ movement, and Marx again immersed himself in it. In the same years that he was preparing the manuscripts for his great unfinished masterpiece, Das Kapital, Marx also became the secretary of the International Working Men’s Association. This was the first real international organisation of workers, and brought Marx into direct practical contact with the trade unions and workers’ parties of Europe.
From the beginning, the IWMA united ‘economic’ and ‘political’ questions. Until 1871, its chief practical activities were two: it organised support for the Polish struggle for independence, and engaged in quite effective international strike support work. It also identified strongly with the struggle against slavery in America, firmly supporting Abraham Lincoln and the North against the southern Slave owners’ Republic. Marx was at the centre of much of this work. He drafted the IWMA’s rules whose opening words expressed the very heart of his ideas: The emancipation of the working classes must be conquered by the working classes themselves.
The aim of the International was ‘the abolition of all class rule.’ The basis of all servitude, misery, degradation and political dependence across the world, the Rules explained, was the worker’s economic subjection to ‘the monopoliser of the means of labour’. Every political movement should therefore centre on the goal of ‘the economic emancipation of the working classes’. That task could not be undertaken on a local or national basis, but required international solidarity between workers in different countries .
In 1871, after the Franco-Prussian War, the working people of Paris briefly and heroically established a new form of organisation, the Paris Commune. After two months, their immensely democratic and popular government was smashed to pieces in a brutal orgy of ruling class violence. Thousands were killed. In the name of the IWMA, Marx put out a long and noble statement in defence of the Commune. In the principles developed by the Communards, he suggested, there lay the most marvellous advances. In their practice, the Parisian workers had developed the basic framework required for a real workers’ state. They had abolished the old ruling class state machine, based on bureaucracy and privilege. In the Commune every office holder had to be elected and subject to recall: not just the ‘government’ but also the judiciary, police, military officers and the rest. All those who held office were paid no more than an ordinary worker. In place of the professional standing army and police, the armed workers themselves handled all issues of order and military defence .
For Marx, the experience of the Commune showed two things above all. The first he always took for granted: the practical creativity of workers in struggle produces results more advanced than any intellectual or leader could achieve. The Parisian workers and artisans had established what two generations of communist theoreticians had never grasped: the fundamental principles of a socialist constitution. Second, their struggle had shown something that even Marx had never fully grasped before: if working people were genuinely to run society, they needed a new and much more democratic form of regime. And that required sweeping away the old hierarchical state. ‘The working class’, as he wrote, ‘cannot simply lay hold of the ready made state machinery, and wield it for its own purposes.’
In that one brief sentence Marx drew a line of division between real communists, those who struggle for working class power, and every variant of reformist. The existing state machinery is designed to keep the great majority out of power; it must be broken, and replaced by a new form of state, which is directly subject to popular election and control.
 
THE DEFEAT OF the Commune meant, in practice, the recession of the IWMA. It would be several years before a new beginning in socialist politics in Europe could be made. When that happened, in France and in Germany, it soon became apparent that the new workers’ parties would be dominated by a new problem: reformism. Marx died in 1883, before these tendencies had fully developed. Nonetheless, among the writings of his last years were two crucial documents that directly related to this question.
In the first, The Critique of the Gotha Programme (1875), he blasted the German socialist party for being soft both on the question of the state and of the market, and for its lack of clarity about the transition to socialism. In the second, a long circular letter to German socialists (1879), he and his comrade Frederick Engels attacked the influence of liberal reformists in the workers’ movement. They concluded:
‘When the International was formed, we expressly formulated the battle cry: the emancipation of the working class must be the work of the working class itself. We cannot ally ourselves, therefore, with people who openly declare that the workers are too uneducated to free themselves and must first be liberated from above by philanthropic big bourgeois or petty bourgeois.’
Thus, from the beginning of his life as a communist until his death, the real Karl Marx argued and fought for one thing: that the working people of the world should organise themselves to take every form of power into their own hands, directly.
Always and everywhere he opposed those who preached ‘socialism from above’. For Marx, the working class alone has the capacity to free the new society that lies, waiting to be built, within the present chaotic and divided world of capitalism. No one need starve in a world where food surpluses are produced every year. No one need be homeless, or tortured, or bossed about by bureaucrats or ‘top people’.
In Marx’s view it is the job of socialists to spread these ideas, to organise themselves, not apart from the everyday struggles of working people, but in intimate association with them. The workers, who can and must rule the globe, can only come to a realisation of their own potential through struggle. In every defeat and in every partial movement, the need is for socialists to be involved in the fight, showing the way forward to working class solidarity and power.
 
IT IS NOT surprising that at this moment in Russia and Eastern Europe workers are rejecting ‘Marxism’. Faced in the 1870s with people (including his son-in-law) who misrepresented his ideas, Marx declared roundly, ‘I am not a Marxist’. For over sixty years, workers have been told that ‘Marxism’ means oppression, exploitation, and lies. For a time, that dead-weight will hold back the movement. But not for very long.
The pressures of the crisis, in the USSR and Eastern Europe but also across the globe, mean that bitter and terrible battles are to come. Russian workers will find themselves pitchforked into struggles in defence of their newly won freedoms and in defence of their living standards. The hard knocks of real life will soon show many of them the need for genuine socialist ideas and organisation.
Stalinism is dead. For the first time in most people’s living memory, the first sprouts of real socialist organisation are already appearing in Moscow, Budapest, Warsaw and the other great proletarian cities.
In these exciting new times, the real Karl Marx can again be discovered: not as some terrible bronze statue of a God, but as an exceptionally fine old comrade and friend of the workers’ movement, with some marvellous ideas that need spreading about.
 



Odd friends one picks up – Ernie Roberts, AUEW assistant gen. sec., has published Workers’ Control (Allen and Unwin, £4.25 hardback/£2.25 paper), full of long quotes from an old IS publication. Incomes Policy, Legislation and Shop Stewards, by Tony Cliff and myself. The subject of the citations? The union bureaucracies, no less. As Bro. Roberts clearly approves of us, we should perhaps comment on him. ‘Union officials’, he quotes us as saying, ‘are becoming less and less the leaders of the workers, and more their foremen.’ Yes, Bro. Roberts, very true. Anyone in doubt should have seen this official critic of union officialdom last autumn at the Fine Tubes Conference, where he sat advising the chairman against taking resolutions calling for local support committees for the strike. Opportunism, thy name is Ern....
Two welcome paperback issues: Penguin’s end-of-May list includes E.P. Thompson’s The Unknown Mayhew (£1.00) and Hobsbawm and Rude’s Captain Swing (£1.40). Other reprints readers might like to note are Wal Hannington’s Unemployed Struggles (E.P. Publishing, £3.50), David McLellan’s editing of extracts from Marx’s Grundrisse (Paladin, 50p), and Chris Searle’s The Forsaken Lover: White Words and Black People (Penguin, 40p). Masochists can writhe under The Essential Stalin: Major Theoretical Writings 1905-1952 (Croom Helm, £3.00 hardback/£1.50 paper); Lenin once called him ‘a marvellous Georgian’ – that curious expression on his Red Square mummy is him trying to eat his words.
Readers might be as sorry as I am to have missed, till now, the magazine Race Today, which at 10p a month is a good buy (from a few bookshops, ours included, or £1.60 a year from Towards Racial Justice, 184 King’s Cross Road, London WC1).
 



Banner BrightJohn Gorman, with an introduction by Gwyn
A. WilliamsAllen Lane, £5.00
This handsomely produced book should certainly be ordered for
every public library. It details particular tradition of trade-union
banners, tradition now largely dead: those huge, silk tasselled oil
paintings on poles that have graced union galas and parades for over
a century. Not many of these banners are made today, but at one
period at the end of the 1880s – after the great dock strike of
1889, – the manufacturers were rushing them out at more than
one a day. The book ably introduced by Gwyn Williams details the
banners and their makers, though perhaps a little too uncritically.
They are so gorgeous, these great banners, that one cannot help
asking what they were for.
At their peak, the banners symbolised the arrival of the unions in
society. The slogans on the majority are exceptionally conservative:
‘Defence no Defiance’; ‘Let Brotherly Love
Continue’; ‘We Provide for the Orphans of our Members’,
etc. They celebrate with the view of a labour aristocracy and/or a
workers’ bureaucracy within capitalism. The union offers itself
to the public gaze as a respectable coffin club, highly moralistic,
drawing on the sentimentalistic school of art characteristic of the
late Victorian Sunday school. A minority of the banners express other
aspirations: Lenin’s portrait looks out from the Follonsby and
Chopwell Lodge banners (Durham miners); Southall ASLEF in 1921 showed
a red-shirted worker booting aside the railway bosses beneath the
statement ‘The Power of Unity Breaks Down the Barriers of
Capitalism’; a number include a sword-fight scene and ‘He
That Would Be Free Must Strike the Blow’; and there are
quotations from the Communist Manifesto, etc.
But the very gorgeousness of the banners creates a doubt –
they’d cost £500 a piece today. Because these are
handsome things (if not to everyone’s taste), they are not the
movement’s fighting flags. A few have appeared, often at
the cost of their destruction, on militant demonstrations. Generally
they were reserved (today, sometimes, by the insurance companies!)
for parades, outings, occasions. They are, as Gwyn Williams remarks,
Labour’s cathedrals. There is another kind of banner that
hardly finds a place here (Except for Tillett’s banner, used to
organise the tea operatives in the 1880s, now sewn in as a proud back
for a silk showpiece). The instant emblems, the battle flags, knocked
up in an evening in a back kitchen, are missing.
On the 1963 unemployment demonstration, a stewards’
committee banner was draped over an entrance to the House of Commons,
a symbol for socialists of the future. It was a white sheet, with
black lettering, and could be replaced for a few bob. Labour’s
cathedrals are crumbling away. If they are to be made again, and
hoisted in their hundreds, the ground will first be cleared by the
home-made flags of struggle.
 



Pelican Books and Allen Lane have announced a Marx Library,
whose first volume appeared on 26 May. The whole of Marx’s
Grundrisse in English for the first time is no mean start,
especially at £1.00. For those many readers who may well buy
this book but not read it, Peter Binns will be doing a long review in
a forthcoming issue of IS. One odd facet of this publication
venture is that the paperback has come out before the hardcover
edition, which must prove something.
Church publications don’t usually get a puff here, but
exception must be made for Jonathan Power’s The New
Proletarians (British Council of Churches, Community and Race
Relations Unit, 10p), a crisp account of the situation of immigrant
workers in Europe. Available, like anything else, through IS Books.
Pluto Press’s summer list includes Sheila Rowbotham’s
Hidden from History, which I’m told contains the
political conclusions that were missing from her Allen Lane book
Women, Resistance and Revolution. Also a study by Werner
Thonnessen on the German women’s movements 1863–1933, an
illustrated study of torture and political persecution in Turkey by
Jane Cousins, a reprint of Lifshitz’s The Philosophy of Art
of Karl Marx, and a pamphlet on The Politics of Homosexuality
by Don Milligan. All these were announced for June, though no date
has been set for what may prove to be Pluto’s best-seller, a
workers’ handbook on health and safety at work, edited by Pat
Kinnersly.
 



Consciousness and Action Among the Western Working Class
Michael Mann
Papermac, £0.60.
THIS IS an [un]usual study. Mann is a professional British sociologist who actually deals with interesting questions. The book is a brief review of the contribution that largely sociological literature can offer to the problem: what are the possibilities of working-class revolution in Western Europe?
Much is his most interesting discussion draws on work by French writers reviewing the events of 1968, work which is little known in Britain. At the same time, his reading in the post-1968 literature is highly selective, reflecting the concerns of French sociologists rather than French socialists. French sociology – as represented here – appears to be infected by a kind of passive ‘Marxismism’, concerned with description in formally Marxist terminology (‘contradictions’ is a favourite word) reminiscent of the New Left Review in Britain.
Mann dismisses the increasingly old-fashioned 1950s sociological images of society as harmonious, an counterposes to this a version of Marxism which he also rejects. Interestingly, the rejected version of Marxism is one that few ‘Marxists’ hold: in this ‘Marxism’ the working class, in some mysterious, semi-automatic manner, arrives finally at revolutionary consciousness and action chiefly through the workings of immutable historical laws. It doesn’t happen, says Mann, but then who – at least since Lenin – ever thought it did?
The events of May 1968 in France, Mann sees as crucial, and rightly. But one element in the situation in France he omits to discuss – because it was not present. The French working class, despite an inspiring upsurge of militancy, despite its discovery and development of new forms of struggle and new demands, did not make a revolution. The French sociologists – and Michael Mann – have theorised extensively about that fact, about the isolation of the students with the revolutionary ideas from the workers with the potential revolutionary power. They have noted the strange hold of the French Communist Party on the militants of the working class. But the lessons they draw from all that they have seen and described are passive lessons. 1968 is a demonstration that, in Mann’s concluding words,
‘It seems rather unlikely that the proletariat carries in itself the power to be a class for itself.’
What Mann does not discuss, seems not to understand except in the crudest sense, is that the crisis of French capitalism could not be resolved by the working class without a revolutionary party. And such a party did not exist, still does not exist. They key lesson of the French experience transcends the limits of sociology, since it is a practical lesson: Marxists have to work to build a revolutionary organisation rooted in the working class, capable of translating, workers’ consciousness of exploitation into confidence of their ability to end it.
The book is thus flawed, a product of the new strain in sociology that recognises – as it can hardly avoid – the presence of class conflict in capitalism but cannot really comprehend it. Nonetheless, it is worth reading, if you want a brief and readable review of some of the more interesting bits of the academic output.
 



IN A RECENT issue of this journal, we urged readers to take out subscriptions, or otherwise obtain, the monthly paper RACE TODAY. No apologies for repeating the message even more strongly.
RACE TODAY has survived, till now, partly on the basis of cash grants from ‘liberal capitalism’. Because it has been moving rapidly to the left, these capitalist sponsors are dropping off like flies. Which leaves RACE TODAY with a dangerous future. 1974 could well be make or break year for the paper.
The editorial in the latest issue presents the paper’s task as ‘to record and recognise the struggles of the emerging forces as manifestations of the revolutionary potential, of the black population.’
For reportage of the racial situation in Britain, RACE TODAY is simply unequalled. The paper is lively, open and controversial. Every socialist should read it, and use it. The revolutionary left in Britain has a responsibility to assist in keeping RACE TODAY afloat. Subscriptions are £1.60 for 12 issues, and should be sent to: Towards Racial Justice, 184 King’s Cross Road, London WC1.
 



Strikes
The Department of Employment’s official statistics provide extensive evidence of a sharp change in the pattern of industrial conflict in Britain over the past five or six years. One index of strike activity, the number of separate stoppages in a year, reveals contradictory tendencies. Through the 1950s and 1960s, it was necessary to differentiate between strikes in coal-mining and in the rest of industry: while the mining industry was being forcibly shrunk (and its high strike figures were falling sharply) the rest of industry was experiencing a rising trend in the number of strikes, as shown in Graph 1. By 1967, this differentiation is no longer necessary. The graph rises to a high point in 1970, and then drops quite steeply in 1971. By 1972, however, there was a strong recovery in the official strike-count. [1]


 


Recently, the average length of strike has been rising fast: from 1962 to 1966, the average strike only lasted two days, 1969, 4.1 days; 1970, 6.1 days; 1971: 11.6 days; 1972: (Jan.-Oct.) 15 days. Similarly, the number of working days lost per strike went up by more than eight times between the 1960s and 1972.
The fall in the number of strikes in 1971 followed the defeat of the postmen’s strike in the early spring; and the recovery in 1972 came after the miners’ massive body-blow to the Tories. The number of workers involved in stoppages now compare more than favourably with the numbers for the militant period from 1919 to 1926.
As for working days lost through stoppages, these have gone upwards at a very rapid rate. From 1960 to 1967, the number of days lost in a year only once exceeded 4,000,000 – in 1962, when there were two one-day stoppages in engineering. Thereafter, the figures run as follows: 1968: 4.7 millions; 1969: 6.8 millions; 1970: 11 millions; 1971: 13.5 millions; 1972: (Jan.-Oct. only) 23.2 millions. This again is a level not seen since the great upsurge of working-class militancy that followed the First World War.
The main reason for the movement in the figures, is the growth of large, long strikes. From 1950 to 1968, the average annual number of strikes involving the loss of more than 50,000 days was just over five. In 1969 there were 20 such strikes, in 1970: 29 and in 1971: 20.
If we consider the strikes which involve the loss of a million working days or more, there were three of these in the whole of the 1960s, all of them one-day stoppages in the engineering industry, all of them token strikes. Since the beginning of 1970, however, there have already been six such strikes outside engineering, all of them of exceptional significance – miners’ strikes in 1970 and 1972, local authority workers in 1970, postmen and Ford workers in 1971, and the building workers in 1972.
Linked with the growth in the scale of strikes has been an important development: workers in the state sector have been more and more driven to industrial action. Seven of the eight largest strikes in the period before 1968 were in the private sector, but half the largest stoppages since then have been of state-sector workers.
To a large degree, the ‘revolt of the lower-paid’ that began in 1968-69. was a revolt of the state’s lower-paid. Workers in the Government sector were hardest frozen in Labour’s ‘incomes policy’. Their reactions to wage-freeze and inflation were slow, but when they came they were massive.
The old distinction between ‘official’ and ‘unofficial’ action has been increasingly blurred. In the official figures, the proportion of strikes ‘known to be official’ has been tending to rise – with catastrophic effects on some union strike funds. But many of the recent ‘official’ strikes have had considerable ‘unofficial’ elements within them.
There were two major unofficial strikes in the pits, in 1969 and 1970, before the 1972 official miners’ strike, which was itself characterised by a high level of militant rank-and-file activity, more or less independent of the union leadership. The 1972 strike, moreover, was prefaced by an extensive unofficial overtime ban.
The building workers’ strike in 1972 was turned into a national strike by unofficial action. In varying degrees, the same was true of strikes in the docks, at Fords, in the Post Office and the local authorities. In each case, the leadership was forced into giving official approval by a rising swell of unofficial action and the threat of ‘loss of control’.
 
Union Membership
Recently, trade-union membership has received a large boost. In 1948, union membership reached a postwar peak of 45 per cent density – the term ‘density’ referring to the proportion of the labour force who are actually members of trade unions. After 1948, union density dropped away to around 42 per cent. But since 1967, the trend has again been upwards: 1967: 42.1 per cent; 1968: 42.4 per cent; 1969: 43.7 per cent; 1970: 46.9 per cent.
The rise in density has been due to two factors: first, a fall in the total national labour force, due to the hidden unemployment of housewives, young and old workers who have not registered as unemployed; and second, a real rise in trade-union recruitment. Total trade-union membership rose between 1966 and 1970 by 889,000 to 11 million, a rise of almost 8.8 per cent.
There have been two major sources of this new recruitment: while-collar workers and women. The white-collar figures are especially dramatic: up to 1964 white-collar union membership just about kept pace with the expansion of white-collar employment.
Since 1964 white-collar union membership has expanded by 34.3 per cent – a larger rise in six years than in the preceding 16 years. White-collar union density, 1964-70, rose from 29 per cent to 38 per cent; by 1970 more than three out of every 10 trade-unionists were white-collar workers. As for women, their density in white-collar unions did not rise significantly faster than men’s, but in the manual unions their density rose by 7.6 per cent 1948-70, while the men’s fell by 0.4 per cent. [2]
 
Strikes For What?
There has also been a marked change in the stated causes of strikes since the mid-1960s. In the 1950s, the average proportion of strikes over pay-claims was only 8.8 per cent – a much higher proportion were concerned with such matters as working arrangements, rules and discipline. From 1960 to 1966, pay claims accounted for 19.6 per cent of stoppages. Thereafter, the proportion of stoppages over pay claims rose sharply: 1967: 30.1 per cent; 1968: 38.9 per cent; 1969: 49.5 percent; 1970: 55.4 per cent; 1971: 40.4 per cent.
There is an additional development that is deliberately ignored in the official statistics: each year, in its summary of the previous year’s figures, the DEP Gazette includes a footnote on stoppages of work not counted in the statistics. For many years, this footnote merely pointed out that strikes involving less than 10 workers, or lasting less than a day, were not counted unless they involved the loss of more than 100 working days. But from 1969 onwards, that little footnote has been listing another sort of strike not included in the statistical record: political strikes.
The first important political strike in Britain for nearly a generation came in April 1968, when a section of London dockers and others struck work and marched in support of Enoch Powell. There were also unofficial strikes on May Day that year. 1969 saw two stoppages, on 27 February and 1 May, against the White Paper, In Place of Strife: the Depatment of Employment and Productivity (DEP) estimated that these cost something like 160,000 working days. In 1970, 2,000 dockers struck in March against the Government’s plans for the docks; there were three strikes in November of Post Office workers against the sacking of Lord Hall; and on 8 December 350,000 struck against the Industrial Relations Bill.
In 1971, the DEP estimates that nearly four million days were lost through political strikes. These strikes were concerned with the Industrial Relations Bill and with unemployment and redundancy. The 1972 footnote, when it appears, should take note of the wide-scale strikes over the gaoling of the five London dockers, several strikes in support of the pensioners during November (notably at the BSC Anchor Site), and the stoppages in December over the James Goad case.
 
More Militant Tactics
One thing the official figures do not reveal, is the recent and important change in the way disputes are fought. The development of the sit-in, and the extensive use of the flying picket in the miners’, dockers’ and builders’ strikes in 1972, are not recorded statistically. They are of great importance. It has been estimated, for instance, that between March and May 1972 there were 57 separate sit-ins going on. [3]
There is every reason to suppose that the new phase in the class struggle in Britain will continue, with its sharper conflicts and its much greater politicisation of strikes and pay. The pressures from the capitalist market, on both employers and workers, have forced the strike trend up. Neither Tories nor Labour have demonstrated that they can control British capitalism’s new mixture of high inflation, productive stagnation, low growth, high unemployment and weak balance of payments.
 
Inflation and Take-home Pay
The inflationary spiral has been getting generally steeper. One factor that has recently attracted attention in this respect has been the tax system, which has been bearing more and more heavily on working-class incomes. [4] Up to the mid-1960s, the Western capitalist powers experienced a moderate and relatively steady rate of inflation averaging between three and four per cent. Only those with exceptionally low bargaining power lost out. The proportion of the population on the poverty line doubled between 1950 and the early 1960s, but the impact of this development on working-class militancy was small. But recently, western capitalism’s rate of inflation has shot up – within reach, at times, of the ‘strato-inflationary’ levels of some backward countries.
The general system of taxation has kept the wage-price spiral turning steeply. It is increasingly necessary to abandon the old and simple distinction, between money wages and real wages, which only took account of the relations between wages and prices. Instead we must talk in terms of what Jackson and his colleagues call ‘real net income’, or better, real take-home pay. This refers to the actual purchasing power of the money the worker actually receives, after tax and social insurance contributions.
In the 1960s, tax and the social insurance contribution together took only eight per cent of the average pay packet. By 1970-71, however, the average worker was losing nearly 20 per cent of his wages to the state through income tax and the ‘stamp’. [5]
The social insurance contribution amounted to three per cent of the pay packet in the 1950s, but by 1970-71 it took six per cent. As for income tax, the key factor is that wages and salaries have been rising faster than tax allowances, so that a larger and larger proportion of the worker’s pay has become liable to income tax, as shown in Graph 2. [6]


 


Not only has everyone been paying a larger and larger slice of tax, but the ‘redistributional’ aspect of taxation has been withering away, as lower-paid groups have fallen into the tax net. A man who earned £500 in 1960, and who managed to raise his wages through the 1960s to keep pace with rising prices, would have lost 5 per cent of his extra money by 1970 through income tax; but a man with £2,000 in 1960, who did exactly the same, would only have lost 3 per cent. Again, the larger the size of the worker’s family, the smaller his increase in real take-home pay in 1960-70. As the 1960s progressed, tax began to bite more and more deeply into the incomes of successively lower-paid groups of workers. Income tax, once thought of as an instrument of social justice, has turned its edge and now cuts the poor. [7]
 
The Double Chop
In addition, while tax was biting more deeply into wages and salaries, it took less and less from profits:



Percentage of income taken as tax from




 


Corporate Profits


Wages and
salaries




excluding
dividends


including
dividends




1949-52


36.5


45.6


  9.8




1965-68


19.0


30.9


15.5



Jackson, Turner and Wilkinson’s conclusion is brutally clear: ‘From almost every point of view, the burden of direct taxation fell increasingly on lower incomes from work.’
Due to the structure of taxation, workers’ incomes were subjected to a pincer movement. Taxes on consumption (purchase tax, etc.) rose from 17.1 per cent of total consumer expenditure in 1961-64 to 20.9 per cent in 1969-70. These rising taxes on consumption raised prices, thus cutting workers’ real incomes. As workers raised their wages to meet this tax-induced rise in prices, the other pincer, income tax, nipped off a growing part of their pay rises. [8]
This double-chop action has developed to such an extent, in a rising inflationary spiral, that the Tory Government has been able to make two ‘concessions’ in the form of cuts in income tax without significantly altering the money it has raked back in income tax. By October 1971 workers had lost all the benefit they gained in April 1971 from Barber’s tax ‘handouts’.
 
Price Trends and Claims
According to all the experts, there will inevitably be inflation in 1973 of anything up to eight per cent, before any pay-claim has even been tabled. Consider: the Common Market’s ‘common agricultural policy’ will raise the price-level by at least two per cent; Value-Added Tax at 10 per cent from April Fool’s Day will add on up to 1½ per cent; the floating (or sinking) pound sterling will raise import prices – up to another two per cent; 1973’s instalments of the ‘Fair Rents’ will add another one per cent at least. Rises in interest rates, which look increasingly likely at the time of writing (mid-December 1972) add another one per cent. To that should be added the effects of rising prices abroad on British imports – for rates of inflation are up everywhere.
For workers, the implications are all too clear. They need at least eight per cent to keep up with rising prices. As a third of any pay rise will be taken back in tax, they will need not eight but 12 per cent. But a 12 per cent general pay rise will certainly mean that the employers will raise prices: add another six per cent, on a conservative estimate, for that. Many workers pay their pensioner relatives an extra, ‘unofficial’ pension, and we should allow say two per cent for that, to meet rising prices. That’s 20 per cent.
To be completely realistic, we should also allow for the increasing cost of getting a pay rise. The average length of strike in the first 10 months of 1972 (see above) was 15 working days, or three weeks. And strikes over pay-claims tend to be longer than average. An average allowance, over the whole working class, of three per cent for the cost of strikes is hardly exaggerated. So, it seems that 23 per cent is needed. Only, we have to allow for price and tax rises on the extra that we found was needed – another four per cent for tax and five per cent for price rises. Total, 32 per cent – just to keep the working class where it is now!
In the increasingly crazy world of Edward Heath, the inequalities in the system are such, the upsets of expectations so rapid in the inflationary whirl, that anyone may at any time be in the front battalion. Nothing yet has seriously demoralised the overwhelming majority of the working class, and short of a devastatingly major confrontation there is nothing that the employers and this Government – or any potential alternative – will be able to do to control the situation effectively. 1973, industrially, has all the makings of an exciting year, and not only statistically. Socialists will have their work cut out for its potential to be realised.
 



Readers should note several useful reprints that have recently appeared. Karl Kautsky’s Foundations of Christianity (Orbach & Chambers, paper covers, £1.75) is still a mine of delights, even if there aren’t so many customers at the godshop these days. Georg Lukac’s Lenin is now out in paperback (New Left Books, £0.60) – our original review will stand; it’s an excellent book, marred only by the author’s own ‘postscript’. From Dover Books (via Oxford at £1.00) comes Karl Liebknecht’s Militarism and Anti-Militarism. Richard Wright’s Native Son (Penguin, £0.50) reveals how much better a writer and fighter he was than James, Baldwin. And Pluto have launched a new series, Reprints in Labour History with three titles – Murphy’s Preparing For Power (reviewed in this issue), Tom Mann’s What a Compulsory 8 Hour Working Day Means To the Workers and Gallacher and Campbell’s Direct Action (both £0.20), all with useful introductions by socialist historians. Raymond Challinor, a contributor to this journal, has published The Lancashire and Cheshire Miners (Frank Graham, £3.75), which we shall be reviewing in a later issue.
The IRA may be bad for most business, but publishers are making hay. Fontana have Tim Pat Coogan’s The IRA (£0.60) and Sphere Books have brought out J. Bowyer Bell’s The Secret Army (£0.60) and Margery Forester’s Michael Collins – The Lost Leader (£0.50). All are useful, none provides the analysis that’s needed.
On the Marxology front, there are rumours of a complete edition of Marx and Engels in 40 volumes emanating from East Berlin in English one of these days. In the meantime, Allen Lane: the Penguin Press are promising a complete edition of the much-mentioned and little-read Grundrisse late this year. In the meantime, the industry rolls on: Gill and Macmillan have published John Maguire’s Marx’s Paris Writings: an Analysis (£3.25), which will prove, with the rest of its tribe, more useful for academic courses on ‘Marxism’ than it will for the science of proletarian revolution. Meanwhile Tony Cliff’s long-awaited Lenin is still awaited.



In Red and Black: Marxian Explorations in Southern and Afro-American History
Eugene D. Genovese
Vintage/Wildwood House, £1.25
The emergence of a revolutionary movement among American Negroes has been one of the most important developments of the post-war world. The struggles of Negro people in the United States have simultaneously revealed the depth of the crisis of American capitalism and opened a path to the recreation of a revolutionary socialist movement. To socialists everywhere, the American Negro experience is of exceptional significance. American capitalism has proved incapable of overcoming domestic racism of the most vicious kind. Not only did the growth of European capitalism depend on the slave trade and on slave cotton production, but the victory of the Northern bourgeoisie over the South in the Civil War and afterwards, and the development of American imperialism, were deeply bound up with the spread of racist segregation and lynch law in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
The twentieth century migration of Negro workers out of the South to the Northern cities, exposed the inability of a society plagued with unemployment, slum housing, and a narrow right-wing labour movement to ‘integrate’ black workers.
The American Negro experience has fused ‘class’ and ‘nation’. While the inherent contradictions of American society can be overcome only by a mass working-class socialist movement, the absence of such a movement, the deeply entrenched racism of South and North alike, have given the Negro people of the United States a deep sense – derived from long and very bitter experience – of their own national and cultural identity.
This sense of national identity has manifested itself in every major mass movement of American Negroes, both in the passive and accomodationist policies of the followers of Booker T. Washington and in the militant stance of the Muslims, the Black Power and Panther movements. At the same time, the American Negro is inescapably American: within the framework of contemporary state monopoly capitalism, the Negro ‘national question’ is incapable of resolution in national terms.
A separate Negro economy, even if it could be established, could not avoid being a semi-colonial client of American capitalism. American culture as a whole is incomprehensible without the enormous Negro contribution in every sphere of life. Yet no socialist can deny the relevance of ‘national’ or ‘black’ consciousness to the Negro experience, nor the vital role that ‘Black Power’ and similar ideologies have played in the development of Negro self-awareness and self-confidence.
This collection of essays by Professor Genovese is generally very fine. Genovese, author of The Political Economy of Slavery (1965) and The World the Slaveholders Made (1969), gives us here a set of writings characterised by its sensitive and undogmatic approach to Marxist analysis. Several essays take issue – sharply, and yet exactly from the vantage of fundamental solidarity – with some theoretical approaches of Black Power intellectuals. Genovese offers a spirited defence of the white Southern novelist William Styron’s Confessions of Nat Turner, which deals with an historical slave uprising, insisting that the Negro people cannot be free without an accurate understanding of their real past history, not some essentially mythical history in which every struggling Negro was automatically either an Uncle Tom or a saint of the revolution.
Above all, every revolutionary movement needs the truth, not a romantic and sentimental account. Thus the exceptional essay, American Slaves and their History, explains at one and the same time – through a marvellously close and imaginative recreation of the social world of the plantation – why slave revolts were not widespread in the South and yet how in practice the Negro slaves did struggle, individually and collectively, against the slave-owners’ oppression and shaped the very world of the Southern gentry.
The book is also impressive in its principled assertion of the vital necessity of revolutionary socialist politics in America. Genovese reacts sharply and properly against that ‘radical’ version of paternalism that puts the Negro at the centre of the struggle for a socialist America and panders uncritically to him, and that does not centre its politics on the need for a white working-class socialist movement.
It may be that American comrades will complain to us about Genovese as a practical socialist – the book reveals little of that aspect. But it would be nice to think that there are many in the black and socialist movements in the United States who call the author of this fine book, comrade. In any case, Genovese deserves to be widely read.
 



A reader asks, ‘Why are most of the books you review so expensive?’ A fair question, to which the only fair answer can be ‘capitalism’. Till that small problem is overcome, more comrades might note the existence of the public libraries. Most of these will obtain any book for you, if you press them.
A new publisher, Wildwood House, has an interesting list, including a paperback edition of Moshe Lewin’s excellent account of Lenin’s Last Struggle against Stalin (April, £1.30). Wildwood House handle a slice of the American paperback publisher, Vintage Books, and are promising Chernyshevsky’s What Is To Be Done? (April, 90p), which gave Lenin his title for that much-quoted and often ill-comprehended little pamphlet; Sartre’s Search for a Method (75p) which Chris Harman reviewed in this journal several years ago, as well as several useful titles on American history and politics. In June, they promise a paperback of Gabriel Kolko’s Politics of War at £1.50; Raymond Challinor enthused about this in a review article in IS 44 on The Origins of the Cold War.
Bill Jordan of the Claimants’ Union is going into print with Paupers: the Making of the New Claiming Class (1.60/80p, Routledge), while our very own Jim Kincaid pops up in Penguin in May with a book on inequality in Britain.
Even the most improverished reader should not be without two new IS publications: Roger Kline’s Anti-Freeze (2p), a sharp handbook for trade unionist on Phases One and Two, and the new Socialist Worker Rents Special (2p). Both obtainable from IS Books. There are various promises, too: Paul Foot (whose Fall and Fall of Reginald Maudling should appear in the summer, writs permitting) on racialism; Granville Williams on reform or revolution; pamphlets on Ireland and on China; and a pamphlet edition of the recent Socialist Worker series on strikers and social security.
 



Class and Society in Soviet Russia
Mervyn Matthews
Allen Lane, The Penguin Press, £3.50
Reliable information on life in Russia is still, relatively speaking, quite rare. For this reason, this book is to be welcomed.
Matthews has assembled a mass of data on income inequality, comparisons between working-class and peasant living standards, party membership, inequalities and tensions in Russian education, youth unemployment, etc. He has drawn extensively from official sources and thrown light on a number of under-publicised areas of Russian daily life.
It is, interesting, for example, to learn of the existence of a Russian equivalent to the Black Paper reaction towards working-class and peasant students, emanating from the heads of institutions of higher education who are concerned about ‘falling standards’. Matthews’ account of the sources of high youth unemployment (running as high as 50 per cent in Armenia in 1966) is exceptionally interesting: employers are unwilling to take on young workers who may claim rights to part-time education on the one hand; while the enormous income and prestige differentials make many young people who are formally qualified to gain admission to full-time higher education, but who fail to get places, very unwilling to take jobs as manual workers.
As a source book for analysis of aspects of contemporary Russian State capitalism, the book will be valuable. But in itself, it is far from satisfactory. The various elements of Russian reality that it presents are not integrated into any overall account of the dynamics of Russian society. ‘Our study should provide a fund of argument for proponents of many schools: we have not elected to choose between them’, declares Matthews. The comment is apt, but he might have added: as a result, the data presented have no meaning by themselves.



A notable publication, in late January, was the massive third volume of E.H. Carr’s Socialism in One Country in paperback (Penguin, £2.00), Carr as a historian emerges in the earlier volumes of his History of the Bolshevik Revolution as incapable of handling the complexity of working-class movements. Carr is no Trotsky, but as the Russian working class tragically withdraws from the centre of the stage, in the revolution’s degeneration, so Carr’s History becomes more and more satisfactory. The price, for a paperback, is appalling, though perhaps as the next volume (still to appear in paper covers) costs over £10 in hardcovers, we had better be thankful for small mercies.
Also on the Russia front, Penguin have brought out a small collection of Solzhenitsyn’s Stories and Prose Poems (30p). Some of the material has already appeared in paperback, in two collections, from Sphere Books. The Penguin collection, however, is more complete, and works out cheaper. Highly recommended.
A useful pamphlet, for tenants and all those supporting their struggles, is Dave Burn’s Rent Strike: St Pancras 1960 (Pluto Press for Architectural Radicals Students/Educators, 15p). A new pamphlet from the International Socialists, in press at the time of writing, deals, with the present battle against the ‘Fair Rent’ Act (watch for the advert in Socialist Worker). Tens of thousands of the earlier IS rents pamphlets were sold; don’t miss this one.
 



Reflections on the Causes of Human Misery and upon Certain Proposals to Eliminate Them
Barrington Moore, Jr.
Allen Lane: The Penguin Press, £3.50
BARRINGTON MOORE, Junior has the reputation of being a radical American sociologist. His collection of essays makes one wonder if it is something in the character of the American right that has won him his reputation.
What is there here? Pomposity of manner, certainly. The manner of one who would be thought wise. These days, the truly wise must deploy some tough, no-nonsense realism. So in chapter two, Moore points out that cruelty and violence are largely used in the world, either to maintain the status quo, or to alter it. Tough, huh?
But that hard-bitten realism is not enough. We need too the strength of ‘major sociological generalisation’ to support that sense of a mind ranging far and wide across human experience. The following is a law that explains international politics:
‘... the mere existence of independent or “sovereign” political units is by itself sufficient to set in motion rivalries and insecurities that will before long have these units at each other’s throats.’
There we are: world wars, imperialism, international alliances, Cold War, United Nations – all explained. Anyone who asks, what do they fight over is clearly not opening his mind to the power of sociological generalisation.
The book also deals with government, intellectual freedom and imperialism in a similar manner, demonstrating along the way that Lenin would have been as nasty as Stalin given the chance, that we ought in the interests of freedom to invite a Nazi to give a few university lectures, and that really America isn’t dominant in the world at all, not really.
The last chapter considers the future of America. The reactionaries might win. The reformists might win. The revolutionaries might win (not very likely). There might just be chaos. We must certainly be sombre about the future. Though remember, ‘a sombre view is not a passive and fatalist one’. Carry on reflecting.
 



FALLING WALL PRESS (79 Richmond Road, Montpelier, Bristol BS6 5EP) have just published a useful pamphlet by Theo Nichols and Pete Armstrong – Safety or Profit: Industrial Accidents and the Conventional Wisdom (18p plus 5p postage, 15p each post-free for 10 or more). It contains a useful attack on the Robens Committee report, though its recommendations for action by trade unionists are very weak.
Falling Wall Press are also promising an interesting title some time late this year: Huw Beynon’s Shop Stewards 1960–1972. If Beynon’s Working For Ford (Penguin Education, 90p) is anything to go by, the pamphlet should be very worth looking at. Falling Wall Press’ current list is worth a look, anyway: it includes several low-priced pamphlets on and for the women’s movement, and a critical bash at Basil Bernstein’s theories of class and language by Harold Rosen.
Penguin Books are still having a ‘sell-to-the-left’ campaign. Their September list includes Leon Trotsky’s 1905, which at 75p must be the buy of the month.
Recent paperback readers might have missed include Ralph Miliband’s Workers’ Control – about which we were a little rude in June – from Allen and Unwin at £2.25. Pluto Press (see their ad elsewhere in this issue) have an interesting new ‘book link’ series they’re hoping to expand: they’re offering paper editions of expensive hardbacks of interest to the left. Their first ‘book link’ is Rosa Levine-Meyer’s life of her husband, Levine, which we’ll be reviewing shortly. Write direct to Pluto for copies (£1.25 plus postage).
 



A COUPLE of lines slipped out of the last paragraph of this column in our last issue at the proof stage. It should have read: ‘Recent paperbacks readers might have missed include Ralph Milliband’s The State in Capitalist Society (Quartet, 60p), and Ernie Robert’s Workers Control – about which we were a little rude ...’ Apologies to all concerned.
A nice idea for Christmas presents from Pluto Press, whose Big Red Diary (75p) should now be in the best shops. Sunday 24 February, even in trade union diaries, is usually noted as ‘Sexagesima’ (whatever perversion that may be), but in the Red Diary it’s properly recorded as the day the Tolpuddle Martyrs were arrested. With illustrations, and useful information instead of the normal weights and measures tables, it should do well.
Pluto Press have also published Pat Kinnersly’s The Hazards of Work and how to fight them. If this book is not a best-seller among trade unionists, I’ll eat many proverbial hats. Trade unionists should note that the bookshop price of 80p need not be paid: there are considerable reductions available for bulk-buyers. A friendly word with your local IS organisation can save your stewards’ committee 40 per cent of the price. Certainly, this book is a MUST.
Some new Socialist Worker pamphlets are available, and can be ordered from IS Books: Paul Foot’s Workers Against Racism (10p), Roger Rosewell’s The Struggle for Workers’ Power (10p), and an urgent and hard-hitting pamphlet on the current trial of the 24 North Wales building workers, Pickets on Trial (5p). All these pamphlets are real weapons of struggle: to be bought, and sold, and used.
Finally, an item that should have been mentioned in June: International Defence and Aid Fund (104 Newgate Street, London EC1) have published a brief but very useful pamphlet on Namibia, South Africa’s colony in South West Africa. While its politics are liberal nationalist, it is a very informative account of ‘South West Africa, that immense prison’. Randolph Vigne is the author, the title is A dwelling place of our own, and the price is 15p (please add postage).
 



Working For Ford
Huw Beynon
Allen Lane, hardback £2.50
Penguin, paper 90p.
VERY, VERY occasionally someone writes a book that everyone ought to read. Huw Beynon has done just that. Working For Ford is a must. It’s the sort of book you don’t just read yourself, you tell your mates about it, you lend it out or it gets pinched so you get another copy. In the building trade, The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists is such a book. The reason for its success its honesty, which gives it its humour and its pathos. Beynon’s book is like that.
His achievement is considerable. Beynon never worked for Ford, only hung round the Halewood plant, with management’s permission, doing ‘industrial sociological research’. He talked to the lads, especially the stewards, and above all he listened. And wrote it all down. A hundred other sociologists have done the same, and produced boredom. Beynon, who is some kind of a revolutionary socialist, mined gold.
The central figure in his book is the shop steward, the militant, the key to the present crisis. There have been articles and books galore about the shop steward, but not like this. It’s not only that Beynon has written in English – and that’s quite something in itself – but his grasp of what it takes to be a steward in a car plant, his readiness to listen. It’s a total portrait, warts and all. Many militants will learn little from this book, but most will recognise themselves and their dilemmas in it, on page after page. What the Halewood stewards think of the book I don’t know, nor what they made of Beynon, but I doubt if they could have found themselves a better biographer.
One might criticise the book in one respect, for not suggesting finally how the stewards might and should break out of their political isolation. Beynon knows it’s necessary, but doesn’t know how. That’s his problem, but it doesn’t spoil the book, only leaves it up to us.
If this review seems excessive, take a look at its competitors. It is, by comparison, excessively good.
 



Socialised Medicine in England and Wales
Almont Lindsey
Oxford University Press. 45s.
This study of the National Health Service 1948-61 is invaluable. Professor Lindsay seems to have read everything that has ever been written on the subject (a task in itself) and there is not an aspect of the Service that he does not deal with in detail. The book is likely to be the most complete reference work on the NHS for some years.
The book is aimed partly at the American medical profession, whose opposition to and propaganda against the NHS is notorious. Lindsey shows beyond doubt that the NHS, as it was shaped by Bevan, entirely justified itself not only to the public but also to the (initially hostile) medical profession. Where the book is weak is in its discussion of the financing of the Service: the author has missed the Tories’ slow chipping away at the redistributive aspects of the NHS and the welfare services generally. Relative to Exchequer expenditure, flat-rate contributions (i.e. regressive taxation) have risen; and charges have been introduced and extended. While drug company profits have risen enormously the original conception of the NHS has been quietly abandoned. In a way Lindsey’s determination to produce a completely unbiased study has made his book a little dull; and the development of the NHS could profitably have been related more closely to its social and economic background. But these are comparatively minor blemishes; nearly 500 pages of hard factual material make this the most useful book on the subject to appear so far.



Order and Rebellion in Tribal Africa
Max Gluckman
Cohen & West. 32s.
Impossible to review this book adequately. It is a collection of essays on various anthropological themes, lineage systems, rituals of rebellion, primitive law, Mau Mau, etc., prefaced by a long introduction where Professor Gluckman describes how his own ideas on processes of change in African societies and on wider issues of sociological explanation have developed. What comes out of these essays very strongly is a sense of the difficulty of good social analysis, something that not only Marxists but also contemporary sociologists too easily forget. This is not an easy book to read, because of its very subtlety and complexity, but fresh ideas and approaches spring out from the pages, often as brilliant asides left for the reader to develop. Gluckman suggests (pp.81-2) that comparison between different societies is not possible: ‘they are too overladen with reality’. Even classification is difficult, so ‘interwoven into incommensurable complexities’ is people’s social life. But comparison may be possible between ‘social processes’ – e.g. cycles of civil war, or indeed the trade cycle.
In his discussion of Mau Mau and its obscene rituals he underplays, I think, the straightforward political side. There was more political direction to Mau Mau than Gluckman seems to allow, though magical elements were clearly of profound importance. But throughout the book concrete detail and theory are meshed together beautifully; on the showing of this volume it seems that socialists may have more to learn from anthropology than from the sad wastes of much contemporary sociology.



Struggle Over The State: Cuts and Restructuring in Contemporary Britain
CSE State Apparatus and Expenditure Group
CSE Books, £2.50.
Capitalism and the Rule of Law: From Deviancy Theory to Marxism
ed. Bob Fine et al. for National Deviancy Conference and Conference of Socialist Economists
Hutchinson, £3.95.
In and Against the State: Discussion Notes for Socialists
London Edinburgh Weekend Return Group
PDC, £1.25.
Over the last decade or so, there has been a revival of Marxist intellectual debate.
One area on which discussion has been focused has been the central political problem of the state. In a first wave, discussion was dominated by the fundamentally barren ‘Miliband-Poulantzas debate’, both of whose major participants evolved openly towards left-reformist positions. A variety of impulses, however, turned the discussion out of this constricted furrow towards a concern with questions posed by classical Marxism. In their way, the three works reviewed here are all contributions to the ‘second wave’ of state debate. In different ways, they all reveal the strengths and weaknesses of the present left-academic debate.
Regrettably, Struggle Over the State is the least interesting – regret because the authors have attempted to produce a readable, relevant book. Its strength is its inclusion of empirical materials, in a variety of chapters that examine the ways in which the Callaghan government slashed and restructured the ‘welfare state’ in Britain. The difficulty, perhaps, is that the book emerged from a discussion group whose members had rather different political perspectives, some being left-reformists, others revolutionaries. Some share a commitment to some version or another of the ‘Alternative Economic Strategy’, others are resolutely opposed. The specifically theoretical and political sections of the book groan under the weight of the group’s attempt to blend slops and fire. Still, the book contains useful documentation on a variety of questions of practical concern to socialists, and is ‘good in parts’.
Capitalism and the Rule of Law is a collection of essays concerned with the state and law. Of the three books reviewed here, it is the most ‘academic’ in tone. Running through this collection is a central argument about ‘reform or revolution’. Several authors take up the arguments of E.P. Thompson, who has developed, in several places, a more or less absolute defence of ‘the rule of law’, which he has posed in terms of an attack on a (partly imaginary) revolutionary left. And an essay by Dario Melossi presents an at-first-sight impressively radical attack on the modern state, whose social relations are presented in terms of the relations of a prison; far from this being the foundation of an ‘anarchist’ theory, however, Melossi’s conclusions are conventionally reformist – he calls for ‘an anti-capitalist use of the state’.
In and Against the State is the most accessible of the three works. If only because it is written in a fairly ‘popular’ style and is well illustrated, it is most likely to gain a significant audience.
The authors’ Preface spells out their problem:
‘Because parties and trade unions on the whole have devoted little attention to the problem of how a state worker’s hours of employment can be directed against capitalism and towards a transition to socialism, we have found that when we join them we are limited to “after-hours” socialism. We spend our evenings and weekends struggling against capitalism, and our days working diligently as agents of the capitalist state to reproduce the capitalist system.’
The authors focus, in particular, on the state’s ‘welfare’ agencies. They write: ‘Resources we need involve us in relations we don’t.’ In the welfare state, those seeking improvements in working-class conditions find themselves embroiled in all manner of social relations that actively impede their efforts. Left-wing Labour councillors, aiming to better conditions in their boroughs, find themselves acting as employers, stifled by central government rules and demands. Teachers find themselves involved as much in discipline as in education; they must teach children, too, to pass pointless exams, in which many children must – through pre-set pass-and-fail rates – be declared ‘failures’. Those who work in the welfare state, in jobs involving care and concern for need and suffering, find themselves being super-exploited for their pains.
Central to the way the welfare state works is its tendency to turn collective class problems into individual cases. Areas and industries are unhealthy, but the state deals only with the individuals who are sick. Health workers themselves are so busy and over-worked dealing with the immediate problems of the individual sick that they have little time or energy left for developing collective solutions to collective problems. After all, these sick individuals’ needs are real and pressing, and cannot be ignored:
‘If someone comes into the CHC office crippled with arthritis, it is difficult to tell them to join a group to make the NHS change its priorities... It is difficult for people, in tight personal circumstances to turn a personal tussle with the state into a political struggle against it. Women with children and without collective support can barely get out of the house for a meeting.’
Teachers who know the exam system is irrelevant, that it distorts education, also know their students need those qualifications if they’re to get jobs. If they don’t teach those hated, competitive exam courses, students and parents will protest.
The dilemmas socialists face arise, the authors suggest, from the very character of the capitalist state. The state is capitalist, not just because of what it does (defending capitalist property, limiting workers’ rights, fostering racism through immigration policies, etc.) but also because of how it does it. Certain kinds of social relations are imposed on us by the state.
In capitalism, exploitation is hidden behind a veil. In, say, feudalism, exploitation was transparently a matter of give-and-take (the peasants gave, the lords took.). But in capitalism it appears that everyone is equal and free. Each worker is free to work for a particular employer or not, free to live his or her own private life. But the world of the ‘free’ labour market is not the place where exploitation happens: exploitation occurs in the ‘private property’ of the capitalist, in: the – workplace, where it is hidden behind: the illusion of ‘a fair day’s work for a fair day’s pay’. Employers enter ‘fair and free’ contracts with workers, and end up with their wealth expanded; while workers end up no better off at the end of the process than at the beginning. The everyday procedures of capitalism disguise and mystify the realities of exploitation.
Similarly with the state. It is not constructed around the fundamental antagonisms of capitalist exploitation, as an agency of open class oppression. But it appears as the state of the ‘citizens’, of the individual free agents of the labour market, who appear to be equal. The state relates to these ‘free and equal’ individuals, and reinforces these relations of freedom’ and ‘equality’. The state does not relate to us as rriembers of classes, indeed it does not recognise classes. Rather, it treats us as fragmented, individual roles: as ‘voters’, ‘taxpayers’, ‘delinquents’, ‘consumers’, ‘claimants’, etc.
All the procedures the state lays down for dealing with us, and for meeting (some of) our needs and problems, atomise us and conceal the class character of our needs and problems. So, as the authors emphasise, the very form of the social relations imposed on us by the state are quite useless for socialist struggle.
‘... the idea that you can achieve socialism through the state is illusory: the state channels and fragments our struggles in such a way that socialism can never appear on the agenda.’
The problem is acute right now. The Tories, following Labour’s lead, are launching massive attacks on the welfare state. We should not forget that Thatcher won millions of votes, in part in a campaign against the state and in particular against the taxation burden. (Not, of course, that the Toriesrhave any interest in cutting workers’ tax burden in reality!) Tax has become a significant working-class issue: in 1950 the average male manual worker paid no income taxes; today he pays something like 20 per cent of his wages in income tax, high rates, national insurance contributions, and 15 per cent VAT on a wide range of items.
Also, it is only in reformist circles – more and more removed from working-class experience – that the welfare state appears as ‘our’ welfare state. All too often, the experience workers have with welfare agencies is of a set of authoritarian, alien institutions, where they are bossed around, spied and checked on, insulted and demeaned, in return for needed but meagre benefits. A high price is demanded for the state’s miserable provision of needs.
Are there ways, the authors ask, in which – in the very fight to defend the welfare state against the Tories’ attacks – we can challenge the existing forms of the state, and begin to advance other, socialist conceptions of how education, health care, social benefits and the like might be organised? Must the struggle be one where we fall in loyally behind reformist politicians, who have no desire to go beyond (at best) restoring the former status quo, or can we raise the question of collective action and organisation, of workers’ power?
The authors note that Marxists have tended to ignore the way in which relations between the state and ‘everyday life’ (the individual, family life, leisure, work, travel, etc.) have changed, and in changing have altered the forms and organisations of the class struggle itself. Marxism has tended to be too narrowly focused, insufficiently open to the changing forms of the class struggle, and thus less effective in its interventions. All this is well said, and important.
Up to this point, I think, the pamphlet is first-rate. It provides one of the most acute analyses of the capitalist ‘welfare state’ yet published. But, I find less satisfactory the comrades’ answers to the problems they pose very well.
The political parties, the comrades suggest, have tended: to ignore the problems of workplace activity. Or, they have confined their activity to trade union demands on pay and conditions. Let us acknowledge that there is some truth: in this charge. But it needs to be: qualified, more than they admit. In the first place, they draw no distinction between reformists and: revolutionaries here. Yet this is sanely crucial: the theory and practice of reformism does not require a challenge to the state form, while revolutionary Marxism asserts the absolute necessity of the destruction of state forms.
The authors’ argument slides too easily into two kinds of assertion: first, that revolutionary organisations ignore these questions; secondly, that ‘trade union’ issues are relatively unimportant. As a result, they clear a space for a turning away from the problems of socialist party organisation entirely. And, they ignore the inter-relation between ‘economic’ and ‘political’ struggles (where ‘political’ includes the issues of challenging: the state form in daily practice) – a matter on which Rosa Luxemburg’s The Mass Strike is so magnificent, and; whose significance appears confirmed in recent history. Put bluntly: a movement that cannot defend its wages and conditions, that cannot struggle effectively against sackings and victimisation, is an unconfident movement, less likely also to challenge the state’s definitions and the ways the state structures and divides the working class. Of course, the reverse is also true: a movement that does not challenge the ways the: state shapes our lives will likewise be less capable of ‘economic’ defence.
The pamphlet’s authors argue that revolutionary organisations have placed too little weight on the question of struggles against state forms, I’m sure they’re partly correct, though they also exaggerate the issue. They, in turn, use this charge as a basis for arguing, in effect, against socialist party organisation altogether.
Thus, in effect, the comrades justify the ‘anti-organisation’ tendency that currently characterises a section of the left. It is an argument we cannot allow to go by default. ‘Anti-partyism’ is not a virtue for socialists, but a confession of weakness; and the weakness is not only in the existing organisations, but in the arguments and politics of those who one-sidedly adopt this position. It is, ultimately, a cop-out, and a strengthening of the self-ghettoising tendency of too much of the left today.
I have spelled out my reservations with this pamphlet at some length, precisely because I think it is important, and worth reading and discussing. It deserves to have some influence in the movement. But that influence is likely to be ambiguous and contradictory because its real strengths are combined with serious weaknesses.
 



Industrial Relations: A Marxist Introduction
Richard Hyman
Macmillan, £7.95 (cloth); £3.95 (paper)
Social Values and Industrial Relations: A Study of Fairness and Inequality
Richard Hyman and Ian Brough
Blackwell, £2.95 (paper).
Richard Hyman has written (and collaborated with Ian Brough on) two Marxist textbooks of considerable merit. ‘Marxist textbooks’ is a curious phrase, but unavoidable. Both of these books are bursting with references, often to very bourgeois academic writers. Both books set out to confront, systematically, an enormous corpus of ideas and information deriving, mainly, from the often convoluted (and reactionary) tongues of academic ‘experts’ on industrial relations, sociology, economics and the like. Both books are organised around a confrontation with ruling academic orthodoxies, and arrive at revolutionary Marxist conclusions. There is no question that both books are considerable achievements. The comprehensiveness of their coverage of the academic literature is positively terrifying. Their use of academic material to confront academic material, of abstraction to hammer abstraction, is precise and revealing.
The first volume is rather more accessible to the general reader. It sets out to provide a Marxist introduction to the main factors affecting ‘industrial relations’, especially in Britain. Some parts are particularly good: e.g. the chapter on ideology and the state. Socialist teachers who get stuck with having to lecture to ‘Business Studies’ courses and the like will find the book invaluable, both for its fullness and for its clarity of organisation.
The second work, by Hyman and Brough, is devoted to the study of ideology, of the complexities of the ways in which workers and others view problems of ‘fairness’ and ‘inequality’ in capitalist industry and capitalist society generally. It is if anything even more comprehensive than the first book.
Both works will, regrettably, find an audience almost entirely amongst a narrow band of ‘academic Marxists’, i.e. among those who can handle the difficulties of the mode of expression. I say regrettably, since the ideas elaborated by academics in ponderous prose are also ideas which – in different linguistic forms – form part of everyday argument and ‘commonsense’. It is, after all, not only Professors of Industrial Relations (whose chairs are often funded by large capitalist concerns) who pontificate uncritically about ‘the national interest’ and the like: so do every socialist’s workmates. To have the arguments developed in these books translated, as it were, into a different kind of discourse, into jokes, cartoons, stories, illustrative arguments and the like, would be to add considerably to the stock of socialist popular literature.
Any reader willing to make the effort will gain much of value here – but not without effort. This is not to denigrate either book. Such a work of confrontation with the systematic mystifications of bourgeois thought is a vital task, and one performed here with exceptional ability. But it does leave us with the job of turning the wealth of ideas into forms that can speak to millions rather than hundreds. But, then, who wants to see a Rock version of The Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right ...?



Labour and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century
Harry Braverman
Monthly Review Press, £5.30 (hardback)
This is a superb book. A paperback edition is promised. Every socialist should have a copy.
If this seems an immoderate beginning to a review, it is quite justified to me. What Harry Braverman has done, in a series of short and readable chapters, is to continue at the point where Marx left off in his analysis of the labour process in capitalist society in the first volume of Capital, and to show what has been happening to work in twentieth century capitalism. After reading the book, it seems amazing that no one had ever written it before. All manner of things that we all know, yet never recognise, suddenly emerge to the centre of attention, to the place in socialist consciousness that they ought to have had for 50 years. Braverman cuts sharply through a series of misconceptions that have become received wisdom in bourgeois thought, but which also have been uncritically accepted in the Marxist movement too.
In the space of a review, I can do no more than outline what he has to say. At the end of the first chapter of Capital Marx suggested, in a famous section entitled The Fetishism of Commodities, that economists who presented the market and its laws as ‘inevitable’ were like primitive people who first carved an idol, a Fetish from wood and then fell down and worshipped their own creation, endowing it with their own powers. In our own age, ‘technology’ has become the fetish, with similar powers over men attributed to it – when, in fact, men have created their technology and can alter it.
The massively expanded use of machines, the application of science to production, the endless rationalisation and growth of output, are matters which belong to the history of capitalism. Capitalism emerged before the systematic use of machinery and then – as it developed – seized upon and transformed the instruments of men’s material production, destroying traditional ways of working and substituting its own. As a by-product of its development, capitalism vastly expanded the collective control of men over nature, creating the material possibility of a world of abundance for all. But only as a by-product. The expansion of men’s powers under capitalism, which Marx celebrates in the first chapter of the Communist Manifesto, followed a path determined by the capitalist mode of production and its laws of motion.
The labour process under capitalism is not something ‘neutral’, but is shaped by its central’ purpose: the accumulation of capital. Capitalism may expand ‘men’s collective powers over nature’, but it does so in a totally contradictory way. Under capitalism, the working class surrenders its decision-making power over the labour process to the employers; workers’ ‘collective powers over nature’ become the capitalists’ prerogative. The capitalist’s problem is, always and everywhere, to squeeze out of the labour-power he has hired the fullest use he can, to control the ‘collective power over nature’ he has hired. In the Labour process, the capitalists’ key problem is control: the worker’s is the, progressive alienation of the labour process from his control. A large part of this book is concerned with just that issue: the development of management’s control over the labour process.
All the means by which ‘science’, and ‘rationality’ are applied to the work-processes of capitalist enterprise are means aimed at the crucial goal of capitalist production: managerial control over the work-force, in order that the rate of accumulation of surplus-value may be as high as possible.
Capitalism develops its own special kind of ‘division of labour’, that characteristic of modern production: the division of each occupation into a multitude of ‘detail labours’ under the planned control of management. Adam Smith presented pin-making as an example of this ‘division of labour’; today, perhaps the car-assembly factory is the most awe-inspiring and familiar instance. As John Ruskin said in the 19th century, under this typically capitalist ‘division of labour’ it is not merely labour that is divided, it is men. Such a division of work into ‘detail labour’ has several great advantages for capitalist management: labour-power is cheaper, management control over the labour-process is enormously enhanced while the workers’ control over the labour process is thereby reduced proportionately – for workers are more easily replaceable, like machine parts. The conceptual, planning, thinking part of work is taken away from the worker, and concentrated in management. Work is ‘de-skilled’.
The thinking of management on these matters has been given systematic expression in the area of monopoly capital in what is commonly termed ‘scientific management’. This ‘science’ is a purely capitalist ‘science’: It was born out of the needs of capital, and will be destroyed by socialist revolution. It is, as Braverman says, the science of ‘the management of the work of others under capitalist conditions’. The problem to which it seeks ‘scientific’ answers is, ‘how best can alienated labour be controlled?’ It seeks, in every sphere of production, to find methods by which the subjection of the worker to the capital he serves may be made more total; in the process, ‘scientific management’ seeks control not only of the externals of work but of the very way the worker does his or her job. Work is studied, timed, reorganised, de-skilled, for one crucial’ purpose: to reduce the employer’s reliance on his workers’ own initiative. Under ‘scientific management’, all possible elements of ‘brain work’ are removed from the operative’s sphere of competence, and transferred away into special ‘planning’ sections of the corporation. Knowledge in the production process belongs thenceforth, not to the workers, but to management. Workers become, more and more, interchangeable ‘detail labourers’, who require not an education but rather ‘training’. Ideally, in millions of jobs in modern industry, the chief thing the worker has to ‘learn’ is not this or that operation (for the ‘operation’ is so simple it can be picked up in a few moments) but rather how to perform the operation fast enough to meet management’s demands. It’s not even ‘training’ that is required, but ‘conditioning’. ‘Mental’ and ‘manual’ work are, as Marx argued, more and more separated, into different places, different sections of the labour force.
The first area in which the principles of ‘scientific management’ were applied was manufacturing industry, but once established there the ‘science’ has been applied to an even-wider range of jobs. One sector of production after another, in each of which initially the workers retain some element of ‘craft’ or ‘skill’, is invaded by the principles of ‘scientific management’. In each sector, the process is completed, as an ‘American union journal commented, ‘the worker is no longer a craftsman in any sense, but is an animated tool of the management.’
The application of modern science in a systematic way to modern production, a development again that coincides with the growth of monopoly capital in the latter decades of the 19th century, furthers the process. The application of the findings of modern chemistry, physics, electronics and the like only further the separation of the worker from the planning function in production. Workers themselves are treated more and more as machines, whose movements can be standardised and measured. (The CEGB boasts proudly of its computerised data bank of information on ‘job descriptions’, a data bank which, incidentally, helped the CEGB reduce its labour force by 20 per cent in a few years under the power industry’s ‘productivity deal’). When Marx argued in Capital that the measure of value in capitalist society was the quantity of undifferentiated abstract labour contained in a commodity, he was describing not just a theoretical notion, but the actual tendency of capitalist production. Workers are reduced, in one branch of production after another, into masses of undifferentiated, abstract labour power.
Thus, the development of machinery, characteristic of the labour process under capitalism, is in social terms a further means by which a worker is enslaved to capital. The worker, as Braverman puts it, is confined ‘within a blind round of servile duties in which the machine appears as the embodiment of science and the worker as little or nothing’. In place of the driving foreman, demanding a faster and faster pace of work, the machine itself forces a pattern and pace of activity on the worker. The more complex the machinery, the cheaper the labour-power that ‘runs’ it: in the USA, it costs 12 times as much to train a machinist using conventional methods as it does to train the operator of a numerically-controlled machine tool. Here again, the intellectual work of planning production is separated from its execution. The de-skilling process does not stop at the factory floor, either, but invades the drawing office, the laboratories, the ‘white-collar’ sectors of capitalist work too.
A great deal of nonsense has been written about the way in which the most advanced forms of capitalist technology enable the worker to ‘rediscover responsibility and skill’. In practice, the chief skill required in the most highly automated plants is the skill of staying awake till the end of the shift. Braverman suggests that in modern American manufacturing industry, only about three per cent of the labour force can be said to embody in their work the technical knowledge required for production, and even amongst these ‘technical’ personnel skill-hierarchies are well developed, detail-labour is strongly apparent. The reduction of the differentials in pay between the ‘technical’ personnel and production workers is witness to the reduction in skill requirements in their occupations too.
Characteristically, ‘automation’, ‘modernisation’, ‘rationalisation’, ‘scientific management’, and the like have the effect, above all, of displacing from one sector of production after another great masses of workers, who ‘become available’ for hire in other, more labour-intensive branches of capitalist work. Capital never stands still but invades more and more branches of human production. Whereas, at the time even that Marx wrote a century ago, many aspects of production in the advanced capitalist countries were still in the hands of families, of self-employed people and so forth, in the intervening century capital has invaded these branches of production and transformed them. In the process, it has made men and women dependent for the satisfaction of almost all their needs on the ‘services’ of capitalist production. Whether it be food preparation, or entertainment, activities that formerly stood outside the sphere of capital are now dominated by it. Even in our sexual activities we hardly manage without at least the products of the modern chemical industry ... The ‘commodity form’ has become more and more generalised. The market has become universal. Whole new ‘services’ are now provided for large urban communities, ‘services’ which suck in to employment great masses of ‘surplus labour’, both the labour ‘freed’ from manufacturing industries by machinery and labour ‘freed’ from housework. Generally, as Braverman notes, the new sectors of employment in the ‘service’ sector pay lower wages than the ‘mechanised’ sector, and absorb higher and higher proportions of the labour force.
In our epoch, women in millions have begun to contribute to the expansion of the ‘gross national product’, have become ‘productive’, in other words, have been drawn into capitalist production. Above all, women have been drawn into the most rapidly expanding branches of capitalist work, in ‘office’ and ‘service’ work. A major feature of 20th century capitalist development has been the enormous growth of so-called ‘white-collar’ jobs, in offices, shops and the like. In the process, conventional views of the relations between ‘manual’ and ‘white-collar’ jobs have become more and more out of date. As ‘white-collar’ work has expanded, it has also been transformed: where ‘clerical’ work in the period of the industrial revolution was a sign of privilege, of association with the boss, of standards of living well above those of factory workers, this is anything but true today. Pay differentials have not merely been reduced, they have in crucial respects reversed. The old association of ‘education’ with ‘white-collar’ work is for many white-collar jobs, utterly meaningless today. Office work, like factory work, has been de-skilled to a vast extent, and the office worker turned into as much of a ‘detail labourer’ as his or her counterpart in a factory. For pure tedium, there are significant numbers of office jobs beside which most factory work is positively thrilling, as the briefest acquaintance with such activities as those of a ‘filing clerk’ or a ‘key punch operator’ will rapidly demonstrate. The ‘educational requirements’ demanded by employers for such jobs are rarely necessary in any technical sense: the possession of ‘O’ levels and the like is a proof to the employer, not of a useful knowledge of English, mathematics, or a foreign language, but of ‘motivation’, ‘reliability’ and other slavish virtues. (This is by no means restricted to office work, of course: in the Fleetwood area of Lancashire, for example, extremely repetitive electronic assembly work is only ‘open to girls of smart appearance and refined manners’ – like jobs in chemists’ shops – the rough and unrefined have to take their chances with fish processing). Certainly, modern office work and similar low-paid, detail labour makes nonsense of modern sociology’s continued insistence on the distinction between ‘manual’ and ‘white-collar’ work and workers. Like work in factories, most work in offices and in the ‘service’ sector has become abstract, unskilled labour.
Marx insisted that a crucial condition for the expansion of capital was the existence of a ‘relative surplus population’, an ‘industrial reserve army’ of workers who could be shunted from one sector of capitalist production to another, into and out of employment as the needs of capital dictated. He asserted, in addition, that this ‘relative surplus population’ must rise as a proportion of the total labour force as the mass of capital expanded. These ideas of Marx have hardly been discussed in the past decades, and certainly not defended seriously. Braverman insists that Marx’s ideas are crucial to understanding the structure and development of the modern working class. Movement of labour-power between branches of modern capitalist production has become a more and more prominent characteristic, with workers being shunted in particular out of sectors of work hit by the application of ‘science and technology’ and into the expanding, labour-intensive ‘service’ sectors. The ‘floating’ part of the ‘relative surplus production’, on the move between jobs regularly, relying on unemployment pay for the intervals between work, has grown in numbers. So too has the ‘latent’ part of the reserve army of labour, in two especially important shapes: as immigrants and, particularly, as women. The labour-market has become international: all the advanced countries of western capitalism have developed, since the war, on huge imports of labour-power from peripheral countries, former colonies and the like, the entry and exit of these migrant workers being controlled by the general needs of capital for labour-power. Even more important has been the expansion of women’s employment in capitalist enterprise. Women have been drawn into employment in boom times, and expelled from it in periods of recession to a degree unmeasured by the official statistics of unemployment. In Britain, for instance, it has been estimated that there are perhaps half a million women workers who have simply ‘disappeared’ from the ‘economically active population’, or the ‘labour force’, who do not register for unemployment pay and so simply ‘disappear’. Certainly, the real level of unemployment in Britain is grossly understated by the government’s statistics. (As according to Braverman, it is in the USA). Thirdly, the ‘stagnant’ sector of the reserve army of labour has also grown: those who live in primary poverty have, despite the vast increases in total social wealth since the war, grown in numbers. This phenomenon, ‘poverty in the midst of affluence’, is not only an American one: in the 1960s it was estimated that the proportion of the British population living on or below the official poverty line has almost doubled by comparison with 1950.
Thus the working class has been more and more caught in a double bind: it has been progressively de-skilled, and forced into a more and more abject dependence on the demands of capital. This, it need hardly be said, is not a picture that finds much of a reflection in the official and conventional view of modern society. Braverman’s final chapter confronts the conventional view head-on: we are all told (and most of us have unthinkingly believed) that the average level of skill and knowledge required by modern production has risen. The application of the miracles of the, scientific-technological revolution in industry has meant, we all know, that the modern worker has to be better educated, more skilled. But is it true? Braverman’s analysis of what has been happening in capitalist work suggests the opposite. It is true that modern production requires higher and more sophisticated levels of application of scientific knowledge, but ... not from the overwhelming majority of society. The actual tendency of modern production is not to increase the average worker’s level of skill or competence, but rather it is to polarise the population into a tiny minority that monopolises science and knowledge and a growing majority that is excluded from them. This reality is obscured by such apparently ‘objective’measures of the population as are provided by official censures, which purport to show that the population of ‘unskilled’ workers is falling while the proportion of ‘semi-skilled’ is rising. The census also shows that ‘white-collar’ work is absorbing more workers, while ‘manual’ work is stagnant or declining. But neither of these indices actually demonstrates an increase in the general ‘skill level’ of the working class: a gardener is ‘unskilled’, while a car-assembly worker is ‘semi-skilled’ – yet gardening actually requires more ‘skill’ and ‘knowledge’ than car-assembly work. ‘White-collar’ work is supposed to require a higher standard of education than ‘manual’ work, yet that assumption too is more than dubious. In reality, the census data – on whose foundation whole mystifying structures of ideas have been erected – systematically conceal the extent to which, the development of capitalist production has robbed the working class of its control over the very processes of work. If Braverman is right – and he surely is – then much of what socialists have taken for granted about, for instance, the expansion of ‘education’ under capitalism begins to look very suspect. Capitalism’s reasons for keeping children and young people in schools and colleges for longer and longer periods of their lives, has not to be much to do with the technical requirements of modern production. This is not the place to develop this question, but it does incidentally throw a good deal of light on the recent raising of the British school leaving age. Why was the school leaving age raised? In order to teach school pupils a variety of matters that the existing ten-year syllabus could not include? Hardly: the decision to keep pupils at school till the age of 16 was taken before much thought was devoted to what to do with them in school! On the other hand, the removal of all those 15-year olds from the labour market must have helped keep down the official level of unemployment ...
The implications of Harry Braverman’s book are considerable. Above all, it should remind us forcibly that no socialist movement whose aims do not include, centrally, the reorganisation of production, the progressive abolition of the distinction between ‘mental’ and ‘manual’ labour, can call itself Marxist or revolutionary. The very demand for ‘workers’ control’, if it goes no further than seeking to change the form of government of the modern enterprise, is profoundly conservative. Workers’ control of production can only be a preliminary, though necessary, means to the socialist goal, which is the humanisation of work, the reintegration of the working class and its work. These are matters of which the revolutionary socialist movement has hardly spoken for a century: Harry Braverman’s fine book should remind us of their central importance.



Fascism
Martin Kitchen
Macmillan £6.95 (hardback), £2.95 (paperback).
On the whole, this is a useful little book review of theories of fascism, although with only 91 pages of text it is grossly overpriced.
The author is at his best when he is exploring the weaknesses of a wide variety of bourgeois and Stalinist accounts of fascism. He focusses his attention, rightly, on Italy and Germany, and is properly critical of the loose application of the term ‘fascist’ to any old right-wing authoritarian regime. His analysis of a variety of writings reveals how difficult it is for liberals to come to terms with fascism, since the fascist phenomenon casts into question precisely their own support for liberal capitalist democracy.
Kitchen is, however, slightly less acute on the errors of the Stalinist positions, both those of the infamous ‘Third Period’ when the communist parties characterised social democracy as the twin of fascism under the appalling label ‘social-fascist’, and those that succeeded this position, when the Stalinist parties retreated backwards into the politics of the ‘Popular Front’. The centre of his weakness lies in his failure to realise that there is only one effective alternative to fascism: socialist revolution.
Because his book approaches this position, it has much of value in it. But because it does not arrive at its proper destination, Kitchen falls back on Popular Front politics without ever noting that they failed, both in France and in Spain (not to mention Greece, Chile and lesser blackspots). He notes that the ‘major safeguard’ against fascism is a ‘united and determined working class’: a proposition which is true, but leaves unanswered the question: ‘determined ... to do what?’
Under the circumstances of crisis, it is precisely the failure of a mass working class movement to proceed to the overthrow of capitalism which provokes the growth of fascism. When the times demand extreme solutions, the petty bourgeoisie, battered as much as the working class by crisis, turn in large numbers to fascism if and when the workers’ parties fail to solve the crisis by revolutionary socialist means. Kitchen himself provides evidence of this for both Italy and Germany, although he emphasises the point insufficiently.
It is symptomatic of his weakness that Kitchen should be scornful of the contribution of Trotsky to the understanding of fascism. Trotsky, he asserts, ‘made a major departure from classical Marxism by insisting that the petty bourgeoisie could be won over to the ranks of the revolutionary proletariat if only the communist parties would provide the necessary leadership.’ In point of fact, there is nothing of a ‘departure’ in this position of Trotsky’s; Marx’s account of the peasantry in Germany and France, and Lenin’s of the Russian peasantry, is precisely in line with this position. If the petty bourgeoisie is a section of society that cannot master society, but requires to be mastered by another class, it is open to a revolutionary working class to assert that mastery: indeed, that assertion is a precondition for the success of socialist revolution.
The last pages of Kitchen’s book discuss the possibility of the re-appearance of mass fascist movements in the advanced capitalisms of today. Rightly, he asserts that the possibility is real. Wrongly, he supposes that such movements may use less brutal means than under Mussolini or Hitler. Actually, since the mission of fascist movements is to destroy working-class opposition within advanced capitalism, there is every reason to suppose that any future mass fascist movements will be still more brutal, more vicious, more extreme than those of the interwar years. For today the working class is bigger, its organisations are still more extended, than they were then: their destruction, therefore, would have to be a still more terrible process. The potential threat is even more severe: a conclusion which makes the development of revolutionary socialism even more urgent than ever.



Cutting the Welfare State (Who Profits)
CIS/CDP, 45p
Poverty and Equality in Britain
J.C. Kincaid
Pelican, 75p
Counter Information Services have joined with Community Development Project’s Information and Intelligence Unit to produce what is arguably their most impressive report to date.
The welfare state, as we all know, is being slashed seriously by the Labour government. The authors of this report show, in field after field of the ‘welfare’ services, how the axe is falling. More important, from the point of view of the development of a movement of opposition to the cuts, they show – in the clearest account I have yet seen – why the Labour government is attacking welfare services. The report is an excellent piece of de-mystification, presenting a mass of material in an exceptionally cogent fashion. Socialists will find it invaluable in arguing the case for a fight back. As the authors show, the cuts are only now beginning. There is more, and worse, to come.
Up to now, the struggle to maintain welfare services – let alone expand them – has been patchy and uneven. The CIS/CDP report ought to be widely read and widely sold, for the issue of welfare state cuts must be one on which socialists seek to build a general working-class movement of opposition. Already, the scattered and uneven experience of campaigns against welfare cuts across Britain suggests that welfare cuts offer socialists an opportunity to present their politics, in concrete terms, to a much larger working-class audience than any other issue over the past generation has done.
For the cuts hurt the entire working class: both the millions who now work in the various ‘public services’, and whose jobs, wages and conditions of work are threatened, and the whole class, for whom ‘welfare services’ are a substantial slice of their real standard of living. The immediate problems are two: first, to work to develop a fighting alliance, in every locality, of workers in all the public services; and second, to win the active and not merely passive sympathy of workers in industry. To date, the first of these tasks appears to be the easier. The common interests of, say, teachers, health service workers and firemen are more readily perceived. Grassroots links between militants in the public sector are more easily developed, for the connection between the cuts in ‘welfare’ and the immediate living standards of the workers who supply the services is direct. But it is the second job which is strategically most central. Not simply because an immediate threat to capitalist profits is likely to prevent welfare cuts much more rapidly than demonstrations and action in the ‘unproductive’ public sector alone, but also because the generalisation of the struggle to defend the ‘welfare state’ involves larger political issues. In that more difficult and more necessary struggle, the struggle to extend the fight against the cuts into the factories, we have to overcome the major ideological defences of capitalism. The idea that ‘public spending must be cut’, that the key problem is ‘waste’ in local council spending, that the interests of ratepayers and council tenants are diametrically opposed, that the only way in which welfare services can be saved is through further taxation of workers, etc. etc. – all of these mystifications have to be directly confronted.
It is not, either, simply a question of demanding ‘more’ where the capitalist state demands ‘less’. For – as Jim Kincaid shows to a degree in his book – the ‘welfare services’ provided by capitalism have a form which alienates them from their recipients. The characteristic relationship between the ‘consumer’ of welfare services, whether this be health, education, relief payments or whatever, is one in which stringency, meanness of spirit, bureaucratic subordination and indifference predominate. ‘Our’ welfare state, even when it was growing rather than shrinking, was not only a most unequal and insufficient provider, it was never ‘ours’. The struggle for the democratisation of the welfare organisations, both in terms of the ‘internal’ relationships in the schools, hospitals and other agencies, and in terms of the relations between the agencies and their users, is a vital part of the struggle against the cuts.
Jim Kincaid’s book, now reissued in a revised and updated edition, provides a mass of useful material on the manner in which inequality in Britain has been maintained precisely through the ‘welfare state’. What it lacks, despite its exceptional usefulness as a compendium of well-presented data, is a view of the place of the welfare state as a whole in modern capitalism. It is not a book whose argument leads naturally to a discussion of how a struggle to transform the situation might be developed. To that extent, it remains ‘reformist’ rather than ‘revolutionary’ in scope. We must hope that Jim Kincaid will soon produce a new book that goes beyond the reach of this.
Nonetheless, both these works are invaluable, and (in terms of modern prices) remarkably good value. The CIS/CDP report is available from IS Books, or directly from CIS at 9 Poland Street, London W1.
 



Musical readers might like to note two recent, and good, LP records. Songs of Alex Glasgow Two is issued by Mawson Wareharn Music Ltd of Newcastle on Tyne (MWM 1011); Leon Rosselson and Roy Bailey’s That’s Not The Way It’s Got To Be comes from Acorn Records, Church Road, Stonesfield, Oxford (Stereo CF 251).
Till fairly recently, Trotsky’s writings on the rise of Nazism in Germany were almost unknown. There has been, in the last few years, a rush of editions (including an excellent selection in this journal). Penguin have now scooped the market with a complete collection, edited by E. Mandel, under the title The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany. At £1.50 it is a must.
 



Readers might like to note a number of publications which have appeared since the spring, and which might get missed otherwise. Counter Information Services (9 Poland St, London, W1) has brought out another of its Crisis reports, Women Under Attack, a very useful compilation at 45p. Their next pamphlet promises an exposure of ‘the fallacies of the government’s economic strategy’.
Recently, we reviewed the British Society for Social Responsibility in Science’s pamphlet on Oil (75p, also from 9 Poland Street). Note should also be taken of a matching pamphlet, at 25p, on Noise. BSSRS will give cut prices for bulk orders from trade union bodies. Hopefully they’ll be expanding this very useful series on individual work hazards. Journeyman Press (97 Ferme Park Road, London, N8) have issued a paperback edition (75p) of Ignazio Silone’s fine novel about Italian fascism, Fontamara. Also Robert Blatchford’s classic Merrie England (90p). In May, Penguin Books continued their Marx Library series with a new edition of the first volume of Capital, at £2.95. This edition has a long introduction by E. Mandel, and includes an extra 136 pages of the so-called ‘unpublished chapter’ which has not been easily available previously.
Writers and Readers Publishing Co-operative (14 Talacre Road, London, NW5) have reissued two books by John Berger, the novel A Painter of our Time, and the study of a country doctor, A Fortunate Man. They have also issued four titles in a series of ‘non-sexist children’s literature’ at £2.50 each. I haven’t seen these books, but IS readers who are interested could at the minimum get the local library to order them. More details available from the publishers.
Pluto’s Big Red Diary for 1977 is to be on law and disorder. The series is now expanded to a Big Red Joke Book, at 90p. This is full of jokes old and new, the best section being (I thought) the East European. Also promised is a Big Red Song Book, with music – what price a Big Red Concert to launch it?
 



A Seventh Man
John Berger and Jean Mohr
Penguin, £1.00.
SINCE THE war, the advanced capitalist countries of Western Europe have become totally dependent, for their continued expansion, on immigrant workers. In Germany and Britain, one manual worker in every seven is an immigrant In France, Switzerland and Belgium, immigrants constitute a quarter of the industrial labour force.


 


Immigrants are ‘naturally’, the most exploited members of the West European working classes. Their civil rights are less than those of indigenous workers; their pay is lower; their housing conditions worse; their promotion prospects weaker; their accident rates higher. Insofar as the native-born working classes have experienced an improvement in their job-prospects, they have done so thanks to the immigrants’ taking the most menial, low-paid and lousy jobs.


 


John Berger the writer and Jean Mohr the photographer (ably assisted by the artist Sven Blomberg and the designer Richard Hollis) have produced a book which tries to capture the reality of the migrant worker’s life. They focus, in words and pictures, on the movement of those migrant workers (’guest-workers’ as official German policy laughably calls them) who are drawn out of Southern Europe’s poverty into the cities and factories of booming Western Europe. These workers, in a sense, are even more disadvantaged than the majority of immigrant workers in Britain, for they nave little right to establish residence or bring their families. They are pushed and pulled from Turkey, Greece, Yugoslavia, Portugal, Spain, Southern Italy, into and out of West European industry entirely at the will of capital The sackings this year at Volkswagen will be felt most sharply, not in West Germany, but in the villages of Anatolia.


 


This is a fine, imaginative study of the fate of the migrants, of the humiliations of their experience, of the exploitation they live, Of the hopelessness of their journeys. The text is clear and powerful, and supported by evocative photographs of the two worlds of the migrant worker, the poverty of the lands from which he comes – lands that have been ‘underdeveloped’ by the West – and the riches of the advanced capitalist world that he enters and services but can never finally touch.
... full of the excitement of arrival, he said, ‘Here you can find gold on the ground. I am going to start looking for it.’ The friend who had been in the city for two years answered him: ‘That is true. But the gold fell from very high in the sky, and so when it hit the earth, it went down very very deep.’
Almost without exception, the trade unions have failed the migrant workers, taking their subscriptions but effectively ignoring their problems.
 



Political Undercurrents in Soviet Economic Debates
Moshe Lewin
Pluto £3.75
WHEN Joseph Stalin died in 1953, he bequeathed to his heirs a massive and growing set of problems. The form of economy he initiated in 1929 with the first Five Year Plan proved to be enormously irrational. None of Stalin’s successors has managed to master its contradictions.
It is characteristic of capitalist economies that, on the one hand, they expand the productive forces of society to a previously undreamed extent while, on the other, they are incapable of employing the massive resources rationally. Thus they become ever more incapable of further development, ever less able to satisfy the needs they themselves generate. The result – as we see in Britain and the USA, for instance – is growing economic stagnation, growing waste. So too in Russia.
The Russian economic growth rate has been steadily falling. Yet at the same time, the proportion of resources devoted to investment has been rising. The economy moves in fits and starts, indeed (as a number of Russian and East European economists have noted) its development is at least as irregular and unpredictable as an ‘orthodox’ western capitalist economy. Waste production is an ever more pressing problem: from 1950 to 1965 Russian stocks of unsold consumer goods grew three and a half times, to reach the impressive sum of almost 35 billion roubles’ worth. The population had the money to buy them, but the quality was so poor no one could touch them. More and more machinery likewise remained in mothballs, being either unsuitable for use altogether or in the wrong place. The building of new factories, houses, and the like takes three times as long in Russia as in the west. The machinery in Russian industry is out of date, prone to breakdown, difficult to replace. 27 per cent of gross capital investment in material production is absorbed by repairs to existing machinery! A third of Russia’s metal cutting machine tools at any time are out of action, being mended. The bureaucratic ‘planning’ system, inherited from Stalin, creates positive disincentives to innovate, to seek more efficient methods of production, to match output to the needs of the population and of the rest of industry.
In the agricultural sector, Russia is in permanent crisis. Despite the vastness of its agricultural land, and despite the large agricultural labour force, the Russian government cannot be sure, from one year to the next, that it can feed its population. 27 per cent of the active Russian population is engaged in agriculture and extractive industries, yet it cannot feed itself, while a much smaller agricultural labour force in the USA produces massive surpluses ...
In the late 1950s and 1960s, in the wake of Kruschev’s revelations about Stalin’s ‘excesses’ and the intellectual ‘thaw’ that developed in Russia, a whole school of Russian economists began to analyse what was wrong with the Russian economy, and to make proposals for reform. Some went further than others in their criticisms, but collectively they developed an account of the way the Russian economy was functioning that challenged almost every one of the lies that communists had been fed for a generation. For a time, the reform economists were given a degree of encouragement by the Russian government: the problems to which the economists addressed themselves were patently obvious to everyone, and the bureaucracy was looking for ways to overcome the stagnation and irrationalities of their own system. Some rather halting steps towards reform of the planning system were taken, though only briefly. More recently, and especially since the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia, the reform process has been largely stopped.
In the Russian context, reform threatens the very existence of the system. The Russian economy’s central dynamic is provided by military competition with the west, under the direction of a rigidly centralised state. The burden of that competition is tremendous: in order to match American firepower, and to have the military means also to threaten its Chinese rivals and control its East European satellites, the Russian state must invest proportionately twice as many resources in military production as the USA. Those resources have to be extracted from the Russian population, and that can only be achieved by ruthlessly subordinating every part of the economy to that central purpose. Only a highly centralised, rigidly stratified, bureaucratic state can direct the process.
But that very state, the modern Leviathan, is itself more and more of an impediment to the further development of Russian society’s productive forces. As the reform economists whom Moshe Lewin discusses so ably in this book have shown, over and over again, the Russian state is strangling Russian society. The arbitrariness of its edicts, its suppression of social initiative, the manifold ways in which it crushes idealism and diminishes responsibility, all combine to restrict the growth of productivity and foster irrationality. Modern Russia presents the world with the most complete proof of the bankruptcy of ‘state socialism’ as a road to social development.
The reform economists argued that if the irrationalities of the Russian economy were to be overcome, the bureaucratic state apparatus must be dismantled. In place of the detailed system of commands from the centre, enterprises and farms must be given much greater autonomy. The ‘plan’ must be, not the master of society, but its servant All sectors of Russian society, managers, .industrial and agricultural workers, intellectuals, must be given much greater freedom to make decisions, to discuss and formulate strategies for development, must be given proper incentives to raise productivity. ‘Reform’ in the economy must mean ‘reform’ in politics too: above all, ‘reform’ demands democratisation.
Inevitably, the reformers made criticisms and raised demands that threatened the interests of the existing power-holders. But they did not only threaten the top bureaucrats’ individual positions; they also threatened the very purpose for which Russia’s rulers use their power, namely accumulation of capital for the purposes of international competition.
For what, ultimately, determines the distribution of economic resources in Russia, and the system of command that enforces that distribution is not the arbitrary will of the planners. Their decisions are shaped, above all, by the dreadful logic of world imperialism. Every move by their rivals in the world must be matched, and matched rapidly. The Americans have ‘MIRVed’ their missiles: so must the Russians, whatever the cost. Submarine launcher must be matched to submarine launcher, radar system to radar system, payload to payload, megadeath potential to megadeath potential. Survival as a ‘great power’ in a great power system demands an ability to destroy half the globe in ten minutes, and under the conditions of modern military technology possession and maintenance of that ability is unbelievably costly.
The costs are borne by the Russian people (and the peoples of the satellites). The existing ‘command economy’ is the only available means by which the people can be made to carry those costs. And the reformers threaten that system of priorities. Their criticisms reached into the internal life of the ruling party, into the state, into the alienation of the working class. If their criticisms were met, if their ‘reforms’ were carried through, the ability of the state to enforce its present priorities on Russian society would be destroyed. The democratisation of political and economic life, a democratisation absolutely required by any serious programme for economic reform, would permit the Russian working class to decide that butter is preferable to ICBMs, houses to steel mills.
In addition, while the reformers’ proposals for change were addressed to the existing ruling class, they threatened in practice to let loose the furies of social revolution. Experience in Eastern Europe showed that all too well: once the reform process develops any degree of momentum, its implicit demands for political democratisation are liable to be seized on by the working classes – and their criticisms and demands rapidly go much further than the original proponents of ‘reform’ ever intended.
In practice, therefore, the ‘reform’ road is closed: the existing bureaucracy resists reform, and the reformers fear its implications. So the endemic stagnation is not overcome, and the crisis deepens. Moshe Lewin’s book documents the reformers’ critiques of Russian economic realities, and the conclusions they drew about the contradictions of Russian state capitalism. He shows how, inexorably, the reform economists of the 1960s were drawn into reviewing the debates in the 1920s that preceded and accompanied Stalin’s forced industrialisation. Above all, the Russian reformers looked back to Bukharin and the criticisms he and his comrades offered at the time of the first Five Year Plan, criticisms that turned out to be very prescient. The pursuit of ‘super-tempos’ of growth, Bukharin argued, must involve over-centralisation, increasing irrationality, increased use of coercion to force the surpluses needed for ‘too rapid’ development out of the population, must involve smashing the remnants of soviet and inner-party democracy.
At the descriptive level, Lewin’s book is exceptionally fine. Anyone with any lingering doubts about Stalinist industrialisation should read it. Anyone looking for reasons why Marxist tradition began with a critique of the state, why the smashing of the state remains a fundamental part of any Marxist programme, should read it. Anyone who still thinks that ‘bigness’ has some automatic socialist virtue should read it. But, while Lewin’s book deserves a large readership, it also deserves a critical readership. There are significant gaps in his account.
Crucially, Lewin says almost nothing about the place of Russia in the world economy. His admiration for Bukharin as a critic of Stalinism is excessive, and unbalanced: the Bukharin who wrote Imperialism and World Economy in 1915 constructed a magnificent picture of the drives to state capitalism within the imperialist world economy. In the 1920s, however, Bukharin ‘forgot’ what he had earlier demonstrated: that developments in any one country depended massively on that country’s place in the international capitalist market. He became, for a crucial period in Russian development, Stalin’s hack theorist, defending the absurd conception of ‘socialism in one country’, assisting in the crushing of inner-party democracy and, hence, retarding and preventing the development of the world revolutionary movement. Lewin presents these questions as if they were secondary, ‘ideological’ issues, focussing only on the formal merits of Bukharin’s defence of the New Economic Policy (NEP) of the1920s. The NEP has been a source of inspiration to the Russian ‘reform’ economists of the 1960s, and understandably so: the pace of economic development under NEP was more rational, the degree of substantive and intellectual freedom altogether greater, than under Stalin and his heirs. Nonetheless – a point Lewin does not mention – the NEP ran into increasing difficulties itself.
Bukharin’s proposals in the 1920s, in the debate with the Left Opposition, for ‘socialism at a snail’s pace’, for balanced rather than forced growth, for reliance on market forces especially amongst the peasantry, was formally correct, given only one missing factor: world revolution. In isolated, backward Russia, however, Bukharin’s plan for Russian development would have led, as his critics pointed out, to peasant-based counter-revolution. ‘Balanced’ rates of industrial growth could not satisfy the demand from the peasants for consumer goods, must provoke inflation, must produce increasing discontent in the countryside. Russian economic development could only be ‘balanced’ if significant resources, in consumer and capital goods, could come in from outside, as a result of socialist revolution in the advanced capitalist countries. In reality, Bukharin’s ‘socialism in one country’ and Bukharin’s economic policies were at complete variance. The merit of the Left Opposition – or at least of the best of its theorists – lay not so much in their emphasis on the need for more rapid industrialisation as in their insistence on revolutionary working-class internationalism. For the economic programme of the Left Opposition, if applied to an isolated and backward Russia alone, would – by different mechanisms – have produced the same results as Bukharin’s policies.
More rapid industrialisation would, in the short run, only exacerbate peasant discontent, since the prime source of the needed surpluses for industrialisation must be the peasantry, as Preobrazhensky (a leading ‘Left’ economist) made very clear. Only if the needed capital inputs came from revolutionary support abroad could the domestic economic programmes of either the ‘Right’ or the ‘Left’ be realised. ‘Socialism in one country’ was not a separate, ‘ideological’ issue, even if some of the ‘Left’ like Preobrazhensky (cited, p.34) thought so. Nor was the debate about economic policy in the 1920s merely a technical debate: at issue was the central question, which class is to rule? The merit of the Left again lay in that they forcefully criticised the bureaucratic degeneration of party and state (as did Bukharin, though even more too late) and argued for a revival of working-class organs of government. Moshe Lewintreats the debate as if it were no more than an acrimonious academic argument, capable of being resolved through mutual understanding:
‘... the quarrel with Bukharin could have been settled at a bargaining table at which practical policies might be formulated. If only matters of grand theory had been left to be settled by further study ...’ (pp.35-6).
And if Lewin does not seem, in this book at least, to offer a satisfactory history of the NEP period, the same judgment must also be offered of his whole book. There is no account of the central dynamic of the Stalinist economy, hence no sense of the interests that the bureaucracy seeks to defend. Thus, the essential failure to date of the ‘reform’ movement also remains unexplained, and-as a consequence – there is no discussion of the alternatives to the ‘reform’ programme.
It is not that any aspect of the ‘reform’ programme per se is formally incorrect: the state must be subordinated to society; equal rights must be won for the agriculturalists; industry and agriculture must have a considerable degree of autonomy; democratisation and the realisation of the co-operative principle are needed; political parties must be just that, not police and state organisations; the bureaucracy must be dismantled. But who is to do these things? The reformers have offered substantial and powerful critiques of the realities of Russian state capitalism, but (at least as they are presented here) they have failed to identify the organising principle of the society they criticise, and they have failed to identify the agent of change. Typically, as with the open letter of Sakharov, Turchin and Medvedey, they have addressed themselves to the party leadership. It is as if a radical critic of British industry were to set out to persuade the heads of the CBI that capitalism must be abolished, and by them. Sakharov and his colleagues warned the party leadership that if they did not reform Russia, there was a danger from ‘demagogues of the fascist type’ on the Right, and from an unidentified extreme Left. That unidentified extreme Left does not otherwise appear in this book – it is presumably a Left that has no hesitations about calling for the overthrow of the existing system by the working class. Far from being a ‘danger’, that unidentified extreme Left – however difficult the circumstances in which it develops and propounds its idea – is the only hope for realistic ‘reform’ in Russia.
There is an enormous amount of valuable material in this book. It is ultimately disappointing, however, because it restricts itself to the reformist Russian critics of Stalinism, and does not evaluate them realistically – i.e. from a revolutionary standpoint.
 



Penguin Books will be publishing several titles of especial interest to readers of IS over the next few months. Two volumes of Trotsky are announced: My Life: An attempt at an Autobiography (27 February) and The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (July). And in May they will be bringing out four books by Wilhelm Reich: Reich Speaks of Freud, Listen Little Man, The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality, and The Mass Psychology of Fascism. We hope to review these in future issues of the journal.
 



Intervention in the Mixed Economy
Stephen Young with A.V. Lowe
Croom Helm, £5.50
Whatever Happened to the Quiet Revolution?
J. Bruce-Gardyne, MP
Charles Knight, £3.50
Big Business and Government: The New Disorder
Neville Abraham
Macmillian, £8.00
IN ALL the advanced capitalist states, the relationship between state and business presents the ruling classes with growing organisation problems. In the state-capitalist countries of the eastern bloc, bureaucratic planning becomes an ever-more apparent brake on economic growth and international competitiveness. In the western bloc, increased nation-state planning is increasingly a sine qua non of growth and competitiveness. In both cases, relations between the various power-centres with the competing nation states become ever more critical.
The three books under review all focus, in different ways, on these problems as they manifest themselves in Britain. By far the most interesting is the volume by Young and Lowe. The heart of their work is two extended essays, on the last Labour Government’s Industrial Reorganisation Corporation (IRC), and on the forced conversion ofthe Heath government to ‘state intervention’. The IRC experience remains of considerable interest, since the present government is proposing effectively to repeat and extend the ‘experiment’ with its National Enterprise Board. The IRC was a state-funded merchant bank, whose operations were (fairly typically) conducted without any serious reference to Parliament, and which was charged with ‘re-structuring’ sections of British industry to make them more competitive in world markets. Its ‘achievements’ include the sponsoring of the GEC-EE-AEI merger, which produced the largest private employer in Britain, the creation of British Leyland, and a significant number of other, smaller merger operations. The IRC operated in almost total secrecy, to the extent that at its dissolution its files were destroyed by its departing executives. Backed up with state funds, to the tune of £150m, the IRC encouraged a massive rationalisation and centralisation of British capital, greatly extending the monopolistic character of domestic industry. Its rationale rested on the inability of domestic market forces to achieve a sufficiently rapid capital concentration to meet the challenges of international competition, and the possible loss of important domestic industrial sectors (as ball-bearings) to foreign multinational control.
If the creation, and the work, of the IRC was a typical manifestation of contemporary state-monopoly capitalism, the industrial policies proposed and pursued by the Heath government in the first year or so after the 1970 election were an anomaly. A.V. Lowe, in her chapters in the ‘disengagement’ experiment under Heath’s leadership, shows how inescapable a high level of state ‘intervention’ in ‘private’ industry proved to be in an increasingly crisis-ridden world capitalism. Reliance on the forces of the domestic market, an anti-interventionalist policy under the administration of John Davies (former head of the CBI), proved to be an impossible stance to maintain. In 1971, the IRC was formally wound up, the Industrial Expansion Act was repealed, the Shipbuilding Industry Board abolished, and other administrative measures carried through as part of the government’s ‘disengagement from industrial intervention. Within a year this policy was in ruins: a new package of support measures for industry was rushed through, an Industrial Development Unit and Advisory Board were set up, new regional aids were announced by the Tory Minister, Chataway as ‘the biggest package of help the regions have ever had. The crucial background to the turn-round in government policy was, of course, provided by the crises at Rolls-Royce and UCS. To allow these simply to go to the wall was – except for a few dedicated Tory monetary backwoodsmen – unthinkable. The rising pressures of ‘stagflation’ forced the Heath government, not just to stop their proposed cuts in state spending, but in fact to expand the role of the state like any social-democratic government.
J. Bruce-Gardyne is a Tory MP, who has subtitled the book – on the collapse of Heath’s policies – ‘The story of a brave experiment in government’. As an explanation of the turn-round in policy, it is a failure: the author is too concerned to salvage the reputation of his party’s last government to see the wood from the trees. But it does contain some fascinating titbits. Among those pressing the government to save UCS was, apparently, the Chief Constable of Glasgow, who warned that if the money wasn’t put up to save the yards he would need an extra 15,000 police! The author thinks there may have been a little ‘emotionalisation’ in this, but also says it was just ‘too much’ for Whitehall. There’s a moral there, and an indication of why, to date, employers have been remarkably willing to discuss short-term working and other methods of avoiding direct confrontations with the workers.
Neville Abraham has tried to come to terms with the inevitability of state intervention from his vantage point as a lecturer at the Manchester Business School, the Cranfield School of Management, his business consultancy work and his former post as a principal at the DTI. Abraham suggests that government and business have yet to learn to come to terms with their new relationships, and looks for a ‘riew order’. Where he is at his best is in suggesting the ruling class’s contemporary dilemmas. His thinking is illustrative of the current confusion in both government and business circles about their own system, and their inability to find convincing solutions to their own economic, political and internal organisational problems. Loss of direction, confusion and uncertainty are very much part of the ideological atmosphere of establishment political economics currently, and this is reflected in Abraham’s book as much as in the editorial agonies of The Financial Times or the collapse of Heath’s ‘Selsdon man’ policies. Abraham himself wants to overcome the confusions by withdrawing into a de-politicised ‘corporatist’ world in which ‘experts’ will be trained in government, industry and trade unionism by being shifted from responsible positions in civil service or industry into the ‘larger unions’, and from the unions into management, etc. He seems to have no conception that this is possible only under fascism (or Stalinism).
A ruling class which suffers the loss of sense of direction and ideological certainty currently characteristic is a ruling class in clear decay. It is also, of course, especially dangerous. Ruling classes whose purchase on reality is slipping, whose ideologists are so manifestly unable to provide convincing solutions to their problems, are apt to resort to the final argument they understand all too well: stick and cannon.
‘State intervention’, reformism’s current nostrum for the ills of stagflation, is a capitalist solution to capitalism’s ills. Its results, increased monopolisation and hence inflexibility, and increases in ‘money supply’, are methods which for each nation-state are attempts to buy time, while ensuring that the general, world set of relations that generates thes^ responses becomes less stable, more liable to blow. Like socialism in one country, state capitalism in one country too at best prolongs the agony. None of the books provides what is really needed: a political economy of contemporary world capitalism, a new version perhaps of Bukharin’s Imperialism and World Economy. But any Marxist setting out to perform the needed theoretical work will find Young and Lowe’s study of value.
 



Lenin’s Last Struggle
Moshe Lewin
Pluto Press, 90p
PLUTO PRESS have performed a small service to the Marxist movement in publishing this paperback edition of Moshe Lewin’s fine study of Lenin’s last year of active political engagement.
Drawing on material that has only relatively recently become available in Russia, Lewin documents the way in which Lenin, desperately ill, sometimes able to engage in political activity for no more than a few minutes a day, turned all his energies towards combating the processes of degeneration of the Russian Revolution.
Isolated by the defeats of the workers’ revolutionary movements in Western Europe, the Russian revolutionary government found itself more and more operating in a void. Under the combined pressure of its own isolation, of the economic and cultural backwardness of Russian society, and of the dreadful strain of the civil war, the working class that made the October Revolution was dissipated, demoralised, fragmented. Into the void, created by the withering away of the working class as a political force, the Bolshevik government had, perforce, to step. For a Marxist the situation was agonisingly difficult: somehow the revolutionary fort must be held, while help from the working class abroad was mobilised. After the defeat of the early hopes of immediate spreading of the revolution, as the wave of workers’ movements in Europe receded from 1919, the situation became even more serious.
In the circumstances of a precarious, narrowly-based dictatorship in Russia, the dying Lenin tried to grapple with the new problems, problems for whose solution there was no precedents, no guidelines in the work of earlier revolutionaries. Lenin never succeeded, as Lewin shows, in fully theorising the new situation. In particular, he came to no theoretical conclusions as to the character and origins of the new, and ever more dangerous, state bureaucracy in Russia. But, characteristically, he devoted his main political energies to fighting the phenomenon.
Central to the problem, as it presented itself to Lenin, was the ‘Georgian affair’. Stalin, and his henchmen Ordzhonikidze, Molotov and others, were intent on pushing ahead with the centralisation of Russian government, in the process over-riding the national susceptibilities of the Georgian communists, bullying and threatening to win their way. Lenin at first did not comprehend fully what was going on, but when he did he threw himself into activity on behalf of the rights of the Georgians – putting into effect the principals he had enunciated on the national question during the war. The course of the dispute, which Lenin followed from his sick-bed with feverish interest, in which he intervened with memoranda, demands for information, attempts to create a faction against Stalin, exposed to his eyes with shocking clarity the extent to which the Russian revolution had progressed in its degeneration. His proposals, when the situation was clear, were characteristically blunt: Stalin must be sacked, ‘Great Russian chauvinism’ mercilessly attacked, the entire state administration reformed.
In the event, those (like Trotsky) whom Lenin sought to win as allies in his struggle against his own party bureaucracy prevaricated. Stalin, whom Lenin had correctly seen as personally embodying the central dangers to the revolution, remained in office, and presided over the extermination of every element of the spirit of the 1917 revolution, using the body and name of Lenin as an obscene symbol of his policies.
Two criticisms of the book seem in order. The first relates to the translation, whose pedestrian air does not serve Moshe Lewin at all well. The second is more substantive: Lewin pays no attention to the international aspect of the problems he so ably discusses. The creation of the Third International was a necessary and vital part of the October revolution. Its failure is, after all, the key to the defeat of the revolution, and Lewin does not mention it. In his sensitive final chapter, he asks what might have happened had Lenin lived, arguing (correctly, I’m sure) that Lenin would have resisted many of the ‘excesses’ of the Stalinist regime. It is also, however, certain that Lenin would have campaigned fiercely against the nonsense of ‘socialism in one country’, and very likely would have turned his energies (who knows – perhaps to good effect) to giving theoretical and practical assistance to the German Communist Party in the revolutionary possibilities of 1923. In this perspective, history might indeed have been very much different had Lenin not died when he did.
Nonetheless, this is a book to be read and treasured.
 



The more affluent readers of IS should, to stay affluent, take serious note of a new ‘offer’ from Pluto Press.
They are setting up a ‘Reader’s Link’, whose terms are simple in the extreme: pay Pluto £100 now, and get £200 worth of books in return. Selections may be made from existing books, from the future list, or both. Subscribers can take everything Pluto publishes, or any selection they like.
Given the quality of Pluto’s present and future list, there is no doubt that – for those with a mere £100 to spare! – this is the best book-club offer ever. Interested readers can get fun details from Pluto Press.
 



Capitalism and Material Life 1400-1800
Fernand Braudel
Fontana, £1.75.
HERE’S A real rag-bag of a book. It’s completely mis-titled, for apart from a chapter on the forms that money took it has nothing to say at all about capitalism, or its emergence.
Indeed, calling this a book is almost a misnomer. What Braudel has given us is a collection of fascinating information, about the material aspects of life in Europe and elsewhere in the world in the years 1400 to 1800. The material – on population, food, housing, clothing, towns, and so forth – is ‘organised’ to the extent that each topic is dealt with in turn, as in an encyclopaedia. The social and economic and political relationships between men hardly appear at all. What does appear is a marvellous catalogue of the brute facts of material existence in various parts of the world at various times.
To make sense of the book, to use it, the reader will have to supply his own interpretations. Anyone interested in the period will get a good deal from Braudel’s work, in terms of raw, unsystematic data. You can learn about the terrifyingly low crop yields in Hungary (three ears of grain for every one sown), about the curious evolution of money, about the housing conditions in European cities, about the way the rice-harvest was gathered in China, about the disastrous effects on the population of Latin America of the Europeans’ importation of diseases.
The only unifying theme is the one that presumably made Braudel, mistakenly, give this collection its title: rich people lived better than poor everywhere. No one will be much surprised by that. But the interested reader can dip into this magpie collection and extract much of value from it.
 



WE’VE HAD plenty of occasion to call attention to interesting publications from Penguin Books Ltd. Their books have probably received more review space than any other publishers. It’s therefore especially appropriate that we express our solidarity with the trade unionists currently fighting 40 redundancies proposed by this company. Penguin are now owned by Longman-Pearsons, whose chairman, Lord Cowdray has a personal fortune estimated at the end of the 1960s at around £100 million. Readers who feel that a little of Lord Cowdray’s money could be well spent saving jobs should send messages of support to Bert Williams, ASTMS Group Chairman, Penguin Books, Bath Road, Harmondsworth, Middlesex.
Pluto Press have a number of special offers which should prove to be of interest to IS readers. Their next four titles are all available at special pre-publication prices provided orders accompanied by cash reach them by the end of the stated month. April sees the publication of Moshe Lewin’s latest book, Political Undercurrents in Soviet Economic Debates (£3.95, special price £3.00) which will be a highly-prized item for anyone who has read any of his other books, most notably the fine Lenin’s Last Struggle (now in Pluto paperback at 90p). Also in April, a reprint of Carter Goodrich’s The Frontier of Control, the 1920 study of workshop politics in Britain (£2.95, £2.00 to those who have the readies in quickly).
In May come two books on the period of the Italian factory occupations: Paolo Spriano’s The Occupation of the Factories (£2.00 special offer £1.50) and Gwyn Williams’ Proletarian Order, Gramsci and the factory councils (£2.70 special price £2.00).
Methuen Playscripts have just brought put an up-dated edition of Alan Plater’s Close the Coalhouse Door, with songs by Alex Glasgow (75p). Those who know the old version will enjoy the new scene and song on the 1972 miners’ strike, with Ted at the helm. Glasgow fans will appreciate the music at the end.
We don’t often give puffs to rivals, but the last but one New Left Review 87-88 (double issue, 90p) has a first rate article by Jon Halliday, Hong Kong: Britain’s Chinese Colony. As Halliday says, the revolutionary left in Britain has largely ignored Hong Kong. The article proves we were wrong.
Basil Bernstein buffs might note a socialist magazine concerned. with language: Language and Class Workshop, 20p from Harold Rosen, 41a Muswell Avenue, London N10 2EH.
Teachers should read the latest ‘Rank and File’ pamphlet, Teachers’ Salaries: The Fight for a Single Scale, 20p plus postage from 86 Mountgrove Road, London N5. More than a discussion of wages, it’s about what a white-collar union ought to be.
 



FOR IS readers who have not yet read it, Eamonh McCann’s War in an Irish Town (Penguin 40p) is still available – but only just, stocks are low. This is by far the best yet on the six counties.

Note by ETOL
This piece is not signed, but as the Reviews Editor was Colin Barker and he signed other such pieces in previous and subsequent issues, it has been attributed to him.
 



The Contemporary Marx
Mihailo Markovic
Spokesman Books, £4.00.
AT the end of January 1975, the author of this work, together with seven other philosophy teachers, was suspended from his post at Belgrade University’s Philosophy Department by the Serbian parliament This book must be judged in the light of that fact
‘... private property,’ writes Markovic, ‘is not the cause but the effect of alienated labour. Abolition of the private ownership of the means of production is only abolition of one possible specific form of the rule of dead labour over living labour. The general structure remains if there is any other social group such as, for example, bureaucracy, which retains a monopoly of decision-making concerning the disposal of accumulated and objectified labour. Therefore, only such criticism might be considered radical and truly revolutionary which puts a definitive end to exploitation and which aims at creating conditions in which associated producers themselves will dispose of the products of their labour.’
That ‘radical and truly revolutionary criticism’ is what Markovic and his colleagues (including Svetozar Stojanovic, whose Between Ideals and Reality was reviewed in IS 67) have consistently attempted to develop. Their work, through the journal Praxis, has for more than a decade been a sustained effort to live by Marx’s famous injunction – ‘The philosophers hitherto have merely interpreted the world in different ways; the point is to change it.’
The world they have sought to change has been, above all, the world of Stalinism, in its peculiar Yugoslav form. They have argued for the right of workers to form different socialist parties, for the fullest right of criticism within the Communist Party, above all for the extension of workers’ control from the factory to the state. This last demand, in Yugoslavia, is revolutionary: it means the smashing of the existing state, the destruction of the ‘bureaucracy, which retains a monopoly of decision-making ...’
The majority of their published work has been devoted to relatively abstract, philosophical questions. But those questions have always been directly related to the urgent political and economic questions facing the working class.
The fact that the Yugoslav ruling class has chosen, after a long battle, to use methods of exceptionally dubious legality (even in the Yugoslav context) to suppress these eight philosophers’ voices, to prevent them from teaching, is witness to the crisis in Yugoslav state capitalism. It is witness to the fact that Marxist criticism cannot be borne, at any price, by the ruling bureaucracy. Those who fear Marxist philosophy fear what it represents, the workers they exploit.
Socialists everywhere should add their voices to those who have already protested to the Yugoslav government at the suppression of a group of important, independently minded revolutionary thinkers. And they should read Markovic’s book for its clarity, its single-minded devotion to the cause of the working class, its relevance.
 



Colin Barker writes (27 July): To date the Prices and Incomes Board has published 18 separate reports on a variety of industries and problems, and its functions and thinking are now remarkably clear. Essentially the Board is an instrument for change in the longer term, as the opening paragraphs of the first report (Road Haulage Charges) assert: the Board’s job is to examine and deal with, not immediate problems connected with the balance of payments, etc, but ‘old habits, inherited attitudes, and institutional arrangements.’
The Board’s central function is that of asserting the longer-term interests of British capital as a whole, both against the short-term interests of sections of the capitalist class, where they conflict, and (especially) against all working-class interests. These long-term capitalist interests require alterations in and strengthening of certain ruling-class institutions and the weakening of working-class institutions.
Efficiency of British capital as a whole in world markets is the central goal and criterion; efficient competition requires, in the price- and wage-fixing areas, a slowing down of the rate of inflation and a faster rise in productivity. From the initial total acceptance of capitalist values the various judgements follow with sharp logic; within a framework of irrational market assumptions, Aubrey Jones’ boys are supremely rational. In the present economic context, a central Governmental problem remains the failure of managements in both the ‘private’ and ‘public’ sectors to discipline their workers sufficiently. Disciplining managers to discipline their workers is thus a necessary task for the Board, given the absence of market forces tending in this direction (until we join the EEC). Current arrangements permit employers to pass on cost increases rather than attack their workers; and customers, often similarly placed, accept price rises and pass them on again; thus the inflationary spiral is maintained. One function of the Board, therefore, is to urge customers to resist price increases, as in road haulage (I; XIV) and printing (II). Where more effective Governmental control is possible, this is recommended, or threatened. Thus ‘financial discipline’ over the managements of nationalised industries must be tightened – gas and electricity (VII, 23), railways (VIII, 46-58), coal (XII, 58-62) – ‘to prevent slackness in management.’ In the absence of market pressures that would force managements on to the attack, the Government must set private industry a firm example – industrial civil service (XVIII, 23, 32, 51). True, pressure for greater ‘managerial initiative’ in nationalised industries conflicts with the parliamentary accountability of these industries, but in such a conflict the demands of bureaucratic capitalist efficiency must win over the vestiges of parliamentary democracy (XVIII, 44). Where direct Governmental control over managements is not practicable, veiled threats are possible: thus the monopolistic brewers are warned that the Government might assist competition a little (?) if ‘the pace of change’ in brewing is not hotted up (XIII, 43) or might refer them to the PIB again (XIII, 48). In other industries, however, there is too much competition, and current legislation on restrictive practices requires reconsideration: bakers should get together more to reduce the varieties of bread (III, 39) and there is a suggestion that more exchange of information between the two detergent firms might enable them to reduce advertising costs of £9½ millions a year (IV, 46, 57).
Generally further concentration of capital is highly desirable – though, needless to say, no mention is made of nationalisation. Standardisation of products, with attendant improvements in efficiency and cheapness, should follow: breads (III, 39, 44-46) and beers (XIII, 37) should be standardised, and inter-company agreements encouraged; gas and electricity capital purchasing is to be centralised and limited to a few contractors only (VII, 73). The processes of concentration in road haulage and baking are regrettably slow.
The Board’s main fire, however, is directed at the institutions of wage bargaining. In particular, the principle of comparability comes under attack – in the reports on electricity supply clerks (V), bank employees (VI, 13), railway staff (VIII, 20-21), bakers (IX, 10), Scottish teachers (XV, 38-40), busmen (XVI), and industrial civil servants (XVIII, 5-17). In general, it has been true in Britain that wage movements have depended to a considerable extent on comparisons made by groups of workers with other workers, and the Board is concerned to break down this institutionalised working-class means of maintaining a rough form of equity. While the electricity supply clerks were permitted to benefit (to the tune of an eight per cent rise) from their ‘sense of disturbance’ at a productivity award to manual workers in the industry, an award that upset traditional notions about differentials, later groups have been forced to go disturbed and unpaid.
In particular, the process of comparison is attacked because it does take account of variations in workers’ contributions to productivity (e.g. XVIII, 25). Anything hindering the ‘more efficient utilisation of labour’ is to be deplored, from shop-floor controls and working rules (printing and baking) to the refusal by road haulage workers to work schedules based on driving speeds of 40 mph. All the partial controls that workers have established over their conditions of work are henceforth to be sacrificed (with or without ‘compensation’) on the altar of higher productivity. Trade-union leaders are prepared to accept this, but workers unfortunately won’t – so the unions must take steps to control their workers (VII, 77-78). No wage rises are to be granted on the simple expectation of continuing inflation, which means the end of cost-of-living bonuses (II, 55; VI, 28). Overtime must be cut, because it leads to ‘slackness’ and ‘inefficiency’ (I; III), and shift-working and the seven-day week are to be encouraged. Uniform wage rises for all workers in an industry are under attack; workers must pay for all their wage rises by working harder (VIII, 74). At the same time firms must seek to raise their profit rates to encourage investment (IX, 25). Labour shortages must be solved, not by paying higher wages, but by getting the existing labour-forces to labour harder and to abandon existing rules and practices (XVI, 18-31; etc). Managements must institute new methods of control, to keep tabs on their workers – like tachographs on long-distance lorries (I, 44; XIV, 35). In short, workers must be placed unreservedly at the service of capital, with no thought of their enlarging their share of the cake.
At the same time, there are no guarantees that any of this will lead to a higher standard of living, or that it will stop inflation. A whole host of capitalist assumptions continue, hardly mentioned: resources will continue to be wasted on defence (X, 4) and the armed forces are not discouraged from their aim of recruiting one in five of the young men in the age-group 15-19 who are not disqualified or ‘lost to higher education.’ Advertising costs may be a little high, but the principle is not attacked – despite the fact that just two firms with stable shares of the market spend £8 millions a year advertising the same product (in different packets) on television. Road haulage and bus managements are to solve their problems, as always, off the workers’ backs, and not as a result of any radical reconstruction of the transport and delivery system. Railway workers must bear their sacrifices to the altar of free enterprise road haulage. If anything differentials are to be widened (eg VI, 47); certainly there’s none of that flannel about paying lower-paid workers more (VIII; XVI) or narrowing differentials (XV). In an unplanned world market, where prices of imports cannot be controlled (III, 6; IV, 20), workers are to accept planning directed against themselves. No account is taken, in discussing the financial difficulties of the nationalised industries, of the burden of compensation to former shareholders who’ve been pulling in the cash for up to 20 years. No comment is offered on the practice of differential pricing of the products of the nationalised industries, a practice that throws additional burdens on the worker-consumer and gives a sub to the ‘industrial’ consumer. The PIB can cheerily note the ‘increased productivity’ of the armed services on their ‘overseas commitments’ – a phrase that should bring joy to the hearts of workers in Aden, Malaysia, Guyana ...
The TUC rejected the Tories’ National Incomes Commission of 1962. Labour’s Prices and Incomes Board has far sharper teeth, but the TUC sees only the toothpaste. (Frank Cousins refused to give evidence for the busmen’s report (XVI) but the T&G bakers were not so well served, as the Board gratefully notes (XVIII, 8).) The Government is arming itself rapidly; rank-and-file trade unionists should be looking to their slings.



Marxist discussions of trade unionism are notoriously thin on the ground, and V.L. Allen’s latest book [1] is therefore especially welcome. Subtitled A Re-Analysis of Industrial Action in an Inflationary Situation, the book is an examination of the nature and purposes of trade unionism in capitalist society, particularly in relation to current controversies over ‘incomes policy.’ It is a serious and constantly provoking work, and deserves a wide readership.
The bones of Allen’s argument are that in a capitalist society, defined in terms of private ownership of the means of production and a free market in labour, trade unionism can only be understood as a natural organisational response by employees to a basically unequal market relationship between the buyers and sellers of labour power. This is evidenced in the continuing spread of trade unionism to ‘white collar’ sections of the working class.
The degree of ‘militancy’ displayed, its forms and purposes, are a function of, firstly, primary economic determinants (state of labour market, fortunes of particular industries, etc) and, secondly, secondary ‘socialising influences’ (here this reviewer would have liked a more extended discussion of ideology): in other words, the objective situations facing groups of workers, and their own interpretations of and activities in these situations. In the British context, Allen points to the powerful and continuing belief in Parliamentary democracy, the over-emphasis on the sanctity of centralised bargaining and the rustiness of national trade-union organisations as the prime factors tending to depress militancy and contain it within ‘responsible’ limits. These ‘responsible’ limits are defined by the ruling class and particularly by its emphasis on the maintenance of the pound sterling. Defence of the pound and the ‘national interest’ are, he suggests, in practice treated as synonymous. Continual pressures on sterling have time and again led Governments to turn their attentions to weakening trade unionism. This approach has rested on an analysis of British economic problems that stressed trade-union responsibility for recurrent crises. There is a clear continuity between the earlier, purely monetary, responses to crisis and the ‘prices and incomes policy.’ The second part of the book examines the conventional framework, the ruling class ideology, within whose terms policy decisions are made, with respect to ‘industrial harmony’ and the causes of inflation in particular. This is the most interesting and valuable section of the book. Allen examines the conventional explanations of strikes (as due to ‘troublemakers’ and/or ‘bad communications’) and exposes their ideological core. He points to the structural basis of strike action, in the capitalist employer-employee relationship. At the centre of this relationship, he suggests, is a basic structural conflict over ‘distribution,’ a conflict between the unequal partners to the core relationship of capitalist society. ‘Class conflict is the norm in a capitalist society and must be a given factor in any analysis of industrial behaviour’ (p.114). The essentially bourgeois assumption of a ‘harmony of interests’ in industrial relations is fallacious. Ironically, all the means currently proposed for ensuring ‘harmony’ involve the use of sanctions of one sort or another against workers.
For the present reviewer, the most interesting chapter of Allen’s book is that dealing with incomes policy and inflation. He points out that the capitalist desire to maintain stable prices – in part a function of ‘equilibrium theory’ – is regularly imposed as a burden on the wage-earners:
‘The cost of Britain’s international banking reputation is borne internally, largely by wage-earners, for it is on these that the burden of achieving stable prices inevitably falls.’
But how great is union responsibility for inflation? The whole emphasis in orthodox economic theory is on the means by which the inflationary process is maintained, not on the causes of inflation. These are, however, structural features of modern monopolistic capitalism, not directly the product of the class struggle in the factories. Firstly, import prices are of crucial importance, yet they enter the system from outside. Secondly, the growing concentration of capital creates monopolistic organisations whose effects on price structure are commonly ignored. Thirdly, there is excess demand, generated not so much by the level of incomes relative to employment, production and investment (as in orthodox analysis) as by the volume of incomes. In other words, ‘additional incomes as well as additions to incomes’ must be examined in any attempt to account for inflation. Four types of inflationary employment of labour are relevant, all of them originating in the pressures created by contemporary capitalism.
First, there are incomes created through arms expenditure; second, labour hoarded in excess of productive requirements; third, excessive employment in selling and distribution, a product of the tendency to greater concentration and of the problems of marketing in an oligopolistic situation in which price-cutting is too dangerous; and, fourth, the enormous growth of administrative functions, far beyond the simple technical requirements of contemporary technology. Here, as in the discussion of industrial conflict, Allen points firmly to the structural bases of inflation. His analysis of the roots of inflation connects with the analyses by Cliff, Kidron and others of the ‘permanent arms economy.’ [2] Where they begin with the capital side, and seek to explain the absence of crisis and the permanence of full employment, Allen begins with wages and inflation, but arrives at the same conclusion:
‘The economically non-productive workers are absorbing a relatively high proportion of the products of industry and in this way their existence covers up the problem of excess production. If they were transferred to economically productive activities, aggregate output would increase, the prime pressure on prices would disappear and the real issue facing capitalism would be uncovered.’ (p.147)
In line with the whole analysis, Allen concludes that the correct policy for trade unionists begins with a recognition that no policy involving wage control can seriously diminish inflation, whose causes are structurally inherent in modern capitalism. Analysis and policy must rest on a class basis. In short, unions must pursue a ‘high wages’ policy, that accepts playing the market to its limits, accepts decentralised bargaining, and rejects conventional thinking about British capitalism’s economic problems.
Space does not permit a longer and probably more just account of Allen’s central argument. Essentially, his book is an attempt to set up a fruitful model in terms of which the situation and problems of unions in Britain may be analysed. The book is a fresh look, within a Marxist perspective, at some of the core institutions of capitalist Britain.
Of necessity, a large part of the book is relatively abstract in its approach; and my criticisms of it amount largely to a wish that the book were longer, so that Allen could have moved from the abstract to a closer, more historical account of present developments. In particular, an analysis of the trade-union movement since the war, and of the sources of opposition to existing policies and so on, would have been invaluable. For while the case for opposition to current TUC policy is excellently argued, the actual movement of opposition (potential and actual) is not assessed. This is a pity, since an examination of this kind might have further enriched and developed the general model Allen presents. Also, Allen’s advocacy of ‘militancy’ might have been made more specific. The urgent need is not simply for general advocacy of militancy, but for identification and encouragement of the likely militants, those whose present situations and activities seem to make them the most likely leading subjects of the class struggle.
In Allen’s model, the central area of conflict in the employment relationship is the conflict over distribution of the product. The lack of equity in distribution is seen as the prime root of class conflict. Yet, if we examine the (admittedly unsatisfactory) national strike statistics, one thing that stands out from them is the remarkable shift in issues over which strikes have taken place since the war. ‘Non-wage’ issues now seem to be more important than ‘wage’ issues. In other words, not only is there structural conflict over distribution, but at the point of production itself the employment relationship is inherently conflictual. This is the point at which, to use Marx’s terminology, labour power is transformed into labour in the process of production. As a number of recent studies (most notably, W. Baldamus’ Efficiency and Effort) have demonstrated, the ‘realisation’ of labour power is a process in which conflict is endemic. Thus the class struggle does not simply amount to struggle for a more equitable system of distribution, but centrally involves questions of control over the means of production and their use.
This of course has implications for the general analysis of capitalism as a productive system. Using Allen’s approach, capitalism can be limited rather narrowly to the specific variety seen in Britain and some other ‘Western’ States up to the present time. What is less certain is how well Allen’s approach can be used to analyse ‘labour unrest’ in the more or less wholly statified economies that have evolved in underdeveloped countries during the present century. A more general model of capitalist relationships might encompass more diverse phenomena.
This relates to a further, less central point, that Allen tends to underestimate the present Government’s incomes policy and its general tendency. The continuities between it and earlier Tory approaches to national economic problems are stressed, but the discontinuities are not, perhaps, sufficiently emphasised. The acceptance of ‘planning’ by the Tories, developed further under Wilson, represents a partially distinct attempt to handle Britain’s economic problems in a new way. The emergence of capitalist planning in the postwar period is of some importance to the general analysis of capitalism. Planning and capitalism cannot be posed simply as alternative modes of organising an industrial economy: the class basis of planning, its purpose, is the crucial factor. Historically, the varieties of capitalist planning have evolved as more systematic and conscious attacks on working-class organisations. The ideological blinkers have not greatly altered, but the weapons have. The ruling class, like the working class, learns from its mistakes, and under pressure re-grinds its weapons.
None of this, however, should be read as denigration of Allen’s book, which is an important contribution to the current debate on incomes policy. This reviewer would have liked a more concrete analysis of the present state of the labour movement that focussed not only on the union leaderships but on the working class as a whole. This is, of course, more easily said than done. Cliff and I offered what was admittedly a very crude account of what seemed to us to be the central features of the present situation. V.L. Allen raises further questions in relation to this discussion that we can only hope he will examine in his next book.
 
Footnotes
1. V.L. Allen, Militant Trade Unionism, Merlin, 1966, 21s (cloth), 12s 6d (paper), 175 pp.
2. See, for instance, T. Cliff, Perspectives on the Permanent War Economy in A Socialist Review, SR Publications, 1965; M. Kidron, Rejoinder to Left Reformism, IS 7; H. Magdoff, Problems of United States Capitalism, The Socialist Register 1965; J. Gillman, The Falling Rate of Profit, Dobson, 1958.



Industrial Relations in Engineering
A. Marsh
Pergamon, 30s
A Collection of Teaching Documents and Case Studies
A. Marsh
Pergamon, 15s
As a reference work, the first of these two volumes is a useful book to have on the shelf. But as an account of what goes on in the British engineering industry, it is not the book we’ve all been waiting for. ‘Industrial relations’ here is a formalised system of rules. No persons with contradictory purposes and views ever creep in, in anything but the most abstract way; none of the trade unionists here could ever have shouted ‘Pigface’ at Ray Gunter in Brighton – or if they had it would have had no relevance for this self-sealed universe. For the Oxford industrial relations school, sociology and social history might as well have never existed. But the book is invaluable as a dull but reliable account of the rules that everyone breaks. The more expensive volume is intended as a textbook for teaching ‘industrial relations’ to trade unionists; the cheaper one is a collection of ‘case studies’ etc. around which to organise class discussion. These classes must be tedious affairs, at least if the stewards who act as students for Marsh and his colleagues stay within the narrow frame of reference here proposed. Certainly no one could recognise himself in this distorting mirror: ‘industrial relations’ here is a parcelled puppet game, without sense or purpose, a set of unfilled roles operating paper constitutions.



Time and space permit only a brief reply to Paul Derrick’s objections, and a reply that centres on his fundamental difference with us. Derrick raises again controversies that were aired a few years ago in the discussion that followed publication of John Hughes and Ken Alexander’s Socialist Wages Plan (cf. A Socialist Review, 1965). Now, as then, the lynch pin of the argument is the question of the socialist attitude to working-class power. On this depends everything else.
Here Derrick seems confused. Our booklet does attempt to make an (admittedly brief and schematic) analysis of the condition of the contemporary British working-class movement. It stresses in particular the growing integration of the trade-union bureaucracies into the machinery of the capitalist planning State, the decline in trade-union democracy, the essential fragmentation and narrowness of vision of the movement today. On the positive side, it points to the way in which the disaggregation and decentralisation of the processes of reform (wages, conditions, welfare, etc.) tend to throw workers back on to their own resources, diminishing their reliance on an increasingly impotent centre. From this analysis (which Derrick does not challenge) follow our political conclusions: the central problem is that of strengthening the shop stewards’ organisation, broadening their politics and further increasing their self-reliance. The booklet proposes a political ‘programme’ which, we believe, rests upon the actual tendencies of the movement today. The importance of Incomes Policy for the working-class movement lies in die general nature of the threat to the movement, from a united Government and capitalist class; here, in defence of the currently fragmented institutions of the movement, a point of general unity, a basis for overcoming fragmentation, can be found.
But Paul Derrick does not relate his proposals to the present condition of the movement. He is thus, of necessity, utopian. Our position rests upon the belief that only the working class can overthrow capitalism, that there is no substitute for the self-activity of the working class as an agent of change, and that all socialist politics begin with this assertion. It is because this necessarily revolutionary assertion is not at the heart of reformism that we oppose mere reformism. Given this assertion, that only the workers can emancipate themselves, through struggle, remaking themselves and history in the one process, it follows that all socialist politics necessarily begin with analysis of the actual condition of the movement, and with the attempt to develop tendencies actually present in the movement.
Parliament is an institution of capitalist society that is in decline. Capitalist planning of the type that is developing in Western Europe is fundamentally bureaucratic; it does not need Parliament. The executive increases its power at the expense of the legislative. Yet Derrick would – against these actual tendencies – have us make demands that centre on a declining Parliament: ‘... the really urgent need is for the workers to educate the Government into understanding that restraint in wage claims is bound to reduce the workers’ share of the earnings of industry.’ But which workers? Organised how? Does Derrick really think the Government doesn’t know? The whole point of the Incomes Policy, we argued, is that it is intended to achieve just this reduction of the workers’ share of the cake.
Derrick complains that we haven’t stated clearly how the workers should use their ‘power’, what they should fight for. He asks if we are in favour of supporting every strike in order to ‘create a General Strike in which the workers will occupy the factories.’ To this the answer must be that if the working class were in such a revolutionary ferment that they might even conceivably occupy the factories, we should call for and support such a General Strike. But it isn’t, and not being utopian socialists we make no such proposals. Our proposals are that workers should further strengthen such power as they have now, in a non-revolutionary situation, by extending and developing their most democratic and militant organisations, the shop stewards’, committees. This proposal, we think, is realistic, in today’s circumstances, and provides the most effective response to Incomes Policy.
Broad political demands are, generally, unrealistic, since the ‘power’ of the workers (their consciousness and organisation today) is not such that demands, like those Derrick proposes match the movement as it is now. Derrick proposes supporting TUC’s 1964 demand for controls over all incomes; he admits that it cannot be achieved, ‘... but that is no reason for not putting, forward the demand.’ We disagree: it is every reason. To make unrealistic demands is to further false consciousness and to foster dream-politics. Thus Derrick: ‘If the Government cannot meet the demand while industry is run on a capitalist basis they will obviously have to change the basis of industrial ownership. And about time too.’ Marvellous! And who will, make the Government do this? The working class, presumably. But, we argued, the working class today ... And back we go to square one.
And so on and so on, with Derrick moving continually back and forth, from reality to illusion. Wholesale nationalisation isn’t a realistic demand at present, says Derrick – it would lose Labour the next election. So, his, answer is that ‘Socialists and trade unionists should demand that company law should be changed so that companies are placed under the effective control of the workers who work for them.’ This, presumably, wouldn’t affect the next election result?
In the end, Derrick’s view of British society is one in which the Government is unfortunately ignorant of what it is doing, while the workers, ‘in a very strong position,’ can help ‘educate the Government in the “law of the situation” in which it finds itself.’ Derrick’s total failure to comprehend the actual relations of class forces in contemporary capitalist society, the actual levels of workers’ organisation and consciousness, leads him into cloud-cuckoo land. No one pretends that things are going to be easy for socialists in the coming period, but a touch of realism will help.



The First New Nation
Seymour Martin Lipset
Heinemann, 35s
Professor Lipset offers us The United States in Historical and Comparative Perspective. He is, one feels, proud to be an American, but, as a prominent member of an international community of scholars, he mustn’t be too proud. He must be proud but responsibly worried. That way he has his cake and eats it.
Lipset reveals his wide reading, and also its partiality. At times he is very interesting: his emphasis on the role of ‘state capital’ and of foreign investment in the creation of the 19th century capitalist infrastructure is rewarding; and his analysis of the (relatively unchanging) support of Americans for ‘religion’ is full of interest. But on the society as a whole he is miles off target.
His missed aim is a function of his basic approach. Lipset takes over from Talcott Parsons and the whole ‘normative functionalist’ school of sociology the notion of ‘a social system in dynamic equilibrium’: ‘a complex society is under constant pressure to adjust its institutions to its central value system, in order to alleviate strains created by changes in social relations’ (p.7). And, although it is never so crudely stated, his basic thesis is that there is something called a ‘central value system,’ born at the time of the 18th century revolution, that has been a prime mover in America ever since. Somehow this is autonomous, a shaper of American lives in its own right. Values, in this analysis, are separated from men’s actions, and the movement of history becomes obfuscated by terms whose empirical reference changes all the time: Big Words like ‘freedom,’ ‘democracy,’ ‘other direction,’ adorn Lipset’s pages. In his American history men do not struggle with men as much as values – ‘equality’ vs. ‘achievement’ – threaten each other. Lipset rejects, as he is entitled to do, a crude materialism that, at its crudest, sees poems as the products of power stations. But what he puts in its place is an equally crude idealism, contemporary ‘functionalism,’ that claims (most unfairly to poor Max’s memory) to derive its inspiration from Weber.
The ‘sociological emphasis on key values in a social system’ obscures more than it reveals: values are treated as external to men, generalised ideas whose content and power have remained unchanged over 200 years, rather than being seen as men’s structured purposes, changing over time in both form and content, and differentially shared by different groups that attempt to deal with the problems presented to them by other men’s actions.
A further consequence of the model employed is that ‘the United States’ are somehow sealed off from the activities of Americans in the world – the limits of the ‘social system’ are the geographical boundaries of the nation-state. There is no room for the bombs that fall on Vietnam, or for Vauxhall Motors of Luton, within the ‘social system.’ The whole conceptual structure is essentially arbitrary, since it rests not upon the activities of men but upon incantatory phrases drawn from the stockbook of American liberalism.
Lipset’s book is a useful (but biased) mine of bibliographical references. But despite the many flashes of insight, and the occasional pieces of highly interesting analysis, it reveals more about a highly influential school of American sociological thought than it does about the society it seeks to portray.



Shop Stewards and Shop Committees: A Study in Trade Unionism and Industrial Relations in Australia
Orwell de R. Foenander
Melbourne UP/Cambridge, 37s 6d
It is a pity that this is the only book available on the subject, for a comparison between British and Australian shop stewards could have been invaluable, and not only to socialists and trade unionists.
Digging about in Foenander’s book, however, it is possible to pull out some points. Australian trade unions, at the official level, are subject to much more extensive legal control than are their British counterparts (at the time of review). In particular, there is a system of compulsory arbitration of disputes and of quite close legal control over union activities, in which it appears that the union leaderships largely acquiesce (as no doubt will their British equals). However, full employment and rapid technological developments together have not, if Foenander is to be believed, produced the same degree of militancy in Australian workers that we find in Britain. (It should be noted, though, that Foenander does not support his conclusion with any measure, of strike activity for instance, and he provides no explanation for this difference.) However, as in Britain, relations between rank-and-file union members and their officials have tended to worsen, and ‘not infrequently’ the labour courts hear disputes between workers and union officials (p.18).
Australian stewards have fewer formal bargaining powers than British stewards. They are excluded from any right to bargain on such matters as job evaluation, overtime, time-and-motion studies and rate-fixing. Nevertheless, they ‘have at times displayed amazing astuteness in discovering possibilities and opportunities for the framing of demands to the advantage of workers’ within the sphere to which they are restricted. No data are provided, unfortunately, on the effect of such local bargaining as they can engage in on wage drift or inflation. As in Britain, workers put pressure on their stewards: ‘Unhappily there appears to be a tendency, in some workers at least, to look upon the shop steward solely as a promoter of their own interests’ – which at law the steward should not be. And stewards, especially those organised into multi-union committees, call and lead unofficial strikes.
The real threat to the Australian union bureaucracies comes from these multi-union committees of stewards, both at plant and at area level. Composed as they are of members of a number of unions, these committees are less susceptible to control by the officials of a single union, although in a number of cases such committees have been closed down by the heavy hand of officialdom. The Australian CP has been associated with several of the multi-union committees, but, as Foenander notes, stewards’ political views trouble the union officials not a whit, as long as a committee ‘refrains from initiating or embarking upon a course of action in contravention of the official aims of the union’ (p 104). The Australian TUC (ACTU) has been sufficiently concerned by the activities of multi-union shop committees to draw up sets of model rules for them, which have (alas!) been largely ignored. Only among workers in federal government employ have there been any significant applications for formal ACTU endorsement of their procedures by shop committees (a fact that is unfortunately left unexplained).
Multi-union area committees are strongly disapproved by all the union leaders and employers’ associations. Regrettably, Foenander notes, some individual employers do business with them (to save trouble) – and this is ‘symptomatic of a poor social outlook’ (p.111) on the part of such employers. Area committees have been responsible for developing political attacks on official union policies and activities, for unofficial strike levies, and for assistance, support and leadership to unofficial strikes. Readers will be heartened to learn: ‘It is indeed difficult to escape the conclusion that, in more than a few instances, area committees have come to constitute a standing danger to peace in industry, making it impossible to view them otherwise than in the light of an industrial nuisance’ (p.115). As in Britain, dissatisfaction with their union officials contributes largely to the importance of the area committees (p.119), though there is no investigation of other reasons for their rise to notoriety.
Readers will probably have gathered from the quotations given what Foenander’s attitude to shop stewards is: plain reactionary. What is difficult to convey is the incredible archaism and pomposity of his style, and the extraordinarily legalistic approach to questions of union organisation. His concern is not to explain why stewards and stewards’ committees are important in Australia, but to attempt to define their (very limited) legal position. Thus for instance the multi-union committees are at best semi-official, but Foenander is not concerned to consider the real implications of this state of affairs; all that interests him is whether the union rules really allow for these committees to exist. It is doubtful, too, whether an Australian steward has a precisely defined and valid legal claim to be elected; but so what? Thousands are. His is a lawyer’s approach to rules, not a sociologist’s: he has no sense of the naturalness of rule-breaking in a society, or of the way in which rules are normally and continually manipulated for group ends. The ideal for him is rigid adherence to the law, as defined by the judges – a prospect that might make a liberal Tory quake. Because of his overwhelming focus on the minutiae of the law, he contributes little to the understanding of the phenomena he supposedly analyses. At 37s 6d for 137 pages I cannot recommend anyone but socialist millionaires to add this book to their collections. Some digging in a library copy might provide a little illumination – no promises, however.



Colin Barker writes: Recent press reports indicate that AEU officialdom is looking long and hard at the union structure, and seeking means to rationalise. Jim Conway, the general secretary, has for some time been proposing radical alterations, and a three-man working committee has been examining his proposals. The three men are EC members John Boyd, E.L. Edmondson and Hugh Scanlon.
In particular the branch structure – clearly quite unsuited to present needs – is to be reformed. In one Ilford factory, we learn, the 2,000 members belong to 35 different branches. The remoteness of the branch from the centre of struggle in the factory is thus guaranteed, and the shop stewards’ organisations fill a natural gap. The working committee, following Conway, proposes that the number of branches be drastically reduced from its present level of 3,000. In Manchester, 90 branches will be merged to form 10 branches. Instead of branches based on the place of residence, the place of work will – at least in the case of the larger establishments-–now become the organisational centre of the branch. So far, so good. Factory-based branches would enable a much more direct expression of militancy in the union’s official structure. But this is clearly not the intention. Thus The Guardian (10 October):
‘It is argued that this kind of closely knit organisation would prevent any recurrence of the “workers’ trial” scandals which created such a stir during the general election campaign.’
The guarantee against more ‘scandals’ of this nature, and against the development of uncontrolled militant stewards’ organisations generally, is simple: branch secretaries in large establishments will be appointed on a full-time basis. Immediately the branch secretaries will be placed in a situation where they will be subject to two sets of pressures, union head office and rank-and-file membership, instead of only one, the rank and file. The career element in the job will assume a new weight.
Secondly, in an attempt to bring the unofficial combine committees into line, advisory committees for specialised multi-plant firms, with a full-time national organiser and national executive member as sitting members, are suggested. Again, there is a clear mixture here of positive and negative: formalisation of the present position is a gain; formalisation under the control of the full-time officials will create new problems for militants. Thirdly, dues will be collected in a new way. As things stand, a minimal effort by members is required, a small but important degree of commitment. In future dues collectors will be paid on a pro rata basis, or dues will flow into head office automatically, through the introduction of the check-off system, whereby the employer does the collectors’ dirty work for them. Attendance at the branch, or contact with a collecting steward, will thus have even less direct point, as UAW experience in the US shows. Ability to express the membership point of view will in future not be sufficient qualification for union office, from branch secretary upwards. Special examinations will be introduced. Instead of elections requiring at least minimal commitment through attendance at a meeting, the postal ballot system will operate. In this way a higher proportion of the membership will, it is hoped, vote in the elections, but the voting will now be performed on a private, individual basis. The national committee, at present elected on a divisional basis that despite its unsatisfactory nature does express some small degree of local organisation, will now be re-structured. Divisional committees may be scrapped, and national committee members elected in a national (postal) ballot on a trade-group basis. The last tenuous links between members and national committee delegates will be finally snipped.
The overall effect of these proposed changes can only be a further bureaucratisation of the structure. The struggle for workers’ control of the union will take on new forms, as yet difficult to perceive. AEU members need to discuss these changes now, in good time for the next conference. But if, as seems likely, the EC gets its way on these matters, the struggle in the factories will have to be re-examined. Recent developments in some Midland car factories point the way ahead: militant stewards have insisted that the convenors may not handle grievances by themselves, but only in association with the particular steward involved and at least one ad hoc representative of the men. In this way control over the bargaining process is kept at the shop-floor level wherever possible.



Mao Tse-tung
Stuart Schram
Penguin, 7s 6d
A Study of the Chinese Communist Movement 1927-34
Shanti Swarup
Oxford, 35s
Schram’s biography of Mao is an excellent introduction to the study of the Chinese Communists. For a non-Marxist, Schram maintains a remarkable and scholarly balance between admiration of Mao’s achievements and reluctance to hero-worship. The portrait is complete, warts and all. At the same time, of course, since Schram is not a Marxist, his biography never reaches the level of the truly great political biographies. We are given narration without judgement at times, major theoretical questions are described without being evaluated in terms of the professed purposes of the participants, and Mao’s historical significance remains slightly obscure. This is most apparent in the concluding chapters, on post-revolutionary China. The facts of the Peking-Moscow rift are presented in historical sequence, but their structural roots remain unexplored, with the result that the personal power-struggle side of the dispute is over-emphasised. Nevertheless, this is a book which no socialist interested in China – and who is not? – can afford to be without.
In the whole history of the CCP, the period 1927-34 is one of the most complex, and Swamp’s study reflects this complexity. This was the period in which the Chinese Communists, through a series of major theoretical and tactical disputes and devastating defeats, evolved a somewhat uneasy synthesis between the demands of the ‘national’ and the ‘social’ revolutions. The period ends with the start of the Long March and die emergence of Mao as the Party’s leader. Swamp’s book is a most scholarly account of the entire period; his presentation of the data is lucid and finely balanced. At the same time, this is not a book for novices: some knowledge of the background of the period, and of the issues at stake in the Party’s theoretical debates is necessary. If the book has a fault, it is principally that Swarup has not seized the opportunity time has presented him with to judge the events and debates he describes so well in the light of the Party’s final victory after the war. He never really enquires into the nature of the ‘social revolution’ that figures so largely in his pages, nor into the form of society created by Mao’s Party fifteen years later. Thus to a certain extent the history lacks shape and meaning. But the materials for the definitive study of the period are all here, and presented in a way that must put any future historian deeply in Shanti Swarup’s debt.



Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution
Vol II: The Politics of Social Classes
Hal Draper
Monthly Review Press £11.80
I had the privilege of reviewing the first volume of this work (State and Bureaucracy), which is now happily available in paperback (£5.60). At that time, I was more dismissive of the project than I now care to recall. In particular, I suggested that Draper’s work was one of ‘marxology’, a term which – for myself as for Draper – is a term of subtle marxist abuse.
Having recently had the occasion to re-read the first volume, and now also the pleasure of reading the second. I should like publicly to alter my previous ever-so-slightly ‘superior’ judgement. Hal Draper is not producing marxology, but scholarly marxism of the highest order.
The scholarship is simply amazing. Draper has read everything there is to read, and has organised his resulting mass of material into a wonderfully clear and systematic presentation of the political ideas of Marx and his comrade Fred Engels. I noted the indispensability of the first volume as a reference work, and can only reiterate that point again.
But something more must be said, about the politics of the work. Hal Draper is well-known and some publisher should make him still better known by a re-issue – for a marvellous short pamphlet of the 1950s: The Two Souls of Socialism. The burden of that pamphlet was the sharp distinction within the socialist tradition between all the manifold varieties of ‘socialism from above’ (including reformism, stalinism, maoism, etc.) and the revolutionary tradition of ‘socialism from below’.
We hear a good deal these days from the reformist communist parties of Western Europe about ‘democratic socialism’, by which they mean a lukewarm struggle to expand popular control, and a mild dose of national-state planning. They urge the retention of the semi-sham democracy of parliamentary government, of ‘representative democracy’ where the electorate have no real control over their parliamentary misrepresentatives.
Faced with real popular movements towards workers’ control and workers’ power, they are at best uneasy and more commonly positively hostile (consider the shameful history of the Italian and French parties in every significant crisis for more than forty years).
Hal Draper is a marxist. and will have no truck with such perversions. His Marx and his Engels defiantly quoted over hundreds of pages are consistent, red revolutionaries, ever concerned with the expansion of popular freedoms, and with an expansion of freedom and control won by the working classes themselves, by their own efforts and their own power.
The Marx and Engels who shine through every carefully annotated page of this monumental work are revolutionary socialists whose central principle was collective self-emancipation, workers’ power. True, they were intellectuals, but intellectuals whose whole lives were organised around the principle of struggle, of political engagement, whose intellectual work aimed always at the central point: making it easier for freedom to conquer.
They were acid in their condemnation of idiots, not out of love of their own cleverness (as we find in so many latter-day academic marxoids) but because the truth mattered to the working class, because ignorance and muddle were impediments to their struggle. For them, reason and freedom went hand in hand.
Hal Draper aims to recover Marx and Engels as revolutionary activists and thinkers. In this volume, he discusses the anatomy of classes, the role of the modern proletariat as the key agent in the overthrow of capitalism, and the relation defined in struggle of the working class to other classes and strata.
Initially, one further volume was planned, but the author now announces that the remaining materials will occupy two further substantial tomes. No question: if the next volumes are up to the standard of the first two, we should be pleased at his excesses.
The term ‘work of reference’ may turn prospective readers away, so do not imagine this work is as dull as an index. Despite the massive scope of the work, and its integrated conception, the various separate parts are themselves a whole series of smaller pleasures. This is a hook to dip into, as well as to read right through.
If you want to know why marxists emphasise the working class before all others, the materials are all here. Students can shiver at Marx and Engels’ remarks on their forebears’ roles in the revolutions of 1848-9. and their reported enthusiasm for knowing the plans of the revolution while not liking sore feet. Academics should ponder what Marx and Fngels thought of them.
Anyone having to argue with the disordered residues of maoism should rejoice in the most definitive collection of Marx and Engels’ very clearheaded views on the peasant question available anywhere: these three long chapters, in themselves, are political dynamite. The Marxist attitude to trade unionism is clearly spelled out, together with the issues of reformism, the need for an independent revolutionary party of the working class, and so on.
Perhaps most important of all for revolutionary strategy, Hal Draper presents an extremely clear and unambiguous account of Marx and Engels’ development, through their experience of the 1848 revolutions, of the theory of ‘permanent revolution’: Leon Trotsky’s claim that he did not invent the theory, but developed it from its foundations in Marx, is amply supported by this fully documented analysis.
Over and over again. Draper shows the theoretical founders of our movement insisting on the central and revolutionary role of the modern working class, as the class which alone hears within its forms of life the seeds of the future society.
I cannot do this book justice. The publishers should be urged to rush out a paperback edition of the second volume. This work should be welcomed, read, studied, used. It is indispensable.
 



‘Here we have the old constitutional folly. The condition of a “free government” is not the division but the UNITY of power. The machinery of government cannot be too simple. It is always the craft of knaves to make it complicated and mysterious.’ – Karl Marx [1]
For some years now, there has been a welcome revival in Marxist discussion on the State. Two names, above all, have been associated with that discussion: Ralph Miliband and Nicos Poulantzas. [2]
Criticism of the work of both authors has been abundant. Among the more perceptive critics [3] it was noted, separately for each writer, that his work was open to reformist interpretation. Both produced works from which revolutionary socialists could learn, but the way in which each argued his case was such that reformist lessons could not be ruled out. This possibility did not arise because of the readiness of reformists to distort anything they come across, and pervert it. (Though that is a well-known phenomenon.) Rather, the very way in which Miliband and Poulantzas constructed their accounts of the state and of capitalist society was itself ambiguous from this viewpoint.
Rather schematically, we can see where the heart of the problem lay. Poulantzas in one of his own contributions to the New Left Review, suggested that a key problem with Miliband was his lack of any ‘theoretical problematic’. He was, in fact, quite wrong: Miliband’s The State in Capitalist Society revealed that he had a very distinct ‘theoretical problematic’, a ‘theory of society’. That theory was quite different from Marx’s, however. Poulantzas failed to notice this, above all, because he made the same fundamental mistake as Miliband – though on different grounds.
What was the mistake? At root, it was a failure to comprehend Marx’s enormous theoretical breakthrough, in particular by comparison with the classical political economists to whose critique he devoted a large part of his theoretical life work. Marx’s achievement in this sphere lay, above all, in his ability to get behind the categories of political economy – value, capital, property, rent, state, class, etc. – and to show that these expressed historically created social relationships. In particular, Marx showed that ‘production’ could only be adequately understood if it were seen as a social process through which human beings create and recreate their own world. Far from being simply a ‘technical’ relationship between human beings and nature, production was also centrally a social activity through which ‘men’ – in the sexist language of the 19th century – made their own history, their own society.
To understand production, it was necessary to grasp its various social forms. Thus, at the beginning of Capital, Marx analyses the commodity as the expression of a double production process: it is, simultaneously, a use-value, a thing of use to human beings, and a value, the expression of a certain kind of social relationship among producers. In producing commodities, we produce not only useful things, but also a distinct form of society founded on alienated social relations.
Similarly, all the other language of political economy has to be reconstrued to reveal this active, social creative process. Workers in capitalist factories make cars, steel, chemicals, toothbrushes, etc.: but in this very act of making things, they also produce surplus value. Their work activity takes a form in which they reproduce their bosses, producing the means by which their own exploitation and domination is continued. The whole social order – relationships of family, state, science, education, etc. – should be understood as perpetually produced and reproduced elements made by real active individuals in their social interconnections. It is not that one section of society makes society, makes the environment, etc., while another is merely the passive, organised section. All human history is the record of activity of all the individuals who compose it.
Hence, for Marx, revolutionary socialist politics is grounded in an understanding of history. The very possibility of socialism – of a society in which the whole population makes its own society consciously and in accordance with a democratically determined plan – rests on the analysis of capitalist and other class societies: for what men and women have made and remade they can remake again in line with their own self-developed needs and perceptions. However radical a break with the past a socialist revolution may be, it does not introduce into history an entirely new principle, the self-activity of human beings. Without that self-activity, the whole of past history cannot be understood.
Thus Marx’s more ‘philosophical’ writings are all of a piece with his revolutionary politics. His critique of Hegel, and of mechanical materialism, is all of a piece with his critiques of political economy and of various ‘socialisms from above’.
Within this perspective, it is the particular form that social relationships take which defines the various ‘modes of production’. In class societies, like capitalist society, the key to comprehending society is the form that the active struggle between the classes takes. In particular, the modes of action and the social relationships among the oppressed majority are crucial to comprehending how the society is maintained, and how it may be overthrown through revolutionary practice.
Now, while the analyses of Miliband and Poulantzas are not the same, it is apparent that in neither of these authors’ work is this central understanding of the class struggle, and in particular of the forms of activity of the exploited classes, present as a central and defining element. Thus there is a measurable distance between their analyses and those of Marx.
In Miliband’s case, The State in Capitalist Society rests on a theory of society which – as one of his more acute critics, Isaac Balbus [4] pointed out – combines ‘elite’ theory and ‘stratification’ theory. That is, the whole study is organised around the theme, not of class struggle, but class domination. In Miliband’s study, only the ruling class appears to act. In the various institutions which he analyses, there is little or no sense of a conflict of classes. (Given that his book was published in 1969, for instance, it is remarkable that his account of education in schools and colleges says nothing about student revolt…) Thus his study is very one-dimensional in its emphases. When he discusses the bases of existence of the ruling classes, he emphasises not their role in production but their benefits from distribution. Thus the ruling classes are primarily defined in terms of their (passive) possession of riches rather than their (active) role as capitalists. The working class, similarly, is defined as the class that ‘works hardest and gets least’, not as a class whose struggles and forms of organisation shape the form of society. The working class as an active, creative, struggling class does not appear in the body of his analysis: there it merely suffers. So, when it suddenly pops out on the last page of the book, as the force which will one day wipe out capitalism, the idea appears as a decorative addition rather than the conclusion of a single argument.
As for the state, Miliband devotes little space to a discussion of the various institutional means by which the present state excludes the working class from power. Rather, he emphasises its class character by the methods of orthodox sociology: by examining not its forms but the ‘social class’ origins of its upper members, their possession of attitudes akin to those of the rich, etc. Thus, as John Lea [5] pointed out, he leaves open the question whether the ‘machinery’ of the state can be captured and used by working class parties for the benefit of the working class and to destroy capitalism. He leaves unexplained and uncriticised the very forms of the state – its characteristic bureaucracy, the ‘democratic sham’, the nation-state form, etc.
The work of Poulantzas, on the other hand, rests on a system of thinking developed by the ‘Althusserian’ school, a system which has already been the subject of a number of important critiques. [6] The Althusserian system represented, in one sense, a reaction against an interpretation of Marxism which it called ‘economism’ – the view that the historical process is the product of changes in the ‘forces of production’, i.e. a form of determinism. It is characteristic of ‘economism’ (or what Colletti termed ‘the Marxism of the Second International’ [7]) that production is treated as a technical and not simultaneously a social process. However, as Simon Clarke suggests (see note 3) the attempt to avoid the trap of ‘economism’ is not necessarily to fall on the ground of Marxism. There are other possible traps. Indeed, Althusser leaps into another hole, one in which even the works of Marx himself have to undergo a major process of rewriting and rereading if they are to be purged of their innumerable failings.
In place of ‘economism’, Althusser proposed the idea that societies be considered as complex systems of interdependent levels – the economic, the political and the ideological – all of which mutually interpenetrate each other but over which the economic is determinant ‘in the last instance’ – which ‘last instance’, Althusser assured his readers, never comes. It has been pointed out by endless critics that Althusser’s system strongly parallels the system developed by the conservative American sociologist, Talcott Parsons, that it is a ‘structural functionalism’. It certainly is a system, as Parsons’ is, in which it is difficult to locate principles of historical change. History, as a ‘process without a subject’, consists of a series of modes of production each of which is treated as an ‘eternity’. Nothing within each mode threatens it: to believe so is to fall into the trap of ‘economism’ or ‘historicism’. The system is radically elitist in its emphases: Althusser makes a distinction between ‘science’ and ‘ideology’ according to which all forms of society require ideology, so that socialism too will have to be a system which is ultimately impenetrable to all but its few ‘scientific’ members.
Poulantzas took over this system. His central account of the state was cast in functionalist terms: it is ‘the global factor of social cohesion’. The state, as both repressive and ideological apparatuses, holds the whole system together. Not only this, but the state actually forms and structures the relations of production, forming isolated individuals and thus the relations of competition which characterise the capitalist form of society. It IS not the case that the state in any sense ‘rises out of’ or ‘expresses’ the social relation’s of capitalist production and exchange: it constitutes these relations. In taking over the Althusserian system, Poulantzas added something which in Althusser is chiefly decoration: classes. But his classes are formed in the ‘relatively autonomous’ “political-juridical level”, not within the relations of production. In the ‘economic level’ there occurs a production process – the production of goods, based on technically conceived ‘relations of production’ consisting of a combination of workers, instruments and objects of production, and non-workers. Nowhere in Poulantzas’s analysis do we find an account of the class struggle understood as a set of social relations through which people produce capitalist society. Social relations are politically constituted, in the ‘relative autonomy’ of the political-juridical sphere.
Despite the considerable differences between Miliband and Poulantzas (which differences extended to their comprehensibility), they shared a common starting point. Both began with technically conceived relations of production, onto which they then constructed social (class) relationships of distribution, of ownership and appropriation. As a result, both of them had difficulty in explaining change within their analytical frameworks. Thus both failed to relate their discussion of fascism (a brief section in Miliband, a whole book by Poulantzas) to the inter-war crisis of world capitalism; neither examined the forms of the class struggle under Hitler or Mussolini. Both, despite considerable arguments between them, offered similar analyses of ideology and ‘ideological apparatuses’, which they both presented as internally coherent and non-contradictory, and certainly not as ideas shaped and reshaped in the process of struggle between the classes.
To borrow a term from Althusser, there is a very significant ‘absence’ in both of them. Neither gives an account of the class struggle, rooted in the social production relations of capitalism, as the key organising and disorganising set of social relations in capitalist society. In neither’s analysis, therefore, does the actual struggle of workers play any significant role. In that crucial sense, the analytical frameworks of both writers were always open to reformist political interpretation.
Until recently, however, final judgement on them had to be held. But both writers have now taken the political plunge quite directly, publishing books with explicitly reformist political programmes. Miliband concludes his recent Marxism and Politics with some reflections on the Chilean debacle. The lesson he draws from the downfall of the Allende regime is, in essence, that the same experience must be repeated; only, next time there will have to be present a grouping of socialists who will point out to the reformist government the necessity of deepening the process of social transformation in its own defence. Thus a social revolution will be achieved without all the Sturm und Drang of an actual revolution. [8]
And now Nicos Poulantzas has published a book, State, Power, Socialism [9] whose appearance announces that the famous “Miliband-Poulantzas debate” is, in all essential respects, over. For the two of them are in basic political agreement with each other. Both have placed themselves on the “left wing” – insofar as that is a meaningful term – of the present “Eurocommunist” tendency. Both have announced, unambiguously, their breach with the Marxism that asserts, with Marx, that ‘the emancipation of the working class must be conquered by the working class itself.’
 
Poulantzas’s proposals
Poulantzas suggests that the transition to socialism must proceed on two levels. On one hand, the parliamentary system must be both used by the Left, and maintained as an integral part of socialist politics. On the other hand, and in parallel, there must be a development of workers’ councils or ‘self-management’ bodies, organised on the principle of direct democracy. The problem is to find ‘a democratic road to socialism, a democratic socialism’,
posed as follows:
how is it possible radically to transform the State in such a manner that the extension and deepening of political freedoms and the institutions of representative democracy (which were also a conquest of the popular masses) are combined with the unfurling of forms of direct democracy and the mushrooming of self-management bodies [10]
The ‘fundamental problem’ is that of ‘combining a transformed representative democracy with direct, rank-and-file democracy’. [11] ‘Democratic socialism is the only kind possible.’ [12] At the national level, central government is to be organised on a parliamentary basis. This, he makes clear in the Interview with Henri Weber, involves a government elected by universal suffrage, on a secret ballot, with no ‘imperative mandate’ over MPs, no right of recall over MPs [13], rights for bourgeois parties. [14] In addition to this national system, there are to be local bodies based on the principles of ‘direct democracy’, i.e. with recall of delegates, mandation of delegates, etc. Parliamentary, representative democracy nationally, plus workers’ councils based on factories, etc: these two forms are to co-exist, and be articulated together, in ways Poulantzas admits [15] he can’t at this stage specify very precisely:
the answer to such questions does not yet exist – not even as a model theoretically guaranteed in some holy text or other.
As he explains, this idea involves quite definitely abandoning the idea of smashing the existing state and replacing it with a state of the kind celebrated by Marx in the Paris Commune:
... the expression ‘sweeping transformation of the state apparatus in the democratic road to socialism’ suggests that there is no longer a place for what has traditionally been called smashing or destroying that apparatus. The fact remains, however, that the term smashing, which Marx too used for indicative purposes, came in the end to designate a very precise historical phenomenon: namely, the eradication of any kind of representative democracy or ‘formal’ liberties in favour purely of direct, rank-and-file democracy and so-called real liberties. It is necessary to take sides… talk of smashing or destroying the state apparatus can be no more than a mere verbal trick. What is involved, through all the various transformations, is a real permanence and continuity of the institutions of representative democracy – not as unfortunate relics to be tolerated for as long as necessary, but as an essential condition of democratic socialism. [16]
No more talk, either, of the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’: Marx, who used the term, used it
as a notion of applied strategy, serving at most as a signpost. It referred to the class nature of the State and to the necessity of its transformation in the transition to socialism and the process of the withering away of the State. [17]
Continued use of the term ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ would only obscure Poulantzas’s programme: he therefore supports the PCF’s[the French Communist Party] decision to drop the idea.
Therefore, Poulantzas criticises those in the PCF who want to retain the phrase in the party programme (e.g. Etienne Balibar). Such people, he suggests, are given to uttering ‘dogmatic
banalities’ of the following kind: ‘...every State is a class State; all political domination is a species of class dictatorship; the capitalist State is a State of the bourgeoisie.’ [18] No doubt it is true that these ‘dogmatic banalities’ have, on occasion, been uttered without examination, with criticism, without deepening of their meaning. But does this make them incorrect? (The better part of Poulantzas’s own work has been devoted to elucidating their truth, after all.) Poulantzas continues his discussion of these ‘banalities’ by suggesting that ‘such an analysis is incapable of advancing research by a single inch’, and that it can’t help us understand ‘concrete situations, since it cannot account for the differential forms and historical transformations of the capitalist State.’ [19] This kind of simplification led to the disasters of Stalinism in the face of fascism, he suggests.
It has to be noted that Poulantzas refers to only one kind of ‘disaster… in the face of fascism’: the ‘social fascism’ analysis which underpinned the German Communist Party’s appalling tactics in the face of Hitler. But can the ‘social fascism’ doctrine be attributed to the ‘banalities’ outlined above? Not without political mediations, it can’t. Trotsky, for one, never doubted the truth of these ‘dogmatic banalities’, yet his analysis of the rise of Hitler, and his proposals for a united front to defeat the Nazis, have yet to be bettered, Furthermore, it was the ‘forgetting’ of these, ‘dogmatic banalities’ which led the Comintern in the Popular Front period (on which Poulantzas is quite silent) to grovel before the Blum government in France and to follow a strategy in Spain from which all the gains were made by General Franco. Poulantzas, however, can hardly criticise the Popular Front: his proposals are for a re-run of that experience.
Poulantzas’s proposals, I want to suggest, would if pursued produce disaster. They would involve the working class repeating a whole series of defeats already experienced this century. His programmatic utterances announce his own, unambiguous, breach with Marxism. And his argumentation for them is very weak.
 
Does workers’ power necessitate Stalinism?
Poulantzas suggests that the classical Marxist conception of socialist revolution – destruction of the existing state apparatus and its replacement by direct workers’ democracy – leads directly to ‘statism’, i.e. to Stalinism. All the horrors of Stalinism, to which the communist parties are now becoming sensitive, were rooted in the way the Russian Revolution was conducted. This, of course, is a proposition that finds ready assent from a chorus of liberals and other anti-socialists, so Poulantzas evokes the seemingly impressive authority of Rosa Luxemburg. In 1918, this great German revolutionary socialist wrote a pamphlet strongly criticising the Bolsheviks for, among other things, their dissolution of the Constituent Assembly.
Poulantzas, however, does not offer much in the way of concrete data on the question. And a few matters have to be faced directly. Was Luxemburg’s criticism of the Bolsheviks correct? Why did the Bolsheviks, who’d been the most active campaigners for the Constituent Assembly, then dissolve it by force? Were they wrong to do so?
On the first issue, that of Luxemburg’s criticisms, Poulantzas fails to mention a couple of germane points. The first is that, according to some historians [20], she later retracted this specific criticism of the Bolsheviks. But it should also be noted that within a year of the Russian Revolution she was to be faced with exactly the same issue in Germany. There Kautsky’s USPD made proposals of exactly the same kind Poulantzas now advocates: for a National Assembly plus soviets. Rosa Luxemburg was utterly uncompromising in her opposition to the idea. Poulantzas does not quote her opinion on the matter – not surprisingly.
Whoever pleads for a National Assembly is consciously or unconsciously depressing the revolution to the historical level of a bourgeois revolution: he is a camouflaged agent of the bourgeoisie or an unconscious agent of the petty bourgeoisie. [21]
and again:
The path of the revolution follows clearly from its ends. Its methods follow from its tasks. All power in the hands of the working masses, in the hands of the workers’ and soldiers’ councils. This is the guiding principle … Every act, every step must like a compass point in this direction. [22]
The National Assembly, rather than a guarantee of ‘democratic socialism’, was that ‘counter-revolutionary stronghold erected against the working class.’ [23]
Thus, in her own practice, Rosa Luxemburg did not believe in the maintenance of parliamentary forces. Had she suddenly lost her (1917) commitment to democracy? Far from it: her position arose directly from her profound commitment to democracy, from her belief that nothing should stand between the working class and direct power. Clearly, if we are to play the game of citing ‘authorities’, Luxemburg is a poor one for Poulantzas to quote. Why did the Bolsheviks dissolve the Constituent Assembly? They certainly had been campaigning for a Constituent Assembly to be convened during 1917. Indeed, their argument had been that only a powerful soviet system could guarantee a Constituent Assembly. It does not seem to have occurred to them, prior to October, that there might be a conflict between soviets and Assembly. In itself that isn’t very surprising: the Bolsheviks were in the process of recasting Marxist theory in action. After all, they entered the revolution believing it would be a bourgeois revolution: before February, only the isolated non-Bolshevik, Trotsky, with his theory of permanent revolution, thought otherwise.
The October uprising completely altered the picture. Lenin was among the first to grasp this, urging a delay in the Constituent Assembly elections and extension of the vote to 18 year olds. As so often, he failed to win a majority for his proposal, and the elections went ahead. Overall, the Socialist Revolutionaries won a clear majority, though the strength of their vote was directly proportional to the voters’ distance from the centres of the revolution. The SR victory was, at best, ambiguously democratic: in the uprising, the SRs had split, with the Left SRs supporting the uprising and the Right opposed, yet the elections lists were presented by a ‘united’ party. Thus it wasn’t clear what the electorate had actually voted for.
On the Assembly’s first day, the Bolsheviks pronounced ratification of the soviet seizure of power, the decree on land, the decree on peace, workers’ control of production, etc. By 237 to 136 votes, the Assembly rejected the motion. The same day it was dispersed. It had become the rallying centre for counter-revolution, as it continued to be in the Civil War that broke out within months. Not to have dispersed the Constituent Assembly would have been a crime against the revolution: it would have permitted the re-emergence of a situation of ‘dual power’, with two rival national political centres, each with opposed aims and methods. [24]
To suggest, as does Poulantzas (who also repeats the old canard about Lenin’s What Is To Be Done prefiguring Stalinism [25]) that it was this event which led to Stalinism is a most fantastic historical judgement and a piece of utter formalism. The tragedy of the degeneration of the Russian Revolution arose, above all, from the working class’s loss of its ability to govern directly, under the impact of the isolation of the Revolution and the terrible rigours of the Civil War, the de-urbanisation, famine, collapse of production, etc. The Soviets, the living heart of the revolution, ceased to beat with the life of the Russian workers. Not, let it be emphasised, initially through the bureaucratic manipulations of any anti-democratic party or leadership, but under the terrifying pressure of circumstances. [26]
‘Representative Democracy’
Poulantzas’s second line of argument is his insistence that ‘representative democracy’, i.e. parliamentarism, is the key guarantee of the preservation of political freedoms. Thus it is the strategic line of defence against state authoritarianism. In his interview, he cites the opinion of the Italian social democrat Nobert Bobbio:
[Bobbio] did highlight one point. He said: ‘If we want to maintain liberties, the plurality of expression, etc., then all I know is that throughout history these liberties have been coupled with a form of parliament.’ Certainly he expressed it in a social-democratic form. But yet, I wonder if there isn’t a core of truth in that, if the maintenance of formal political liberties doesn’t require the maintenance of the institutional forms of power of representative democracy. Obviously they would be transformed: it’s not a matter of keeping the bourgeois parliament as it is, etc. [27]
Poulantzas doesn’t offer very much by way of arguments for ‘representative democracy’ beyond the observation that both this form of government and other political freedoms were ‘conquests of the masses’. Historically, though we might cavil at this simplification of the path by which workers won civil and political rights under capitalism, we needn’t object in principle. Marxists continue to defend those rights against attacks from the right. On the other hand, we also do not glamorise the extent or nature of these rights and freedoms. In particular, we have to recognise the very ambiguous and limited character of the ‘conquest’ involved in representative democracy. (Indeed, both in his earlier work, Political Power and Social Classes, and indeed in his latest offering, Poulantzas is not uninteresting on the whole issue: he provides plenty of materials for denouncing parliamentary government as sham democracy.) Let’s recall a few of the major limitations on what is properly called ‘bourgeois democracy’.
Workers in the capitalist democracies have the right to vote in parliamentary and local elections. This right they exercise through the secret ballot. [28] Thus each voter exercises his ‘power’ in isolation from any community, as an individual in an atomised relation to the state. This atomistic relation between ‘citizen’ and state was a major theme in Marx’s critique of the capitalist state, from the early 1840s, and is indeed continued in Poulantzas’s own writings. [29] Individual voting is not a matter for public discussion, or for meetings. It is utterly individualised. Revolutionaries have always argued that mass meetings are more democratic than secret ballots, since they permit the exercise of wider kinds of political reasoning than can be applied by the isolated voter. In a mass meeting, issues can be discussed, arguments refuted. In a mass meeting, estimates can be made of the general level of support for some proposals for action, and thus of the likelihood of that action being successful. This is not possible with the secret ballot.
Secondly, and notoriously, voters have no real control over their elected ‘representatives’. There is no effective right of recall, no effective mandate which voters can exercise over MPs, etc. The voters elect the MP as isolated voters, and as such have no control over him or her. The MP is protected from control by constituents by a whole gamut of ‘privileges’ once he or she is elected. The MP ceases to represent anyone once elected. In the late 18th century, the conservative Edmund Burke expressed the relation between MP and constituents very well when he told the electorate of Bristol that if they voted him into Parliament he would not represent them “to the nation”, he would represent the nation to them. More recently, Harold Wilson reportedly expressed the same idea with a definition of democracy as ‘government of the people, for the people, by the people – with the emphasis on government’. Thus, in the parliamentary system, the exercise of political freedom and power consists in the few seconds, every few years, it takes the voter to express a choice between parliamentary misrepresentatives – marking his ballot paper with a cross, like an illiterate.
Thirdly, it is in any case only the legislature which is elected by the anonymous and powerless parliamentary constituencies. We exercise no control over the remaining part of the state machinery: if we gain some influence there, it is not by legal-constitutional means, but by means varying from riot to bribery. We do not elect our army, judiciary, police or humorously named ‘civil servants’. Nor have we effective means of control over them. If complaints against them are made, most often they have their own internal mechanisms for providing their own judges and juries in their own cases. It is even exceptional for the legislature itself, i.e. Parliament, to exercise real control over the state bureaucracies. The non-elected part of the state – that vast machinery which we support with taxes and other exactions, and which maintains a multiplicity of controls over our daily lives – is protected from popular control by a whole variety of institutional means, including rules of ‘contempt’ (note that there is no charge of ‘contempt of people’ that can be brought against our judges), official secrecy (extending even to the rules for Social Security benefits), bureaucratic appointment, etc. Even the MPs are excluded from scrutiny of large parts of the bureaucracy’s personnel and actions.
Fourthly, the legislature deals chiefly with the framing of laws, with general rules rather than particular cases. (Otherwise, as radio listeners have now discovered in Britain, it chiefly generates noise like a school debating society on an off afternoon.) But the business of modern states is more and more concerned, not with generalities and widely applicable laws, but with specifics, with the detail of bargains between ministries and corporations, with particular administrative cases and so forth. Parliaments are neither empowered nor competent to deal with these issues. The whole framework of the ‘legal state’ is thus being progressively undermined by tendencies to concentrate capital and power. [30] Orthodox political science has registered this development with a growing literature on ‘pressure group theory’, the ‘decline of parliament’, etc. Parliament, which never very precisely represented anyone, comes less and less to. represent real powers in society and to involve itself in real decisions.
In short, the ‘conquest’, of the vote has proved rather insubstantial. It cannot be said that the defence of the existing right to vote is a major defence of the democratic principle. Now Poulantzas, of course, wants to preserve a ‘transformed’ representative democracy, though lie is generally vague on how it is to be ‘transformed’. What is not to be transformed, however, he insists, is the secret ballot, the lack of a power of recall over MPs, the lack of a mandate over MPs, etc. [31] So, wherever we are to look for a ‘transformation’, it is not in the direction of democratisation.
But then he claims he has an altogether grander aim in view. The task is ‘to open up a global perspective of the withering away of the state’. [32] The idea of the ‘withering away of the state’ is a noble idea first developed by Marx and Engels, along with their other ideas about smashing the existing state, the dictatorship of the proletariat, and the other things Poulantzas wants to junk. It refers in Marx and Engels to the process whereby the overwhelming majority, the working class, having formed a new state power under their direct control, is then and only then capable of developing a new pattern of social relations and control over the conditions of life such that they stand in less and less need of organised violence to manage their social affairs. With the withering away of the state, conviction rather than coercion becomes society’s key organising principle. But the maintenance of a parliamentary body, which is not even directly subordinated to society, does not even begin to meet the conditions for the realisation of this aspiration. It stands in the way, as an impediment to democratic life, as a governmental form out of the control of the people. In reality Poulantzas is not proposing a route to the ‘withering away of the state’: to suggest that he is, is, in his words, a ‘verbal trick’.
In short, Poulantzas’s ‘democratic road to socialism’ depends on the maintenance of an undemocratic form of government. [33]
 
Attack on workers’ self-government
Poulantzas’s argument also embodies an attack on direct democracy, on workers’ councils as a form of government. Here too his arguments are very weak.
His first point is simply a non-argument: namely, that up to now all such movements of the working class, aiming at the dictatorship of the proletariat, have failed. It is of course true: there is no socialism anywhere in the world. By various means, every revolutionary movement of the working class has so far been beaten back. That is no more of an argument against learning from the historical experience of these defeats in order to succeed next time than drownings are an argument against learning to swim.
Secondly, he suggests that the existing state is too strong to permit the emergence of a rival centre in a ‘dual power’ situation, as a prelude to socialist revolution:
...if you consider the essence of the state apparatus as it is in France, and then the forms of centralisation of popular power… Well it’s obvious that it will be crushed before it’s taken more than three jumps of a flea. You surely don’t think that in the present situation they will let you centralise parallel powers to the state aiming to create a counter-power. Things would be settled before there were even a shadow of a suspicion of such an organisation. [34]
Here Poulantzas introduces a whole new dimension into the dialectic: the method of self-contradiction, or having your cake and eating it. In support of his own argument, the state appears as essentially weak [35], too weak to be certain of barring the ‘democratic road’. For his socialist opponents, however, the state is too strong!
The argument is anyway ridiculous. Who, after all, thinks that ‘in the present situation’ in France (or anywhere else) workers are going to try to centralise the power of their workers’ councils? The very precondition of such a development is that the ‘present situation’ has changed. The idea of revolution in a non-revolutionary situation is absurd. Every revolutionary situation has involved a split within the existing state apparatus and the existing ruling class. A revolutionary situation involves a crisis for the state, a loss of effectiveness. Without such a crisis there can be no revolution: that is part of the ABC of Marxism. It is precisely the crisis in the state which permits the emergence of a situation of ‘dual power’ and the possibility of a new form of state power conquering.
In practice, Poulantzas – like all reformists – seeks to construe a transition to socialism from the ‘present situation’. He suggests that today’s capitalist state is best understood as a state in crisis, a state of crisis:
This state crisis offers the Left new objective possibilities of a democratic transition to socialism. There are several kinds of political crisis: the present one defines for the Left a precise field related to the possibility of a democratic transition. What is involved is neither a dual-power crisis nor a crisis stemming from a tendency towards fascism. [36]
There are two elements here: first, a correct (if ‘banal’) observation that general tendencies to crisis are not in themselves revolutionary crises; second the absurd idea that there can be a transition to socialism without a revolutionary crisis. By revolutionary crisis I mean not some economic slump, but a crisis in class relations of the type Lenin referred to in ‘Left-Wing Communism’: a boiling situation where the ruling class cannot keep ruling in the old way and the oppressed refuse to continue being ruled in the old way. Poulantzas sometimes recognises this. He suggests the election of a ‘Left’ government can only amount to a ‘social democratic experience’ unless there is simultaneously a mobilisation of the ‘popular masses’. That this would fundamentally alter the ‘present situation’ for the working class, for the state, for all forms of political life, however, seems to escape him.
Thirdly, Poulantzas suggests – in line with his argument about Russia – that direct workers’ democracy leads to Stalinism, the suppression of political liberties and the crushing of dissent:
Direct democracy, by which I mean direct democracy in the soviet sense only, has always and everywhere been accompanied by the suppression of the plurality of parties, and then the suppression of political and formal liberties. [37]
This theme is repeated in the book. If we ‘base everything on direct, rank-and-file democracy’ we take a path that ‘sooner or later, inevitably leads to statist despotism or the dictatorship of experts’ [38]; if workers’ councils form their own state power, ‘it is not the withering of the State or the triumph of direct democracy that eventually emerges, but a new type of authoritarian dictatorship’. [39] It must be said that Poulantzas offers no arguments in support of this elitist proposition that working class self-government is impossible, only flat assertions. But we can note two things.
First, Poulantzas is wrong. There has not been an association between workers’ councils and the disappearance of a ‘plurality of parties’ (China, Cuba, Cambodia, etc., are nothing to do with the case, for there never were workers’ councils there). The Paris Commune had a plurality of parties; so did the Spanish workers’ councils in 1936-7; a key demand of the Hungarian workers’ councils in 1956 was a plurality of parties.
Second, what Poulantzas is actually arguing for is a plurality of bourgeois parties. These, for him, are the guarantee of ‘political liberties’. It is true there has not tended to be much room for bourgeois parties in workers’ councils – though, not so much because workers’ councils have banned them as because in revolutionary situations bourgeois parties do not seek democratic rights within workers’ councils, but seek to destroy them! The Constituent Assembly, after all, refused to recognise the soviet power, and Mrs Thatcher’s chief interest, faced with a congress of workers’ councils in Britain, will hardly be one of winning a delegation from the Finchley working class …
It should also, perhaps, be noticed that Poulantzas doesn’t even seem to understand the idea of a socialist revolution. At several points he employs a ‘fortress’ analogy which he attributes to the revolutionary left: e.g. ‘It is first of all necessary to take state power, and then, after the fortress has been captured, to raze to the ground of the entire state apparatus, replacing it by the second power (soviets) ...’ [40]; ‘...first of all the existing state power is taken, and then another is put in its place. This view can no longer be accepted.’ [41] Whoever did ‘accept’ this notion? It is a reformist fantasy. The idea that a socialist revolution first puts itself in charge of the bourgeois state apparatus, then abolishes it is nonsensical. The existing state power is a target only for destruction, not for ‘taking’.
 
But, does Poulantzas want socialism anyway?
It is by no means clear that Nicos Poulantzas, judging by his own arguments, doesn’t want to avoid socialism altogether. In the Interview, he successively makes two points: first, and unexceptionably,
I agree with you: the whole of the present state and all its apparatuses – social security, health, education, administration, etc. – correspond by their very structure to the power of the bourgeoisie. I do not believe that the masses can hold positions of autonomous power – even subordinate ones – within the capitalist state. They act as means of resistance, elements of corrosion, accentuating the internal contradictions of the state.
and then the remarkable statement:
[It is necessary to struggle within the state] not simply in the sense of a struggle enclosed within the physical confines of the state, but a struggle situated all the same on the strategic terrain of the state. A struggle, in other words, whose aim is not to substitute the workers’ state for the bourgeois state through a series of reforms designed to take over one bourgeois state apparatus after another, and thus conquer power, but a struggle which is, if you like, a struggle of resistance, a struggle designed to sharpen the internal contradictions of the state, to carry out a deep-seated transformation of the state. [42]
In short, no taking of power!
In his book, he proposes that the state’s economic apparatuses should not be smashed:
At no point should changes lead to the actual dismantling of the economic apparatus: such a development would paralyse it and accordingly increase the chances of boycott on the part of the bourgeoisie. [43]
How awful, we might paralyse the Department of Trade and Industry, or the Treasury! Poulantzas feels able to argue this, despite the fact that on the previous page he has stated that the ‘economic apparatus’ (yes, the same one) ‘remains, in its unity, an essential factor for the reproduction of capital’. Note, too, that the bourgeoisie is presumed still to have the power of boycott. Might not this risk have been reduced by the local workers’ councils taking control of the factories, banks, etc.? No, this too is ruled out:
... the democratic road to socialism refers to a long process. the first phase of which involves a challenge to the hegemony of monopoly capital. but not headlong subversion of the core of the relations of production. [44]
The reader who dares to ask the naive question, “Why on earth not?” gets an answer: Change cannot go beyond certain limits without running the risk of economic collapse. [45]
Thus, the transition to socialism is to occur from the ‘present situation’ and without ‘economic collapse’. And Poulantzas thinks revolutionaries are utopians! Against Poulantzas, we must be clear: a transition to socialism, to the complete reorganisation of society by the working class, cannot occur without ‘economic collapse’. A socialist revolution involves ‘economic collapse’: the problem is to carry it through, decisively, so that economic recovery on a new basis can be started immediately. [46] But not for Poulantzas:
Over and above the breaks involved in the anti-monopoly phase, the State will still have to ensure the workings of the economy-an economy which will remain to a certain degree capitalist for a long time to come. [47]
 
Lessons of history
Parliamentary democracy and workers’ councils, I suggested, are incompatible institutions. Poulantzas suggests they must be yoked together, though he doesn’t know how. But, he remarks that ‘History… has provided – and that is not insignificant – some negative examples to avoid and some mistakes upon which to reflect.’ [48] Let’s reflect, then – on a classic ‘negative example’ and the ‘mistakes’ involved in a ‘combination’ of parliamentary democracy and workers’ councils: Spain in 1936 and 1937.
In July 1936 Franco’s revolt against the Spanish republic began. Initially, the revolt was defeated over large parts of Spain, largely by popular forces who demanded (and often seized) arms from the Republican government. The background to the generals’ revolt had been a development, all across Spain, of convulsive mass struggles. The signal for these had been provided by the election, in February 1936, of a Popular Front government. There had been a wave of general strikes and land expropriations, workers’ and peasants’ councils were formed, etc.
After July, this movement developed tenfold. In large parts of Spain, especially Catalonia, Aragon and Castile, workers’ and peasants’ councils organised production and distribution, ran the towns and villages, set up their own militia forces, etc. At the centre of republican Spain was an enormously weakened bourgeois parliamentary government. Spain, after July, represented a classic situation of ‘dual power’.
The republic’s chief source of military aid against Franco was Stalin. He wanted a diplomatic and military alliance with the ruling classes of France and Britain against Hitler, and was implacably opposed to the development of socialist revolution in Spain – out of fear, among other things, that this would alienate the French and British governments. In backing the Republic, therefore – and at a high price – he insisted that the revolution be contained within bourgeois democratic limits.
The period up to mid-1937 was one of permanent struggle between the central republican government, chiefly armed and organised through Moscow, and the local workers’ councils, workers’ militia, etc. The bourgeois democratic Republic was clearly incompatible with the workers’ and peasants’ struggles and organisations, and with the demands they embodied (socialised property, land expropriation, workers’ control of production, etc.). The outcome of the struggle was that first the forces at the base of Spanish society were limited and contained, and then the workers’ councils were destroyed in pitched battles, police actions, etc.: in Barcelona in early May 1937, in Aragon a little later on.
What the whole tragedy demonstrated was the clear incompatibility between the maintenance of the bourgeois parliamentary government and even local workers’ councils, even local independent working class action that went beyond the narrow prescribed limits set by the central government. The key to the tragedy of Spain was that those who led the workers’ councils – above all the anarchists – opposed the centralisation of the workers’ councils, thereby leaving a void at the centre of Spanish life which the counter-revolutionary liberals and Communist Party filled, organised and used against the working class. From that struggle the only victor was General Franco.
Wherever the issue has appeared, parliamentary democracy has proven incompatible with forms of workers’ councils. If one form is to be maintained, the other has to be destroyed. In France, in 1936, to save the Popular Front government, the Communist Party called off a mass strike movement. At the end of the war, in France and Italy, the Communist Parties saved the parliamentary system by disarming the Resistance. In Chile, the maintenance of the Allende Popular Unity government was achieved through attacks on the workers’ movement, both directly and through the method of bureaucratising and limiting it. The results, over and over again, are famous disasters.
Poulantzas is not putting forward a ‘new’ strategy, but an old, tried and tested, fully guaranteed formula – for working-class defeat. It is the job of Marxists to insist that a mass workers’ movement that does not complete the process of socialist revolution by centralising its own power in new institutions, and by smashing all obstacles to that centralisation of its power in workers’ councils, prepares its own downfall. It is vital that the ideas of those like Poulantzas, who propose limitations on workers’ power, be combated as strongly as possible.
It may not, however, be Poulantzas himself we have to combat. He ends his book with a gloomy reverie on the ‘risks’ of the ‘democratic road’:
… at worst, we could be heading for camps and massacres as appointed victim. But to that I reply: if we weigh up the risks, that is in any case preferable to massacring other people only to end up ourselves beneath the blade of a Committee of Public Safety or some Dictator of the Proletariat… There is only one sure way of avoiding the risks of democratic socialism, and that is to keep quiet and march ahead under the tutelage and the rod of advanced liberal democracy. But that is another story.
The ambiguity is characteristic. Is this to be the topic of Poulantzas’s next offering, we wonder? It would not be inappropriate: for he has shown, decisively, that he is already under the theoretical tutelage of liberal democracy – whether we call it advanced or not.

Notes
1. K. Marx, The Constitution of the French Republic Adopted November 4 1848, Notes to the People, London, no. 7 (June 1851); cited in Hal Draper, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, Vol. I (1977), Monthly Review Press, p. 316.
2. Ralph Miliband, The State in Capitalist Society, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, (1969), (now in Quartet paperback); Nicos Poulantzas, Political Power and Social Classes, NLB, (1973); Fascism and Dictatorship (1974); Classes in Contemporary Capitalism (1975); Crisis of the Dictatorships (1976). Miliband and Poulantzas debated in various issues of the New Left Review.
3. John Lea, The State of Society, International Socialism, old series, no 41, Dec.–Jan, 1969; Simon Clarke, Marxism, Sociology and Poulantzas’s Theory of the State, Capital and Class, 2, summer 1977.
4. Isaac Balbus, Modern capitalism and the state, Monthly Review, May 1971.
5. John Lea, op. cit.
6. For instance, Simon Clarke, Althusser’s Marxism (scandalously still unpublished mimeo, but available from him at Dept. of Sociology, University of Warwick); E.P. Thompson, The Poverty of Theory and other essays, Merlin 1978.
7. Lucio Coletti, From Rousseau to Lenin, NLB (1972).
8. See Colin Barker, Muscular Reformism (review of Marxism and Politics), International Socialism, old series, 102 (October 1977).
9. Nicos Poulantzas, State, Power, Socialism (hereafter SPS), New Left Books, (1978), £7.50. Poulantzas also gave a very interesting interview to Henri Weber of the French section of the Fourth International; this first appeared in Critique Communiste 16, (June 1977), then appeared in translation in International and was reprinted in the US journal Socialist Review, no. 38 (March–April 1978), the source from which I quote (hereafter Interview).
10. SPS, p. 256.
11. ibid..
12. ibid., p. 257.
13. Interview, p. 20.
14. Well, almost. There is the following small interchange between Poulantzas and Weber, in which neither is very illuminating:
Poulantzas: Do you believe in pluralism?
Weber: Of course. We believe in it and we practice it.
Poulantzas: But for your opponents as well?
Weber: Certainly. Even for the bourgeois parties, it’s there in writing.
Poulantzas: Aha. Even for the bourgeois parties. Now, not to be too naive, there are things one has to say, because we fear for ourselves as well.
Weber: Of course.
Poulantzas: It’s all very well to say so, but I want to know what forms of institutional guarantee there would be – they are always secondary, of course, but they matter … (Interview, p. 23)
We leave to some other occasion discussion of the FI’s written guarantees to bourgeois parties!
15. SPS, pp. 264–5.
16. ibid., p. 260.
17. ibid., p. 256. Note that Poulantzas, eager to claim the restless spirit of Karl Marx for his ideas, is very cavalier with the old revolutionary, as he is with Engels, who actually suggested that if people wanted to understand ‘the dictatorship of the proletariat’ they should look at the Paris Commune. It seems that if there was a ‘signpost’ in Marx and Engels, it did not exactly point in Poulantzas’s direction, but directly against him.
18. SPS, p. 124.
19. ibid., p. 125.
20. e.g. Norman Geras, The Legacy of Rosa Luxemburg, NLB 1976, p.187. Others of her criticisms of the Bolsheviks in her pamphlets were, in any case, quite misplaced: cf. Tony Cliff, Rosa Luxemburg, IS 1969, ch. 7.
21. cf. Tony Cliff, op. cit., p. 70.
22. Norman Geras, op. cit., p. 144.
23. ibid., p. 126.
24. I draw here on Tony Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 3, Pluto (1978).
25. SPS, p. 253; Interview, p. 21.
26. In the Interview, Henri Weber offers this argument, but lets Poulantzas get away with murder in reply. Poulantzas refuses to accept the historical explanation of the inward defeat of the Russian Revolution, citing as additional examples of lack of democracy the revolutions in China, Cuba, Cambodia. Weber does not mention – how could he? – that the working class played no independent role in these revolutions, that they never were any kind of socialist revolution. Has the FI come to this pass, that it cannot defend the soviet idea against reformism?
27. Interview, p. 22.
28. Poulantzas defends the secret ballot, as surprisingly does Henri Weber. (Interview, p. 25)
29. e.g. SPS, p. l04, on the ‘individualisation of the body-politic as an ensemble of identical monads separated from the State.’
30. cf. e.g. Franz Neumann, The change in the function of law in modern society, The Democratic and the Authoritarian State, Free Press (1957); Poulantzas himself also notes this, e.g. SPS, p. 172.
31. Interview, p. 20.
32. SPS, p.262, emphasis in original.
33. Poulantzas’s argument involves overthrowing Marx’s opinion, from the Paris Commune onwards, that the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made machinery of the state and wield it for its own purposes. He treats ‘representative democracy’ as if it were a class-neutral form of eternal relevance. Yet he also contradicts himself: e.g. ‘... political domination is itself inscribed in the institutional materiality of the State… state power (that of the bourgeoisie in the capitalist state) is written into this materiality’ (SPS, p. 14); he notes that the capitalist state embodies the separation of manual and intellectual labour, but fudges the issue in relation to Parliament – ‘It is equally clear that a number of institutions of so-called indirect democracy (political parties, parliament, etc.) in which the relationship between State and masses is expressed, themselves depend on the same mechanism’ (SPS p. 56) – leaving open the possibility that ‘some’ institutions are somehow different, but without specifying which, or how.
34. Interview, p. 31.
35. e.g. his chapter on The Weakening of the State, SPS, pp. 241ff.
36. ibid., pp. 206–7.
37. Interview, p. 20
38. SPS, p.255. Cf. also ibid., p. 261.
39. ibid., p. 264.
40. ibid., p. 255.
41. ibid., p. 260.
42. Interview, pp. 13–4.
43. SPS, p. 198.
44. ibid., p. 197
45. ibid., p.197.
46. Inter alia, cf. Nicolai Bukharin, The Economics of the Transformation Period, Bergman (1971).
47. SPS, p. 197.
48. ibid., p. 265.



The Messingkauf Dialogues
Bertolt Brecht (translated by John Willett)
Methuen, 8s 6d (paper)
More of Brecht’s writings on the theatre, here in the form of a number of fragmentary dialogues between a Philosopher, a Dramaturg, an Actor and (occasionally) an Actress and a Worker. Once again, Brecht’s central concern is with the social purpose of the theatre, the ends to which its techniques are turned. All representations of human life contain some purpose, however implicitly; for Brecht the Marxist the purpose must be that of assisting the audience to examine its own existence critically. From this central concern everything else flows: the concern with acting styles, with scenic effects, with the interpretation of the classics, the ‘Alienation effect,’ etc.
In particular, Brecht is again at pains to assert that the intellect has a place in the theatre, an intellect that is naturally involved with emotions:
‘You provoke all sorts of passions (in the contemporary theatre), but a passion for an argument – oh no. Indeed, you don’t even satisfy it when it’s there.’
The dialogues are in a very fragmentary form, and switch from topic to topic without any clear development of the argument. This is a minor work in the Brecht canon, with little that is not more easily said elsewhere. Nevertheless, it is often witty and provoking, and always interesting. Brecht’s lack of dogmatism and his real delight in everything to do with the theatre make him essential reading for anyone concerned with the rediscovery of Marxist method in aesthetics – if not for all the answers, at least for many of the right questions.
‘The art of acting is one of society’s elementary capacities; it is based on a direct social asset, one of humanity’s pleasures in society; it is like language itself; it’s really a language of its own. I propose we rise to our feet to make this tribute stick in our memory (All rise) And now I propose we should take advantage of the fact that we’ve risen to our feet, to go and relieve ourselves.’



The Bolshevik Revolution, 1917-1923
E.H. Carr
Penguin, 3 vols 9s 6d each
These are the first three of the eight volumes of E.H. Carr’s History of Soviet Russia. Space forbids more than a brief recommendation to every IS reader who has not already done so to avail himself of the opportunity Penguins have given him of buying these books at a relatively cheap price, to be studied and treasured. For Carr’s History is simply indispensable as a mine of finely digested and presented information. His scholarship is exemplary, his detail overwhelming, his judgements finely balanced. At the same time, Carr is no Marxist. He is at his best dealing with the stuff of more conventional politics, diplomacy and administration; but those who wish to learn about the working class that created the Bolshevik Revolution and that disintegrated as a political force all too soon afterwards must turn to other sources, to Trotsky’s History and elsewhere. And Lenin, Trotsky and the other Bolshevik theorists must still be read for a full comprehension of the choices facing the Bolsheviks in the agonising days from October until the death of Lenin. And on one issue in particular, that of workers’ control, Carr’s lack of involvement leads him to underestimate the scale of the post-October tragedy.
None the less, Carr must be read, and read again. We can only hope that Penguins will complete their gift to English-speaking socialists by publishing the remaining five volumes.



The entire pattern of the class struggle in post-war capitalist Britain has been in process of change for some time. A number of inter-related economic, political and social changes have shifted the central areas of struggle to an extent that is only partially clear even now. This article will examine a few of these changes and some of their political implications. The account given here is necessarily sketchy, and to some extent repeats the arguments put forward in Incomes Policy, Legislation and Shop Stewards. Further discussion on the question by way of supplement, criticism or clarification will be very welcome.
 
1. The Change in Scale
The historical tendency of capitalism in Britain as elsewhere has been a continual concentration and centralisation of capital. This hardly requires detailing: what is important is that the typical and dominant capitalist enterprise today is quite unlike the owner-managed mill or factory that characterised the 19th century economy; today the typical unit is the huge corporate semi-empire, with establishments often scattered throughout Britain and overseas as well. Unilever is large even among the giants, but by no means untypical. The 1962 Annual Report, specially reprinted as a pamphlet, reports that the Boards of Unilever (one in Rotterdam, one in London) control ‘several hundred subsidiary companies engaged in their work in more than 50 countries, each of them ultimately answering to the parent companies, Unilever Ltd and Unilever NV.’ Capital employed more than doubled from 1949 to 1961, from £281 millions to £642 millions, while trading profits trebled, from £31.9 millions to £100.7 millions. [1]
The directors and top managers of these great concerns dominate the most profitable sectors in the economy, and typically record the highest growth rates. Inter-connected with each other in diverse ways, from joint directorships and common holdings in joint subsidiary companies or servicing agencies to inter-marriage and common school and club affiliations, those who control these companies effectively control the major decisions in our society.
The rise of oligopoly means that they play a large part in the determination of their own prices in the home economy, rather than having them determined for them by the free play of the market. But more than this, they over-flow and can to a degree ignore the boundaries of the traditional national state. They, and the international financial organisations with which they are intimately linked, are thus in a position to put enormous pressure on to any national government, particularly in a state like Britain which is heavily dependent on export and import trade and whose balance of payments is so fraught with problems. Their collective, if only semi-planned, control over the flow of goods, services and capital in the world market gives large business international powers inconceivable even in the 19th century. Then, paradoxically, the British government’s potential power over business was much greater than today.
These changes are familiar. In relation to the class struggle in Britain, however, what matters is that the British government is not the only, or even always the most important agency determining, directly or indirectly, what happens in Britain. This is clearest in relation to its social welfare policies: before the 1964 General Election Labour offered as one of its principal baits to the electorate the promise that if elected it would immediately increase and reorganise the State old-age pensions. In the event the pressure of international financial opinion, mediated largely through the City of London, made this impossible. The ‘pound sterling’ had to be given priority over reform at home, and the increases were delayed for six months to win the ‘confidence’ of the banking fraternity of London, Europe and the United States. So too with the ‘incomes policy,’ the freeze, the squeeze, and so forth. International business opinion sets close limits for any capitalist government. This is true anywhere, but is most acutely apparent in Britain.
It is for this reason, among others, that working-class reforms won through Parliament have declined in importance since the war. It is also an important factor in any explanation of the general decline of Parliament as an important decision-making centre in British political and economic life. For the pressures of international capitalism are but poorly mediated through the walls of the Palace of Westminster; rather they are felt immediately at the points of intersection between industry, finance and government, in the Cabinet, Whitehall, the new ‘planning’ bodies etc – anywhere, indeed, but in Parliament. Centrally important decisions are made without reference to the central governing institution of traditional bourgeois democratic theory and practice: the decision to manufacture the atomic bomb is a famous example, and even today knowledge of how the government made its decisions about the Suez campaign is kept a closely guarded secret. The magnitudes and alternative options involved in the new growth industry of ‘planning’ are rarely discussed, and never voted on. Governmental contempt for Parliament is plain: in late July 1966, for instance, the name of the new ‘ombudsman’ was announced before MPs had even had a chance to decide to have an ‘ombudsman’ at all. Gradually the Mother of Parliaments becomes more and more a mothers’ meeting. The MP today, socialist or otherwise, has never been so powerless; the ‘honest left-winger’ is all too often an isolated buffoon at national level, while locally his declining band of party activists seek to turn him into a social worker with connections. Such struggle as there is hardly touches him.
 
2. Decentralisation of Reform
What is of relevance here is that the forces of Parliamentary reform are almost spent. The Labour Party’s conversion, in theory as well as in practice, from a party of working-class reform to a party of ruling-class rationalisation is a part of this change. But the change does not by any means imply that there are no more reforms to be had, in the sense that workers in Britain are making no more material gains. What is happening, however, is that the old means of securing reforms are in decay, and new ones are taking their place.
The change is of profound importance for revolutionary socialist politics in Britain. From the second half of the 19th century onwards, the tradition of parliamentary reformism, embodied in the Labour Party from its inception, has been the great barrier to any significant growth of revolutionary politics in the working class. If, however, as we have suggested, there is a decline in parliamentary reform in practice, this cannot help but affect the hold of the theory of parliamentary reformism over British working-class politics. The beginnings of the change are already discernible, even if they are not as yet fully articulated. Immediately, one of the effects of the decline of Parliamentary reformism has been an overall decline in working-class politics of any kind.
The typical 19th century capitalist in Britain was so small and relatively independent that reforms had to be imposed on him from above, through the government. The degree of competition in the market and the small size of his reserves made it imperative that if he granted a reduction in hours, or better working conditions, his competitors should do likewise. Reforms were thus won indirectly. The competition of the Tory and Liberal (and later the Labour) Parties for working-class votes, in the context of an expanding capitalist economy, ensured a relatively steady flow of reforms of various kinds, largely won through national political institutions. The high point came in the years 1905-1913.
Today however the situation is different. Instead of paying out for their reforms through indirect political bargaining by representatives only distantly connected with those for whom they bargained, the directors of the contemporary oligopolistic enterprise pay out directly to their own workers. In terms of ‘social welfare’ provision, this means that fringe benefits like company pension and sick-pay schemes, holiday benefits and so forth, granted directly by the company without the intermediation of the state (except in a supporting role through tax-concessions), have become increasingly important. State schemes have, by and large, just about managed to keep pace with the cost of living, and there has been a tendency to shift their cost increasingly on to those who use them in order to reduce the direct state contribution. Workers who wish their welfare benefits to match the rising standard of living must, however, look increasingly to winning increases at their own places of work. The process of reform has become partially decentralised. [2]
Fringe benefits are not evenly spread over the economy, and their incidence between industries varies quite widely. Thus in 1961-2 49.3 per cent of all employees in all manufacturing industries were covered by some kind of sick-pay scheme at work, but the variation between industries was considerable. At the top end were the chemical and food industries, with 84.2 and 71.7 per cent coverage respectively, while at the bottom end of the scale, metal manufacturing and leather recorded only 26.7 and 26.3 per cent coverage. [3] The most complete coverage has been for administrative and clerical employees, but manual workers are increasingly coming within the scope of the various private schemes. And there appears to be an increasing tendency for fringe benefits, originally a matter for unilateral settlement by employers, to come within the scope of collective bargaining. As for occupational pension schemes,
‘The great growth in coverage has occurred since the Second World War ... Growth has been associated inter alia with a change in character of the pension arrangements, and in the attitude of employers and employees thereto: occupational pensions developed as a form of employer-benevolence, a reward for the “faithful servants,” discretionary in character but difficult to dishonour in practice. They have evolved into a part of the contract of employment, a postponed wage- or salary-payment.’ [4]
The following table shows their spread since the war [5]:



 


   


Private
Schemes


Public services
and nationalised
industries


Total




1936


1.6  


–


–




1951


–


–


6.3  




1952


3.1  


4.0


7.1  




1956


4.3  


3.8


8.1  




1958


4.95


3.8


8.75




1960


5.5−6.0


3.8


9.3−9.8




1964


6.5−7.0


3.8


10.3−10.8




3. Wages
The decentralisation of bargaining over reforms is not confined to those matters coming under the traditional head of ‘social welfare’ but applies also – and even more importantly – to wages. On top of a national minimum rate, negotiated centrally in bargaining between national trade-union and national employers’ organisations, local bargaining has developed rapidly since the war. The product of this local bargaining is well-known as ‘wage drift.’ It has been steadily increasing in importance. Today national bargaining over wages sets the floor for the poorest firms and the most backward industries. For the more advanced sections, in many industries, it has become more and more a battle over unrealities. One estimate is that ‘supplementary payments’ (the difference between nationally negotiated wage rates and actual earnings, regardless of overtime) rose as a proportion of average earnings from 19 per cent in 1948 to 26 per cent in 1959 – by 1959, in other words, actual average earnings for a standard working week were about one-third higher than the standard rate, and the ratio was increasing. [6]
The importance of local wage-bargaining varies considerably between industries. In engineering and other metal-using and metal-manufacturing industries, and in building, local bargaining is of great importance, and it is now by no means uncommon for local bargaining in expanding firms to win workers more than national minimum-rate bargaining. In other industries, where organisation is less effective, where companies are less capital-intensive, less profitable and generally smaller, in declining industries, and where such institutions as payments-by-results systems do not provide the same negotiating opportunities, the proportion of earnings won through local negotiation is smaller. Within particular industries, too, there are wide differences in earnings: regional factors, together with variations in militancy and in opportunity, create a situation in which some engineering workers, for instance, probably earn almost twice the amount earned by other workers doing the same jobs.
And there are other industries, like the railways, with one employer controlling the wages throughout the organisation, in which local bargaining is of little direct importance in determining the level of earnings. [7] Even for these industries, however, local negotiations are of great indirect importance, since railway workers compare their earnings not with the minimum rates but with the actual earnings of those who operate a double-layered bargaining system. ‘Wage drift’ now leads the national wage-movement. [8]
The decentralisation of the whole process of bargaining and reform is of profound importance for the labour movement. It creates new problems, and opens up new possibilities. The rest of this article will deal with a few of these.
 
4. Rusty organisations
The traditional, official trade-union machinery has not adapted to the new situation in a way that enables it to exploit the new possibilities. At a time when national bargaining is becoming less important, the trade-union hierarchies still defend national bargaining as first priority.
The most notable example of this is the official union attitude towards the national engineering procedure, as set up in the notorious York Memorandum. This procedure, with its ‘provisions for the avoidance of disputes,’ was more or less forced on the unions in the engineering lockout of 1922. Union conference after union conference in the engineering industry has gone on record in opposition to this procedure, which is not only extremely tortuous and slow but also heavily biased in favour of the employers. Yet in practice union leaderships have done nothing to negotiate the abolition of this ‘procedure.’ Instead they have tended to defend it, by insisting that their members should use it rather than engage in ‘unconstitutional’ action – action in other words that falls outside the scope of a set of rules that has been repeatedly condemned at union conferences. At the shop-floor level, it is clear that the ‘procedural rules’ have largely fallen into desuetude and contempt. A.J. Scamp, the motor industry’s ‘trouble-shooter,’ for instance, reported recently that at Morris Motors, Cowley, 256 out of 297 stoppages of work had occurred even before the senior shop steward, let alone the local official, had had a chance to put the grievance into procedure. Scamp continues:
‘In the first half of 1966, again 128 stoppages out of 142 took place before the senior shop steward had had time to act on them, in spite of special efforts made by the company to provide facilities for the bringing in of senior shop stewards as soon as a problem was known to exist.’ [9]
The typical official union reaction has been to condemn this kind of development out of hand, without instead seeking its cause and cure in a rapid change in the old procedure.
Centralised, national bargaining was developed in a period when the unions were in a much weaker position than today. It was in the interwar years that it was finally and firmly established. Unemployment made it easy for employers to victimise militant trade unionists, and the absence of any real power in the workshops made workers rely on their full-time officials, who had the obvious advantage that they could not be easily victimised. In this situation, national bargaining made sense. It enabled the unions to resist or delay to some degree the employers’ pressure to reduce wage rates, by forcing the use of the rather cumbersome procedure. In a situation in which there was a close correspondence between national rates and actual earnings – i.e. in which ‘wage drift’ played a much less important role – it was important that the national rates be guarded carefully. Of course, as V.L. Allen has recently pointed out, the advantages in this arrangement did not only rest with the unions:
‘(The employers) were hampered in their attempts to reduce labour-costs in that they could not easily and promptly impose uniform wage reductions. But they could reduce their labour forces by shutting down part of their works or by imposing short-time working ... (Also) to some extent national negotiations enabled employers to keep rates lower than some of them could reasonably have afforded to pay.’ [10]
National bargaining also suited the employers in the interwar years since their main interest was in restrictive practices, market-sharing cartels and so forth. National bargaining without wage drift meant uniform wage costs and thus a reduction in the area of competition.
Today the situation is quite different, yet the trade-union leaderships still hang on to the empty forms of national bargaining, instead of ‘playing the market’ to the full now that it has turned so much to their members’ favour. It is left to other members of the unions to develop the struggle locally and to wring out the extra shillings that the employers can now be made to pay. [11]
Second, the basic unit on which the rest of the union hierarchy rises has tended to wither away. On the whole, the trade-union branch is in a state of decline, although there are variations in this development. One of the more optimistic assessments of attendance at branch meetings suggests that it varies between 3 and 15 per cent, with a heavy concentration in the region of 4-7 per cent. [12] The causes of the branch’s decline are several. First, with bargaining now taking place at the remote distance of the national bargaining session, or in the factories, the branch is only remotely involved in the central function of trade unionism. Second, the growth of both State social services and company-based fringe benefits has reduced the ‘friendly society’ function of the branch as a servicing agency for the individual member. Third, the continued growth of the great cities and the development of public and private forms of transport have created a situation in which workers often travel considerable distances to work. With union branches based on the worker’s place of residence rather than his place of work, it can often happen that he knows hardly anyone in his branch so that the branch declines as a centre of social activities. Also, branches contain members from many different workplaces, so that they are incapable of handling problems arising in any one factory. In one Ilford, Essex factory, for example, it was found that the 2,000 AEU members belonged to 35 different branches! This decline of the branch is a natural response to new circumstances, although there are variations in its extent. It may be that the decline has been greatest in the South of England, although this remains to be proved. [13]
It is on the basis of the branch that the union hierarchy rises, and the slow decay of the basic organisational unit, the branch, makes for a greater separation between leadership and rank and file. It is more difficult to apply ‘constitutional’ pressures on the union leaderships in this situation. Apathy towards the branch, itself a product of changes in capitalist society, helps to foster bureaucracy at the top. The whole organisational structure of British trade unionism no longer meets the needs of the membership.
 
5. State collaboration and bureaucratisation
At the 1966 Trades Union Congress in Blackpool, Victor Feather, Assistant General Secretary, stated:
‘The more integrated the economy becomes, the more integrated must the unions be.’
Full employment and the growth of capitalist ‘planning’ have led successive governments to seek the collaboration of the trade unions in the administration of British capitalism. As a process, its real origins may be seen in the Treasury Agreement of 1915, when the union leaders gave up the right to strike for the duration of the First World War. Only when the unions, by reason of the potential power given them by continuous full employment, have been in a position to threaten what the government has defined as the ‘national interest’ has the government been interested in seeking union collaboration. Thus, while the State was responsible for setting a quite elaborate conciliation machinery in the course of the First World War, in an attempt to prevent union militancy from restricting the patriotic war effort, governmental interest in the maintenance of ‘industrial harmony’ faded remarkably when unemployment again shot up at the end of the war:
‘The number of conciliation settlements under the auspices of the Ministry of Labour fell from 1,323 in 1919 to 167 in 1923. Conciliation appeared to be unnecessary when unions could be brought to heel so quickly and effectively by employers.’ [14]
With unemployment never much below one million in the inter-war years the government had little concern over union impact on the national interest until the advent of the Second World War. Then, suddenly, full employment returned, union membership rose, and the official attitude to trade unions altered:
‘In 1940 without a blush the government again acknowledged the importance of labour and union officials were drawn into the decision-making process of government. The scale of consultation was greater than it had ever been and occurred at each level in the hierarchy of operations from the Cabinet down.’ [15]
Since 1940, full and ‘over-full’ employment has been the rule, and union leaders have been drawn into government collaboration to an increasing extent, regardless of which Party happened to be in power.
The advent of ‘planning’ has only furthered the trend. Union leaders sit on many of the government’s committees, from NEDC and the Prices and Incomes Board to the Court of the Bank of England. The more that the government seeks to intervene in the economy, and particularly the more that interest in the control of labour develops, the further too will the collaboration of trade-union leaders increase. With no willingness to seek alternative solutions to the problems of capitalism, indeed, it is difficult to see what else they could do.
The fact that the trade-union leaders accept a collaborationist role from the government does not by any means increase their ability to get what they want. Indeed, this is very far from being the case. The gains are almost all on the government side; at best a ‘responsible’ posture on a Whitehall chair can delay a little or mildly compromise a government move, unless some credible threat of action by the mass memberships of the unions can be made. But collaboration rules this out. And the costs are considerable, to the mass memberships at least. In return for the right to rubber-stamp governmental decisions, the unions are required to accept limitations of their role in wage bargaining, legislation to diminish their independence and unemployment once every few years to ‘protect the pound.’
But whatever the losses, the great majority of the union leaderships – in practice if not always in public utterance – are committed to the continuance of this system. For a very long time they have been increasingly unwilling to contemplate any form of direct challenge to the government. The General Strike of 1926 was, for them, lesson enough. And so the reality of class struggle experienced daily by their members is transformed in their hands into cooperation and compromise with the powers-that-be in the interest of maintaining the status quo.
Their positions must be justified to their members. It must be understood that the heroic days of the past, while not to be sneered at, need no practical recall. After all:
‘This year we have made special efforts to include Lecturers from outside the Trade Union Movement ...
Mr Jukes, the recently appointed Director of the Engineering Employers’ Federation, who is a Barrister and has brought an entirely new approach to our relations with the Federation.
Mr Jack Scamp, GEC Management Expert, and the trouble-shooter of the motor industry ...
Mr Tom Byrne, Labour Attaché at the American Embassy, who was a member of the Teamsters’ Union ...
It is good that we should hear from such men as these. The days when workers and management were enemies are over. We have a common interest. The good of the country of Great Britain is of more importance than sectional interest ...’ [16]
To these policies various minorities of the rank and file of the unions offer sporadic, more or less articulate challenges, and the reaction from the top wavers between attempts on the one hand at increased internal discipline from the top and on the other half-hearted and shifting compromises between what their members want and what business, through its government, demands of them. The most obvious example of this was the TUC’s acceptance of a ‘wage-vetting’ role in the period before the ‘freeze.’ As the total freeze begins to come to an end, at the time of writing, the TUC is again seeking to persuade the government to let it play the same role again – a small concession to rank-and-file militancy, whereby instead of allowing the State to limit wages directly, the TUC will try to perform the job for them by persuading unions to reduce their demands. Alternatively, discipline can be increased. In specific instances a steward’s credentials can be and are withdrawn. But more generally the obvious solution is further bureaucratisation to reduce the degree or at least the visibility of rank-and-file opposition. One of the best ways is to increase the numbers of full-time officials, and to keep matters in their hands as far as possible; these men are dependent for their jobs and their careers on the top brass of the unions, and are thus more likely to be responsive to directives from head office than are lay members who are closer to the rank and file. In 1959, full-time officials numbered some 2,600. [17] Since then, and particularly since the advent of ‘planning,’ the drive to increase their numbers and influence has been greatly increased. In the ETU, 1965 was the year in which the EC was changed from a body of laymen to one of full-time officials, in which the EC’s term of office was extended from two to five years, in which the process of turning branch secretaries into full-time officials began, in which rank-and-file Area Committees were abolished and the credentials of stewards issued instead by the EC itself – in which, in short, the whole union structure was made more effective.’ [18]
In 1956 a similar idea was put forward at the National Committee of the AEU. Since then, a sub-committee of the EC has been studying a set of proposals for reorganisation put forward by the General Secretary, Jim Conway. These include merging of branches under full-time branch secretaries, full-time factory convenors, postal ballots, the check-off system for dues, official control over committees linking different factories in the same combine, payment to dues collectors and special examinations for all full-time officials. [19]
This tendency to greater bureaucratisation is in line with frequent official and semi-official calls to the unions to ‘control their members’ better. The purpose of the AEU proposals was made very clear:
‘It is argued that this kind of closely knit organisation will prevent any recurrence of the “workers’ trial” scandals which created such a stir during the general election campaign.’
Similarly, one of the central points in the Devlin Report on the docks was the demand that the T&GWU regain control of its members in dockland – not that the members should regain control of the T&GWU! The government is demanding that the unions act more ‘responsibly’ towards the national capitalist economy and become more like foremen and less like workers’ representatives. This of course requires that power be further centralised in the unions – significantly, one of the most common suggestions in evidence to the Royal Commission.
 
6. The Rank-and-File Response
To this situation the rank-and-file members of the unions have replied in various ways. Of these, by far the most important has been the growth and development of work-based rank-and-file representatives – shop stewards and similar lay representatives. Shop stewards first appeared in the engineering industry towards the end of the 19th century, as the scale of industry increased. Until the First World War, however, they were largely concerned with collecting dues and checking that members were paid up-to-date. They were confined to the skilled men. Within a year of the outbreak of the war, however, they had become prominent and had begun organising the semi-skilled. The official trade-union machines voluntarily gave up the right to strike, and as new problems appeared in the workshops in the shape of massive ‘dilution,’ job regrading, removal of ‘restrictive practices,’ extensions of overtime working and (later) mass call-ups, the stewards filled the void left by the full-time officials. With the postwar onset of mass unemployment the stewards’ movement collapsed, leaving a small Communist Party and employer-recognition of stewards as its only legacies. Throughout the twenties and into the thirties little was heard of shop stewards, but the rise in employment associated with the renewed military spending in the latter half of the thirties saw their return to prominence. Since then they have grown in number and importance.
The decentralisation of bargaining has played a key role in their latest rise. Today probably something like a half of all British manual workers are covered by some form of steward organisation, and these are typically the better-paid, more militant workers in the technologically more advanced industries. In some sections of industry and business, organised white-collar workers too are tending to develop a similar system of lay workplace representatives.
Today, in most factories, the shop steward is identified as the union, and workers pay far more attention to the election of stewards than they do to the election of branch and higher union officials. The intimacy of the daily association between workers and stewards ensures that the stewards reflect the current level of workers’ consciousness in particular factories more accurately than do the more remote national and even local full-time officials.
Even at the local level, the steward has several advantages over the branch official, from the point of view of working-class democracy, quite apart from the fact that his activities are of greater interest to the ordinary members. First, the steward is a worker like other workers, and directly responsible to a ‘constituency’ whose problems he fully shares. Second, the closeness of his relations with his members makes him much more responsive to membership feeling at any one time. Third, since he is usually elected on an annual basis and typically receives little (if anything) as a reward for office, he is easily removed – and a high proportion of stewards are in fact changed each year. Fourth, his constituency is normally of such a size that he can know all his members, and they can all know him. A multitude of informal workplace sanctions can thus be exercised to keep him more or less in line.
 
7. Unofficial strikes
The gulf between the official union machinery and the rank-and-file members is well expressed in the data on strikes. The proportion of strikes recognised by the unions as ‘official’ has been declining: in 1936-37, according to the Ministry of Labour, the unions recognised about one third (33 per cent) of strikes, while today the proportion is at least as low as one twentieth (5 per cent) and probably much lower. Indeed, not only are most strikes not recognised by the unions, but in many cases the union officials intervene actively to bring them to an end.
The pattern of strikes itself has also shifted. One of the factors lying behind this has been the growing integration by large-scale capital of its plants and processes. In the technologically advanced industries, this process of integration has created a situation in which a strike by quite a small number of workers can halt a fairly massive production process. The steel, chemical and motor industries provide the most obvious examples; motors are the most publicised, but in steel and chemicals a strike threat is probably equivalent in its effect on management to a two-hour walk-out at a BMC factory. A stoppage of work which holds up production on a large scale obviously hurts the employer a great deal more than does a stoppage whose immediate effects are limited to the work performed by the strikers themselves. Typically the industries with highly integrated production flows are also the industries with high capital-labour ratios: a strike means expensive capital equipment lying idle. The workers’ bargaining strength is enhanced. This change in bargaining strength, associated also of course with full employment, is illustrated by the statistics for strikes in Britain since the start of the First World War [20]:



 


Average no.
of stoppages
per year


Average no.
of workers
involved
(th’s’nds)


Average no.
of working
days lost
(th’s’nds)


Average no.
of days
per worker
on strike




1914−18


   814


   632


  5,292


 8.4  




1919−26


   654


1,384


49,041


32.2  




1927−38


   539


   306


  3,246


10.1  




1939−45


1,538


   506


  1,897


  3.75




1946−50


1,690


   463


  1,944


  4.2  




1951−64


2,312


   984


  3,361


  3.2  




During the First World War, the special conditions of wartime full employment and the new strains placed on workshop practices by demands for ‘dilution’ and the like created a large strike movement that grew in intensity in the workshops as the war proceeded. After the war the employment level fell sharply, the number of strikes diminished but there was a series of large-scale defensive actions in long strikes that culminated in die General Strike and the miners’ strike of 1926. After that defeat the rate of striking declined completely during the worst of the Great Depression. Towards the end of the thirties, however, it began to pick up again as the employment position improved. In 1944 it topped the two-thousand mark (so much for making strikes illegal!) and after a brief fall in the period of the First Labour Government after the war it rose steadily. Today strikes are many, and they are short and effective. A large and unknown proportion of them are not recorded in the official statistics, because of the shortness of their duration. A.J. Scamp reports of the motor industry that of 445 stoppages that took place in five firms in the first half of 1966 more than two thirds lasted for short periods of up to four hours, and that more than 80 per cent did not exceed one working day in duration. [21] Excluding the figures for strikes in the mining industry (which vary widely because of that industry’s special problems) the official figures show a remarkably steady rise in the number of strikes since the mid-1950s. [22] Although by comparison with earlier periods the shortness of strikes makes the number of working days lost small, the number of separate stoppages is higher than it has ever been, and the number of workers involved in strikes today compares quite well with the number involved in the period of the great battles of the early 1920s.
Not only has the rate of striking changed its pattern, but also the issues over which strikes are fought have changed to some extent too. Turner notes that:
‘In the 20 years of high employment from 1940 the proportion of strikes about “wage questions other than demands for increases,” and (particularly) about “working arrangements, rules and discipline” rose remarkably: from one-third of all stoppages to three-quarters ... One could say that these disputes all involve attempts to submit managerial discretion and authority to agreed – or failing that, customary – rules: alternatively that they reflect an implicit pressure for more democracy and individual rights in industry.’ [23]
The TUC’s 1960 Report on Disputes and Workshop Representation similarly confirms that in the years 1958-59 the majority of strikes involved an issue of managerial authority. [24] In other! words, as well as the direct struggle over wages, there is a growing struggle in the workshops over the question, who is to control?
Only if this is understood can the large number of strikes in which workers engage with no hope of increasing their incomes – indeed, in the sure knowledge that they will lose money – make any sense at all. One of the crucial facts of capitalist production is that workers do not sell their labour, but their labour-power. In other words, a worker sells his ability to work, for a given time. But the contract of employment does not, and can not, specify how much work he will actually do, or under what conditions. And as workers have grown more and more self-confident, they have set up their own standards, so that today a great part of the struggle in the factories is over the question, whose idea of a ‘fair day’s work for a fair day’s pay’ is to prevail in practice? An American sociologist suggested that when a worker is hired he ‘sells his promise to obey commands.’ [25] But even this definition leaves a wide area unspecified. For whose commands are to be obeyed, and which ones are legitimate and which not? The question of who is to decide these matters, the worker or the employer, remains unsettled. In practice the relation of forces between the two sides in industry settle the question, but never with any degree of fixity. The frontier of control advances and retreats continually. This is one of the central points of conflict within all capitalist societies. The daily experience of factory work is the root of all trade-union militancy.
Within this perspective, it is easier to understand how many of the strikes that do involve money questions are really strikes over the question of control. If there is no immediate prospect of doing anything concrete to shatter the foundations of capitalist power as it impinges daily on workers’ experience, then at least the price for this alienated form of labour can be forced high. In many cases, indeed, the bargain may be conscious, as Goldthorpe has suggested is the case with Luton’s Vauxhall workers, who accept poor social relations and unpleasant conditions at work in return for a relatively high wage-packet that will at least buy a reasonable leisure life. [26]
As the urge to control has become more powerful, managements have sought a variety of ways, new and old, for fighting back. For management’s own power and status interests are threatened by an upsurge from the shop floor; a hierarchical, sometimes semi-paternalistic structure is constantly threatened, implicitly and explicitly, as the statistics of the labour office records continually assert themselves as ‘commodities with fists.’ From disciplinarian foremen and ‘personnel management’ to automated line-production and ‘measured daywork’ (and lately productivity agreements), the aim is the same, to reduce the continual threat of planlessness and unpredictability represented by the workers on the shop floor. In many plants, particularly where individual piece-work schemes are in operation, management has no real idea of its relative costs, because of the thousand and one ‘fiddles’ operated everywhere. There is a state of ‘near-anarchy’ in sections of the motor industry; there is a need for ‘more discipline’ everywhere. There are subterranean and subversive oppositional movements in every workplace in the country, organised and unorganised alike. They take their shape, typically, in organised form in shop stewards’ organisations, the natural expression of workers’ urges to control their own destinies.
 
8.’Do it yourself’
The new pattern of strikes reflects changes in the working class itself. Today workers are self-confident as probably never before; they are able to hurt the employers’ interests more than in any previous period; they fight over questions that, in earlier periods, they were prepared to let the bosses decide. And because the winning of better wages and conditions, ‘social welfare’ benefits and so forth has become decentralised in the great majority of private industries and in large sectors of public enterprise too (mining, electricity, gas, airways, etc), the struggle is now much more firmly in the hands of the rank-and-file workers themselves rather than being dependent on the initiatives of their national leaders and full-time officials. The growth of the stewards’ organisations is an expression of this change, even if its significance on a national level is small because of the current fragmentation of the movement.
The whole process has received a number of different names: ‘privatisation,’ ‘Americanisation of class relations,’ ‘depoliticisation,’ ‘bourgeoisification,’ ‘the growth of apathy,’ and so forth, each name seeking to summarise an aspect of the new pattern of class relations in Britain. But whatever title one gives to the process, one feature is of great political importance. There is a decline in interest in the whole traditional system of means for winning material reforms. One index of this is the low proportion of union members who vote in national trade-union elections. In the recent ballot for the important new AEU post of national organiser, for example, only four per cent of the membership bothered to vote. In national parliamentary elections, all the minority parties (with the exception of the Welsh Nationalists) have shown a more or less steady decline in their votes. Ward Labour Parties are similarly in decay, although there are (reportedly) occasional exceptions to this; overall, individual memberships of the Labour Party have fallen from 1,005,000 in 1953 to 816,765 – a fall of nearly 20 per cent in 12 years, which the return of a Labour Government has done nothing to halt.
In political terms, the growth of confidence in their own strength and the parallel decline in importance of nationally won reforms has meant for the working class a greatly reduced reliance on national leaders, be these national trade-union leaders or MPs, and a greater self-reliance. Far from leaving it to their national representatives to win things for them, the contemporary British working class wins things for itself. Reforms are no longer a matter for the top but for the bottom of the labour movement’s pyramidal structure. Today the degree of local militancy determines many workers’ standards of life far better than does national militancy.
Nonetheless, the picture is not all bright. Despite the undoubted growth of militancy, of self-reliance and willingness to fight over new issues in new ways, despite, and partly as a result of, the overall decline in traditional reformist practice, the contemporary working class suffers from a narrowness of vision and a lack of unity that can and does discourage many socialists. If the potential is to become reality, a number of problems must be overcome.
The greatest of these by far is the current fragmentation of action. Locally, the militancy of groups of workers in particular factories, building sites, docks, pits etc is admirable. But the bonds of solidarity between one group and another that would be a sign of a new movement among British workers, are largely absent. Even for the conventional trade-union struggle, without any overall political perspective, this is a serious weakness in contemporary conditions. As capital is more and more concentrated, and more and more integrated, the need for rank-and-file unity is vital since it is easy for the employers to play off one factory against another, to defeat a group of militants here by transferring work there, to other worse organised factories. Nor is isolation only between factories: there are also defeats within a particular shop or department through isolation from other parts of the establishment. At worst, groups of workers have even taken reprisals against others whose militancy caused them to be laid off. Those cases in which practical solidarity has been shown only throw the problem into clearer relief. The central reason for this fragmentation is clear: there is no clear perception of a common purpose that can unite workers outside the narrow and specific struggles that arise in their own workplaces nor any organisational structure. The horizons of the stewards’ organisations are narrow. The specific details of their day-to-day struggles provide no basis for a more generalised unity.
The current form of the struggle, bitty, uneven, narrow, selfish – the routine economic struggle of trade unionism in a period of continuing capitalist prosperity and growth – will never solve the problems posed in a fragmentary way every day of every worker’s life. The spontaneous upsurge of the masses is not with us; nor is the revolutionary party that can seize the moment given to it by that upsurge to conquer political power .for the class. For the moment we struggle still with the symptoms and hardly touch the causes, except in propaganda.
 
9. Prospects: revolutionary politics
By far the largest and most coherent body of political and industrial militants in Britain are to be found within the ranks of the Communist Party (and the ex-Communist Party). No revolutionary group can afford to ignore them. As well as being the only group of militants in the country who were able to lead significant national activities in or around industry, they won a position whereby to a considerable extent, despite their small numbers, they defined the terms of the debate over socialism among sections of the Labour Party and the unions. Until recently the Communist Party has been able to provide almost the sole operative definition of either militancy or left-wing politics in general.
But today the Party is in disarray, particularly in the industrial field. Where the Labour Party has never had any intimate connection with the industrial struggle, and has indeed tended to stress the separation between ‘trade unionism’ and ‘politics’ while yet developing, in voting terms at least, as the mass working-class party, the Communist Party has historically been divided between two principles. On the one hand the Party has, from its origins in the shop stewards’ movement in the First World War, emphasised rank-and-file industrial militancy. On the other hand has been the stress on loyalty to the shifting line from Moscow. The two aspects of the Party have corresponded in part to different sections of the membership: industrial militants on the one hand, and the Party intellectuals and leadership on the other.
The two aspects fused into that odd amalgam, British Stalinism. The Party held the loyalty and patterned the political thought and activity of more than a generation of British working-class militants. Nor was this influence confined to the Party members themselves, or the many who joined and left again, but also Stalinist conceptions of political struggle permeated broad sections of the Labour Left and defined the areas of debate and the climate of ‘left’ opinion.
The period of maximum Communist Party influence has passed, however, for a number of reasons. Firstly, the working-class, with full employment and the spread of decentralised bargaining, has become increasingly self-reliant. In consequence, the need to believe in a socialist paradise as a source of inspiration and strength is much less. The religious quality that characterised support for Russia has received heavy blows from Kruschev’s revelations about Stalin, from the East German and the Hungarian uprisings and so forth.
Added to this is the fact that the Communist world itself is now deeply divided. The days are gone for ever when Communism was one monolithic unity, headed by a universally accepted pope in the Kremlin. Today there is not one pope, but two, and they are in deep and public rivalry.
But for the industrial militants, perhaps the most important factor of all is the growing division between the rank and file and the full-time officials in the unions. This division has important implications for the Communist Party, which has many union officials within its ranks. For Party members and non-Party lefts alike, the Party has provided a career structure within certain unions, in line with its essentially reformist emphasis on getting ‘left’ candidates into office. Once in office, many of these ‘left’ officials have succumbed to the pressures of their positions and have lost the militancy that gave them their support while they were on the shop floor. A whole series of minor betrayals, failures to give adequate support, ineptitudes, petty bureaucratic attitudes and so forth have tended to embitter many of the Party’s loyal militants. But the Party is committed, to its current line on getting ‘left’ officials elected, and will defend its officials against criticism from dissatisfied rank-and-file militants.
Probably there is less disenchantment with the Party’s parliamentary politicking than with the union aspect, since the Party runs few candidates (and there are no Party MPs today) and anyway at present there is little in the way of general politics to make the question of parliamentarism very relevant to day-to-day issues. Nevertheless the Party’s vote in General Elections has been declining, along with other minority parties’. There is an undoubted tendency for support to wither among the Party’s few thousand industrial militants. The Party is less able than ever before to achieve the goals it sets: in the AEU presidential elections for instance, it cannot guarantee a significant proportion of the ‘left’ vote for its candidate, Hugh Scanlon, any more.
For revolutionaries, the most important thing of all is the relative demoralisation of the Party machine: not because of the process itself, but because of the effects of that demoralisation. The Party does not provide very much in the way of activity for its own militants. If anything, it has tended to seek to repress upsurges of militancy, which constantly threaten to evade Party control. Its politics are humdrum and semi-active at best. Today the industrial militants thus very often hold, in a sense, two separate membership cards: one that links them to the Communist Party, and the other that connects them to a nascent militant rank-and-file industrial movement. The latter is the card that is likely to matter most when choices have to be made. For those revolutionaries who seek to rediscover, in their theory and their activities, the core of that bright scarlet revolutionary thread linking them to Lenin, Trotsky, Luxemburg and the rest of the revolutionary Marxist tradition, there can only be one realistic politics at present: the politics of the united front in industry. The possibility exists for work with Party members and sympathisers as never before, work that stresses the points of unity with them: currently opposition to incomes policy, opposition to legislation, defence of rank-and-file trade unionism, and so forth. This means often pushing Party members into activity that the Party itself fails to offer, but cannot oppose. The precise form that the activity takes will vary in every district and in every area of life, depending on the relation of forces at a given time.
What is important, in any case, is that there should be activity and activity that is geared to the movement as it is. For it is the unity between revolutionary theory and revolutionary practice that lies at the heart of the Marxist tradition. In Connolly’s words, ‘The only true prophets are those who carve out the future they announce.’ At the same time, mindless adoption of ‘Bolshevik’ solutions that fitted a genuinely revolutionary situation would be fatal, not because of any desire of Marxists to avoid questions of the seizure of state power, but because we work with the movement as it is and not as it might be. The richest source for the development of Marxist theory is the experience of the working class; to impose grand ‘political’ conceptions on a movement that is fragmented and very narrow in its contemporary focus is both to miss the opportunity for the recreation of theory and also in practice to become isolated and sectarian. The rebuilding of a revolutionary party in Britain begins now with the materials to hand.
 
Footnotes
1. Unilever Ltd, The Anatomy of a Business, London 1962, pp.1-2.
2. See in particular R.M. Titmuss, Essays on ‘The Welfare State’, London 1958.
3. G.L. Reid and D.J. Robertson, Fringe Benefits, Labour Costs and Social Security, London, 1965, p.216.
4. Ibid., pp.169 and 171.
5. Ibid., Table 52, p.170.
6. L.A. Dicks-Mireaux and J.R. Shepherd, The Wage Structure and Some Implications for Incomes Policy, Economic Review, November 1962, p.42.
7. If the tendency towards ‘productivity bargaining’ continues this may become less true. It has been suggested, for instance, that the Southern Region railwaymen should have been paid additional bonuses for ‘greater productivity’ without reference to other railway workers. National Board Prices and Incomes, Report No.8, Pay and Conditions of British Railways Staff, Cmnd 2873, January 1966, para.74.
8. See for instance T. Cliff and C. Barker, Incomes Policy, Legislation and Shop Stewards, London 1966, pp.61-2, fn.5.
9. A.J. Scamp, Report on the activities of the Motor Industry Joint Industrial Council, London, November 1966, para.24.
10. V.L. Allen, Militant Trade Unionism, London 1966, p.39.
11. One notable exception to this general rule is the Draughtsmen’s and Allied Technicians’ Association (DATA), which is almost a model of what a union should be today. Partly because in the past the employers have resisted DATA nationally, but also for reasons of conscious policy, the union pursues an active policy of getting as much for its members as it can on a local basis, and then seeks to spread a gain made in one workplace across the rest of industry. Since all strikes are more or less automatically made official, the union has a very good record among militants for its democracy (and for its policy of paying full pay during disputes!) Some other white-collar unions approximate to this, but none with the aggressive practical militancy of DATA. Here the gap between officials and members is less than in other unions.
12. B.C. Roberts, Trade Union Government and Administration, London 1956, p.95.
13. It is asserted by W.E.J. McCarthy in his Royal Commission Research Paper, The Role of Shop Stewards in British Industrial Relations, London, August 1966.
14. V.L. Allen, Op. cit., p.50.
15. Ibid., p.51.
16. Jim Conway, General Secretary of the AEU, on the Shop Stewards’ Summer School, AEU Journal, September 1966.
17. H.A. Clegg, A.J. Killick and Rex Adams, Trade Union Officers, Oxford 1961.
18. ETU, Abridged Report of the Second Biennial Conference, London 1965.
19. The Sunday Times, 9 October 1966 and The Guardian, 10 October 1966. See also The Notebook, IS 27, Winter 1966-67.
20. Computed from Ministry of Labour, Evidence to the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers’ Associations, London 1966, Appendix XV, p.145.
21. A.J. Scamp, Op. cit., p.10.
22. H.A. Turner, The Trend of Strikes, Leeds 1963; a continuation of the figures up to the end of 1965 can be found in T. Cliff and C. Barker, Op. cit., p.81.
23. H.A. Turner, Op. cit., p.18.
24. TUC Report, 1960, pp.125-6.
25. John R Commons, The Legal Foundations of Capitalism, New York 1932, p284.
26. John H Goldthorpe, Attitudes and behaviour of car assembly workers, British Journal of Sociology, 17, 3, September 1966. Such a bargain depends for its stability on the continuance of that relatively high wage packet. Its actual instability – not noted by Goldthorpe – was sharply demonstrated in the sudden outburst of militancy in autumn 1966 in a factory always previously regarded as a ‘cabbage patch.’



Labour Relations in the Motor Industry
H.A. Turner, Garfield Clack and Geoffrey Roberts
Allen & Unwin, 55s.
Industrial Relations in a British Car Factory
Garfield Clack
Department of Applied Economics Occasional Papers No.9, Cambridge, 17s 6d.
After the mass of rubbish that has been pouring out from the publishing houses under the general head of ‘industrial relations’ these two books are very welcome. The larger volume is a detailed examination of the changing patterns and causes of strikes in the British car industry, with a chapter on international comparisons to round it off. It is almost faultless, and provides a mine of information and ideas that make it the best book ever published in Britain in its field. It is impossible to summarise in a brief review; it requires reading, closely. Garfield Clack’s study is a by-product of the larger work, an account of a period of participant observation in a car plant. This adds detail to the more general survey, and again is required reading.
Of particular interest to socialists, perhaps, will be the sections in the Turner volume (and the larger part of Clack’s) on the role of shop stewards. They demonstrate beyond all doubt the growing importance and the institutionalisation of workshop bargaining, and the declining relevance of official trade unionism for the problems of car workers. The shift in issues, especially marked in the 1960s, towards a hesitant, uneven but gradually developing challenge to ‘managerial prerogatives’ is finely documented. So too is another development, noted in passing in IS 27 (cf. The Notebook): the institutionalisation of shop stewards’ organisations, and in particular of the role of the convenor or senior steward, has begun to create a situation in some factories in which the senior stewards in particular have come to take on semi-managerial functions, and have in the process become partially separated from their shop-floor membership.
As a result, we now have a new phenomenon, the ‘unofficial-unofficial’ strike, a strike that lacks the approval not only of the official union hierarchy but also that of the stewards’ organisation too. Turner and his associates suggest, in fact, ‘In the motor industry, at any rate, thus type of dispute appears to be becoming the norm’ (p.223). Clack’s case study demonstrates the way that this works in practice: senior stewards adopt the role of buffer between employer and workers, and are found arguing against strike action up to the point where they clearly cannot win, at which point they assume the leadership of a strike to protect their own organisation. It would seem that the implications of this development have still to be worked out by militants in the industry.






We are grateful to the shop stewards of ENV and to others in the North London labour movement who gave us so much of their time and help in writing this article. None of them will agree with everything we say, and we should like to pay tribute to them for their patience with us. All responsibility for this article must necessarily be ours. We hope we have not done them too great an injustice.




1. Before the Attack
The initial emergence of ENV as a militant factory seems to have taken place in the period after the War, and particularly in the latter years of the Labour Government. In the context of a Government wage freeze, supported by the great majority of union executives, shop-floor action in support of local wage claims gradually developed.
Under a predominantly Communist Party leadership, the factory had a whole series of small stoppages, go-slows, overtime bans, etc. In general these actions were successful, and there was little managerial resistance to shop-floor demands, provided that the stewards and workers backed these up with action or the threat of action. The workers themselves were prepared to go on strike, as experience had shown that the strike-weapon was both effective and relatively speedy in operation.
In November 1951, however, there was a more serious dispute. One of the shop stewards wished to have a meeting with the works manager, but a foreman refused to arrange this. When the convenor, Bill McLoughlin, took this up with the management the foreman physically threatened him. The factory struck, demanding the foreman’s removal. This strike lasted 13 weeks, and ended with a Government-appointed Court of Inquiry. The issue was one of some importance, for it was the first time that so explicit a challenge had been made to the management’s own prerogatives of choosing their staff. There is some dispute as to whether this was in fact a good issue on which to lead a protracted strike. It is unlikely that, if the men had realised quite how protracted the struggle would be, they would have agreed to go on strike over this issue, in the absence of a long period of preparation, agitation, etc on the issue of managerial functions in the months before the stoppage. The experience of the previous few years had led them to suppose that all strikes would be brief, and no attempt was made to point out to them that no management was likely to give in as easily on an issue of this kind, intimately touching as it did their power within the factory. On the other hand, the strike was over a question of trade-union principle, and this was the central issue. In this connection, it is possible that the Communist Party at this time were anxious to have strikes called in the motor industry, in line with current WFTU (World Federation of Trade Unions, the Communist Trade Union international) policy, and that the Communist stewards at ENV were to a degree more concerned with having a strike than with the principle of the thing.
The strike was made official, after six weeks, and then only by the AEU (Amalgamated Engineering Union). The T&GWU (Transport and General Workers’ Union), however, decided to pay strike-pay to its members, although it did not recognise the strike. Only a small proportion of the strike fund, which amounted in all to some £14,000 by the end of the strike, came from the official unions; the majority of the funds came from factory collections organised by the ENV stewards themselves, not only in the North London area, but all over Britain. Teams went out to Birmingham, the West of England, Scotland, etc, and it was largely through the efforts of the strike committee in organising their own financial support that the strike was maintained for so long. One interesting feature of this collection was the fact that it was by no means from the largest, or reputedly most ‘militant’ factories that the greatest support came: Fords of Dagenham gave the ENV stewards only £25, and the Austin factory at Longbridge gave only £50.
In about the tenth week, the strike began to crumble a little, as about 100 of the men went back to work. (Up to the tenth week at most half a dozen had blacklegged.) In the 13th week the Court of Inquiry reported, and recommended that there should be a return to work on the following terms: that the foreman should be removed from any contact with trade unionists, and that McLoughlin, the convenor, should be replaced in the post by another steward. The strike committee decided to accept these terms, with one dissenting voice (who urged that it was for the stewards and not a capitalist court to elect the convenor).
The obvious candidate for the post of convenor among the remaining stewards was the deputy convenor, Sid Wise, an ex-member of the Trotskyist Revolutionary Communist Party, and for a short time, with Gerry Healy, a member of the Socialist Outlook group. The Communist Party stewards, however, not wanting a Trotskyist convenor, proposed in his place Harry Ford. Much later Harry Ford was appointed safety and security officer by ENV, and was sacked in the summer of 1967 after he had played his part in the breaking of militant organisation in the factory (feeling against him after his promotion to management was considerable: one of his jobs was the setting of traps round the factory to catch the numerous cats that infested the place, and workers went around releasing the cats. Harry Ford complained of ‘lack of cooperation.’)
The two years after this big strike found the rank and file in the factory much more reluctant to take strike action. Until 1950-51 ENV had held a virtual monopoly in the manufacture of gears but from then on the car manufacturers (Austin and Morris in particular) started to make their own and the ENV management, fighting for a place in new markets, toughened their attitude.
From 1953 to the end of 1957 there were numerous strikes, almost without exception confined to particular sections of the factory. The most important activity during this period was the formulation of an eleven-point plan for fighting redundancy. This plan, whose main architect was Sid Wise, provided for a sliding scale of demands. It was discussed on a number of occasions at factory meetings in the middle of this period, and was accepted by the men as their policy on redundancy. It was not to be put to the test, however, until 1957.
A little before Christmas, 1957, the management informed the stewards that they would have to make ten per cent of the workforce redundant. The stewards were extremely concerned about the situation: it was just before the holiday period, the motor industry as a whole was in difficulties, and they were extremely doubtful about their ability to fight the management on this issue. True, they had a plan for dealing with redundancy, but although the men had given their support to the eleven-point plan in a period of prosperity, there had been doubt about it. Many of the men had felt that, although the plan was a good one, the management could not really be expected to pay a man for doing nothing.
At a factory meeting, however, when the stewards informed the men about the position, there was a demand from the men themselves that the stewards remember ‘our eleven-point plan.’ Many of them argued that it was better at least to ‘have a go with the plan,’ since there was nothing to lose anyway. The meeting instructed Geoff Carlsson, recently elected as convenor, to inform the management that they would not accept redundancy.
When Carlsson told Mr Pailing, the senior manager, that the men would not accept redundancy and that there would be a major strike if the management sacked anyone, Pailing walked out in a rage. The stewards told him that the furnaces would be closed down, and, after Pailing’s anger, fully expected to find next morning that the gates were locked against them. However, the management clearly decided that they would box clever, and informed the stewards that it was now their problem, and they would have to solve it themselves. Effectively this meant that the stewards would have to reorganise a considerable part of the production-arrangements, and the management no doubt expected that this would frighten the stewards into acceptance. They were unlucky.
The stewards’ committee accepted the responsibility and began the process of reorganisation. The men were put on to four and four-and-a-half day weeks, and were transferred from departments where there was a shortage of work to departments with enough to do. It took several months to sort the whole factory out, and the reorganisation was a process of continual improvisation. Although the reorganisation led to a certain amount of tension and jealousy, since it proved impossible to guarantee that everyone would suffer the same degree of inconvenience, the factory did stay united for nine months. For the whole of this period, although a number of men left voluntarily because of the work shortage, not one man was made redundant.
There was one incident which illustrated some of the conflicts and problems. Some men were supposed to be moved into one department, but the three men already working refused to accept them. Havelock, the manager, approached the stewards and asked them what they intended to do about their ‘three brothers.’ Carlsson told Havelock that he would either have to listen to the three men, or listen to the whole factory: if the three would not cooperate, then the management would have to sack them. This was done. As soon as the three men had been sacked, the stewards demanded that they be given a second chance. The three were visited and invited back to the factory; one refused, and two returned. This must be one of the few cases in which stewards have, in pursuit of a militant line, had men sacked; the essential thing in this case being, of course, that circumstances had turned the reorganisation itself into a dispute, and failure to cooperate with the majority was equivalent to crossing a picket-line.
The struggle over redundancy had several implications. Firstly, this was a period of fairly widespread struggles over redundancy. At BMC in the summer of 1956 there had been a strike over mass sackings. The labour movement was actively discussing policies for redundancy in various ways. Within the AEU, Communist Party militants were fighting for the acceptance of a rather dubious ‘right to work’ policy, whose principal demand was that workers should be retained on a firm’s books until ‘suitable alternative employment’ had been found for them; this rather legalistic approach left unanswered the whole question of what was ‘suitable’ and what was ‘alternative.’ In this general context the example of ENV stood out as one of the very few factories in which redundancy was actually fought successfully; managements in other local factories found that their stewards were less amenable, and were quoting the ENV example when sackings were demanded.
Secondly, the way the struggle had been conducted raised, although in only a partial way, issues of workers’ control within the factory. ENV management had to accept a situation for nine months in which the workers’ shop-floor representatives took over control of manning scales in the different shops, and organised production within the factory to an extent previously unheard of. It should be noted that this was done without any of the blueprints for workers’ control that are currently being offered on the Left, but was a process of continual improvisation in response to concrete problems in the factory.
Thirdly, the lesson was not lost on management. As we shall see below, when the ENV management finally set about the systematic destruction of the stewards’ committee they at no time attempted to remove the stewards on the pretext of a redundancy, for they knew that if redundancy were threatened the men would fight it. Given the history of the factory, the management’s choice of weapon – the (completely false) assertion that they were going to close the factory down – becomes more comprehensible.
Towards the end of 1958 trade picked up again and there was a return to the earlier pattern of national wage claims and disputes. In 1959 the stewards attempted to bring the factory together for a unified wage claim. The pattern of wage advances within the factory up to that time had been uneven, each shop fighting by itself for its own particular claims, and the whole factory’s wages going up by fits and starts through a process of leapfrogging and comparisons. The stewards, fearing the effects of differentials among the workers, proposed that the factory should fight as a whole, but at a factory meeting a majority of the men turned this idea down.
Six of the most militant shops then went out on strike on their own, in support of their own wage claims. This was not especially successful, since the balance of forces within the factory was now altered: the six most militant departments were outside the gates, and the weaker ones were still inside. As was traditional, the labourers immediately blacked all the work from the six shops on strike. There then arose a division on the stewards’ committee (composed for the occasion of the stewards from the shops remaining inside the gate). The majority of the stewards unfortunately argued that the question of blacking should be put to a factory meeting; the minority of militants urged that this was not necessary, since the labourers were already, on their own initiative, blacking the six shops’ work. But the majority argument was carried, and at a factory meeting (not including the men from the six shops) the blacking was rejected. The labourers then began handling the work again, and, with the factory’s strength evaporating rapidly, the men from the six militant shops had to make the best settlements they could.
Two years later there was again a similar danger that the factory might be divided. Under the National Agreements in the engineering industry piece-workers are supposed to be able to make an average minimum bonus of 45 per cent, or about 8£d per hour. In fact this agreement is completely out of date, at least for all but the most backward factories. At ENV average bonuses ranged from six to eight shillings an hour. But the existence of the agreement provided the ENV workers with a handy weapon; when working a go-slow they could justifiably argue that they were fulfilling the terms of the National Agreements and making the requisite 45 per cent bonus. The tactic was known as ‘working time-work.’
In the grinding shop a go-slow of this kind ran for a number of weeks. The grinding shop was of some importance in the factory’s production flow, and there were pile-ups of work from some departments and shortages in others. The action of one shop could seriously disrupt production throughout the factory, and this could easily create resentment, especially when, as in this case, the grinders were among the highest-paid groups already. In cases like these there was usually a certain amount of grumbling among the men in other shops, although it must be added that this grumbling never actually stopped them from giving the required support. Faced with the grinders’ protracted go-slow, and refusing to meet their demand for more money, the management approached Sir William Carron, president of the AEU, who informed the stewards that they must abide by National Agreements. The stewards’ answer was that they were abiding by these agreements, but Carron replied – in the spirit if not the letter of what the employers had intended – that the grinding shop must resume normal production. The stewards ignored this instruction. As the pile-ups and shortages continued, the rest of the factory decided to go on ‘time work’ as well: At this the management put out a notice stating that the grinding shop must resume normal working by 11 a.m. that day, or be sent home, and that the rest of the factory had until 2 p.m. to return to normal working, or be clocked out.
When these ultimatums were ignored, the whole factory was in fact clocked out. On the stewards’ instructions the men stayed at work. The foremen refused to give them any work-cards, so the men simply carried on with the jobs that were already in the shops. This went on for several days, with the management pretending that it had no workers, and the factory buzzing with activity. No wages were paid, and no record was kept of times on jobs. After a few days the management decided to come to terms, reached a settlement with the grinders and paid the whole factory back pay at a standard, consolidated time rate.
 
2. An ‘organised’ factory
The above stories should make it clear that ENV was a highly organised factory from the trade-union point of view. Although there is always the danger of exaggeration, it seems clear, that it was one of the best-organised in the London area. It was the very fact of its high level of organisation, indeed, that was responsible for the major managerial offensive that developed there over the years 1962 to 1967.
In calling ENV an ‘organised’ or ‘militant’ factory one or two things have to be borne in mind. In the first place, the organisation was developed by the stewards and the men within the factory, with very little reference to the official union structure outside. The union outside was of very little importance; indeed, in general the stewards only had recourse to the union officials as a ‘face-saver.’ In situations where a return to work was necessary at the end of a dispute, and there was little possibility of going back on the terms the stewards and men wanted, then the officials might well be called in, to advise the men to go back. In this way the officials rather than the stewards would carry the blame for the element of ‘defeat.’
Secondly, one of the most important aspects of its ‘militancy’ as a factory was ENV’s readiness to help other sections of the labour movement who were in dispute. The stewards claim – not without justification – that the first place in London to which workers would turn for help was the ENV stewards’ committee. Any group of workers coming to ENV could be assured of an immediate donation from the stewards’ funds, and in a number of cases there were regular collections taken on the shop floor in support of disputes in other factories. Some of these collections were very considerable. During the 13-week strike at British Light Steel Pressings, Acton, in 1961, for instance, collections taken among the 1,100 workers at ENV amounted to over £1,500. During the strike of predominantly coloured workers at Marriott’s in Southall in 1963 a weekly collection of a shilling a head was maintained for 30 weeks – amounting to £1,717, or 18 per cent of the national total contribution.
This readiness to help other workers in dispute contrasted strongly with other so-called ‘militant’ factories in which assistance, particularly on this kind of scale, is very much the exception, or is subject to various conditions and qualifications. Mention has already been made of the poor response from a number of factories during the 1951 strike at ENV itself. One of the stewards, at that time a CP member, recounts how he visited the Austin factory at Longbridge and was only able to persuade the convenor there to help the ENV workers when he produced his Party card. During the Marriott strike, indeed, this kind of political exclusiveness led to serious divisions among groups within the Party itself. Due to the involvement of the Socialist Labour League in the dispute, the Southall District Committee, under CP influence, would do nothing to help the strike, declaring it ‘Trotskyite.’ And when Reg Birch and Bill McLoughlin of the London Committee (also Party members) wished to do something to help the Marriott strikers, they were verbally attacked by the Southall Committee. [1] At ENV, although there were serious disagreements over the way the strike was conducted, differences of this kind did not at any time inhibit the basic principle of solidarity with other workers in dispute. Even after it was felt that the strike should have been called off, ENV stewards and workers took part in the Marriott demonstrations, contributed to the strike fund, etc.
Thirdly, and most important, the term ‘well organised’ within the factory refers especially to the relationship that was built up and maintained between the workers and their stewards. Throughout the whole history of the factory this relationship was one of close support. Had this not been so, it is difficult to see how the 1957-58 fight against redundancy could have been kept up. Workers would not take orders from their foremen without reference to their stewards. On average a full meeting of the factory in the works canteen was held at least once a fortnight. What is more important, the calling of factory meetings was something decided by the stewards themselves without reference to management. In fact there was an agreement with the management to the effect that in the event of anyone working during a factory meeting they would not be paid wages. This came about as a result of a threat not to start work after a meeting if anyone had been working. As soon as an issue arose, a meeting would be called; there was no question of delaying a meeting to suit the convenience of the management or their production schedules. In effect, therefore, the very calling of a meeting amounted to a stoppage of production. Through this use of regular meetings the membership in the factory was kept fully informed of all developments in negotiations with management, and their feelings were communicated directly to the stewards. Thus the all too common phenomenon of a stewards’ committee that adopts a militant posture towards management but loses contact with its rank and file was avoided.
The stewards too met frequently. Apart from numerous ad hoc meetings on particular issues, there were regular meetings twice a week of the entire stewards’ committee. These meetings took place on Tuesdays at lunchtime and again after work. Unlike many other engineering factories, it was the policy of the ENV committee to refuse payment from the management for time spent at stewards’ meetings, apart from one hour’s wages every other Tuesday evening when the meeting began an hour before the normal working day ended. (This is a small point, but there are many factories where the stewards do, in a sense, gain material advantage from their positions: they receive payment for time spent at meetings, often after other workers have gone home; they perhaps administer overalls-cleaning schemes and receive a small payment for this. At ENV this kind of practice, which can tend to divide the steward from his ‘constituents,’ was rigorously opposed by the stewards themselves.)
All the various aspects of ‘organisation,’ of course, have a serious purpose: better wages and conditions. And at ENV wages were higher than elsewhere in the North London District, considerably higher than the District average and probably above the level in any other organised factory in the area. In February 1967, when the chairman and convenor were sacked, the average skilled man’s pay for a 40-hour week was just under £28. Like other militant factories, the atmosphere on the shop floor was very friendly. Also, ENV was probably unique in the engineering industry in that women workers got the same pay as men. One sign of the good conditions in the factory was the remarkably low rate of labour turnover: in the late 1950s the management told the stewards that on average 6 men a month were leaving (a rate of 6 per cent a year) of whom the majority were labourers. Of the others who left, most went because they were retiring or moving to another district. In fact the rate of labour turnover, most unusually, was higher among the clerical and administrative staff, and among the management themselves than it was among the men on the shop floor. There can be no doubt at all that militancy at ENV, as elsewhere, paid off in terms of good wages and conditions.
At no time did the stewards meet the management on any kind of formal ‘works committee’ with an agenda laid down by the management. All notions of joint production committees’ and other similar devices to get the workers’ representatives to take responsibility for the failures of capitalist production were strongly resisted as ‘stooge’ committees. Moreover, within the factory there were no rate-fixers allowed; in some departments there were even agreements totally banning the use of stop watches. The management had production departments and production advisers and other similar machinery of control, but in point of fact it was generally the men on the shop floor themselves who determined the amount and speed of production. To some degree this exists in every workshop, but at ENV this type of embryonic control was developed to quite a high degree: the workers had established tight ceilings on their earnings, which they varied as they saw fit, so that they could easily be used as sanctions against the management in case of dispute. At one point the management claimed that 55 per cent of the workers in the factory were on what was termed ‘dispute production.’
In the kind of environment that developed over the years at ENV, in which managerial control over a whole range of issues connected with discipline, production and so forth was hopelessly ineffective, it became possible for individual workers to develop their own special side-lines in open view of the management (some of whom did not even realise what was happening). Thus one man in the factory spent a large part of his time mending watches and clocks for his own customers – who included members of the management – while receiving a high average wage from the firm for his long hours of non-production. A labourers’ rest room gradually developed into a full-scale cafe, complete with a bar, tea-urn and sandwiches. In another part of the factory there was a highly organised cut-price shop. Proprietary rights to these ‘informal institutions’ were passed on from generation to generation. And one legendary worker had a dispute with his foreman, in the course of which he announced that he was not going to work for ENV any more. He came to work each day for six months, but for the whole of that time did nothing at all for the firm, spending his time making fancy metal goods for his mates. The wretched foreman let it pass for a couple of days, but then found that he could do nothing out of fear of his superiors. The possibilities for workers who wish to exploit the contradictions of bureaucracy are enormous! Another worker, who had been on a go slow the preceding week, refused to go home for his holidays without his correct pay, locked himself in the shop stewards’ room and phoned the national press. The management pleaded with him to come out, but he refused, and finally the money was pushed to him through a small hole in the window.
There were many more stories of small individual struggles against the management at the factory, as no doubt every other factory has its stories; what is important about them is that the majority would have been impossible without: a background of a very high level of organisation and control within the factory by the workers and their stewards.
 
3. Problems of Organisation
The very fact of having a militant factory creates new problems for the shop stewards. In the first place, there is a constant tendency for the majority of the workers to assume that the situation is a stable one and to depend on their stewards for everything. This attitude threatens the whole strength of union organisation in a factory, which hangs on the maintenance of a continuous pattern of mutual interdependence between workers and stewards. Faced with a foreman attempting to get him to do something he did not want to do, a worker would immediately take the problem to his steward without attempting to handle it first himself. Stewards were relied on to help with all manner of personal problems, the writing of letters, marital questions and so forth. Much of this of course is a sign of the worker’s trust in his steward, but at the same time if it develops too far it tends to separate the stewards from the men as a special race apart.
Maintaining a high degree of organisation, and keeping the initiative in dealings with management, is not a simple matter of just going around ‘being militant’ but requires strategy and continual adaptation. No stewards who wish to maintain their organisation intact can afford to fight on every small issue that comes up for fear of wasting their strength and alienating sections of the factory. Issues for struggle have to be selected to some degree, and estimates made continually of relative strengths and weaknesses. Where, as happens all the time in a highly organised factory in a period of relative working-class political inactivity, workers ‘lean’ on the union there is a constant danger that the essentially fragile strength of the stewards vis-à-vis the management may be exposed. And this kind of problem is endemic. At ENV, for instance, there was a shop in which the men regularly finished work three quarters of an hour early, cleaned up the shop and then stood about waiting for the hooter with their coats on, deliberately provoking the management. The management knew very well that the men had finished their work for the day, and appealed to the stewards to get the men, not to carry on working, but to pretend that they were! On rare occasions men would come in drunk – an open invitation to the management to discipline them – and the stewards would have to get the other workers to keep them concealed until they had sobered up. Again, a rather unpopular worker urinated on the bins of work outside his shop instead of going to the lavatory, and was sacked. The stewards, feeling quite unable to call a strike over the man’s sacking, pleaded for suspension as an appropriate measure, and were relieved when the management agreed to alter the sacking to a suspension.
None of this in any way implies a weakness on the part of the ENV stewards: any militant, acting in a non-revolutionary situation, has to estimate all the time precisely how far he can push without exposing his weaknesses; an unimaginative excess of ‘militancy’ can weaken an organisation quite as much as the lack of it.
There are also various problems concerning relations between groups of workers within the one factory. Differentials are one: although the stewards resisted attempts to widen differentials, it was much more difficult to get them narrowed. Yet the existence of differentials can weaken the fighting capacity of a factory. If a highly paid shop goes on strike there is a danger that others in lower-paid departments will resent the cut-backs in production that follow, even though the higher-paid group are opening the way for further wage claims for the rest of the factory. Over the period from 1950 to 1965 differentials were probably maintained, more or less, in percentage terms, and of course widened quite considerably in cash terms. It must be noted, however, that this potential source of division, although it did on occasion lead to grumbling, did not at any time actually lead to serious divisions in the factory when one section needed support. For the whole of the period, some shops stayed in front of some of the others. In particular, the Hard Test shop were earning a significantly higher wage than the rest; they had a unique agreement whereby the whole shop’s wage was determined by one man’s production – with the result that whenever there was a dispute, all the men but one could go slow, cutting production by 80 per cent without loss of pay, while the one man maintained their earnings level by ‘highly organised scabbing!’ The management tried for years to get this agreement annulled, but without success. Although percentage differentials were not permitted to increase, attempts to reduce them were not very successful. The holiday bonus was changed from a differential to flat-rate system at a factory meeting, but generally it was not possible to overcome the feeling of the ‘skilled’ men (many of whom were in fact up-graded) that their differentials should be maintained. At the same time, the ENV factory did have an unusually high proportion of up-graded men, and the stewards never accepted the argument, regrettably still all too popular among some sections of the Left, that ‘skilled’ men had to have their position especially protected, at the cost of other sections of the class.
Within the AEU and other engineering unions there is, formally, a rule that overtime must not exceed 30 hours a month. This is a rule which is much more honoured in the breach, even in the majority of the organised factories. At ENV it was fairly rigidly adhered to, on the grounds that higher pay should be won through negotiations and not through extra work. The stewards won an agreement with the management whereby, if one man was asked to work overtime, the whole factory was immediately guaranteed three full months’ work. No evening or Sunday overtime at all was permitted, nor was overtime on the night shift. This policy tended on occasion to cause some dissent, especially among the labourers, who compared the hours they were permitted to work with the hours worked by labourers in other local factories. During overtime bans it was the labourers in particular who had to bear the brunt, but still the stewards insisted that if the labourers wanted more money they ought to win it by bar-gaming. The labourers were fortunate in their stewards, however, and their rates were higher than those obtaining in other local factories; thus the unity of the factory was never seriously impaired by this potential division.
Despite the fact that on many occasions the strength of the organisation within ENV was available to help other sections of workers in dispute, it would be a mistake to imagine that the ENV stewards were very popular in other factories. They were admired for the level of their organisation and militancy, certainly, but at the same time this admiration was touched with a degree of jealousy among less successful militants in other factories, a problem that was compounded by political differences between the leading elements among the ENV stewards (in the latter days) and the majority of the District Committee. They made several attempts to get a representative on to the District Committee, but on each occasion were blocked for political reasons. When they succeeded in getting Ron Johnson on, he was virtually isolated by other delegates for most of the time. When the final battle was joined by the management, there were reports of local militants remarking, ‘It serves them right. They were too greedy.’ Thus, through no wish of their own, the ENV stewards were really quite isolated from other local militants. Such a position of isolation is especially dangerous for a highly organised factory like ENV, which tended to stand out for local managements like a sore thumb. In the North London area, ENV was something of a symbol to all the enemies of militant factory organisation, not only the local managements and the Government but the union bureaucracies as well.
Thus for some time it was apparent that sooner or later the management at ENV, with the backing of other local employers, the majority of the AEU executive and others, would initiate action against the ENV organisation. The same thing had happened at other organised factories in the London area: the British Light Steel Pressings strike in 1961 and the Ford debacle in the winter of 1962-63 were the most obvious examples. There is a danger, therefore, in such a situation that the stewards will grow over-confident, over-estimate their actual strength and work on the assumption that they will be able to hold the situation in the factory static for as long as they like. This very much bothered a couple of the stewards’ committee, Carlsson and Hogan, who were convinced that sooner or later they would have to accept some form of increased productivity, if only to avoid a major management offensive against their whole position. Carlsson and Hogan did, therefore, work out a serious plan for presentation to the management, which would allow for the introduction of new work methods, etc, while keeping the advantage with the stewards. The cardinal point of the plan was a proposal to reduce differentials and demand a higher consolidated rate in such a manner that the lower-paid workers would get much larger rises than the higher-paid. The plan was worked out in the explicit expectation of an attack by the management, and rested on the recognition that some kind of change was inevitable. What mattered was that the stewards should anticipate the management and seek to keep such changes under their control. However, when Carlsson and Hogan presented their ideas to the stewards’ committee, the plan was turned down with very little discussion; the stewards most vocal against it (calling it a ‘sell-out’) were in fact the least politically aware of the stewards, and also the least militant.
Given the failure of this attempt to control the pace of change within the factory, it became almost inevitable that the management would initiate some kind of attack on the stewards. The form that it took was not however arrived at all of a sudden: the managements (who changed with great rapidity over the period 1964-66) tried a number of approaches without success before they worked out the final formula that led to the defeat of the ENV organisation. It is worth remarking in general, however, that in a factory which is both more highly organised than other local factories (and in which wage costs are consequently higher than elsewhere, and management control weaker) and which is isolated more or less from the rest of the local labour movement, the management is bound, sooner or later, to demand changes. The problem for stewards in this situation is one of finding a way of reacting in a realistic manner to preserve the essentials of their organisation, often while accepting that some concessions will have to be made. In a sense the final defeat of the ENV stewards is a measure of their failure to manage this. It is to the story of their defeat that we now turn.
 
4. The American Takeover
In 1962 the giant American firm of Eaton, Yale and Towne bought the ENV factories at Willesden and Aycliffe. It seems that they were anxious to get a foothold in the aircraft industry and in the Common Market. Later they bought another factory in Manchester. They immediately set out to change things and in particular to destroy the power of the trade-union organisation at Willesden.
Initially they used a succession of British managers for these tasks. These were frequently given time limits in which to produce results – if they failed they left. During the next four years there was a very high turnover of managers at the factory as new men and new methods were tried. These managers were carefully watched by American managers, some of whom actually worked at ENV. Townsend, who later smashed the factory organisation, worked for six months as General Manager before taking over completely.
Some managers tried to win the support and cooperation of the workers by stressing that in the long run the interests of management and workers were the same; both would benefit from a prosperous factory. They made special approaches to the shop stewards. An American who worked for a year at Willesden as a ‘tool specialist’ took the stewards on trips to other factories and attempted to make friends with the workers. He later became Managing Director of the Manchester factory. Another manager called Hill tried the same approach, stressing that he was also only an employee and that he was really on the workers’ side. He would show his trade union card to everyone and was continually attacking the other managers. Another kept telling the stewards that he was working in close touch with George Brown (whom he assumed the stewards would support) and that the management were keen to do what the Labour Government wanted (which they were!).
A Dr Jarrett from CAV (a part of the Lucas electrical group) was then made Managing Director. He started productivity bargaining throughout the factory. As he said, ‘We want you to earn more money ... this is the socialist approach of equality.’ Hill commented, ‘I’m a bit of a Communist myself and Dr Jarrett has got a real socialist plan.’
These crude approaches were hardly likely to fool anyone. Some of the managers brought in were just hatchet men with no experience, including ex-naval commanders and the like. Similarly approaches and offers made specially to the shop stewards were also rejected. For instance, they were offered a proper office, that the management deduct union dues from wages, and some stewards were offered supervisory jobs (as mentioned above, one ex-convenor accepted).
Jarrett introduced into the factory Emersons, the Work Study firm which had been responsible for the Fawley agreements. A meeting was arranged with the shop stewards at which the Emersons’ representative outlined their plan. Jarrett then said that he expected the shop stewards would like to ask questions; but the stewards walked out and refused any cooperation. They threatened that the workers would go out if the Emerson people as much as came on to the shop floor. So although Emersons had an office in the factory for several months, they never did a thing. This is the only known occasion on which Emersons have failed to get any concessions whatsoever.
It was also Jarrett who started productivity bargaining in the factory. The management had issued several statements about the unsatisfactory state of affairs at ENV and how they were losing orders. They stressed that everyone would benefit from greater productivity at the factory – ‘High wages and high productivity go together.’ They also produced outline proposals for a new wage structure, both simplifying it and making it fairer.
The productivity campaign had a certain appeal for the workers, because the management were saying that there was to be more money but no redundancies. Also there was discontent about the existing pay structure and differentials. Even though the stewards realised that productivity deals represented a disguised form of attack on union organisation and working conditions, the plausibility of management’s offer made it difficult for them to refuse participation, unless they were to cut themselves off from the rest of the workers. So the stewards participated in the central and shop committees which were set up. The management were then very desultory over productivity bargaining.
Many of the lower managers were reluctant to suggest changes as they did not want to carry the can if things went wrong. So most of the proposals and suggestions came from the shop stewards’ side. But after many months only a few agreements had been reached and there was no agreement on the new wages structure. Some of the agreements which were concluded revealed both the strength of the shop floor organisation on these issues and the general incompetence of the management. For instance the packers agreed to a reduction from 16 to 12 men when in fact there had been 12 all along and also agreed to help with loading and unloading lorries which they had also always done. For these ‘concessions’ they got 1s an hour extra. The stacker-truck drivers agreed to become ‘mobile’ for an extra 1s an hour. Before this agreement each driver had regarded himself as attached to a particular shop and would only take loads from his own shop but would not bring them back. The failure of productivity bargaining to produce any real result meant the end of Jarrett who admitted at one time that he had been given a deadline of only a few months to produce results.
In 1966 there was a dispute in the milling shop and work from this shop was blacked. The management then sacked a worker who refused to be moved to this department. At this time the management seemed anxious to provoke a strike and get the workers outside; the stewards on the other hand were trying to avoid this, preferring to choose their own issue and occasion for a major fight. A factory meeting was held over the sacking and three shop stewards went to see Jarrett. He refused to meet them, so the meeting decided to go en masse to Jarrett’s office; ‘If he won’t see three of us, he’ll have to see all of us.’ About 1,000 workers marched singing through the office to Jarrett’s office. Jarrett declared he would have a meeting the next day but this was not accepted. Finally he said that the man would not be sacked or suspended. This incident led to the resignation of Jarrett a few weeks later and was also referred to later by the management as an example of the ‘anarchy’ existing in the factory.
 
5. The Final Offensive
On Jarrett’s resignation in June 1966 Townsend assumed full control and became Managing Director. Only a few weeks later he notified shop stewards that things had gone too far, the company was losing money and there were too many disputes. He announced that the management were not prepared to negotiate with the stewards until normal working conditions were resumed. He had asked the Engineering Employers’ Federation to approach the Executive Councils of the unions to arrange an informal Joint Composite Conference to be held at the Willesden factory. Until that Conference was held there were going to be no more negotiations with the stewards.
It seems probable that in the meantime Townsend had had a secret meeting with Carron at the Confederation of Engineering and Shipbuilding Unions Conference. Some of the stewards saw a letter from the management to the AEU headquarters trying to arrange this meeting. Carlsson made this public in the local press and was never disciplined for it. Townsend obviously wanted to make direct contact with Carron. There were other examples of contact between the ENV management and the AEU head office: the management for instance, used to collect all references to ENV stewards and workers in the press and agendas of factory and stewards’ meetings, and send them to Carron.
The joint Composite Conference was held on 4th July. Amongst the representatives of the AEU were Carron, Boyd, Berridge from the Executive, Reg Birch (then Divisional Organiser) and District Officials. Carron and Berridge warned the ENV stewards before the meeting that they must be prepared to compromise. National officers of the ETU, TGWU, ASPD and ASW were also present. ASSET were not informed and when Mike Cooley of DATA tried to attend the meeting he was refused admittance because the Conference was just for representatives of manual workers, not staff unions. All ENV stewards attended as did the top ENV management, some of whom were flown over from the States.
Townsend opened the Conference with a prepared statement illustrated with charts showing the company’s position. In his words he was ‘astounded, amazed and shocked.’ According to him the company was losing money and customers. He admitted that in the past there had been weak management at ENV and it was natural that the stewards would take advantage of this. But, he went on, ‘The main reason why we are here today is labour relations; the management will not put up with the actions of the shop stewards and therefore are refusing to negotiate with them.’ He complained of the ‘mass of domestic and verbal agreements’ at the factory, and of the fact that ‘two unauthorised mass factory meetings have taken place, one culminating in the march of an unruly mob through the Executive Offices ... this is anarchy and will not be tolerated in the future.’
He went to warn the union executives that although he was asking them to support the management’s actions in making these changes, ‘if the unions are unable to do this, we will take the necessary steps ourselves.’ Even Carron could not accept Townsend’s approach: ‘If you insist on going forward in the way you are, then you must expect a revolution.’ Of course, Carron was merely defending procedure, not threatening anything. He insisted that whatever proposals the management had must go through stewards and local officials.
Townsend then went on to outline the management’s proposals which were presented in the form of two documents called Management Functions and Interim Agreement. The effect of the proposals would have been to wipe out all the gains and benefits won by the trade-union organisation at the factory over the previous 20 years.
Firstly, the management intended to check all domestic and verbal agreements and would renegotiate them in a revised form that would make them clear. Of course these agreements were one of the strengths of the shop-floor organisation, especially the purely verbal agreements which could be interpreted as necessary whenever a dispute arose. The management had often complained that they did not know of the existence of half of the supposed agreements.
Secondly, standards were to be set up by ‘modern time-study methods’ and would include multi-machine operation. At the same time that the new standards were applied a graded wage structure of between five and nine grades would be introduced. Payments to time-workers were no longer to be linked to pieceworkers’ earnings and when an established piece-work rate was in dispute, payment would continue at the established rate until agreement was reached through procedure. Townsend admitted that the management had not yet decided whether in the long run the factory would continue to operate on piece-work or on measured day-work.
Amongst the other management proposals were things like mobility of labour, shift working as required, tea breaks to be limited to 10 minutes, and so on. Also the management would be able to transfer work to other factories as it wished. Towns-end mentioned that if these proposals were not accepted the factory might have to close.
Carron and the other officials made it clear that they were not prepared to agree to this. If the management wanted to change the agreements they must operate through the procedure, which meant first of all discussing it with the shop stewards. Carron reminded Townsend that the employers had as much obligation to go through procedure as the work people. The employers accepted this point.
However after this Conference the ENV management still refused to meet the stewards. So at a factory meeting it was decided to have token stoppages in protest. A series of guerilla stoppages to start on 20th July was planned. Each evening different shops were to be told by the stewards to go out the next morning for a few hours. At this stage it seems clear that the workers were prepared to resist the management. In fact the workers were prepared to resist the management right up until closure was announced.
On the day before these stoppages were due to begin a conference was held at the Employers’ Federation headquarters. At this the ENV management agreed to resume negotiations with the stewards the following morning. However the meeting finished late and so it was impossible to inform the workers at Willesden about the decision.
On the morning of 20 July, as planned earlier, the stoppages started. The management now announced that they knew nothing about the agreement made the previous day. This is one incident quoted by the stewards to illustrate how it was impossible to trust the ‘new’ (i.e. American) management – at least the ‘old’ management did keep their word. This resentment of the methods of the new management was one of the reasons that the stewards used the contrast between the British and American managements and made it a political issue.
Anyway, on this morning the storemen and electricians were already out as planned. They were due to come in at 10 o’clock. When they tried to return to work the management would not let them in and locked them out for the rest of the day. Carlsson, the stewards’ chairman who went out to see them, was stopped at the gate but pushed his way in. Shortly after this the management threatened to sack a stacker driver who refused to pick up a load as a protest in support of the workers locked out. A factory meeting was held and it was decided that if some workers were out then they would all go out. They planned to come back the following morning.
The next day the workers came back to find the electricity switched off, and everyone being herded into the canteen. On the platform were half a dozen managers and two representatives of the Electoral Reform Society. When all the workers had entered the canteen the doors were locked and Townsend made a speech about the crisis the factory was facing. He said that it came down to a choice – either the factory could stay open upon new conditions or it would be closed. He told the workers that they must now vote on whether they were prepared to accept the management’s proposals. Ballot boxes had been placed by each door and as each worker left the meeting he was to take a form and put it in the box. The ballot would be run by the Electoral Reform Society.
After Townsend had spoken Carlsson made a speech from the floor in which he condemned the methods being used by the management and insisted that the proposals must go through the shop stewards. He launched attacks upon the recent change in behaviour of several of the managers on the platform, but excluded Wilson, a popular representative of the ‘old’ management. Mitchell, the convenor, then spoke and said that he was walking out of the meeting and wanted everyone to follow him
stewards and some workers left the canteen, but immediately after they had gone the management locked the doors behind them, leaving the majority of the workers inside. So the stewards and other workers forced the doors open, upturned the ballot boxes, and the meeting broke up. During this meeting police in black marias were stationed near the factory and a manager phoned for them to come round to the back gate. The press and TV came down to the factory immediately after the meeting. Possibly it was a mistake to walk out of the meeting rather than argue the case out in full in front of the workers, showing that there was an alternative and then letting them refuse to vote in the management’s ballot. However the next day a factory meeting was held to which the press were invited and the workers voted unanimously in support of their shop stewards and against the management’s proposals.
At this meeting the workers passed a unanimous resolution stating that they would rather accept closure than any worsening of their pay and conditions. This resolution was continually re-affirmed at further meetings throughout the following period, and to the time of writing (late October 1967) still represents the attitude of those who remain at ENV.
Townsend announced that this sort of ‘intimidation’ would not put him off and he was going to organise another ballot, but this time it would be a postal one. Again it was organised by the Electoral Reform Society, who used the same pre-paid envelopes which they had used in an ETU ballot. Apparently the ETU did not object to paying for this ballot; they said they were not interested in taking the matter up. On another occasion one ETU official remarked that the ENV stewards ‘deserved to be shot’ if the management’s story was true.
Reg Birch protested about the postal ballot, but Townsend refused to drop it. However a few days later the ENV management called it off themselves because of ‘interference’ by the stewards – ‘once more the stewards had wrecked it.’ The vast majority of workers had returned the ballot forms to their shop stewards.
At about the same time a factory meeting was held at which the stewards attempted to settle outstanding disputes. This was done in order to prevent management having an excuse for locking workers out. Several disputes were settled as a result of this meeting. Negotiations were going on between shop stewards and management over the management’s proposals. On all major issues ‘failure to agree’ was recorded and the issues were passed to local officials.
On 24 August all ENV workers received letters saying that the Willesden factory was going to close. There was to be a phased close-down to be carried out over the next few months. The management gave as the reason the financial position of the factory which was, they said, aggravated by the government’s economic policies.
The major issue for the next few months was whether this announcement was genuine or only a bluff. The majority of workers and stewards tended to believe that the closure was genuine; only the convenor and chairman believed consistently that it was a bluff and that they must act accordingly. Yet there was plenty of evidence that the picture the management painted of the financial situation at ENV was inaccurate. Firstly, the aircraft sections at ENV were always busy and work from other departments too was deliberately being transferred to Aycliffe and Manchester or abroad- Secondly, the Annual Reports of the company showed large profits and increases in orders. Finally the management’s account of the effect of government policy was clearly misleading. For instance ENV as a manufacturing firm would stand to gain considerably, not lose, from the Selective Employment Tax.
Looking back it is now easy to say that it was a bluff but at the time the great majority of workers and stewards were not sure. The ENV management’s campaign had had a long build up over the previous years, with frequent announcements of ‘crises.’ Now they stressed continually that the factory was to close, and without any qualification. And of course even if one did not accept the firm’s reasons for closure, there was still the possibility that if in the last resort they could not defeat the trade union organisation in any other way, they would close down the factory, even if only temporarily. Whether this would have been possible is more difficult to say; the fact that the aircraft sections had plenty of work throughout the next six months suggests that the management would have found it very difficult to transfer all the work that the factory was doing.
The other issue which became of increasing importance was that of redundancy payments. The workers started to think of these payments and what they were going to spend them on. Since most of the workers had long service, the sums involved were quite considerable – many of them over £500. The management argued that if there were a strike, this would count as misconduct and would mean that the workers would lose redundancy payments. The stewards denied this and got lawyers to back them up, but this type of rumour had a considerable influence.
 
6. The Campaign Against Closure
At the beginning of September the unions challenged the management’s case at the longest Local Conference on record. McLoughlin, an ex-ENV convenor, now local AEU official, opened the union’s case. He rejected the management’s figures which showed falling profits and losses of orders, and quoted Eaton publications which gave a glowing report of trade prospects. The President of the Employers’ Federation, who had just been to the USA at Eaton’s expense, then said that the closure was definite, and even if the management’s earlier proposals were accepted by the workers, it would not make any difference. He stressed that this was the result of the government’s economic policy.
At the end of this Local Conference, a failure to agree was recorded and in October 1966 the issue went to Central Conference at York where there was still no agreement. The night before the conference Carron stated that he did not see why he should take up the reference since both the management and he had been criticised sharply by Carlsson, and he had to be reminded that the jobs of more than 1,000 workers were at stake. After the closure was announced the ENV stewards began organising their campaign. In their publicity, they attempted to show that the closure announcement was only a bluff to defeat the workers’ organisation. They also attempted to get support by arguing that the ENV management’s policies were against the Labour Government’s policy of increasing exports. They argued that the bulk of the goods produced at ENV were exported and that the balance of payments figures would suffer if the factory did close and the work was transferred out of the country. The ENV stewards got the support of Brent Trades Council which organised meetings and marches about ENV. Marches were held in Willesden and Wembley. The issue was also brought up at meetings of the Shop Stewards’ Defence Committee, which had originated months before out of a legal dispute concerning the ENV convenor, Mitchell.
Deputations of ENV stewards and workers went to the TUC conference at Blackpool and the Labour Party conference at Brighton where they held demonstrations. A group of workers went to the Farnborough Air Show and picketed the ENV stand in order to illustrate the conflict between reports of the factory closing down and attempts to get new orders.
The stewards issued regular statements to the press about ENV. They told the press that work was being transferred from Willesden to factories in the USA. But although some of the journalists were interested in the stories, nothing appeared. The stewards found out that some of the journalists had been warned by the AEU head office that if they did print the stories about ENV then they would not get any more stories from the union.
The stewards organised lobbies of MPs and tried to get support and questions asked in Parliament. When they first tried to contact the MPs, many of them, especially the Left-wingers, agreed to help. But very few of them did so. Russell Kerr, who expressed great interest, later walked into one of the ENV meetings by mistake, much to his embarrassment as he had done nothing. The MP for Uxbridge, Ryan, promised to help but never turned up. But perhaps the worst case was that of the two Willesden MPs, Laurie Pavitt and Reg Freeson. They had been in close touch with the factory for years and had often held factory gate meetings there. ENV had raised canvassing teams to go out for them at election times. When the closure was announced, the stewards arranged a meeting with both of them. Pavitt and Freeson came and announced that they could not interfere as they had just discovered that ENV was not in their constituencies! In fact it was just inside the boundary of North Hammersmith, and so the ENV stewards were told to go to their own MP, Tomney. Pavitt and Freeson then went off to a meeting with the ENV management and didn’t see the stewards again.
When a meeting of MPs at the House of Commons was called to discuss ENV, only four turned up. Two of these, Stan Orme and Norman Atkinson, who were AEU MPs, said that they could not stay because they had been advised not to listen as the AEU Executive was going to advise them on the case. The only MPs who did consistently try to help were Sid Bidwell and Bill Molloy. Bidwell and Molloy were warned for taking the matter up and Molloy lost his chance of promotion.
In general the Left wing MPs were useless on an issue like this. A few were genuinely sympathetic, but where they were required to be more than ‘social workers with connections,’ they were too frightened to come out openly.
A few questions were asked in the House of Commons but these were mostly ‘safe’ questions, about the value of exports which would be lost and so on. The fact that the gears which ENV made for defence purposes could not be made elsewhere in Britain and would have to be made in the USA or on the continent was never mentioned, although at the time it would have created quite a controversy.
It was known that the ENV management had already had meetings with members of the government. One of the American managers went to a meeting with Austin Albu and he took a copy of the Shop Stewards’ Defence Committee’s pamphlet on Incomes Policy with him.
The ENV stewards and the union officials had a meeting with Douglas Jay and then with Shirley Williams, both at the Board of Trade. Mrs Williams said that they seemed to have a good case and if any union asked for an investigation it would take place. Only the DATA representative took up this offer, but nothing happened.
The results from this type of campaign – contacting MPs, questions in the House, and so on – seem to have been nil. One serious criticism which has been made is that it diverted attention away from the factory and took up effort which could have been used in trying to get opposition organised inside the factory. In point of fact, the campaign outside was only an alternative because there was no action within.
Regularly after the closure was announced, calls for a factory strike were put to factory meetings. The shop stewards recommended strike action as they knew that this was the only way they could win. Yet the strike calls were always turned down by large majorities. Among the workers and some of the stewards, doubts about whether the closure was a bluff or not persisted. Most workers were prepared to let the stewards attempt to avert the closure but they were not willing to risk sacrificing their redundancy pay. In the meantime they were anxious to increase their earnings in order to increase the amounts of these payments.
During this period the management were transferring work from Willesden to Aycliffe and Manchester in order to lay off Willesden workers. This was well known at the time. One criticism of the stewards was that they should have foreseen the situation arising out of this transfer of work months before and should have prevented it. When the Manchester stewards offered to black this work, the Willesden stewards turned down their offer on the grounds that since there was no opposition in their factory it was not fair to leave it to Manchester when they themselves were doing nothing. In this way they deliberately passed the buck back to their own workers.
In October the management announced that they wanted another stock-taking and therefore some workers must do overtime. Since they were proposing to lay off workers because there was not enough work, the factory banned overtime. As a result some sections were locked out and others went out in support. The management then locked out the entire factory for a week, with the exception of the storekeepers. When the management tried to do the stocktaking themselves the storekeepers walked out.
During the lock-out a meeting of ENV workers was organised at Hammersmith Town Hall with 800 workers attending. (However the following day, Saturday, when a march was held in Willesden only 14 people turned up, and these were mostly stewards.) At the Hammersmith meeting Birch and Cooley spoke, as well as the ENV stewards. A solicitor also explained that any strike action would not lead to loss of redundancy pay. The meeting supported the fight against redundancy and closure. The stewards had previously agreed that those workers who wanted to leave ENV should be allowed to go as this would make the rest of the factory stronger, but no vote was taken on this at the meeting.
But after the Hammersmith meeting, nothing happened. The men returned to work the following week. Resolutions for strike action at factory meetings were still turned down. Although various proposals for departmental strikes were discussed and sometimes agreed, they never came to anything. In the continued absence of any action from within the factory, the stewards attempted to get an official strike.
At the end of October the AEU District Committee took the rare step of calling for an official strike at ENV. However this had to be endorsed at the next AEU Executive meeting. When this took place Reg Birch moved that the North London District Committee’s decision be endorsed, but could not even get anyone to second the motion (Hugh Scanlon, who was at the meeting, just kept quiet.) So the official strike came to nothing at all. No attempt was made to strike in the few days before the EC met, since unfortunately the majority of the workers wanted to wait for the EC’s decision. Thus the chance for a strike was missed, although some of the stewards now think that the majority of the workers would have come out then. One difficulty was that it was getting near to Christmas and hence there was a greater unwillingness to strike. Quite a few of the workers could remember the long 1951-52 strike which began before Christmas.
In November the first group of workers were sacked. Each week more followed. A large number of stewards and other militants went in the first weeks, often in spite of their seniority. Early in the new year the management offered to make a deal with some of the remaining shop stewards, especially Carlsson. If they would get the workers to agree to the management proposals then they would not be sacked. This Carlsson insisted on reporting to a full factory meeting. The factory refused to make any deal of this sort. After this, both Carlsson and Mitchell were sacked.
It was now clear to everyone that the management’s only interest was in getting rid of the militants and then keeping the factory open. Soon after the sackings of Carlsson and Mitchell, they announced that ‘due to changed economic circumstances’ they would be keeping the factory open with a labour force of between 400 and 500. The workers who remained at ENV, however, stuck strongly to their earlier decisions and refused to make any concessions on pay or conditions. At the time of writing, eight months after the chairman and convenor were sacked, the management has still not succeeded in changing one agreement. The new ENV stewards, as we went to press, had just won back control over overtime at a Local Conference, where the management was forced to stand by the agreement that forces them to ask the shop stewards for permission before they could approach any worker to ask him to work overtime.
 
7. Assessment of the Fight Against Closure
Once the ENV management had announced their intention of closing the factory, the problem that faced the shop stewards was that of finding some realistic way of opposing the management and carrying the men with them. It must be remembered that only a minority of the stewards – and an even smaller minority of the men – were convinced from the start that the management’s declaration of imminent closure was in fact a fraud. As we have seen, the men were already planning how they would spend their redundancy pay, and the stewards’ efforts to convince them that a strike would not affect their right to redundancy money were not entirely successful against a barrage of management propaganda.
In the period before the actual announcement of closure, the stewards, aware that a wholesale attack of some kind was about to be launched, followed a policy of ‘clearing the decks for action.’ They urged workers to settle outstanding departmental disputes in order to avoid giving management the opportunity to provoke a strike before they were ready or on an issue of management’s own choosing. With the benefit of hindsight, it seems perhaps that the management would not anyway have risked provoking a major stoppage at this stage, for they had not seriously begun to shift work from the Willesden factory elsewhere (indeed some sections of the factory remained busy throughout 1966 and 1967). At this stage it seems that the management’s hope was still that they would make some kind of breakthrough in the negotiations, through their attempt to divide the stewards from the rank and file by devices like the ballot. However one unfortunate result of the ‘clearing the decks’ policy was that some of the men, not fully realising the way that the management were shaping up for a major struggle, began to think that the stewards were ‘going soft’.
It has been suggested that during this period the stewards should have pursued a militant policy on all fronts and tried to secure a large-scale strike before the closure was announced, in order to keep the initiative. Some critics have condemned the ENV stewards for not turning the dispute into a major political campaign in the North London area. But this criticism ignores the current level of consciousness in the labour movement. Certainly any realistic review of .the movement’s experience over the past three years suggests that the formula, ‘incomes policy equals political struggle’ is quite wrong, over-simplified and Utopian. The campaigns which have been successful have depended on the presentation of issues in very low-level ‘trade union’ terms: the role of the State has been seen as an additional cause for working-class indignation, rather than as the central element in a larger pattern. Outsiders see only the abstract possibilities – down on the ground in North London, the real response of other workers looks quite different. Of course, this does not mean that every issue must be reduced to the lower common multiple. A campaign of solidarity must operate on at least two levels – aiming to rebuild, through activity in fragmented day-to-day struggles, a meaningful labour movement, and to re-group the existing militants and formulate a more coherent and revolutionary political programme.
If a campaign outside the factory was, in the concrete conditions of the moment, almost fruitless, the campaign among the workers within the factory was also difficult. For, although the stewards knew very well that a management offensive was imminent, it was not easy to communicate this general awareness to the men until the management showed its hand.
The actual announcement of closure quite seriously disoriented the stewards’ committee. For one thing, there seemed to be no precedent for this – how, after all, does one fight a closure? Furthermore, as we have already seen, it was only a minority of the stewards who believed that the management was bluffing. And in face of the management’s repeated insistence that it would be shutting up shop in Willesden (and for economic reasons not directly connected with the shop stewards) it was by no means easy to win the other stewards over to a realisation of the actual state of affairs. (We might add, too, that it is by no means impossible that if a more successful fight had been waged by the stewards the management would have closed the factory for a time.) The belief that the management were serious in their stated intentions was in fact not really dissipated until early 1967, by which time a number of stewards had already been ‘made redundant.’ It took the management’s offer of a ‘deal’ to Carlsson and Mitchell to convince even some of the most militant and ‘political’ spirits on the stewards’ committee.
Unless this background is understood, it is difficult to attempt a fair criticism of the policy of the leading stewards. They were, and through no fault of their own, faced with a situation of undoubted difficulty, being the only ones who saw even that a fight was necessary. There was by this time, it is true, an IS factory branch with about 12 members, most of them stewards. This met fortnightly after work. But it would be a mistake to see this as a highly conscious organised group. Throughout the ‘fifties and early ‘sixties, Geoff Carlsson had been completely isolated politically in the factory. The bulk of the stewards had been members of the Communist Party or had accepted a Party lead, although disillusion had gradually been setting in. It was not until well into 1965 that it proved possible to recruit the militant stewards to IS. Inevitably, given the political histories of these comrades, the development of the branch had hardly begun when the attack came. In a very real sense, as one of the ex-CP stewards remarked, the IS branch ‘came too late.’ Partly as a result of this immaturity of the branch, the group did not act in a very organised way on the stewards’ committee.
Given the failure of their repeated attempts to get a majority of the workers voting for strike action (although the minority in favour grew steadily) the question that arises is whether a minority or departmental strike of some kind was possible. In the past, faced with different circumstances, the stewards had encouraged the development of a tradition at ENV of abiding always by majority decisions. This stress on factory democracy – by no means present in all ‘militant’ factories – was of course very valuable. This kind of democratic procedure is particularly well fitted to a situation where workers and stewards are on the offensive, for then the more advanced can afford to wait for the more backward to catch up. In a defensive struggle, whose terms are set by the management, however, an unwillingness to lead, even from a minority position, is a definite weakness. And it is on these grounds that we feel the ENV stewards were open to criticism.
In a real sense, the stewards lost the initiative. It is not for us, at this remove, to specify that on such and such an occasion they ought to have pursued a particular line of action. What we do feel, however, is that they should have done something. Various suggestions have been made, from a ‘sit-in’ by the militants to a departmental walk-out. And many ideas were discussed by the stewards, but in each case they seem to have weighed the advantages to such a degree that they partially paralysed themselves. They were – quite rightly – afraid of being ‘adventuristic,’ but adventurism is better than nothing. In a way, the stewards’ legitimate fear of substituting themselves for the majority of the workers was, we feel, carried too far. Action cannot be determined mechanically by the existing level of consciousness; a spark of action could, perhaps, have altered the workers’ consciousness too. The stewards had a large fund of goodwill that they could rely on, and they should have risked more than they did. At the most general level, they saw only that substitutionism was a danger, but did not see that the theory of substitutionism (with which IS has often been identified) implies no rejection of the need for leadership. [2]
Would they have been defeated anyway? Almost certainly. But for socialists and militants this is not the sole question. What was sad about the defeat at ENV was that it was so quiet. For the stewards to go down without a fight was to miss the opportunity to generate any kind of campaign that could assist in the further linking of the militants in the engineering industry. Even if for example the pickets on the Myton and Sunley sites in London go down in defeat (as seems sadly probable at the time of writing), other militants in the building industry will have gained from their struggle, and from the solidarity movement that was built around it.
At the same time, the extent of the failure should not be exaggerated. An employer can be defeated fifty times, and he will still be there. A stewards’ committee cannot survive one major defeat. And in no sense was it a ‘sell-out.’ No concessions were made to management. Even today, fifteen months after the management’s final attack began, none has been made. One worker, still at the factory in October 1967, was amazed at the very idea that there had been a defeat: ‘We’ve never given them anything!’
And the positive elements remain. For years ENV provided a powerful instance of the possibilities of strong factory organisation. And it was, in a very real sense, the centre of militancy in North London engineering. Its defeat, as other militants in the area recognise, was a serious loss. The memory of the years of the struggle at ENV will serve for some time to come as an example to all those who are involved in the struggle for workers’ control and a new socialist movement. The unhappy manner of the final defeat should not be allowed to obscure that.
 
Footnotes
1. This kind of division among the Communist Party’s industrial membership in the engineering industry undoubtedly played an important part in the development of the later split in the Party’s ranks over the question of the AEU Presidential election, the Shop Stewards’ Defence Committee and ultimately the expulsion of Reg Birch from the Party.
2. See T. Cliff, The Revolutionary Party and the Class: Trotsky on Substitutionism, IS 2, Autumn 1960.



The Delinquent Solution
David M. Downes
Routledge, 42s
Despite its seemingly over-academic opening, this is a very worthwhile and serious contribution to the study of delinquency and of young workers generally. If the early chapters, examining the contributions of American sociological theorists (Cohen, Cloward and Ohlin, etc.) still bear the heavy imprint of the PhD style, the latter half of the book is a stimulating account of the forces making for delinquency in working-class Stepney and Poplar. Downes’ strength is his acute perception of the relations between absence of meaning in semi- and un-skilled work for adolescents, the barbarities of our secondary school system and the aimlessness of delinquent leisure. Rather than treating delinquency as the problem, as has been conventionally done, Downes instead suggests that ‘the working-class boy starts out in a delinquency-prone life-situation’ which constitutes the real problem. It is the absence of delinquency that has to be explained, not its presence.
The early chapters on sociological theory are carefully done, but they overbalance the structure of the book a little. Downes’ sympathetic empirical reportage in East London could well have been extended at the cost of a little of the analyses of earlier theory. Nevertheless this is a book deserving more than a brief glance. Meanwhile Rebel salesmen might try the Aldgate Wimpy.



Colin Barker writes: (30 July): The Roberts-Arundel dispute in Stockport, at the time of writing in its ninth month, has illustrated certain problems and weaknesses in the current organisation and policy of the labour movement, and also pointed towards the possibility of some kinds of solution.
The dispute, initially a strike against a new management’s attempts to reorganise production without consultation with the shop stewards’ committee, was rapidly converted into a lockout in December last year, when the management announced that in future it would not accept the ‘paraphernalia’ of trade unionism within its factory. The dispute was declared official, and has continued since then; the management are continuing production, after a fashion, with a new, ‘scab’ labour force, and negotiations have proved fruitless.
From the first it was clear that a victory for the unions in this dispute would depend on the support they received from other sections of the movement. The management, under the control of an anti-union parent company in North Carolina, USA, withdrew rapidly from the Engineering Employers’ Federation to pursue a plain anti-union policy in the Stockport factory: sweet reason alone was never going to convince them, while a major deployment of force might. The 140 strikers (the entire workforce), although loyal union members, had no tradition of militancy; before the takeover in 1965 the factory had been entirely dispute-free, and the majority of the workers were long-service men intent on a quiet life, and out of the mainstream of moderate militancy that has characterised the engineering unions in the area for some years. Alone, they could only sink quietly into defeat.
Solidarity action, crucial to this dispute, has taken three forms. The first, the simple collection of money, has been the most successful in one sense, in that there has at least been enough money in the strike committee’s kitty to pay out a reasonable weekly wage to the men on strike. Three local District Committees of the AEU have arranged a 6d weekly levy on all their members, and other donations and collections have flowed in very well. This, and the blacking of the firm’s products and supplies, has been partly stimulated by the strike committee’s pamphlets [1] on their strike, nearly 30,000 of which have been sold or otherwise distributed. But money by itself can do no more than slow down the process of demoralisation among the men when they are engaged in a long dispute like this. If it can help to delay a defeat, monetary support can do little to contribute directly to a victory.
The second form of solidarity action is of much greater importance in this respect – blacking the supplies and products of the Roberts-Arundel Company. Here the strike committee has, through an enormous, amount of work, been able to chalk up some important successes; Shipments of goods destined for export have been locked up on the docks at Manchester, Liverpool and Hull, and at Manchester Airport. As a result the firm has almost certainly been forced to lose money through penalty clauses in contracts, and has beyond all doubt had to spend large sums of money on alternative forms of transport, multiple trans-shipping arrangements and the like, in an effort to move their products around Britain and shake off the pursuing strikers. Supplies have been denied to them, and whole ranges of means of transport, from British Rail and British Road Services to many smaller contractors, have been cut off. In many other firms the stewards’ committees have enforced the general embargo on Roberts-Arundel. The firm’s own public estimate of the costs of the strike several months ago was one million dollars, and by now the sum is likely to be considerably greater. At the time of writing approaches were being made to the National Union of Seamen in an attempt to stop all cross-channel shipment of goods between the Stockport factory and other establishments in the same group on the continent.
Nonetheless, despite the general success of the embargo, reliance on this alone converts the dispute into a straightforward war of attrition between the unions and the management. The process is very long drawn-out, and it is difficult to maintain much morale among the strikers as a whole; a few experts at blacking have emerged from the strike committee, but their activities take them away from the picket line, and even their greatest successes have little impact on the daily grind of maintaining a picket outside the factory. In the long run the blacking of Roberts-Arundel may induce the management to negotiate, or to pack up shop and clear out of Stpckport for good, but it does not greatly bother the blacklegs that the firm has recruited, nor does it stop the slow whittling away of enthusiasm among the pickets.
Support of various kinds on the picket line itself is therefore crucial, and it is here more than anywhere else that local weaknesses have revealed themselves. In January and February a series of mass pickets in the mornings undoubtedly scared off some of the less resolute blacklegs. The local Trades Council organised two large demonstrations of solidarity, and there was a generally rising tide of support. This culminated, towards the end of February, in a coordinated half-day stoppage in several local factories, and a mass demonstration outside the Roberts-Arundel works. In the course of this several policemen were injured, including the town’s deputy-chief constable, large numbers of windows were broken, and an attempt was made to break down the factory gate.
This ‘riot’ led to a flurry of negotiations, which finally came to nothing. The management recovered its nerve, largely because there was an almost total stop to all picketing in the succeeding weeks.
A call for token stoppages in local factories, endorsed by stewards in a fair number of plants, ended in fiasco, when the stewards failed to win the support of their own men for the policy. It rapidly became apparent that the much-boasted strength of the ‘left’ in the local engineering shops was largely illusory, a conclusion since reinforced by other events and situations in some of those shops.
Since February the whole local movement appears to have been partially paralysed. Such picketing as there has been has lacked the earlier spirit and numbers. At the time of writing, however, the local Trades Council has announced a meeting to discuss the whole issue, and there is a feeling in some quarters that it may still be possible to revive activity. Perhaps more important, support for some kind of rank-and-file solidarity committee has strengthened. Disillusion with the essentially passive ‘unity of the left’ policy propounded by the right wing of the Communist Party in association with a number of ‘Labour lefts’ has grown, partly through the experience of the struggle around the Roberts-Arundel dispute. The effective absence from the picket line of a number of key figures in the ‘unity’ movement has been noted, and the appropriate lessons drawn. It may be that out of the Roberts-Arundel dispute a quite extensive network of local militants may come to a new conception of militancy and socialist activity. Certainly the need for such a change of approach is very apparent; the job of local socialists is to help sow the seeds of this new consciousness.
 
Footnote
1. Copies of the latest pamphlet, The Story of the Strike, may be obtained, price 6d, from the Strike Committee, 125 Wellington Road South, Stockport, Cheshire, or from Colin Barker.



Professional Employees
Kenneth Prandy
Faber, 32s 6d
This study of professionalism and trade unionism among scientists and engineers is a might-have-been book. It adds little or nothing to the existing body of theory about the proletarianisation of the white-collar ‘professional’ and ‘semi-professional’ employees in government and industrial bureaucracies. And the data that Prandy presents are extremely thin. Almost the entire account of trade unionism amounts to the results of a remarkably unrewarding questionnaire survey carried out in the Liverpool area. There is none of the fairly dense historical data that Lockwood offered in his Black-coated Worker; and there is a complete lack of empirical data about the actual work-situations of the scientists and engineers that Prandy is investigating, beyond rather obvious general statements. The manifold tensions and contradictions of the search for status within contemporary bureaucracies, the conflicts between ‘research’ and ‘administrative’ personnel and so forth that others have documented are not even mentioned. If the study is unobjectionable in its conclusions, it is also unrewarding.



The Incompatibles: Trade Union Militancy and the Consensus
Ed. Robin Blackburn and Alexander Cockburn
Penguin/New Left Review, 6s.
Workers, Unions and the State
Graham Wootton
Routledge, 25s.
Blackburn and Cockburn have produced a mixed bag of essays on the problems of trade unions today. To some extent the mixture appears to reflect the editors’ lack of a clear view of what precisely they wanted the book to be. Some of the essays stand in flat contradiction to others, and there are some rather surprising gaps. Although there are occasional references, particularly in Tony Topham’s New Types of Bargaining, to the growing importance of shop stewards and the like in the bargaining process, there is no real discussion of the problems of union structure today. Nor, indeed, is there any attempt to asses the shape and potential of the contemporary labour movement – an omission that is somewhat surprising in a socialist collection like this.
Three of the articles stand out in particular: those by Robin Blackburn, Paul Foot and Tony Topham. Blackburn presents a scrupulously documented account of the continuing inequalities of British capitalism, and goes on to examine the roots of this inequality in the capitalist mechanism of exploitation. It is a first-rate piece of work, a model of its kind. Paul Foot presents what must rank as one of the best pieces of reportage on any dispute, in his The Seamen’s Struggle. Operating in the best muck-raking tradition, he presents a vivid exposé on the shipping industry, the NUS, the TUC, Wilson’s Government’s reaction and so forth. There are one or two real gems here: thus on p 192 we are told, in connection with Wilson’s allegations of a ‘red plot,’ that when Bert Ramelson (the CP’s industrial organiser) visited Jack Coward’s flat, he ‘surprised his hosts by advocating an immediate return to work.’ If Foot’s piece has a fault, it is perhaps that it strikes a slightly too heroic note; one would like to know how, after the undoubted militancy displayed by the NUS rank and file, the Left within the union could be more or less routed at this year’s conference. True, the voting rules are incredibly undemocratic, as Foot shows (some members have four votes each!); and there have been allegations from a London branch that their Conference delegates were forced on them by right-wingers from other branches who swamped their meeting. But – despite the obvious difficulties in doing this – some assessment of the extent to which militancy during the strike was further articulated in attitudes to the union machinery itself would have been useful. Tony Topham has re-written his excellent piece from ISJ, examining the new tendencies to long-term contracts and productivity agreements.
The other contributions are more mixed. Four of Michael Frayn’s pieces from the Observer have been brought together, and are pure gold. Ken Coates (Wage Slaves) has written a sparkling essay, but one that deals too much in abstractions; he seeks a bridge, or set of bridges, between the actual day-to-day search for the ‘fair wage’ and the abolition of the wages system itself, a bridge between ideas rather than between actual movements. We are left with a set of ‘ifs’ and the usual call for the elaboration of ‘a set of schemes for structural, anti-capitalist reforms’ (p.87), in which the link between these demands and the actual day-to-day struggles of our current fragmented movement is not examined.
Philip Toynbee and Claude Cockburn offer very lightweight pieces, both of them lacking Frayn’s bite. Robert Doyle, a printworker, presents a gritty and unromanticised picture of the situation in an IPC warehouse whose workers are faced with the prospect of redundancy. Bob Rowthorn gives a useful account of some of the root causes of British capitalism’s current problems, but his discussion of incomes policy is rather too abstract. Clive Jenkins puts the orthodox case for ‘More,’ and notes the official movement’s tired muscles.
One piece particularly seems out of place here. Jack Jones of the T&GWU argues a case for the 40 hour week, a £15 minimum wage, a standard minimum three-week holiday, etc, but completely fails to connect this worthy set of aspirations with any realistic view of the actual tendencies within the labour movement. His proposals amount to a simple list of good ideas, quite abstracted from actual social developments and possibilities and without any examination of the forces that might be summoned in support of these ideas – or in opposition. He wants a stronger TUC, but does not consider what the current moves to provide this mean; the demand for factory branches, today taken up most strongly by the Right, is also regarded in isolation from a context of increasing bureaucratisation. So too with his advocacy of productivity bargaining. Anyone looking for a classic example of the essential sogginess of contemporary ‘Left-reformist’ thought could hardly do better than read this.
The inclusion of Jack Jones’ article in this collection is symptomatic of its main weakness, the editors’ seeming unwillingness to do more than present a ‘broad left’ front of ideas, or to tie the contributions together with some assessment of their own of the nature of militancy or the actual tasks facing socialists at present. Only Robert Doyle touches on the level of consciousness of the average worker, or the forces that mould and change it. Perry Anderson argues a conventional case for the need for a revolutionary party, but does this without any serious evaluation of what such a party, or those seeking to build such a party, might be expected to be doing now.
In sum, at the level of proposals for activity this book is weak, and in a socialist collection this is a serious weakness. But there is much of value here, and comrades with six bob will not be wasting their cash.
Graham Wootton’s book is best left on the shelf, arguing a son of right-wing Young Liberal case for getting everybody educated to a greater ‘capacity to participate in some sense at some level,’ he contuses the state and society, assumes social problems to have psychological causes and moralises away at tedious length with, at times, hardly an empirical reference. Starting with the question, ‘What are the obligations of workers in their unions to the state’ he sounds a call for a swift return to some feudal industrial society. He hasn’t a clue what is actually happening. Strictly for laughs, this one.

 Barker: In the middle way (Winter 2003)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Colin Barker
In the middle way [1]
(Winter 2003)

From International Socialism 2 : 101, Winter 2003.
Copyright © International Socialism.
Copied with thanks from the International Socialism Website.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Geoff Eley
Forging Democracy: The History of the Left in
Europe, 1850–2000
Oxford University Press, 2002, Â£25
In 1985 Geoff Eley, with David Blackbourn, co-authored The
Peculiarities of German History. That book represented an
important contribution to Marxist thinking, not just about 19th
century German history, but about how we should understand ‘bourgeois
revolutions’. [2] In the intervening years Eley has produced a
steady flow of articles and books on the history of Germany, the
working class, popular culture, and the work of prominent Marxists
like Christopher Hill and Edward Thompson. It was thus with some
anticipation that I opened his 698–page book, dealing with the
interlinked themes of the development of democracy and of the left in
Europe over the past century and a half.
The author tells us that he produced this volume over the last 20
years. He was writing during the 1980s and 1990s, in a period that
significantly reshaped the European and world left, when it was
peculiarly difficult for socialists to maintain their bearings. The
events of that period – the large defeats suffered by centrally
important groups like the Italian Fiat workers or the British miners,
the rise and fall of various parliamentary and extra-parliamentary
left movements including the 1980s peace movement, the apparent
prominence of ‘new social movements’, the collapse of ‘communism’
in Eastern Europe and the former USSR, and the drive towards
neo-liberalism by the parties of social democracy (and above all the
Blair-led New Labour Party) – could easily depress socialists or
lead them astray. Certainly the sense they made of those decades
necessarily informed how they thought about the history of their own
movements. As he acknowledges, Geoff Eley has been marked by the
period of his own research and writing. The views he formed then have
shaped his history.
Any serious review of this ambitious book must, therefore, be
political. If I locate serious problems in Forging Democracy,
my argument is almost entirely not with Eley’s ‘facts’, but
with the pattern he has found in them, the lessons he has drawn, and
the issues he has emphasised as well as those he has neglected. On a
number of critical matters, there are major differences between Eley
and the tradition broadly represented by this journal.
 
Themes
There are several repeating themes running through Eley’s book.
On the first of these we can open with agreement. Between 1860 and
2000, as Eley suggests:
... the most important gains for democracy have only ever
been attained through revolution, or at least via those several
concentrated periods of change I’ll call the constitution-making
conjunctures of modern European history. [3] Let there be no mistake:
democracy is not ‘given’ or ‘granted’. It requires conflict,
namely, courageous challenges to authority, risk-taking and reckless
exemplary acts, ethical witnessing, violent confrontations, and
general crises in which the given sociopolitical order breaks down.
In Europe, democracy did not arise from natural evolution or economic
prosperity. It certainly did not emerge as an inevitable by-product
of individualism or the market. It developed because masses of people
organised collectively to demand it. [4]
To this we should add that democracy in Europe has also been a
fragile, contested, unfinished and relatively recent growth. Not only
have democratic advances occurred via major political crises, so too
have the sometimes crushing defeats which the struggle for democracy
in Europe has experienced: think only of the victories of Mussolini,
Hitler or Franco between the wars, of Stalinist reaction across
Eastern Europe after 1945, or the Greek colonels’ coup.
There have, Eley argues, been five moments in European history of
‘transnational constitution-making’, each of which laid down
possibilities and limits for decades afterwards. The first,
1789–1815, lies outside his book’s remit. The other four were
1869–1871, 1914–1923, 1943–1949, and 1989–1924. In practice,
Eley doesn’t hold very firmly to this list, spending some space,
for example, in considering the ‘political explosions of 1968’.
But his general argument is surely right: history moves between
periods when nothing fundamental seems to change and when politics
seems to become ‘the machinery of maintenance and routine’, and
other periods when:
... things fall apart. The given ways no longer persuade.
The present loosens its grip. Horizons shift. History speeds up. It
becomes possible to see the fragments and outlines of a different
way. People shake off their uncertainties and hesitations; they throw
aside their features. Very occasionally, usually in the midst of a
wider societal crisis, the apparently unbridgeable structures of
normal political life become shaken. The expectations of a slow and
unfolding habitual future get unlocked. Still more occasionally,
collective agency materialises, sometimes explosively and with
violent results. When this happens, the formal institutional worlds
of politics in a nation or a city and the many mundane worlds of the
private, the personal and the everyday move together. They occupy the
same time. The present begins to move. These are times of
extraordinary possibility and hope. New horizons shimmer. History’s
continuum shatters. [5]
We need not discuss here how and why such dramatic shifts in tempo
and possibility occur, what matters is that they do happen. Leaps and
jumps in development, political and social crises, unexpected
transformations are normal in history, and they affect the way that
socialists, above all, respond to the past, the present and the future.
The other recurring themes present some difficulties, which we
shall need to pick up at appropriate points. One concerns gender and
class. Left politics, Eley suggests, has been centred around ‘the
traditional imagery of the male worker in industry’ [6] and this
imagery has weakened the left both theoretically and strategically.
Several problems arise. The European left’s approach to what an
earlier generation termed ‘the woman question’ has, he proposes,
been consistently flawed, so that the very term ‘class’ itself
has been identified in ‘masculine’ terms. In practice this has
often weakened the left’s assessment of and struggle for democratic
advance. Additionally, Eley suggests that the ‘centrality of the
working class’ has been ‘deconstructed’ in contemporary social
and economic thought, and this leads him to ask what happens if we
‘dethrone’ the working class from its privileged primacy in
socialist politics at various periods in the past? In this, he draws
inspiration from ‘feminist critiques of “class-centred”
politics’, as these developed in the 1970s. [7]
There’s a second, problematic theme concerning Eley’s account
of what some rather critical terms – notably ‘the left’ and
‘socialism’ – should be taken to mean, and what and who should
be included in and excluded from them. These issues were, of course,
themselves very much contested across Europe during the period
covered by Forging Democracy, and the author’s own stance
with respect to these debates cannot but affect his historical treatment.
There’s a final theme, although it is not openly stated in the
introductory pages. Faced with a variety of crises, in which the left
found itself divided and arguing furiously, Eley’s instinct is to
seek some middle path between the contending forces. Closely
connected with this, not surprisingly, is Eley’s generally
unsympathetic rendering of the Leninist tradition, and indeed a not
very convincing account of the politics of Marxism generally.
This review will follow the broad organisation of Eley’s book
into four sections.
 
1860–1914
The 1860s represent a useful starting point for the history of the
left and democracy in Europe. The decade saw a series of state
reorganisations across the world, whose effects would be felt for the
next century. Serfdom was abolished ‘from above’ in Tsarist
Russia, Italy and Germany were unified from above, Canada gained its
federal constitution, the North won the Civil War in America and
abolished slavery, and the Meiji Restoration set Japan on the path to
rapid capitalist development. The British parliament, through the
Second Reform Act and the Education Act, gave some male workers the
vote and provided for a national state education system. All the
major states which were to play prominent roles as Great Powers in
inter-imperialist conflicts in the 20th century underwent significant
political changes between 1860 and 1870.
The formation of unified and relatively liberalised national
states was, as Eley notes, a necessary preliminary to the struggle
for democracy. It was in the new world of large nation-states in late
19th century Europe that modern socialist movements emerged. As
industrial capitalism and its system of states developed, so too did
the content of popular demands for democracy:
Gradually and unevenly, democracy became linked to two
new demands: an economic analysis of capitalism and a political
programme for the general reorganising of society. The new ideas
didn’t inevitably follow from socioeconomic change. But in the most
general way, changes in the democratic idea clearly had this material
source. They resulted from the serious efforts of political thinkers,
and countless ordinary men and women, to understand the disruptions
of their accustomed world. It was in that moment of transformation
that people began exploring the possibilities of collective ownership
and co-operative production. And in that juncture of socioeconomic
change and political rethinking the ideas of socialism were born. [8]
In that process, the prefix ‘social’ was attached to
‘democracy’ to define a distinctive working class politics. And
the term ‘social democracy’ implied a new form of society,
contrasted sharply with emerging capitalism: ‘It came to mean “an
idea of society as mutual cooperation”, as opposed to one based on
“individual competition”.’ [9] Private property itself came to
be identified as the source of social ills.
Two intimately interlinked questions were naturally posed. First,
how should this new social democratic vision be realised? Second,
what content should be given to this vision?
So far as the first question was concerned, the predominant
solution adopted across Europe involved the creation of new, social
democratic parties. These, Eley suggests, displaced older forms:
notably local workers’ associations and clubs on the one hand, and
‘Blanquism’ on the other. Where they were successful, the new
parties absorbed workers’ associations, around a new project. If
only working people could gain the vote, then universal suffrage
should permit a parliamentary majority to institute social democratic
change. The newly emerging socialist parties were a realisation of a
broad democratic vision, which focused working class political
energies on parliamentary politics.
Looking back from the early 21st century, it seems improbable that
such a project could catch fire with millions of people. Plenty of
people today think politics is restricted to parliamentarism, but
true believers in ‘parliamentary socialism’, who still seriously
see this as a means to uproot the whole social foundation of
capitalism, are quite few. In that sense, someone like Tony Benn is
relatively unusual. But before 1914 such ideas could enjoy wide
appeal. Nor is this surprising. In the 19th century most male workers
were still excluded from the suffrage, as of course were all women.
What could be more natural than the assumption that, if the ruling
class denied you the vote, acquiring it could be a powerful means to
both oppose them and remake society?
Eley mostly interprets the growth of social democratic parties as
a ‘forward march of labour’. He is, surely, broadly correct in
his positive presentation of the ‘socialist model of the mass
party, campaigning openly for public support and parliamentary
representation on a national scale, and organising its own affairs by
the internal democracy of meetings, resolutions, agreed procedures,
and elected committees’. This was ‘the crucial democratic
breakthrough of the 19th century’s last four decades’ – it was
‘the vital departure’. [10]
There is, however, a curious gap in his story, in that he does not
pay much attention to the interrelation between the pursuit of
parliamentary victories and questions of trade unionism and workplace
struggle. The pre-1914 decades witnessed a considerable growth in
union membership and activity across Europe, in part absorbing the
forces which were previously drawn into ‘workers’ associations’.
As both national trade union structures and the social democratic
parties grew, they fostered each other’s development. (The patterns
of development, though, did not follow the same order in each
country. While the Labour Party in Britain was largely the creation
of the unions, in Germany the order was reversed.) In a book focused
on the relation between the left and democracy, Eley’s relative
inattention to trade unionism – which marks his whole book –
means that he never very directly addresses the complex of
theoretical and practical issues about struggles over authority and
thus democracy within the capitalist workplace. Yet the ‘despotic’
power of employers and their managerial apparatus, from bullying,
racist and sexist supervisors to the ‘scientific’ managers who
tried to squeeze ever more surplus value from workers, were as much a
source of trade unionism’s attraction as questions of wages alone.
The struggle to control the exercise of capitalist power in and
around the workplace posed issues quite as important for democracy –
especially for the left – as did suffrage questions. To be sure,
the growth of union bureaucracies and their increasing domination of
union agendas did, very often, divert attention away from such
matters – but they also regularly resurfaced, manifesting
themselves not least in periodic contests between rank and file
members and their officials.
This is not to say that Eley never mentions these matters. He
observes the way trade unionism’s mass basis made it an important
factor in national life, and notes the rise in the strike statistics
in the immediate pre-1914 period. As he remarks – though it will
play less part in his overall narrative – the 1905 Revolution in
Russia inextricably linked questions of work and democracy, wages and
citizenship. And he does record both the costs of top-heavy
centralism in labour movements, and also the way that it in turn
became a big spur to unofficial militancy. He also remarks that the
conundrum of ‘reconciling the case for centralism with the demands
of internal democracy and grassroots militancy ... would become the
source of enormous internal conflict’. They would, as he remarks,
underpin ‘rival visions of socialism’. [11]
What Eley suggests is that, in the consolidated organisation of
social democratic parties and unions, something got lost along the
way – in particular, the valuable aspects of the legacy of the
utopian socialists of the earlier 19th century. The utopians
(Saint-Simon, Fourier, Owen, Cabet and others) did, in practice,
retreat into apolitical and often outlandish forms of experimental
community building; often they were silent on how a real transition
to a new society might be achieved; and they tended to be indifferent
to political economy and the structural origins of class-based
inequality. Social democrats after the 1860s explicitly repudiated
the utopians here. However, there were other sides to the utopian
legacy. One was the focus on producer co-operatives and ‘social
workshops’, tied to a vision of self government. That part of the
utopian legacy did not, I suggest, so much disappear as transmute and
reappear on an immensely larger scale, no longer attached to
experimental communities but as part of the 20th century repertoire
of revolutionary workers’ movements – most notably in the
workers’ councils and soviets.
What Eley, however, especially laments is the loss of the ‘radical
politics of gender’ that characterised the early utopians: the
critiques of marriage and of the family, of patriarchal relations
between men and women, of the absence of mutuality and equality
between the sexes. The second half of the 19th century witnessed a
double movement, in which working class organisations came to accept
the given basis of the wage relation and to organise and bargain
collectively within this – learning the rules of the market game,
as Hobsbawm expressed it – and at the same time tried to construct
a form of family life fitted to this reality. [12] Its ideal
assumption was a worker-husband who left every morning to earn a
family wage while the wife remained behind doing household tasks and
bringing up the children. Outside the skilled and better paid layers,
this was often no more than a dream, for most working class wives
continued to earn money when and how they could. This pattern of
adjustment to the pressures of working class life in capitalist
society had the effect of remaking the ‘traditional’ dependence
of women on men. In the process, as Eley puts it:
... commitment to gender equality was lost. Visions of
sexual freedom and alternatives to the patriarchal family were pushed
to the dissident edges of the labour movements. Women were no longer
addressed by means of an independent feminist platform but were
treated either as mothers or potential workers. The early belief in
sexual equality (‘women’s petty interests of the moment’, as
the German social democrat Clara Zetkin put it) became swallowed into
the class struggle. Or, as Eleanor Marx exhorted in 1892, ‘We will
organise not as “women” but as proletarians ... for us there is
nothing but the working class movement’. [13]
In Eley’s account, ‘By choosing certain strategies of
community defence over others, working class radicals shaped an
enduring ideology of domesticity, limiting effective citizenship to
men’. [14] And, as part of that process, they constructed an image
of the working class itself, centred on the figure of the male manual worker:
Across industrialising Europe, the ideal of the household
managed by the nonworking wife was available only to a minority.
Women’s earning power may have been vital to working families, but
its status was practically and explicitly devalued. Thus in building
the collective ideal of the working class – in shaping the
disorderly facts of industrialisation into a basis for politics –
socialists embraced only some parts of working class life while
derogating others. In the centring of class identity, some working
class experiences became valorised, others ignored or effaced ...
Labour movements institutionalised precisely the systems of
distinction that were least conducive to a genuinely inclusive and
gender-blind working class political presence. While invoking the
interests, authority, and collective agency of the working class as a
whole, those movements were actually far more narrow and
exclusionary. [15]
The world of the skilled trade unionist did not encompass the
‘authentic’ working class, any more than did that of the
unskilled and unorganised labourers of pre-1914 Europe. What the left
needed to do was to devise a politics for both, and to organise:
on two fronts of social dispossession: the working men’s
experience of long weary walks to work, exhausting labour,
occupational injuries and diseases and grim periods of unemployment;
and the lives of their wives at their own paid jobs, in local
markets, dealing with landlords, charities and state institutions.
The term ‘labour movements’ often implicitly suggested that the
former was their province.
In Eley’s reading, not until the 1960s would any proper recovery
of the utopian legacy with respect to gender occur. He ties that
recovery to the flowering of a new feminism.
It is undeniable that there is some truth in the story Eley tells.
But he rather skates over the complexities, in offering an account in
which ‘the woman question’ was always subordinated and even
ignored in the pursuit of a ‘class politics’ that was resolutely
masculinist. Socialism itself, he suggests, became – both in its
vision and in the instruments shaped to fight for it – a one-sided
male affair. There is a peculiar forgetfulness in Eley’s story in a
couple of respects. First, he never even mentions Engels and his
Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State, a short book
that maintained a fairly constant left readership, and whose pages
both include a striking critical image of the modern working class
family as itself divided between a ‘bourgeois’ husband and a
‘proletarian’ wife, and which envisages a future in which sexual
relations will be founded solely on mutual attraction and not
material dependence. Eley does note, though only in passing, that
August Bebel’s Women and Socialism was a bestseller in the
socialist movement. Second, his implied critique of both Clara Zetkin
and Eleanor Marx quite hides from view that, just as the ‘left’
was a field of contesting voices, so too was ‘feminism’. There
was always a practical and theoretical argument between ‘bourgeois
feminism’ and ‘socialist feminism’ [16]
Eley’s treatment of the question seems too one-sided. Yet he
himself provides some of the materials to question it. He opens his
discussion of the pre-1914 period with the story of Edith Lanchester,
a Social Democratic Federation (SDF) member from Battersea, who in
1895 announced her intention of living with James Sullivan in a ‘free
love’ union. Edith and James were opposed in principle to marriage
as a social institution because it destroyed women’s independence.
Edith’s father and brothers intervened, having her hauled off to an
asylum with a certificate of insanity signed by a mental specialist,
Dr George Fielding Blandford. A campaign in her support won a writ of
habeas corpus. Two commissioners in lunacy found Edith to be ‘of
sound mind, if misguided’ and eventually ordered her discharge.
The left at the time was divided over the ‘Lanchester case’.
Her own party, the SDF, defended her rights and condemned the
kidnapping, but while nodding to the Marxist critique of marriage it
argued for pragmatic observance of ‘the world as it is’ and
disavowed individual ‘anarchistic action or personal revolt’. The
SDF wanted to dissociate itself from ‘free love’ doctrines, and
was joined by the Independent Labour Party (ILP), whose leader, Keir
Hardie, also worried about socialism’s bad name: ‘Enemies of
socialism know that such an escapade as that meditated by Miss
Lanchester tends to discredit it among all classes.’ However, there
were other voices, among them dissenting SDF members, who saw Edith
Lanchester’s stand as a blow against ‘this dark age of hypocrisy
and ignorance’, while Robert Blatchford’s independent socialist
weekly, The Clarion, declared, ‘Socialists believe that a woman has
a perfect right to do what she likes with her own body ... in
defiance of priests, laws, customs and cant’. [17] Blatchford’s
view was perhaps more widely shared on the left than Eley will allow.
What more general sense should we make of this story? One obvious
point is that the left was divided in respect of this case, as indeed
it would continue to be over all manner of questions. That suggests
that we need to understand ‘the left’, not as a homogeneous body
of opinion and organisation, but rather as a field of argument.
Within that field, a whole variety of voices appear, some seemingly
echoing half-forgotten voices from the past (and suggesting, by the
way, that earlier utopian ideas about gender were not entirely lost),
others offering ideas and terms that would burst forth again in
different conditions – how very modern, for example, Blatchford’s
Clarion sounds! All of this means that the very definition of ‘the
left’ presents a practical-theoretical problem, whose contours are
liable to alter in different conditions, and which sets up important
strategic questions for socialists.
In this respect, Eley’s account is sometimes unsatisfactory. On
the politics of gender, he states, ‘The more consistent the
socialism, one might say, the more easily feminist demands were
postponed to the socialist future, because a sternly materialist
standpoint insisted that none of these questions could be tackled
while capitalism perdured’. [18]
This is very questionable. What or who is to count as ‘consistent
socialism’, and what is this ‘materialist standpoint’? As Eley
himself documents in the second part of his book, it was the
Bolsheviks who, in the immediate aftermath of the October Revolution,
carried through legislation embodying the most complete set of
feminist demands available at their time, far in advance of anything
in the rest of the world. But then the Bolsheviks’ version of
‘materialism’ was very different from that which Eley attributes
to the left. Bolshevik politics involved a rediscovery of the
revolutionary ideas of Karl Marx, ideas founded on a version of
materialism that Eley seems not to understand well. The issues are
quite fundamental, for they concern the book’s central themes:
democracy, socialist transformation, and the nature of the left.
How is democracy, and social transformation generally, to be
achieved? ‘In practice,’ writes Eley, ‘democratic goals can
only ever be pursued against the resistance of dominant social
groups’. [19] Expanding democracy is not just a matter of goodwill
and understanding, but of struggle against resistance. Here we have
half of a Marxist argument, and an important half. But only half.
Back in 1845–1846, in The German Ideology, Marx and Engels
made a similar point, in support of the necessity of revolution, but
added to it something deeper:
Both for the production on a mass scale of this communist
consciousness, and for the success of the cause itself, the
alteration of men on a mass scale is necessary, an alteration which
can only take place in a practical movement, a revolution; this
revolution is necessary, therefore, not only because the ruling class
cannot be overthrown in any other way, but also because the class
overthrowing it can only in a revolution succeed in ridding itself of
all the muck of ages and become fitted to found society anew. [20]
Socialism is not just a matter of overcoming ruling class
resistance. Those who do the overcoming must also transform
themselves in that struggle. That whole argument rests on a
materialist position spelled out by Marx in a brief but critical set
of notes in the spring of 1845. Materialism up till then, he
suggested, treated reality only as an object of contemplation, and
not as ‘sensuous human activity, practice, not subjectively’. It
had been idealist philosophy which had developed – albeit
abstractly – ’the active side’. Against ‘old materialism’
Marx upheld a ‘new materialism’ which no longer treated human
beings as the (passive) creatures of their circumstances, but
insisted that they defined themselves through their own activity:
‘The coincidence of the changing of circumstances and of human
activity or self changing can be conceived and rationally understood
only as revolutionary practice’. [21]
This is a ‘sternly materialist standpoint’, but one leading to
conclusions very different from those Eley attributes to those
(unnamed) socialist thinkers who said women must wait for socialism
to liberate them. Whether the subject be women, or workers, Marx
insists, they can only change their conditions insofar as they
themselves are active and thus transform themselves. It is upon this
foundation that Marx, in the 1860s, wrote the opening words of the
Provisional Rules of the First International: ‘The
emancipation of the working classes must be conquered by the working
classes themselves’. [22]
Such ideas will be familiar to many readers of this journal. They
provide the basis for drawing a fundamental distinction within the
ranks of those identifying themselves as ‘the left’ over the past
century and a half. The point was made brilliantly by the late Hal
Draper, who distinguished between ‘two souls of socialism’ that
he termed ‘socialism from above’ and ‘socialism from below’.
[23] The essence of ‘socialism from above’ is the idea that some
‘saviour from on high’ – clever intellectuals, a party, an
elected body of parliamentary MPs, etc. – will carry out the
emancipation of society on its behalf. Such a conception, Marx
suggested in his third Thesis on Feuerbach, underlay all those
varieties of ‘materialism’ which declared that men are the
products of their circumstances and upbringing, forgetting that men
change their circumstances and that the educator must himself be
educated. If human beings are determined, rather than self
determining, then changing society must be the activity of a group
superior to society, which itself somehow escapes determination. The
doctrine of ‘socialism from above’ is inherently elitist, indeed
reproduces fundamental assumptions of class society. It denies the
crucial role of popular creative development in history; it is,
indeed, in the strictest sense ‘counter-revolutionary.’ By
contrast, ‘socialism from below’ insists that society’s
transformation is necessarily the work of the majority, the product
of their own self activity and self organisation. This doctrine is
inherently revolutionary, as well as being inherently democratic. In
general terms, we can view the whole history of socialism as an
ongoing contest between adherents of these two opposed traditions.
That contest is central to the equally long-running argument
between ‘reform’ and ‘revolution’. This is not,
unfortunately, how Eley understands that argument. For him, while
democratic goals can only be pursued against the resistance of
dominant social groups, the decisive political and philosophical
question becomes something different: ‘How far can attacks on the
legitimacy of private interests stay compatible with the democratic
principle, without requiring the use of force and the damaging of
basic rights, while the new collectivist system is being installed?’
Divisions over this question, he goes on to suggest, have been ‘one
of the main dividing lines between reformist and revolutionary
movements’. [24] This reduces the argument to a debate between
socialism and liberalism about the degree to which private interests
can and should be overcome, and about whether force is a legitimate
means to achieve this. What quite disappears is any conception of
popular self organisation as the critical issue. Nor does any issue
of principle appear to divide those who stand on either side.
Eley presents a Marx who seems something of a caricature. His Marx
in 1848 was ‘trapped in Blanquism’s practical logic’, despite
his break with the conspiratorial traditions of existing
revolutionary groups:
... moving ahead of popular consciousness, [Marx] still
aimed to steer the masses towards insurrectionary showdown ... Marx
and his friends claimed to know the future by virtue of understanding
history’s inescapable progress. This put them in a superior
relation to the masses, divining the true direction of their
interests. [25]
In a footnote, he expands on this idea: ‘When knowledge of a
future outcome is claimed, a manipulative approach to popular
politics easily follows, in which the masses are moved to the
appropriate destination, whether or not they understand’. [26] In
this manner, Eley gives flesh to an earlier argument, that the legacy
of Blanquism continued in the shape of vanguardism, which he defines
as ‘the idea that minorities of disciplined revolutionaries,
equipped with sophisticated theories and superior virtue, could
anticipate the direction of popular hopes, act decisively in their
name, and in the process radicalise the masses’. This is the
politics he attributes to Marx – in flat contradiction to the
historical record.
What did Marx actually argue during and after the 1848
revolutions? Practical experience in 1848 showed, he suggested, that
bourgeois forces rapidly lose their appetite for revolution in the
face of working class revolutionary activity, and come to play a
reactionary role. What is the status of this argument? It is, surely,
that we can learn something about who can and can’t be expected to
be consistent and trustworthy allies in a revolutionary crisis. It
suggests, moreover, that workers need to understand this reality, so
that they will not be misled by false friends. How is this
‘manipulative’? Does it involve any element of acting in the
masses’ name under the illusion that such action will radicalise
them? Not at all. What it does involve is openly expressing a
standpoint. Marx and Engels, like their successors, disdained to hide
their views. The test of their ideas would lie, in part, in the
clarity with which they expressed them, the means they developed to
promulgate them, and, above all, the degree to which they were
actually recognised by real workers’ movements as summarising their
actual experience and showing a road forward. There is nothing
Blanquist, or manipulative, in any of this – unless one supposes,
as Marx decidedly did not, that workers couldn’t think for themselves.
Eley is not even very consistent in his account of Marx. He notes
in passing that the period after Marx’s death, when labour
movements bifurcated into ‘political’ and ‘industrial’ wings,
each pursuing its own reformist ends, undermined Marx’s vision of a
unified emancipatory struggle and that, in that process, Marx’s own
commitment to ‘direct participatory democracy’ (exemplified in
his comments on the Paris Commune of 1871) was also lost, as the
battle for democracy was, for a period, reduced almost entirely to
parliamentary forms. [27] Now, we can either have a Marx whose
thought was hopelessly split between ‘Blanquist manipulation’ and
a belief in ‘direct participatory democracy’, as Eley seems to
imply, or we can have a more consistent Marx – much truer to the
historical record – who completely rejected Blanquism and all other
forms of ‘socialism from above’, and whose thinking was always
that of a revolutionary and democratic socialism ‘from below’.
What is true is that Marx’s revolutionary ideas were
significantly changed by the generation of socialist intellectuals
who came to leadership in the social democratic parties after Marx
and Engels quit the scene. In the hands of thinkers like Kautsky and
Hilferding, the revolutionary ideas of Marx were reduced to a
‘scientism’, in which ‘historical laws’ were somehow supposed
to guarantee socialist advance, independently of what actual
historical men and women actually did and thought.
The development of mass social democratic parties, committed to
parliamentary methods and attached to national unions, with their own
bureaucracies, would pose new problems of theory, strategy and
tactics to the left. These developments provided the setting for the
Europe-wide debates, in the two decades before 1914, about
‘revisionism’ and ‘economism’ – the first form in which
divisions between ‘left’ and ‘right’ manifested themselves
with some degree of clarity. What gradually became apparent was that
the very institutions and practices of European labour movements were
becoming, even as they were being created and developed, not only
means but also impediments to democratic and socialist advance. This
growing awareness is signalled, for example, in Rosa Luxemburg’s
writings. In 1899, sharply rebutting Eduard Bernstein in her Social
Reform and Revolution, she attributed the influence of
‘revisionism’ to the continuing weight of the ‘petty
bourgeoisie’ within social democracy. Seven years later, when she
wrote The Mass Strike, her whole emphasis had shifted: now she
saw the very structures of existing social democracy in Germany, with
its divisions into parliamentarist and trade union wings, as itself
the source of the problem. Now it appeared that the barriers the
working class must surmount if it was to overthrow capitalism
included not only the combined forces of capital and the state, but
also the very organisations it had itself created in pursuit of its
aims. Now the left must also take account of the conservatism of the
party and trade union bureaucracies, and their readiness to hold back
working class insurgency.
That discovery – variously nuanced in the different countries
where industrial capitalism was most developed – necessarily had
momentous consequences for socialist theory, for strategy and
tactics. [28] How, in the first place, should the emergence of these
‘revisionist’ tendencies be explained – as the product of a
thin layer of relatively privileged officials and ‘labour
aristocrats’, or as the outcome of deeper contradictory processes
of working class incorporation within the routines of modern
capitalism? Second, how far would their conservative impulses carry
the leaders of the parties and the unions towards accommodation with
the ruling order? Would they merely seek to blur the contradictions
between capital and labour, or actually change sides? Third, what
kinds of activity did these new realities imply for those who held
fast to the idea of working class self emancipation? How far and in
what form should the left break organisationally with organised
reformist bodies? Was it sufficient to debate fundamental questions 
within the framework of existing organisations? Should socialists
rely on the emergence of spontaneous rank and file opposition to
union and party bureaucracies? Should they organise entirely
separately and in complete isolation from the reformist bodies,
whether in new specifically revolutionary parties or in newly founded
militant unions? How should revolutionaries relate to the large
masses of workers who remained under the sway of the conservative
bureaucracies within the official labour movements? Here was a mass
of complex questions, whose solution would require both a rediscovery
and remaking of Marxism’s core meaning in the light of new
conditions, as well as the practical testing of different solutions.
Nor did these problems arise in isolation. By the start of the
20th century the European powers had largely divided the globe
between them in a set of competing empires and spheres of influence.
Great Power rivalries were building up, military budgets were rising,
nationalist sentiments were being promoted (along with support for
anti-foreigner feeling and racism towards colonial subjects), and
questions about the rights of the nations in Europe’s ramshackle
absolutist empires were being posed with growing sharpness. Across
most of Europe, there were still millions of small farmers whose
political allegiances were in doubt: what policy should working class
parties adopt to them and their concerns – or should they
effectively ignore them and focus only on farm labourers on big
estates, as Kautsky urged?
Solutions to these and other dilemmas were not quickly and
immediately available. It would take the immense crisis produced by
the First World War and its aftermath for anything like clear answers
to emerge.
Geoff Eley is a good historian, in the sense that he does report
the various issues and debates, often with a wealth of fascinating
detail. He recognises the emerging conflict within unions between the
growing bureaucracies and ‘the elemental democracies of the shop
floor’. He records how the SPD and other social democratic parties
hankered after bourgeois respectability, the parliamentarist nature
of the parties, their disinterest in (indeed in Kautsky’s case,
their direct opposition to) aspirations to workers’ control in
industry, their inattention to colonialism and to feminist issues,
and so on. But he reaches a limit. At no point does he ‘take
sides’, in the sense of arguing where the logic of any position
might lead, even though he clearly feels that many of these positions
were mistaken or problematical. Nor, therefore, does he press hard at
that difficult but vital question, who or what is to count as ‘the
left’? Was ‘the left’ a potentially united entity, or did deep
inherent divisions mean that its major wings were bound to come into
sharp conflict? Such questions haunt the rest of his story.
 
1914–1923
The ten years from 1914 to 1923 represented a critical period in
the development of the left in Europe, and indeed across the world.
The unprecedented mass killing and deprivations of the First World
War occasioned an immense wave of popular radicalisation. Already
developing contradictions in emerging labour organisations came to a
head. Working class and socialist organisations were riven with
bitter conflicts and splits: between union and party bureaucracies on
one hand and the aspirations and demands of rank and file workers on
the other; between the defenders of parliamentarism and moderation
and newly self conscious proponents of revolutionary politics;
between different conceptions of the nature of socialism and equally
of Marxism. New, if temporary, alliances were formed, for example
between revolutionary Marxists and anarcho-syndicalists.
This period threw up fundamental problems which would continue to
be central to socialist argument for the next 80 years. Because they
were not resolved adequately – ie practically – the appalling
slaughter of the First World War was followed only two decades later
by six more years of even more terrible death and destruction, in
what Eric Hobsbawm dubbed the Thirty Years War of the 20th century.
Before 1914, famously, the Second International passed apparently
united resolutions declaring its militant opposition to impending
war. In August 1914, however, all but the Russian and Bulgarian
socialist parties fell in behind their respective national
governments, contributing to the pro-war hysteria that marked its
outbreak. In country after country the socialist opponents of
imperialist war found themselves in isolated minorities. As Eley
records, for right wing socialist party leaders and union
bureaucrats, the war brought a kind of ‘socialism’: they were
courted and integrated into government, in return for their
abandoning the practice of class opposition. It meant, for the
working class, as well as mass conscription and rising death rates at
the front, speed-up in the factories, the suspension of factory
regulations, lower safety standards, the freezing of basic union
rights and falling living standards: ‘Thus the socialists’
integration into government was matched by rank and file alienation’. [29]
Given the disorientation imposed by official social democracy, the
speed and degree with which organised popular discontent manifested
itself was impressive. Strikes – at first over ‘economic’ and
soon over ‘political’ issues – became ever more frequent as the
war progressed. Militant workers created new organisational forms
like the Internal Commissions in Italy or the Clyde Workers’
Committee and shop stewards movement in Britain. The stage was set
for deep splits and regroupments in existing left organisations.
Internationally, the left managed to organise two small anti-war
conferences in Switzerland. In Germany the SPD expelled its left wing
in 1917, producing a new Independent Party, the USPD. However, as
Eley notes, the new party ‘lacked either a coherent vision or a
solid popular organisation’. [30] The same was true of other broad
left oppositions such as developed in France, in the Italian
‘Maximalists’ or the Leeds anti-war convention in Britain. The
strongest expression of militancy, economic or political, came at
rank and file level.
In the latter part of the war and after, the old European order
was to be shaken to its core by popular militancy. The critical
question became: what will follow? Who will master the popular
explosions, and where will Europe (and the world) go? No serious
practical answer could be given to that unless, simultaneously, the
question of defining ‘the left’ was also posed clearly. If the
1914–1918 war had already brought that issue sharply to the fore, the
revolutionary wave from 1917 made it still more urgent.
The same essential elements that would soon convulse the whole of
Europe were, as Eley remarks, central to the first revolution, in
Russia in February 1917. That revolution drew on the militancy of
women from the textile mills and the bread lines, a huge wave of
strikes and the mutinying of troops. In the very process of the
uprising, workers and soldiers recreated the institutions they had
first invented in 1905, the soviets (popular councils). February thus
produced a situation in Russia of ‘dual power’ in which rival
institutions – on one side a provisional government, on the other
the soviet – contested for practical power. However, those who
initially came to head the soviet were the ‘moderate left’ who
fell back into the position of the social democratic right across
Europe: they resisted popular demands for change and reform, defended
the polices of the Provisional Government, and continued to support
the war. The Menshevik view, summed up by the German socialist Karl
Kautsky as ‘masterly limitation’, was, Eley suggests, ‘principled
and realistic as an assessment of Russia’s existing developmental
resources’. However, as he goes on to point out, ‘this strategy
remained doctrinaire, abysmally unsuited for the popular mobilisation
of 1917 ... Mensheviks found themselves constantly trying to hold
popular hopes back, within the bourgeois revolution’s normative
limits ... [Their policy] trapped the Mensheviks into a debilitating
logic of incorporation ... They continued substituting for the social
force – the liberal bourgeoisie – they believed the rightful
bearer of the revolution’. [31] Time and again both the Mensheviks
and the Social Revolutionaries resisted popular demands for an end to
the war, for a solution to peasant land hunger and a resolution of
the social struggle over wages, prices and the control of industry –
demands emerging from a still radicalising population.
Such inner conflicts – between newly promoted governments and
radical popular movements, where proponents of so called ‘moderate’
policies sought to demobilise the very forces that had propelled them
into office – would characterise every significant subsequent
revolution. Time and again such conflicts would derail those
revolutions. [32]
What made the Russian Revolution unusual was the presence of
Lenin’s Bolshevik Party. During 1917 ‘pressure for resolving dual
power in favour of the soviet reached a crescendo’ – and only the
Bolsheviks consistently urged that resolution. [33] Eley sums the
matter up well: ‘Bolshevism rose to power by organising this
popular radicalisation’. [34] As he also shows, Bolshevism in
reality was far from the widespread caricature of a disciplined
vanguard party. Additionally, only Lenin’s Bolsheviks had a
practical pro-peasant policy: ‘The worst failure of the
non-Bolshevik left’ (the Mensheviks and SRs) was their refusal to
back peasant demands, and actions, for immediate land reform. In
1917, the Bolsheviks ‘alone took the peasants seriously’. [35]
Eley’s account of 1917 in Russia is refreshing after the
mountains of reactionary nonsense so many historians have served up.
Unlike other historians, he gives proper weight to the
internationalist perspective that underlay the theory of ‘permanent
revolution’. I would only question his account in two respects.
First, he doesn’t discuss what might have happened had the
Menshevik policy succeeded. Had power not passed to the soviets, the
revolution’s popular base in the working class, the army and the
countryside would have been demobilised. Menshevik success would have
opened space for the victory, not of liberal moderation, but of the
far right, represented by both the military high command (in a more
successful re-run of the Kornilov coup attempt) and the Russian
employers. [36] The war, with its immense loss of life, would have
dragged on; fierce and bloody repression of workers, peasants and
mutinous soldiers would have been instituted. ‘Dual power’ could
not last: resolving it against the soviet would have stripped the
popular revolution of its gains. Second, while Eley finds Lenin’s
‘powerful unity of conviction and action’ admirable, he finds
‘less appealing’ Lenin’s ‘belief in splitting – his drive
for polemical clarification, brutally distancing his rivals’. [37]
But a ‘nicer’ Lenin would have compromised with the Mensheviks,
not challenged the Second International’s betrayals, and let the
revolution go hang. It was precisely the sharpness of Lenin’s
political intellect, his willingness to follow a correct idea to its
conclusions, indeed a readiness to split when necessary, that made
him effective. Eley’s term ‘rivals’ diminishes the problem, as
if the matter were one of competition among potential partners. Those
whom Lenin ‘distanced’ were political opponents, whether parties
or individuals, whose influence would, if unchallenged, have the
effect of undermining or reversing the revolutionary struggle.
After the Russian Revolution, the question posed was, as Eley
rightly asks, was there a possibility that revolutionary socialism
could also triumph elsewhere in Europe? Here Eley expresses doubts:
Russian extremes created chances for the left that
weren’t available elsewhere in Europe. Some wartime circumstances
were generic – notably, the labour movement’s incorporation via
patriotism, bringing gains for leaders but hardship for the rank and
file. But in other ways, Russian circumstances were least like the
others, because the thinness of civil society left Russia
exceptionally vulnerable to generalised breakdown, which the West’s
more developed institutional resources forestalled. [38]
The theme is ‘Gramscian’, with a Eurocommunist inflexion. [39]
But the analysis is weak. In what exactly did the ‘thinness of
civil society’ in Russia consist, by comparison with Western
Europe, and especially as far as strategy was concerned? The crucial
‘more developed institutional resources’ in the West were those
of organised reformism, notably as they were embodied in the social
democratic parties and union bureaucracies. There is no question that
overcoming their conservatism would be a central strategic question
for revolutionary socialists, but a question that required, let us
emphasise, an answer cast in terms of politics and not of
sociological determinism.
Eley’s account seems muddled. He notes how the Russian
Revolution caught the imagination of socialists across Europe,
cracking apart Kautsky’s and Hilferding’s tired old version of
Marxism as a theory of historical inevitability. Now human creative
agency could again be given its proper, central place. But Eley
argues that the revolutionary politics of the new generation suffered
in two respects. On one hand, ‘post-revolutionary constitutions
were still conceived in parliamentary terms,’ while on the other,
‘the new revolutionaries neglected building the coalitions so
crucial to the practical survival of revolutionary regimes, given the
social, religious and ethnic heterogeneity of all European
countries.’ The first criticism ignores the way the socialist
movement divided sharply over whether ‘post-revolutionary
constitutions’ should be conceived in parliamentary terms, and thus
how these divisions set up new strategic and tactical questions. As
for the second, the issue of coalitions was certainly crucial.
However, it was not merely about the survival of revolutionary
regimes, but about whether revolution ought to happen at all.
Furthermore, the problem of ‘coalitions’ was not just about
sociological heterogeneity within Europe, but above all concerned the
question of how to respond to the existence of varied political
currents within the working class itself.
What is striking about the years 1918–1923 is the combination of
immensely powerful popular revolutionary impulses with an absence of
strategic clarity among the newly emerging revolutionary socialist
parties and groups. Eley catches something of this with the remark
that (in Germany) ‘during 1919–1921, the passions and hopes of
rank and file insurgents constantly outstripped the capacity of
existing left organisations to represent them’ [40], a judgment
which could be extended well beyond Germany. If one thing tended to
unite the emerging revolutionary left, it was a rejection of
parliamentarism and an aspiration to a form of society based on
workers’ councils, an impulse that took on different organisational
forms and names in different countries. However, the realisation of
such visions necessarily required a strategic capacity that was
mostly wanting. For ‘council communism’, Eley’s term for these
impulses, brought the movement into direct conflict with trade union
officialdom and with the leadership of the social democratic parties.
In order to win out, its supporters must necessarily face up to a
range of practical as well as theoretical issues. Eley mentions some
of these – although his list is curiously ordered:
There were huge areas council communists ignored.
Questions of women, the family, and the sexual division of labour
were one. Coalition building was another, for the council movement
refused to worry about peasants, petty bourgeoisie and other
non-proletarian social groups. Council militants were untroubled by
the administrative consequences of organising revolutionary
government around the point of production. If the councils had a
factory rather than a territorial basis, training workers for running
production rather than society in general, then how would the
non-economic functions of government be addressed? How would the
councils deal with social welfare and education? How successfully
could they represent the interests of non-workers? [41]
Yet if these weaknesses were real – and they were – even more
central was the question, how are the defenders of such revolutionary
programmes to win over real, practical majorities, given the still
predominant influence of social democracy and its associated union
bureaucracies within popular movements? Council communism’s
opponents were not simply the capitalist classes and the state
machineries, but the forces of ‘moderation’ inside the labour
movements of Europe. ‘The left’ was now not just openly divided –
it was facing in opposite directions.
Nowhere was this more apparent than in Germany. November 1918 saw
the Kaiser’s regime fall, in a rerun – on a still more massive
scale – of February 1917 in Russia. Also as in Russia, an immediate
division appeared between ‘moderates’ and ‘militants.’ The
SPD, which had supported the war until the end, was suddenly thrust
into government, alongside a left whose forces lacked anything like
the ideological clarity the Bolsheviks had possessed and won in
Russia. Eley comments on the SPD, ‘The most striking thing about
the German revolution was the unrelenting intransigence of the SPD’s
moderation. Rather than harnessing working class militancy, the
leaders did their best to suppress it’. [42] Even the term
‘moderation’ is understated: the SPD leaders allied themselves
with the former Kaiser’s army high command, and deliberately
assisted in the creation of the Freikorps, a right wing military
formation established to destroy working class militancy. While the
SPD were hard-headed and determined, the USPD offered no convincing
alternative, despite attracting large new forces, while the newly
formed Spartacists and the rest of the far left were fragmented and
inexperienced. Indeed, within weeks of their founding conference, the
Spartacists allowed themselves to be drawn into a minority effort at
socialist revolution, the Spartacist uprising of January 1919, which
was put down with ferocity. Among those deliberately killed were the
new party’s leaders, Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht. Urged on
by the SPD leaders, the Freikorps marched about Germany crushing
working class resistance with murderous force.
In Eley’s account, the emergent workers’ councils in Germany
represented the possibility of a ‘third way’ between the SPD’s
constitutionalism and the insurrectionary politics of the left,
inspired by the Bolshevik Revolution. [43] For Eley, the tragedy is
that the SPD failed to offer any support to such a ‘third way’.
He finds Ebert and the other SPD leaders ‘lamentably unimaginative
in failing to harness this popular upsurge ... [The SPD’s]
constitutionalist course was imposed at a double cost: the bases of
authoritarianism in the state and economy had been saved, indeed
renewed, in their time of greatest vulnerability; and the best
expressions of popular democracy had been rebuffed, even brutally
repressed’. [44] He continues:
The real tragedy of 1918–1919 was not the failure to
force through a socialist revolution. The abstract merits of such a
course may be endlessly debated, but it could only have succeeded
through a long and bloody civil war, and for many socialists this was
too high a price to pay. The real tragedy was the SPD’s excessively
legalistic, stolidly unimaginative, and wholly conservative notion of
what a democratically ordered polity might be. In 1918, the SPD had
an unprecedented chance to expand the frontiers of democracy, both by
dismantling the bases of authoritarianism in the discredited ancien
régime and by harnessing the new popular energies the council
movement released. The chances of a further-reaching reformism were
squandered. It was by its own democratic lights that the SPD failed
the test. [45]
Here his judgment seems to me to be seriously at fault. It is not
that socialist revolution could be on the immediate agenda in 1918 or
early 1919. That would require the left winning a majority among
German workers and others in support of such a project. ‘Civil war’
was, in any case, unavoidable: it is exactly what occurred in
Germany, on and off, from 1919 to 1923. The real problem with Eley is
that he thinks it appropriate to chide the SPD leaders for their
policies and lack of imagination, as if they could in any sense still
be counted as part of the left. It was the achievement of the
Zimmerwald left during the war to realise that the SPD and the other
parties of the Second International had already not only declared
their bankruptcy as agencies of socialist change, but become part of
the problem rather than of the solution. The fact that the SPD still
gained the largest slice of the working class vote was,
strategically, of no more significance than the adhesion of many
workers in Britain to the Tory and Liberal parties. The real tragedy
in Germany was the left’s failure to find a way to challenge and
transcend the SPD’s hold over workers’ political loyalties, a
hold that was – as Eley notes – never a given. Separate communist
organisation did not even appear until after the November Revolution.
The Spartacists, and subsequently the KPD, were marked by lack of
clarity about how to respond to the explosion of popular movements,
and subsequently veered between ultra-leftism and rightist
accommodation in ways that cost the German left dearly – and, in
costing them dearly, it would cost a lot more, not just for German
working people but for the whole world. [46]
The struggle to gain such clarity was hard. An entire theoretical
and organisational heritage had to be critically explored and remade,
often in the heat of difficult new developments. Nor was the problem
in any sense confined to Germany. In Italy, for example, the central
source of confusion lay in the PSI (the Socialist Party of Italy),
whose leader, Serrati, was responsible for the infamous statement,
‘We, as Marxists, interpret history; we do not make it.’ Eley comments:
Maximalist failings were an object lesson in how not to
conduct a revolution. They fed expectations without resolving them.
They fanned a mood of revolutionary excitement but refused to shape
it into a revolutionary challenge. They fashioned socialism into a
barrier against the bourgeois world and from behind this ideological
stockade released a fusillade of rhetorical provocation. But when the
masses took them at their word and acted, they counselled discipline
and patience. [47]
He goes on to add, rather confusingly for those who have just read
him on Germany, that:
One lesson of Maximalist failings, then, was
organisational: the need for revolutionary leadership, a Bolshevik
party. This was Bordiga’s position, and during 1920 Gramsci joined
him ... Italian socialism encapsulated the left’s dilemma in the
post-war revolutionary conjuncture. The obstacles to socialist
revolution, in Italy no less than Germany, were formidable. But among
them was a failure of revolutionary leadership, which ‘faded away
at the moment of truth’. [48]
It might seem, then, that Eley agrees that the problem in Germany
too was the failure of revolutionary leadership. And might we then
expect some discussion of the specific failures of both the German
and Italian communists, and of what a ‘Bolshevik leadership’
ought actually to have done in the midst of the crises that convulsed
these countries?
Not at all. Eley’s real agenda is different. He is interested in
asking how the ‘transition to a new social democratic era’ might
have been achieved, even if that might then become the prelude to ‘a
restabilisation of capitalism’. [49] After their electoral
successes in November 1919, and again at the height of the factory
occupations in September 1920, Eley thinks the PSI’s best hope was
to join and help shape ‘a broader democratic bloc’. [50]
In both Germany and Italy, Eley looks for what never had a basis:
‘A successful non-Bolshevik left needed the best of both worlds:
radical yet democratic extraparliamentary energies mobilised and
channelled through the parliamentary process’. [51] There is no
sense of the process, repeated time and again in potentially
revolutionary situations in the course of the 20th century, whereby
just such ‘channelling through the parliamentary process’ is the
very means by which extraparliamentary popular energies have been
regularly demobilised. Nor is any concrete analysis offered of the
emerging shapes of the actual ‘radical and extraparliamentary
energies’ that most certainly did develop.
Within a remarkably short space of time after the 1920 factory
occupations, Mussolini’s fascists had taken power. It was a
stunning defeat for the left, and indeed for democracy in any sense.
[52] But, extraordinarily, Eley has nothing to say about it, about
how it happened, whether it was preventable, and what it can tell us
about the left’s failings. The lapse in his narrative is
astonishing – and he is, as we’ll see, to repeat it on an even
more serious scale in his next section.
Part of the difficulty with Eley’s account of the whole period
consists in an apparent failure to understand what, in shorthand, we
might term ‘Leninism’. While he gives a generally good account of
the Russian Revolution itself, his sense of the logic of Lenin’s
politics is deficient. He writes that, once insurrection in Europe
was no longer on the agenda, ‘Lenin would find himself,
willy-nilly, conceding the importance of parliamentary, trade union
and other “legal” fields of action, however tactical,
subordinate, or cynical these concessions claimed to be’. [53]
Lenin’s whole political career before 1917 is thus dismissed: his
arguments for and involvement in factory and union agitation, the
Bolsheviks’ work in the Duma, their activity in ‘sickness funds’
and so on. [54] Eley makes nothing of Lenin’s reproof to European
‘left’ communists in Left Wing Communism: An Infantile
Disorder. And he makes nothing, either, of the whole debate
within the new Communist International about the importance of
‘united fronts’. He does note that the new Communist Parties
faced national ‘lefts’ that included a whole gamut of positions
from left reformists to ultra-lefts, identifying this as their
‘thorniest dilemma: how successfully they shaped such militancy
would decisively influence the kind of Communist parties they would
become’. [55] But what the parameters of debate among them were,
and which were the better and the worse responses, he doesn’t say.
Nor, therefore, does Eley generally explain why various revolutionary
attempts in this period were defeated. Were they simply inappropriate
leftist adventures, were they overcome by the ‘thickness’ of
civil society’s institutions in West European countries, or did
serious failings in communist strategy and tactics play any
significant role? Eley is generally not very interested in the
revolutionary left, especially as far as its actual politics are
concerned, and thus there are no direct answers to such questions in
his book. Sometimes, as in his brief remarks on the failed Hungarian
soviet revolution of 1919, it seems as if these things just happened
– rather like his treatment of Mussolini’s victory in Italy.
In part because he treats these matters as relatively unimportant,
Eley’s judgment on the political outcome of the period has two
faces. On one side, he sees the split within international socialism
– most obviously represented by the sharp division between social
democrat and communist, between the Second and Third Internationals –
as ‘disfiguring the left’s politics until the flux of 1956–1968
and beyond’. [56] On the other, he sees the years of war and
revolution as bringing real gains for democracy and for the left:
1918 brought them to the brink of governing for the first time; they
benefited from universal suffrage, emerging social rights, a large
increment of reform. Those gains were sustained by extraparliamentary
social movements, ranging from the huge growth in trade unions to
women’s movements of various kinds along with a wide array of
single-issue campaigns, many of them locally based. ‘Indeed, the
failures of central European socialists to break through to socialism
during the revolutions of 1918–1919 mattered far less than the new
democratic capacities and legal resources that the improved
constitutional frameworks now supplied’. [57]
Was the split in the left at the time disfiguring, or necessary?
What could a ‘unity’ resting on the suppression of profound
differences have achieved? How could the followers of the murdered
Rosa Luxemburg sit in the same organisation with those who organised
her killing? What really ‘disfigured’ the politics of the left
was not the split, but the trajectories of the two sides thereafter.
As for the social and political gains of the period, it seems
reasonable to ask how securely founded they were. In this respect,
the debacles in Italy and Hungary were as much indicators of crises
that would, all too soon, convulse democracy and the left alike.
There are fundamental issues here. To approach them, we must step
back from Eley’s text, to explore the rational core of the
‘Leninism’ that Eley opposes and misunderstands, indeed to argue,
in Lukács’s words, that ‘the organisation and tactics of
Bolshevism are the only possible consequence of Marxism’. [58]
Marxism’s political project is the self emancipation of the
working class, as the key to the emancipation of humanity. That
requires the self constitution of the working class as a collective
subject aiming to abolish its own condition of wage slavery. This is,
it must be stressed, a political project, and not some inevitable
outcome inscribed in imagined laws of history. ‘Barbarism’ –
its potential shapes in advanced capitalism including fascism,
nuclear warfare and ecological degradation – always remains as an
alternative. History always poses choices.
The key to the Marxist revolutionary project is working class
agency, consciousness and organisation. Its crucial opponent is
ruling class ideology, itself arising not simply from the obvious
effects of capitalist media and the like, but also from the everyday
workings of capitalist economy and politics. Working people, divided
among themselves in manifold ways by competition, come to see their
alienated existence within capitalist social relations as ‘natural’,
even if they contest aspects of this alienation. Popular
consciousness, in Gramsci’s phrase, is inherently ‘contradictory’,
containing in spontaneous combination elements of the most advanced
and backward thought and activity. Yet it is this working class, with
its actual contradictory tendencies of self development, which
Marxism envisions as the salvation of humanity.
The realities of life within the exploitative and oppressive
social relations of capitalist society constantly regenerate forms of
opposition to the status quo. That opposition takes practical
appearance in an enormous variety of shapes, in a multiform array of
‘social movements’. Never and nowhere are such movements,
especially as they take on mass form, composed either of members only
of a single class, or of all the members of any one class. Rather,
constructed out of diverse social networks, they typically contain
within themselves a wide spectrum of opinions, aspirations and
prejudices. Just as the working class as a political actor is
anything but homogeneous in its outlook, so it is with the movements
in which it (variably) participates. ‘Consciousness’ –
theoretical and practical alike – develops unevenly, at different
speeds and degrees and in divergent directions.
Movements are themselves networks of social relations and activity
marked by inner contestation and practical argument. They are not
characterised by unified and coherent ideologies. Furthermore, they
are anything but immune to influence by their opponents, or by ruling
class ideas. What the debates within movements concern is not just
general ideas, or goals, but also the very meaning and nature of the
movements themselves, the kinds of practical methods it is
appropriate for them to employ, the ways they ought to organise
themselves, particular strategies and tactics and so forth. Movement
opponents – notably employers and states – have a decided
interest in these various debates. Where, as in liberal democracies,
they have learned that they cannot easily exist without
movement-based oppositions, they have definite interests in shaping
the forms such movements take.
What they prefer are movements without teeth, led by ‘responsible’
people who use their leadership positions to contain supporters
within the ‘normal channels’ of legality and constitutional
respectability, and to oppose and demobilise more radical currents.
They want unions that do not step beyond wage demands to challenge
‘managerial prerogatives’, just as in the 19th century they
wanted even Friendly Societies to remain within the bounds of decency
and good order. [59] And ruling classes have various factors working
for them in their search for self limiting movements: not only the
everyday effects of the very workings of capitalism itself, in which
the wages system and employer authority come to seem ‘natural’,
but also the mechanisms of law, media influence, and even the
material and symbolic rewards offered to co-optable and
‘statesmanlike’ leaders.
However, contrary to those theories of ideology which see nothing
but ruling class domination, the actual experiences of exploitation
and oppression within capitalist society produce countervailing
pressures. There are dual tendencies, both to the containment and to
the regeneration of opposition. As a result, the interior life of
movements consists of permanent contestation of ideas – permanent
ideological struggle, not least ‘over the terms in which the actors
in the class struggle are to construe their experience of it’. The
very institutions and practices of movements are generated in a
history of victories, defeats and compromises which mark working
class experience, and through which both ruling class ideology and
popular experience come in part to constitute each other mutually.
[60] Marxists are numbered among the participants in the arguments
within and about what movements are, can be, and should do and say.
These struggles have to be grasped theoretically, not just in
abstract and general terms, but in relation to a succession of
concrete and particular situations, which are always changing. A
Marxism, on the one hand, which does not deal with the concrete and
immediate is condemned to practical irrelevance, to mere academicism.
On the other hand, a set of oppositional ideas that does not
constantly seek to tease out the dialectical interrelations between
concrete and abstract, between the particular moment and the
totality, is open to ‘economism’ and other forms of partial
critique. Thus, for example, it can ignore the varieties of forms of
oppression (and resistance to oppression) that constitute the whole
concrete situation. Each specific situation poses strategic and
tactical issues for all sides, in which the various forces at play
may learn, devise new stratagems, respond and invent. Movement
opponents may put forward new means by which they may seek to confine
or disrupt movement activity, in ways whose implications are not
always easily decoded. Movements in this sense are always, in
Shandro’s term, ‘in the strategic sights’ of their adversaries,
compelling ideological struggle within movements over the
interpretation of events along with the meanings and purposes of
opponents’ actions and words. [61] Such conflicts concern battles
not just over matters of ‘distribution’ or ‘rights’, but over
movements’ very self constitution, organisation and self understanding.
Each situation thus constitutes a significant event, whose outcome
will have consequences for future struggles. Every separate event is
always relatively ‘open’, its outcome depending on who does and
says what. All large and small events in the class struggle have
‘turning points’, moments when the practical and ideological
stances adopted by the various parties and the actions they undertake
set the stage for what is possible next. If this is most obvious in
the case of ‘revolutionary situations’, the principle is by no
means restricted to these. Events involve narratives of struggle,
involving consciousness, organisation and the reformulation of ideas
in the light of experience. Marxists, to be effective, have to be
able to respond creatively to the concrete developments occurring
within each particular situation.
In all of this, the revolutionary socialist standpoint remains
that outlined in the Communist Manifesto: stressing the basic
incompatibility of interests that lies at the heart of capitalism,
advancing arguments for the maximum unity of the movement, always
holding to the overall socialist goal of working class power. What is
quite alien to this is the kind of narrow ‘classism’ that Eley
imputes to the left, in which the focus necessarily falls on
apparently immediate working class interests. Here one of Lenin’s
central arguments in his much-maligned early pamphlet What Is To
Be Done? is vital: socialists have to advance the interests of
all the oppressed, acting always as ‘tribunes of the people’.
Working class power as a goal requires that Marxists struggle to
advance the interests of all those who are oppressed in different
ways within class society, and must fight for those interests within
working class movements themselves. Marxism, in other words, always
involves a critical stance towards the very working class movements
that it seeks to influence and advance. [62] The vital interest of
the working class is to constitute itself as the hegemonic force
within all movements, whether against national, gender, racist or any
other form of oppression, since the alternative is always its own
division, its own narrowness of outlook and aspiration – and thus
its own containment within capitalist limits.
In this light, Marxism must be a developing rather than a fixed
and finished theory, advancing itself through continual interrogation
of movement practice and ideas, and in a permanent dialogue between
Marxist organisations and the movements in which they participate and
intervene. Its proponents cannot simply be ‘educators’, for they
have to be constantly open to learning. The impulses to Marxism’s
own creative development often come, not from ‘within’ organised
Marxist parties and groups, but from ‘without’, from the
inventive practice of movements themselves. [63] Indeed, one
important criterion by which to judge Marxists themselves consists in
their capacity to listen and learn as well as to speak and to teach,
to develop their own theory in the light of others’ creative
responses. All of this assumes the position we suggested earlier:
that workers are themselves active, both theoretically and
practically, as subjects of history.
At the same time, Marxism must involve the kind of ruthless
realism that Eley seems to find objectionable in Lenin. If the ruling
class has an interest in shaping the inner world of movement
organisation, ideas and activity, then at any time the movement as a
whole may include forces whose practice and ideas work to mediate
ruling class ideas within the movement. [64] The implication of that
should be very clear: one part of the movement is a problem for the
left, and needs to be opposed effectively. Thus issues of strategy
and tactics concern the interior life of movements. It is necessary
to differentiate within ‘the left’ between left and right, with
the right understood as systematically opposed to working class
revolution, i.e. in the strict sense counter-revolutionary. At best,
the right within the movement is always an unreliable ally, and may
come to adopt completely the standpoint of capital and the state.
That was a key lesson Marx derived from the experience of the 1848
revolutions. Later Marxists would further elaborate the practical
implications. The left must establish its own organisational and
ideological identity, separate from and opposed to the ‘moderate’
wing within movements. It needs to do this so that, at any juncture,
it has the capacity to clarify the critical questions facing the
movement, and to argue from within for the adoption of its own
strategy and tactics, as against those whose alternative leadership
would mislead it. The left must stand ready, always, to take sides in
intra-movement disputes and debates, and make continuous
reassessments of successive situations in terms of their particular
limits and potentialities.
A Marxist politics understood in these terms is not ‘revolutionism
at any price’. It demands careful assessment of the balance of
forces at any given moment both within and between movements and
their class opponents. It demands the kind of practical judgment
displayed, for example, by the Bolsheviks in the ‘July Days’ in
Petrograd when, faced with a vast armed demonstration of sailors,
soldiers and workers, they were able to say ‘Not yet’ to
insurrectionary calls – on the grounds that a majority of workers,
let alone others, were not yet convinced of the necessity of a second
revolution. That same capacity to judge the situation and act
accordingly was, tragically, absent from the German Spartacists and
the Hungarian communists in 1919. Practical Marxism never meant
abstention from specific struggles. As Lukács argued, against his
‘Menshevist’ opponents, the defeat in Hungary occurred, not
because ‘historical processes’ did not allow victory, but because
– in essence – the new Hungarian Communist Party ‘blew it’
through inexperience. [65] It was precisely the capacity to make
serious assessments of situations, and then to intervene actively and
effectively, that Lenin, Trotsky and the best leaders of the new
Communist International attempted to instill in their comrades in
post-war Western Europe.
In the event, they failed. But for several years it was a
close-run thing. The consequences of the failure would mark the rest
of the 20th century. There followed a whole series of political
crises in which the possibility of significant revolutionary
intervention was posed. But by the mid-1920s those who held to the
tenets of Bolshevism had been marginalised. For the rest of the
century, they did not achieve implantation in Europe’s movements to
shape their development. They could and did provide a series of often
brilliant commentaries on events, demonstrating the dangers and the
bankruptcies of other tendencies, and outlines of how things might
have been different – but without the practical capacity to see
their standpoint win out.
Social democracy proved, time and again, incapable of responding
adequately to major crises or, worse, it played a conservative role –
in a pattern already established in the period before, during and
after the First World War. What was new was the evolution of the
official communist movement. The Russian Revolution’s isolation,
along with the multiple defeats and mistakes across Europe in the
early years after 1917–1918, produced the conditions for a
conservative ‘degeneration’ of the Russian regime and, in
parallel, of the guidance it provided to communist parties elsewhere.
The internationalism of 1917 was replaced, by the mid-1920s, by the
predominance of Stalin’s doctrine of ‘socialism in one country’,
and an increasing subordination of the international communist
movement to the raison d’état of the Russian state.
Official communist policy would veer and zigzag in all manner of
directions over subsequent decades, but never in a direction that
involved the development of a consistent revolutionary policy based
on real working class power.
Geoff Eley provides much of the materials from which it would be
possible to assemble this argument about post-1923 European
developments, and in that sense his book is useful as a source for
mining by socialists. But he doesn’t offer the argument itself. The
revolutionary left rather disappears from view in the rest of his
history – and thus also in his prognoses for the future.
 
1924–1967
The inter-war years turned into disaster both for the left and for
democracy in Europe. Social democracy collapsed in the face of
economic crisis, Stalinism triumphed in the USSR, the Nazis came to
power in Germany and then Austria, the Spanish republic was defeated,
and the world was plunged into the even more barbarous slaughter of
the Second World War. Eley’s book is unevenly helpful in
understanding these dreadful defeats.
He’s at his best dissecting the weaknesses of social democracy.
Organised reformism had emerged in a seemingly stronger position once
the years of revolutionary crisis had passed. Nowhere did this seem
more true than in ‘Red Vienna’. Yet, as he notes, there was a
‘reformist conundrum’ underlying the Austrian socialists’
achievements: ‘they depended ultimately on a prosperous
capitalism,’ and they had no strategy for transcending capitalism’s limits:
The labour movement wielded impressive social power, as a
subcultural complex organising the community solidarity and everyday
lives of the working class in all the ways Red Vienna professed. Yet
the bridge from this subaltern collectivism to genuine political
leadership over society – hegemony in Gramsci’s sense – had yet
to be found. Translating the labour movement’s subcultural
influence into power in the state, through a non-insurrectionary
revolutionary strategy, was the problem. [66]
Reformism’s key theorists completely misestimated their
prospects. Hilferding argued that capitalism was now ‘organised’,
making democratic public control of the economy easier. Napthali and
others developed what they claimed was an alternative strategy to
Leninism, in which either reformism was capable of having
revolutionary consequences or (as Kautsky argued), since capitalism
automatically led to socialisation, socialists should do no more than
encourage capitalism’s maturation. As Eley notes, ‘This reliance
on capitalism’s future foundered in the 1929 crash’. [67] The
German SPD accepted huge cuts in social spending and wages, believing
it more important to restore capitalism’s profitability than to
hasten its demise. They backed Germany’s conservative forces,
chiefly because of their fear of the Nazis, ‘while the socialist
rank and file suffered creeping demoralisation’. [68] Eley’s
summary of social democracy’s stance is correct:
Having rejected the Bolsheviks’ vanguardist model of
proletarian democracy as authoritarian and counter-productive, a
recipe for destructive violence and self isolating dictatorship,
social democrats adhered rigidly to parliamentary rules, trapped in a
psychology of proceduralism and forever shying from the fight. This
hardwiring of social democratic imaginations into the integrated
circuits of parliamentary legality was the key to the post-1918
period. [69]
Faced with the threat of Nazism, the social democrats adhered, to
the bitter end, to their parliamentary cretinism, leaving their own
rank and file, many of whom were ready to fight, leaderless and
demoralised. Given their whole previous history, that was hardly
surprising. The problem in Germany was that no force to the SPD’s
left had a policy capable of pulling whole sections of the SPD’s
membership into joint anti-Nazi activity. And here the question of
the Communist Party, and the whole problem of Stalinism, is critical.
What is extraordinary about Eley’s treatment of this question is
that he has almost nothing to say about it. Famously, the German
Communist Party, following Stalin’s lead, declared that the German
social democrats were not potential allies in resistance to the Nazis
but ‘social fascists’, enemies of the working class equivalent to
Hitler’s forces. The KPD pursued a lunatic ‘ultra-left’ course,
splitting rather than uniting the German workers’ movement. But
Eley has nothing to say about the political effects of the theory and
practice of the Stalinist ‘Third Period’, or indeed about the
processes by which the Nazis came to power in Germany in 1933. He
only notes that their ‘seizure of power’ was a disaster for the
left, a ‘democratic catastrophe’. [70] Nowhere does he consider
the respective roles of the SPD and the KPD in allowing this
catastrophe. If ever there was a case where events, and the
responsibility of various left forces for outcomes, demanded
analysis, this surely was it. But Eley – a notable historian of
Germany – offers nothing. If his lapse over Mussolini’s victory
was weird, his silence over Hitler’s victory, in a history of the
left and democracy, is an unbelievable error.
Eley’s treatment of Stalinism presents problems. The distance
between Eley and the tradition represented by this journal comes out
in a choice of phrase: ‘Revolutionary agency was exercised on
gargantuan scale in the Soviet industrialisation drive after 1929, as
Bolsheviks transformed their society from above’ (my
emphases). [71] Given that the Stalinist industrialisation drive was
premised on massive cuts in workers’ wages, the reversal of
peasants’ land gains in the 1917 revolution, and the extirpation of
any last remnants of soviet democracy, the term
‘counter-revolutionary agency’ seems more appropriate; while any
notion of serious political continuity between the revolutionary
Bolsheviks and Stalin’s Communist apparatchiks seems more than
dubious. While Eley offers some bare facts concerning the USSR,
European Communists’ uncritical identification with its rulers,
their policies and purges, and the failures of the Popular Front and
the Stalin-Hitler Pact, he never offers any serious account of why
and how events in Russian happened as they did, and why the history
of the 20th century left is therefore so tragic. Yet the matter is
significant for his theme: were Russia’s rulers always in some
sense part of the left, or did they transmute into something else, to
become part of the problem facing the left? Did they indeed, as this
journal’s tradition has argued, become part of the ruling class of
modern world capitalism? If the former, then the story of the left
must be told in one way; if the latter, the history must be told
differently. Eley doesn’t pose the question, but his failure to do
so makes for an incoherent history that seems to straddle both
positions without recognising its own dilemmas.
Our tendency has argued for more than half a century that the
degeneration of the Russian Revolution of 1917 did produce a
qualitative shift to a form of capitalist class society. The
implication is, then, that Stalin and his heirs, and their policies,
are only part of the story of the left in two senses. First, they
developed as a significant part of world capitalism, with which the
left had to interact and which it had to oppose. Second, however,
large forces on the left failed to recognise that situation, with
immensely confusing and demoralising effects that revealed themselves
time and again. This is, in principle, quite as open to analysis as
the dependence of the German social democrats on the old regime, the
existence of many Tory voters within the ranks of the British working
class, and so on. The influence of Stalinism in working class and
‘progressive’ politics across the world for two generations
became nothing other than a case of the normal dominance of ruling
class ideas over the consciousness of the exploited and oppressed –
with the difference, of course, that the ruling class in question
happened to be abroad. Such a perspective makes it easier to
understand how, probably from the adoption of ‘socialism in one
country’ in 1924 and the debacles of the British General Strike and
the Chinese Revolution, through the ‘Third Period’, and most
certainly from the adoption of the Popular Front onwards, ‘communism’
became a politics which first failed to threaten capitalism and
eventually – via Eurocommunism and its successors – turned into a
politics that embraced capitalism in the name of ‘realism’. Along
the way, ‘communism’ in Europe became, like social democracy, in
practice counter-revolutionary in the strict sense that it opposed
popular revolution – in Spain during 1936 and after, in Eastern
Europe and Western Europe from 1944, in Hungary in 1956, in France in
May 1968, etc. Eley is too good a historian not to record the
transitions empirically. But he does not account for them. That
failure makes his history far less interesting and useful than it
might have been.
Eley’s history is better on the politics of the Popular Front in
France and in Spain, where he catches the subordination of class
politics to national politics. On France, he notes the revival of the
direct action spirit of 1917–1921, and the élan that
accompanied this. However, the Blum government wagered – like the
Austrian social democrats of the 1920s – on capitalist success to
fund their programmes, and then had no answer when capital went on
strike, abandoning its commitments and cutting back its social
legislation. Even here, Eley has no sense of the need for an
‘eventful’ history, in which the responses of different players
are analysed and explained at each juncture, and in which it is
possible to explore the kind of left interventions that were needed.
The sharpest light needs to fall on the French Communist Party, as
the most left wing of the forces involved. However, beyond noting
rightly that the PCF ‘sought to leash militancy as much as drive it
on’, Eley tells us little. [72] He offers a summary answer to the
question, how might the debacle in France have been avoided?
This situation needed leaders of vision who commanded the
necessary political will – capitalising on the opening of June
1936, feeding the sense of historic opportunity, driving the
advantage home against the dominant classes, and finding the broadest
unity in the PCF’s sense. [73]
But if this is what was needed, what would it have demanded of,
say, the leaders of the PCF – given that such leadership would
never have come from the SFIO or the Radicals? In the real world, any
such leadership of vision must always be constructed in the face and
teeth of other, non-visionary leaderships within popular movements,
and that implies a struggle inside movements between rival
tendencies. Either such a struggle can be pursued with clarity, along
lines indicated by the earlier remarks about ‘Leninism’, or it
can be evaded in the spurious interests of an abstract ‘unity’
which involves conceding the struggle to those who would moderate and
disable the movement. [74] How could or should the left have
responded to crises like the strike of capital? What would it mean in
practice to ‘drive the advantage home against the dominant
classes’? One feature would have to be further moves towards
socialisation, surely – and that would have involved, indeed
demanded, the further mobilisation of workers in the factories and
mines, etc. A logic akin to that of ‘1917’ would have supervened
– against Stalin’s wishes, to be sure, and going far beyond the
limiting logic of the Popular Front. Popular mobilisations like that
in France in 1936 develop in one of two directions: either forward,
to an institutional remaking of politics and society that depends on
the mobilising power of millions, or backwards, to their own
demobilisation and demoralisation, and to a recuperation of ruling
class positions – sometimes at deadly cost. That choice of
direction appears at critical turning points in each movement’s
development, when the balance of forces within the movement as well
as between itself and its opponents is tested. Specific moments and
events matter. The experience of two centuries of mass movements
suggests that, even if each movement has its own historical
particularities, there is a kind of inescapable logic to these
moments of dilemma, and a left that is unable to respond decisively
to them declares its irrelevance or worse.
The Spanish Civil War produced yet another terrible defeat for the
left and for democracy. Eley offers sufficient materials to show what
a disaster the Popular Front was, both in Spain itself and
internationally, though he offers no suggestions about what
alternative policies were required. Though he’s correct, it’s not
enough to say, ‘Prosecuting the war with a central command while
securing the revolutionary gains were not mutually exclusive’. [75]
As he says, the whole Popular Front strategy failed. That might
suggest that he would argue for some alternative, but he doesn’t.
He writes of Spain:
The Comintern hoped to combine both the United Front of
working class parties and the broader Popular Front ... But many
divisions undermined the effort. The biggest of these pitted the
Comintern’s advocacy of self limiting republican defence, from
which specifically socialist demands were dropped, against the
desires of the people militant, for whom revolution was all. [76]
That ‘pitting’ (as he records) included the Comintern’s and
the GPU’s use of terror against the POUM, etc. ‘in a disgraceful
copy of the Soviet purges’. [77] From all of this, who could and
should learn what? In particular, who on the left should learn what?
While history may have been ‘bunk’ for Henry Ford, for socialists
it can at least be a book of shocking lessons. But Eley doesn’t
draw any.
All in all, the 1930s were a dreadful decade for the left, only to
be followed by the barbarity of the Second World War. Perhaps the
‘midnight of the century’ was provided by Stalin, not just
entering a (soon to be dissolved) non-aggression pact with Hitler
that included the carving up of Poland between them, but actually
handing over German Communists to the Gestapo’s tender mercies as a
terrible coda to ‘socialism in one country’.
The death toll and destructiveness of the war were appalling, yet
the reformist left did manage to make some gains – not so much by
its own actions as a result of the Allies’ final compulsion to
contain the fascist powers of Germany and Italy and also the Japanese
empire. In their victory, the Allies remade the world’s political
map, constructing new empires in place of the old and redividing the
world on new lines. That new world, by accident rather than design,
then entered a period of unparalleled growth and prosperity for a
quarter of a century. [78]
Eley suggests there was a brief moment at the end of the war when
other possibilities seemed to open up:
The left’s situation in 1945 was close to what the 1935
Popular Front strategy had imagined. The international coalition
against fascism had worked. Mussolini was deposed, Hitler defeated;
of the other rightist dictators only Franco in Spain and ... Salazar
in Portugal remained. The ‘workers’ state’, the Soviet Union,
had emerged triumphantly from a war that had immensely boosted its
prestige. Broad coalitions for democracy and reform, so called
national fronts, were formed in most countries. United fronts between
Socialists and Communists were also common, especially locally all
over Europe. Radical changes seemed afoot. [79]
However, as he says, ‘the chance was fleeting’ – it lasted
at most from 1943 to 1947. He dubs those years the ‘moment of
anti-fascist unity’, which he sees as a period of ‘radical
openness’. My feeling is that Eley rather exaggerates the potential
of this moment. His argument is that the Resistance organs in France,
Italy and elsewhere represented the seeds of a more democratic and
participatory alternative, and that their disbanding and disarming –
under Communist Party pressure especially – was a key defeat.
‘These were’, he proposes, ‘the molecular forms of a different
course, analogous to the workers’ councils that mushroomed across
Europe in 1917–1921. Both movements aspired to remake society in
just and egalitarian ways, organising food supplies, social
administration, and public order in the end of the war emergency,
while enlisting ordinary people’s energies and skills.’ Eley
comments, by now characteristically, that what was lost was ‘the
chance for creative intermediate solutions ... for harnessing the
energy, idealism, and commitment of the people in motion, by building
new participatory forms into emerging constitutional settlements,
bridging the gap between national arenas and the local everyday’
(my emphasis). [80] The difficulty is that the comparison with the
end of the 1914–1918 war goes only so far. First, the scale of
anti-fascist committees’ organising capacity, their rootedness in
popular militancy and their connections to both workplace strength
and military mutinies were very much less; second, nowhere were
significant political forces capable of harnessing the undoubted
radical moods at the end of the war for really transformative
purposes, in competition with the demobilising policies of both the
Communist and social democratic parties. In Britain, nationalisation
was, as he says, ‘the socialisation of loss not profit’ and
lacking any real socialist content. [81] In his judgment,
‘participation was the democratic fault-line of the post-war
settlements in Western Europe ... [There was] a sad contraction of
the democratic imagination. Politics was squeezed back into
parliamentary frames; other forms were forgotten’. [82]
The US played a key role in the post-war conservative
consolidation of Western Europe at the same time that, in Eastern
Europe, Moscow’s conservative ascendancy was brutally enforced. All
across Europe, even if by different means and even if in ways that
promoted popular living standards, labour remained firmly
subordinated to renewed capital accumulation.
 
1968 and after
‘There is not much enthusiasm abroad among intellectuals in our
time’, wrote the (then) Trotskyist Alasdair MacIntyre in 1960, ‘for
the day when the last king will be strangled with the entrails of the
last priest’. [83] For more than two decades after 1945,
revolutionary (indeed, even radical) ideas were the property only of
tiny isolated sects – the groupuscules that Charles de Gaulle
derided (even as he banned them) in 1968. The predominant
conservative consensus, denying the possibility of radical social
change, affected even leading thinkers on the left. The most that
happened in the 1950s and early 1960s was a degree of repositioning
among the radical left: in particular, the brutal crushing of the
1956 Hungarian Revolution undermined the hegemony of Communist
parties on the left, and independent ‘new’ lefts played
significant roles in, for example, French opposition to the Algerian
war and in the growth of CND in Britain. Two decades of full
employment bred a new degree of confidence among shopfloor workers,
represented by a rising tide of unofficial and wildcat strike action.
In addition, though Eley doesn’t mention this, a number of
important impulses crossed the Atlantic to Europe. The civil rights
movement in the US not only seized the imagination of European
radicals, but also provided the seedbed for several other important
developments. The student movement, which rapidly developed open
opposition to the US war in Vietnam, the first stirrings of a new
women’s movement, some of the earliest critiques of capitalist
ecology, and (a little later) new gay and lesbian liberation
movements all spread east from the US, to take on their own local
colours and forms across Europe.
These and other impulses came together in the extraordinary
explosion in France in 1968 – also the year of the Tet offensive,
of the birth of the civil rights movement in Ireland, and of much
more. May-June 1968 initiated a new period in the history of the
left. Eley provides a lively narrative of the May events, observing
about the crisis that followed the workers’ rejection of the
Grenelle agreements:
The gap between the popular movement and the left’s
existing national leaderships now really mattered. The former had no
national structure. Ideal for some purposes, anti-centralism was
disabling in a general crisis of the state. [84]
He goes on to discuss the government’s use of its centralised
forces to attack those strikers who continued, and equally the way
that the centralised French Communist Party stepped up its
denunciations of the students. Yet he draws no general lesson that
might inform the rest of his history of the last third of the 20th
century. What he does say is that ‘two lefts faced each other
across the frontier of de Gaulle’s 30 May address – one anxiously
awaiting normal politics to return, the other disbelieving they ever
could’. [85] On one side was an ‘old left’ typified by the PCF,
and marked by conservatism; on the other was a ‘new left’ marked
by anti-authoritarianism and the ideal of self management. I’m not
sure that Eley draws the line of division very accurately. The ‘old
left’, he suggests, spoke of ‘seizing power in the state’ while
the new left spoke of beginning with a change in everyday life. These
ideas are what marks the post-1968 period from what went before:
From the fascination with direct democracy and
participatory forms through ‘permissiveness’ to the enabling of
sexuality and the counter-culture’s hedonistic excess, from the
practical experiments with autogestion to the obsessive critiques of
alienation – in all these respects ‘1968’ challenged the
hegemony of ‘1945’. The resulting conflicts took many years to
work themselves out, but over the longer term their effects were
huge. They redefined the ground of politics. They complicated notions
of the left. They changed established assumptions about where radical
democratic agency could be found. [86]
Eley’s terminology is ambiguous: the old left’s concern, to
‘seize power in the state’, might mean seizing state power
through revolution and might mean contesting elections in order to
obtain a modicum of state office. In reality the French Communist
Party (and other essentially reformist parties) saved the language of
‘revolution’ for May Day purposes – though Eley, oddly, refers
later to the (by then, Eurocommunist) parties of Italy, France and
Spain as ‘the last organised advocacy of revolutionary socialism in
Western Europe’ [87], rather ignoring the fact that they had ceased
to take such positions seriously since the 1920s! It might be more
illuminating to see the dividing line between the conservatism of an
old left and the radicalism of a new left as an issue between a
politics from above and from below. Among the new left there
continued to be a quite fluid debate about the appropriateness of
continuing with the language of ‘revolution’. Parts of the ‘new
left’ proved perfectly capable of stepping back across the divide
and rejoining the ‘old left’ (in the shape of the Communist and
social democratic parties). The new feminism or sexual
permissiveness, for example, was not automatically linked to
anti-authoritarianism or to ideals of self management.
That the ‘ground of politics’ changed in important respects is
undeniable. Part of that involved a major (re)discovery of the
politics of gender and sexuality – the issue that most exercises
Eley. The very idea of socialism was hugely enriched by this. But
equally, an increasingly urgent critique of capitalist ecology
reshaped socialist thought, even if Eley has less to say about this.
His focus on matters posed by feminism means that he rather downplays
the importance of issues to do with immigration, racism and the
revival of fascism across Europe. He records the importance of racial
and other divisions, but remarks that ‘left parties largely evaded
the challenge of this popular divisiveness’ [88], which rather lets
those parties off the hook. In reality, they promoted racist division
via tightened immigration controls and the acceptance of arguments
about ‘acceptable numbers’ of immigrants. That ‘New Labour’
under Blair and Blunkett has been even worse than ‘Old Labour’ is
beside the point: Old Labour adopted shamefully racist positions from
1965 onwards [89], while Communist parties accepted the ‘need’
for immigration controls, urging only that these should be
‘non-racist’ – whatever that meant!
Despite his attention to ‘second-wave feminism’, I suspect
that Eley actually underestimates its impact. He writes that it
‘failed to institutionalise itself nationally’ [90], but doesn’t
allow for another possibility, which is that the women’s movement
did succeed, to adapt an idea from Edward Thompson, in warrening
society from end to end, even if like the 19th century workers’
movement it did not achieve its multiple ends. [91] If there was one
part of society it warrened with particular success, it was the
European left, many of whose fundamental assumptions about ‘class’,
‘democracy’ and the like were reshaped after the 1960s under its pressure.
Where Eley parts company with our tradition most seriously is in
his discussion of ‘class and the politics of labour’. [92] In
essence, he offers a version of Hobsbawm’s arguments about ‘the
forward march of labour halted’. Where, in the past, he suggests,
the socialist project was tied to an idea of the centrality of the
working class, itself rooted in ‘Fordism’ (in essence, big
factories and Keynesianism), now that very basis of identification
has gone, along with the working class itself as a political
formation. Eley concedes that ‘class as an analytical category, and
as an organising condition of social life, may have remained’ (I
like that may!), and indeed he is also correct that ‘its structure
and manifest forms had profoundly changed’. [93] It’s true that
‘with new employment patterns, the geography and gender of
working-classness changed, as did the architecture of everyday life
in housing, family, sexuality, friendship, schooling, recreation and
leisure, and taste and style. So too did the cultures of
identification. It made a difference if the representative trade
unionists were coal miners, dockers, steel workers, machine builders,
and other men applying muscle and intelligence to arduous physical
tasks, or men and women sitting behind computers, canteen or laundry
workers in public institutions, or nurses’ aids in big city
hospitals. The valencies of class as a basis for politics were
different’. [94] But so what? And how is that different from the
‘cultures of identification’ of the 1930s in the new car and
aircraft (mostly men) and light engineering (mostly women) factories,
which were initially seen as inherently closed spaces for trade
unionism, yet later viewed as central bastions of labour militancy
(and indeed of safe Labour voting)? In the end, the whole argument
comes down to this: is the place of class struggle in the battle for
socialism altered by ongoing sociological and cultural changes within
capitalism by, as it were, ‘structural’ shifts in the
occupational composition of the working class, or is the politics of
the class struggle far more decisive? If, as Eley is inclined to
think, ‘class’ as a basis for socialist politics is finished,
what on earth does ‘socialism’ now mean? Are we to assume that
the politics of ‘new social movements’ are to take the place of
class-based radical politics? Eley, picking up a widespread notion in
the 1980s and 1990s, is inclined to think that way. The view is one
he shares with the former Communist intellectuals who went on to
establish (and then dissolve) Marxism Today in Britain, and who gave
intellectual expression to the drift of much of the European left
away from ‘ultra-leftism’ and towards an accommodation first with
social democracy and increasingly ‘market socialism’ and indeed
just ‘marketism’.
The root of Eley’s view is a kind of sociological determinism,
which also underpinned much of the uncritical celebration of ‘new
social movements’ in the 1980s and 1990s. [95] Eley inclines that way:
By the 1970s, the left had a central problem. As parties
traditionally based on the industrial working class, socialists and
Communists were appealing to ever smaller populations. Furthermore,
the remaining workers no longer saw themselves collectively in the
same way. As an operative identity – as the socialist tradition’s
organising myth, capable of inspiring collective action, of uniting
disparate categories of working people inside the same solidarity,
with enduring efficacy in politics – the ‘working class’ was
losing its motive power.
In this double sense – in social structure and social
understandings, as the social aggregation of wage-earning positions
in industrial economies and as an organised political entity – the
working class declined. [96]
True, he immediately adds, one kind of worker was being replaced
by another – Eley is too sophisticated to fall for a general thesis
of ‘deproletarianisation’ – but nonetheless he identifies an
‘unmaking’ of the working class where previously there had been a
‘making’ (to borrow again from Thompson). And the logic
underpinning that unmaking is a semi-structural one.
There is an alternative account, which in my view makes far better
sense of the last three decades. [97] The great wave of popular
struggle that climaxed in Europe in the late 1960s and early 1970s
ran into essentially political barriers produced by the continued
dominance of social democratic and official Communist politics. It
subsided, and its decline was registered above all in terms of
industrial struggle. What contained and then pushed back working
class militancy was not immediately a direct offensive by capital and
states, but the collaborationist politics of union leaders and the
parties to which they were tied. Here our interpretation of the 1970s
differs very sharply from Eley’s. For him, the Social Contract
between the unions and the Labour government of the 1970s was given
‘some much-needed social idealism and ethical drive’ by Jack
Jones of the TGWU. [98] Eley makes no mention of the way both Jones
and the other major ‘left’ union leader at the time, Hugh
Scanlon, encouraged scabbing, or of the fact that the British left
(both the International Socialists and the CP!) campaigned against
the Social Contract. Even his account of the decline of union
membership has to be qualified. The TUC’s weakness in Britain is
explained in terms of ‘the politics of a virulent anti-union drive’
[99] as if that determined the TUC weakness, rather than its own
bankrupt ‘new realism’, whose path had already been prepared by
the same Jones and Scanlon. None of the major defeats that working
class organisation undoubtedly suffered in the 1980s was somehow
inscribed in automatic social processes. Perhaps the greatest of
those defeats, that inflicted on the British miners, was quite as
‘resistible’ as fascism’s victories in the inter-war years.
Both problems in the strike’s leadership, and failures by other
union leaderships in the delivery of solidarity action created the
conditions for Thatcher’s victory over the miners. [100]
Recovery from periods of defeat is a drawn out process, requiring
a regrowth of confidence, sometimes the emergence of a new generation
less marked by the scars of old battles, but should not be confused
with some terminal decline due to a change in the occupational
composition of the working class. [101] That there was a ‘downturn’
in working class combativity from the mid-1970s onwards is undeniable
[102], but the sense we make of that period of retreat and defeat
must necessarily shape our whole political conception of what is
possible and necessary, and what the future may hold. Eley’s rather
deterministic position leads him to look for substitutes for working
class power as an agency of transformation, and thus not to consider
the possibility of a revival of working class organisation and
militancy. He does not, for example, take serious note of the huge
public sector strikes in France in 1995, nor does his whole account
prepare the reader for the large strike waves in Italy, Greece and
Spain in the context of the anti-war movement of the past year and
more. What he draws is a contrast between a rather rosy past and a
grim present:
Through these changes trade unionism lost its credentials
as a progressive force. Unions had always been intimately connected
with socialism. Beyond party-union relations was the larger sense of
trade unionism as the weapon of the weak, mobilising workers’
collectively organised strength as their only defence against
exploitation, social inequalities, and the power of capital. Trade
unionism was a class capacity, through which masses acting in unison
could have effects. Industrial strength was essential for immediate
improvement in wages and working conditions. But trade unionism was
also a larger vision, a collectivist ideal of the general good, a
desire for improving society, a general ethic of social solidarity
... Under welfare states, however, trade unionism stopped carrying
these hopes of the poor ... mainly trade unionism narrowed into
sectionalism. [103]
One would not guess from this account that sectionalism had ever
been a problem in the past, and certainly not that trade union
history involves a dialectic of sectionalism and collectivism. The
history of trade unionism includes the engineers, who only admitted
women to membership in 1940, and even then in a special ‘section’.
Nor was sectional strength always a necessarily backward feature,
standing against the possibility of class identification: witness the
deployment of craft union strength in the shop stewards’ movement
of the First World War.
By the 1990s, in Eley’s account, ‘the left was divided between
advocates of change and defenders of the faith. The former carried
the day’. [104] By 1990, it would be more accurate to say that his
‘advocates of change’ were giving up entirely on the possibility
of change, conceding victory to capitalism. That the left –
’defenders of the faith’ – were very weak in 1990 is true, but
it will hardly do to place them in the camp of sad conservatives,
unable to see that the world had changed. It was not from the ranks
of the ‘advocates of change’, after all, that the new movements
against global capitalism at the turn of the new century would come;
the ‘defenders of the faith’ embraced them readily.
Yet Eley also continues to provide good materials on this final
period. As so often, he is at his best documenting the failures of
reformist parties. He notes the way that the Eurocommunist strategy
in Italy ran into the sand, as the PCI (the Italian Communist Party)
became ‘the party of law and order, the bulwark of democratic
legality, the shield of the constitution’ – only this was a
bulwark and shield defending a corrupt state still honeycombed with
DC vested interests, and a well-oiled machinery of paybacks and
private enrichment. Restricting public rights and expanding police
powers, the PCI’s anti-terrorist stance painfully compromised its
guardianship of civil liberties. By its strong alignment with the DC,
the PCI damaged its links to the broader left. ‘In the Historic
Compromise, the PCI rehearsed an old socialist dilemma, familiar from
Weimar and Red Vienna. By accepting the system’s premises – NATO,
the DC, Catholicism, and capitalism – the PCI took a deck already
stacked’. [105] Like Jones and Scanlon in Britain, they espoused a
version of the Social Contract, on the theory that workers’
sacrifices would save the economy and enable its reconstitution on
more equitable bases, linked to social reforms and stronger
democracy. What the theory meant in practice was demobilise your own
side, and expect to gain reforms! As Eley says, ‘By 1979, there was
little to show for this compromising. Inflation was down to 12.4
percent, and unions made big concessions on wage indexing,
redundancies, and productivity. But unemployment was rising and
workers’ dissatisfaction was rife’. [106] In Spain, too, the
Communist Party pursued the politics of ‘pacts’, and lost out to
a revived social democratic party, the PSOE. In France they did no
better. Eley credits Eurocommunism with some civil reforms, and also
with a truly ambiguous achievement: ‘Eurocommunism brought southern
Europe into the fold of social democracy’. [107] Despite its
failures, he is warm to Eurocommunism: in making ‘broader appeals
to socially diverse support, from new professionals and white collar
strata to the university-educated and women’, the CPs:
... implied a different kind of party from before –
away from the Leninist party of militants, with its demands of time
and energy, and exclusive Communist loyalties; and toward the broadly
campaigning electoral party, with its looser structure of alliances
and less exacting identification, based on varied social
constituencies. Eurocommunist calls to democratise the party meant
not only dismantling centralism but also opening the party to diverse
currents and issues. Such issues posed a distinct challenge for
parties of the left, given their powerful class-political reflexes.
This agenda remained on the table.
Finally, Eurocommunism opened greater space on the left for
radical democracy, suggesting a ‘third way’ between Western
European social democracy and the official Communisms of the East. [108]
Here Eley’s inexhaustible search for a ‘third way’ leads him
seriously astray. Eurocommunism represented a further shift to the
right in Western Europe, with the rhetoric of ‘radical democracy’
as a partial cover. Moreover, the idea that some desirable path could
be found between a rightward moving social democracy and a decaying
Stalinism is hardly full of attractions for any kind of left!
Part of the difficulty is that, as we noted above, Eley never
really comes to terms with Stalinism. Its crisis in the 1980s leaves
him somewhat adrift. He continues to allow the use of the term
‘socialist’ in relation to Russia and Eastern Europe. [109] True,
many on the left in the West still maintained all manner of illusions
and identifications with the USSR and its satellites, but Eley never
gets behind this to consider its effects. As a result, he has some
difficulty with the explosions in Eastern Europe. While he notes,
rightly, that Solidarity in Poland ‘belonged squarely within
socialist traditions’ even while its ideas had great difficulty in
finding expression in socialist language, and while he can properly
record that ‘it was certainly Europe’s most impressive working
class insurgency since 1917–23’, for him the outcome in
Jaruzelski’s declaration of martial law was ‘inevitable’. [110]
Sadly, he allows the Italian Communist Party to draw the moral from
Solidarity’s defeat:
We must accept that this phase of socialist development
(which began with the October Revolution) has exhausted its driving
force, just as the phase which saw the birth and development of
socialist parties and trade union movements mustered around the
Socialist International also ran out of steam ... [111]
His halfway treatment of the nature of Stalinist societies leaves
Eley with an unanswered question: if these societies were in some
sense socialist, then isn’t his whole book’s stated theme that
there is a profound connection between socialism and democracy
flawed? Also, two things need to be explained about the East European
revolutions of 1989. First, why was there a low level of ‘social
movement’ involvement, for example by comparison with the
Solidarity period in Poland, 1980–1981? Second, why did the new
governments embrace the market so eagerly?
On the first, he writes with some accuracy that – outside
Romania – the common organisational medium of the revolutions was
‘the Forum’, which he describes thus: ‘a broad informal front,
hastily improvised, comprising mainly intellectuals, with unclear
popular support and not representative in any procedurally democratic
sense ... self constituted committees’. Yet he treats these as
somehow embodying ‘revived civil societies where democracy could be
regrounded, the sites of a “parallel polis”;’ and he writes,
‘The intense moment of the revolution as an immediate event was an
extraordinary laboratory of popular democratic initiative –
especially in the massed insurgencies of Czechoslovakia and the GDR
but also in the popular ferment of the negotiated transitions as
well, and in every small and everyday statement of rebellion across
the region’. [112] There’s a contradiction here, which Eley
doesn’t explore properly. Something was ‘missing’ in 1989, and
it was surely any popular institutional initiative, itself a
necessary component of popular democratic insurgency. The Forums were
a way of avoiding this: in Poland, Lech Walesa was explicit about the
matter, declaring it a matter of principle that ‘the street’
should be excluded from the negotiations. The East European
revolutions had something in common with the ‘negotiated
transitions’ in Spain, in Argentina and Brazil, etc: the people
were largely excluded, except when called on to participate in mass
demonstrations. In the GDR, indeed, the people seem to have
explicitly rejected the politics of the Civic Forum, and its
class-bound assumptions. [113]
On the second question, Eley perceives a ‘painful dilemma for
the left’ in the way that post-Communist governments shared a
neo-liberal belief in privatisation and marketisation. He comments,
‘Private property, the market, capitalism – these were what
socialists wanted to overturn. Socialist readiness to embrace the
market, not in some Keynesian sense of the mixed economy but in a
more absolute sense, was a profound change. It became the common
ground of Eastern European reform’. [114] That it became ‘common
ground’ is certainly true. But ‘socialist readiness’? Surely
the point is that there were never revolutions in which specifically
socialist ideas were less prevalent? The intelligentsia, by and
large, had given up on socialism, in any meaning of the term.
Thinking that Stalinism was socialism, and seeing the ‘socialism’
of social democracy as anyway largely empty and lacking in moral
vigour, they bought the neo-liberal idea that ‘freedom’ was
indissolubly linked to the market. If critical Marxist voices were
thin on the ground in the West, they were even thinner in the East.
The few there had been (notably Kuron and Modzelewski in Poland) had
long abandoned their own revolutionary ideas; the Yugoslav Marxists
(and Praxis) had gone silent or converted to nationalism. Eley
writes of the ‘shock therapy’ applied across the region, ‘This
was less the transition to democracy than the region’s brutal
subjection to the global capitalist system’. [115] His phrasing
would have been clearer if, in place of ‘less ... than’, he had
said ‘both ... and’, forcing the paradox to the surface, and
compelling inquiry into both the conditions that permitted such an
association to persist for a time and that, in the longer run, would
draw people from Eastern Europe into the anti-capitalist
demonstrations in Prague, Genoa and so on.
Eley’s account of the 1990s begins – rather peculiarly, given
that he has just recorded a whole series of revolutions in Eastern
Europe – by suggesting that the days of insurrection are past, ‘the
popular uprising, a pitched battle for the state amid the sudden
collapse of the system’. That he has a poor understanding of
insurrections is suggested by his comment that the ‘storming of the
Winter Palace’ was the emblematic event of the October Revolution
in Russia. After 1917, he thinks, insurgencies became rare: ‘There
was one case of popular insurrection under late capitalism, namely
France in 1968, where liberal democracy was brought to a halt. And
the revolutions of 1989 produced systemic change on a transnational
scale. But otherwise, the insurrectionary fantasy – of a massed
uprising, paralysing government and violently seizing power –
largely disappeared’. [116] The whole account is a bit fantastical.
First, outside the imagination of movie-makers, there was never a
‘storming of the Winter Palace’, which was actually taken by a
tiny group who slipped in through the back door. Nor was there, as
Eley’s own earlier account shows, an ‘insurrection’ in France
in 1968. That any serious idea of socialist revolution has little in
common with Eley’s fantasies needs stressing: its ‘emblematic
events’ are more likely to involve workers’ self organisation,
often of a non-murderous kind, and not all at once, but as a
spreading and deepening movement combining economic and political
demands that pulls into its orbit all manner of other struggles
against oppression and the like.
Never mind. That was the fantasy, says Eley, and in his account
the disappointments of 1968 led some student radicals to chase it,
recreating the Leninist model ‘in the form of small and
hyperdisciplined sects, rejecting participatory ideals for the
panacea of the party’. I don’t know what company Eley kept, but
that was anything but universally true. That many leftists lapsed
into sectarianism is correct, but not all did. Perhaps what he terms
‘sectarian militancy was thus little more than a noisy sideshow’,
but he needs at least to get his facts right about it. He has a
footnote saying that ‘Wishfully, the Socialist Labour League and
International Socialists declared Britain pre-revolutionary,
launching respectively the Workers Revolutionary Party (1973) and the
Socialist Workers Party (1976), each reaching a membership of several
thousand’. [117] If we leave aside the SLL/WRP, which was rather
prone to declare every temporary blip a terminal crisis, the IS/SWP
never declared Britain pre-revolutionary, and changed its name for
much more mundane reasons. But Eley, who has little time for the
revolutionary left, doesn’t bother to do his homework properly here.
He’s inclined to hope that ‘DIY’ politics as exemplified by
raves, roads protests and Reclaim the Streets might offer part of a
way forward. Tentatively he suggests that some modest kind of
‘localism’ in economic policy might enable socialist ideas to
regain ground lost to neo-liberalism, and partly reclaim
collectivism:
Modified Keynesianism was feasible – involving
decentralised public enterprise, tax concessions and public funds for
local initiatives, use of public resources like land and planning
permission for smaller-scale projects, community-based planning, none
of which meant reversing privatisation or relegitimising
nationalisation per se. [118]
However, in a ‘brutally adversarial national climate’, those
backing such ideas – like the GLC of the 1980s – were
overwhelmed. The outcome was the ‘confusing picture’ he finds at
the end of his story, in the late 1990s. ‘Socialists were governing
almost everywhere’, he suggests, adding, however, that these
‘socialists returned to office with no economic design’ [119] –
a judgement that is breathtakingly misdirected, certainly as far as
Britain is concerned. Blair and his ‘New Labour’ government had a
definite economic design, taken over and developed from essentially
Thatcherite ideas, and they eschewed completely even the language of
socialism. In Germany, an official SPD intellectual declared that
‘the left must stand up for consumer rights, free investment
decisions, the free disposal of assets, and a decentralised decision
making process’. [120] The ‘established socialist tradition’
had been left behind, capitalism’s ascendant forms were embraced,
and the rule of the market was accepted. Eley laments: ‘Socialists
had lost their confidence in the state. Without this Archimedean
point, their capacity for imagining anti-capitalist alternatives
dissolved’ (my emphasis). [121] This catches the problem of
‘the left’ in ways Eley can’t quite grasp. What does seem true
is that the brand of reformist socialism that always looked to
statist solutions, which Marx and Engels criticised in its early
manifestations in the 19th century, and whose regular failings Eley
himself has documented in his account of the 20th century, is now
immensely weakened, as the rival statist ‘socialism’ associated
with Stalinism is also finished.
Eley is inclined to regret their passing. We should not. What Eley
regards as the steady undermining of the socialist left over the past
third of a century involves several interrelated but partly
contradictory developments. What has not occurred is a diminution in
the potential strength of working class organisation, although the
undeniable shifts in occupational composition have altered the inner
organisational character of the social networks that make up the
contemporary working class. Stalinism – a huge impediment to
socialist politics all through the extended middle of the 20th
century – has been fatally weakened. As for social democracy, while
(as Eley remarks) its capacity for regeneration is considerable, the
very capitalist success on which it is premised looks more doubtful,
and the national-state reformism to which it appeals has been
extensively undermined by contemporary developments in world economy.
 
Looking forward and back
So, finally, where are we now? Not, I think, in the rather
depressed environment that Eley offers us as his book ends with a
farewell to the 20th century. In the very last days of that century,
it was already apparent that rapidly expanding spaces were being
opened up, across Europe and the world, for new movements of
opposition to both capitalist globalisation and imperialist
war-making. If the demonstrations in Seattle at the very end of
November 1999 were a brilliant signal of what was to come, the
materials to make them had been prepared for several years before.
There are indeed plenty of ‘reasons to be cheerful’. [122]
The long ‘downturn’ of working class containment and defeat
that followed the upsurge of the 1960s no longer constrains the
aspirations and imaginations of new generations in the way it did
during the 1980s and much of the 1990s. The space for socialists to
spread their ideas has expanded hugely. Terms like ‘capitalism’
and ‘imperialism’, which might have seemed part of an antique
lexicon only a decade ago, are now part of everyday radical currency.
And all the issues in the great debates of the past are now
resurfacing: not just utopian ideas but also arguments about whether
and how they can be reconciled with practical strategising; serious
books on the feasibility of socialist economics are selling well
[123]; thousands upon thousands of activists organised the largest
demonstration in Britain’s entire history in February 2003, against
the war on Iraq; it may be that we are no nearer agreement about how,
in the words of a famous banner of 2002, to replace capitalism with
‘something nicer’, but the question itself is very alive, as are
wide-ranging questions about the expansion of participatory
democracy. Barely commented on, too, because so taken for granted, is
the leading role that many young women play in the new
anti-capitalist movements, in ways that a previous generation of
women might only have dreamed of.
What, in the end, is sad about Eley’s history is that, as a
product of the dominant political sensibilities of the downturn
years, it never prepares the reader for the possibilities that are
now erupting around us. If Geoff Eley were to prepare a second
edition in a few years’ time, I hope he might tell his tale rather differently.

Notes
1. ‘So here I am, in the middle way, having had 20 years –
Twenty years largely wasted, the years of l’entre deux guerres’
– T.S. Eliot.
2. G. Eley, Forging Democracy (Oxford 2003); see also A. Callinicos, Bourgeois Revolutions and Historical Materialism, International Socialism 2 : 43 (Summer 1989), pp. 113–171.
3. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 10.
4. As above, p. 4.
5. As above, pp. viii–ix. T. Shanin draws a similar
contrast between periods when ‘the alternativity of history’ is
low, when the dominant images are of repetition and stability, and
other periods or ‘axial stages’ when ‘The locks of rigidly
determined behaviours, self censored imaginations, and self evident
stereotypes of common sense are broken, and the sky seems the limit,
or all hell breaks loose.’ T. Shanin, Revolution As a Moment of
Truth (London 1985), p. 312.
6. Forging Democracy, as above, pviii.
7. As above, p. 8.
8. As above, p. 20.
9. As above, p. 21.
10. As above, p. 27.
11. As above, p. 78.
12. E.J. Hobsbawm, Custom, Wages and Work-Load in the
Nineteenth Century, in Labouring Men (London 1964).
13. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 30.
14. As above, p. 55.
15. As above, p. 56.
16. See, for instance, H. Draper and A.G. Lipow, Marxist Women and Bourgeois Feminism, The Socialist Register 1976 (London 1976).
17. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 14.
18. As above, p. 23.
19. As above, p. 22.
20. K. Marx and F. Engels, The Germany Ideology (London
1964), p. 86.
21. K. Marx, Theses on Feuerbach, in The German
Ideology, as above, pp. 645–647.
22. In the same spirit, Marx and Engels look back jointly in 1879
to insist, ‘When the International was formed, we expressly
formulated the battle-cry: The emancipation of the working class must
be the work of the working class itself. We cannot ally ourselves,
therefore, with people who openly declare that the workers are too
uneducated to free themselves and must therefore be liberated from
above by philanthropic big bourgeois and petty bourgeois.’ K. Marx
and F. Engels, Circular letter to Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke, et al. (1879) in K. Marx, The First International and After
(Harmondsworth 1993), p. 375.
23. H. Draper, The Two Souls of Socialism, International
Socialism, first series, 11 (1962), pp. 12–20. The text
has been reproduced in many other places. It can be found on the web
at www.anu.edu.au/polsci/marx/contemp/pamsetc/twosouls/twosouls.htm.
24. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 22.
25. As above, p. 37.
26. As above, p. 508.
27. As above, p. 45.
28. The same recognition was also manifested on the right. Roberto
Michels, in his Political Parties (first published in 1908),
developed the conservative side of the revisionist argument in the
direction of total elitist pessimism. The need for organisation, he
suggested, always and everywhere generated ‘oligarchy’, which
must itself impede the struggle for socialism. Thus socialism was,
through its inner necessities, impossible to achieve. For a critical
assessment of Michels’ thesis, see C. Barker, Robert Michels and
the Cruel Game, in C. Barker, A. Johnson and M. Lavalette (eds.),
Leadership in Social Movements (Manchester 2001), pp. 24–43.
29. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 133.
30. As above, p. 135.
31. As above, pp. 144–145.
32. For discussion of these dynamics in five sets of events from
the later 20th century, see C. Barker (ed.), Revolutionary
Rehearsals (London 1987).
33. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 141.
34. As above, p. 146.
35. As above, pp. 147–148.
36. Eley cites the chilling speech of Moscow financier and
industrialist Pavel Riabushinski on 3 August 1917: ‘It will take
the bony hand of hunger and national destitution to grasp at the
throats of these false friends of the people, these members of
various committees and soviets, before they will come to their
senses’, as above, p. 142.
37. As above, p. 148.
38. As above, p. 152.
39. C. Harman, Gramsci or Eurocommunism?, International Socialism 98, first series (May 1977), pp. 23–26.
40. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 120.
41. As above, p. 162.
42. As above, p. 165.
43. As above, p. 168.
44. As above, p. 169.
45. As above, p. 169.
46. See C. Harman, The Lost Revolution: Germany 1918–1923 (London 1982).
47. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 172.
48. As above, p. 172.
49. As above, p. 173.
50. As above, p. 174.
51. As above.
52. For a fine recent account, see T. Behan, The Resistible
Rise of Benito Mussolini (London 2003).
53. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 183.
54. See, for example, T. Cliff, Lenin, volume 1: Building the Party (London 1975).
55. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 184.
56. As above, p. 179.
57. As above, p. 222.
58. G. Lukács, A Defence of History and Class
Consciousness (London 2000), p. 47.
59. On the containment of even the apparently innocuous Friendly
Societies, see S. Yeo, State and Anti-State: Reflections on Social
Forms and Struggles from 1850, in P. Corrigan (ed.),
Capitalism, State Formation and Marxist Theory (London 1980),
pp. 111–142.
60. A. Shandro, “Consciousness from Without”: Marxism,
Lenin and the Proletariat, Science and Society 59.3
(1995), pp. 268–297.
61. As above.
62. In this respect, there is an important difference between the
mostly uncritical modern literature on ‘new social movements’ and Marxism.
63. Marxism was born out of reflection on the already developed
achievements and experience of workers’ movements in Britain,
France, Silesia and elsewhere; Marx and Engels drew their account of
‘the dictatorship of the proletariat’ from the practices of the
Paris Commune; the Bolsheviks learned the significance of soviets
from the organisational accomplishments of Russian workers; Marxists
(where they were not utterly bone-headed) learned from the women’s
movements and the gay and lesbian movements of the 1960s and 1970s,
etc., etc. If, on the one hand, Lenin insisted that Marxist ideas
have to be imported into the spontaneous movement ‘from without’,
key steps in Marxism’s own development came to it equally from
‘outside’ its own ranks.
64. If repeated sequences of events suggest there are
organisational patterns to such ‘mediating forces’, then further
theorisation is required. That theorisation may be initially rather
vulgar and insufficient. Thus it was with both ‘residual petty
bourgeoisie’ and ‘labour aristocracy’ theories of the roots of
revisionism in the early 20th century. On the former, see for example
C. Johnson, The Problem of Reformism and Marx’s Theory of
Fetishism, New Left Review 119 (January–February 1980),
pp. 70–96. On ‘labour aristocracy’ theories of reformism,
see T. Cliff, Economic Roots of Reformism, Socialist Review
(June 1957); reprinted in T. Cliff, Marxist Theory After Trotsky:
Selected Writings, vol. 3 (London 2003), pp. 177–186.
65. G. Lukács, as above.
66. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 237.
67. As above, p. 238.
68. As above, pp. 238–239.
69. As above. One qualification: the ‘hardwiring’ had been
largely accomplished well before 1914, as, for example, R. Miliband
showed long ago in his great Parliamentary Socialism (London
1961), a work unaccountably missing from Eley’s references.
70. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 262.
71. As above, p. 236.
72. As above, p. 270.
73. As above, p. 271.
74. None of this implies some necessary vituperativeness on the
revolutionary left, as if that is the key thing to learn from Lenin,
but it does imply clarity.
75. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 274.
76. As above, p. 275.
77. As above, p. 274.
78. Our tendency developed the argument that the post-war long
boom was founded on arms spending. See, for example, T. Cliff, Perspectives for the Permanent War Economy, Socialist
Review (March 1957), reprinted in T. Cliff, Marxist Theory
After Trotsky, Selected Writings, vol. 3 (London, 2003),
pp. 169–176; and M. Kidron, Western Capitalism Since the
War (London 1968).
79. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 288.
80. As above, p. 297.
81. As above, p. 296.
82. As above, p. 296.
83. A. MacIntyre, Breaking the Chains of Reason, in E.P.
Thompson et al. (eds.), Out Of Apathy (London
1960), p. 195.
84. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 348.
85. As above, p. 350.
86. As above, pp. 352–353.
87. As above, p. 414.
88. As above, p. 399.
89. See, for example, P. Foot, Immigration and Race in British Politics (Harmondsworth 1965).
90. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 378.
91. E.P. Thompson, The Peculiarities of the English, The
Socialist Register 1965 (London 1965), reprinted in E.P.
Thompson, The Poverty of Theory (London 1978).
92. Forging Democracy, as above, ch. 23.
93. As above, p. 394.
94. As above.
95. For a critique, see C. Barker and G. Dale, Protest Waves in
Western Europe: A Critique of “New Social Movement” Theory,
Critical Sociology 24.1/2 (1998), pp. 65–104.
96. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 397.
97. It is a little more fleshed out in C. Barker and G. Dale, as
above. See also for an excellent historical study C. Harman, The
Fire Last Time: 1968 and After (London 1988).
98. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 389.
99. As above, p. 391.
100.See, for example, A. Callinicos and M. Simons, The Great
Strike; The Miners’ Strike of 1984–5 and its Lessons,
International Socialism 2 : 27 (Spring 1985).
101. For a good discussion of some of the dynamics involved, see
R. Fantasia and J. Stepan-Norris, ‘Labor Movement in Motion’, in
D.A. Snow, S.A. Soule and H. Kriesi (eds.), The Blackwell
Companion to Social Movements (Oxford,2004), pp. 555–575.
102. For good contemporary comment, see T. Cliff, The Balance
of Class Forces in Recent Years, International Socialism 2 : 6
(Autumn 1979), reprinted in T. Cliff, In the Thick of Workers’
Struggle: Selected Writings, vol. 2 (London, 2002), pp. 373–422.
103. Forging Democracy, as above, pp. 401–402.
104. As above, p. 403.
105. As above, p. 412.
106. As above. He doesn’t mention that this was also the outcome in Britain ...
107. As above, p. 415.
108. As above, p. 416.
109. As above, pp. 431–455.
110. As above, pp. 433–436.
111. As above, p. 437.
112. As above, pp. 448–449.
113. See for example, C. Barker and C. Mooers, Theories of
Revolution in the Light of 1989 in Eastern Europe, Cultural
Dynamics 9.1 (1997), pp. 17–43; L. Fuller, Where Was
the Working Class? Revolution in Eastern Germany (Illinois 1999)
and G. Dale, Popular Protest in East Germany: The Revolution of
1989 (London 2004).
114. Forging Democracy, as above, p. 450.
115. As above, p. 451.
116. As above, p. 457.
117. As above, p. 583.
118. As above, p. 481.
119. As above, p. 482.
120. As above.
121. As above, p. 483.
122. M. Steel, Reasons to be Cheerful (London 2001). A wonderfully funny book.
123. See, for example, M. Albert, Parecon: Life After
Capitalism (London 2003), A. Callinicos, An Anti-Capitalist
Manifesto (London 2003).
 



I only met Ralph Miliband personally towards the end of his life.
However, his books and articles played an important role in the
political development of my generation of socialists. Ralph Miliband
was a very good clear writer – a real virtue in a period when the
worst academicism often afflicted socialist theorising.
His most important book was surely his first, Parliamentary
Socialism (1961). Deservedly, it has been reprinted several times.
The book laid bare the fawning towards British capitalist
institutions that has marked the Labour Party from its beginning.
Labour, after 90 years in parliament, has never made Britain
significantly more democratic. It can’t even claim it gave votes to
women under 30. Labour, Miliband showed, maintained an unremitting
subservience to crown, imperialism and property.
Periodically a left developed in the party, but it was regularly
sucked into the same habits, or utterly marginalised.
His argument and documentation were brilliant. His book has
sustained and enlightened us all for three decades. But it posed an
obvious question: what’s the alternative? To that, regrettably, the
author’s answers were far less adequate.
In 1964, with John Saville, Ralph Miliband launched the annual
Socialist Register. In it, he called for the formation of a
new socialist party. But on what principles? Here the weakness of his
position came to the fore.
In 1969, he published The State in Capitalist Society. Here
he set out to show that the state in the advanced countries was
inherently capitalist. But the arguments belonged more to ‘elite
theory’ than to Marxism, with two major weaknesses. The whole force
of his case rested on the personal connections between state
personnel and the propertied, and their shared prejudices and
culture. The difficulty here is that whole periods of capitalist
history don’t fit: for example Meiji Japan, Nazi Germany, the
Stalinist states.
Sadly, the book lacked any sense of the class struggle. It
presented a relentless picture of ruling class domination. The waves
of revolt from below that have shaped and transformed capitalist
states do not appear. Even in his account of education, the same
problem appeared. To his credit, Ralph Miliband in 1968 spoke
strongly in defence of the students’ struggle at the London School
of Economics, yet his 1969 book offered an account of higher
education from which classroom struggle is completely absent.
Miliband’s hatred of inequality and oppression was genuine and
powerful. But what his writings never provide is a concrete sense of
the potential power and creativity of working people in struggle. In
30 years of turbulent world history, Socialist Register
managed not to celebrate a single revolutionary struggle in the
advanced world. It missed out on 1968, on Portugal, Iran, Poland.
As a result, Miliband’s suggestions for new socialist parties
never seemed grounded in any living reality. John Saville’s
obituary in The Guardian (23 May) mentions that, unlike others
of his generation, Ralph Miliband never joined the Communist Party.
Perhaps he was the worse for that. For all its terrible record, the
CP might have given him some sense of the possibilities and
difficulties of socialist organisation, and of the roots of socialism
in everyday struggle.
His best memorial remains Parliamentary Socialism. Any
thinking member of the Labour Party who reads it will shudder, or
blush. The beast anatomised there has not changed since 1961, only
become more like Miliband’s devastating portrait.
 



AFTER THREE YEARS’ labour, the Royal Commission on Trade Unions has finally reported. The 352-page document (price £1) looks at industrial relations from the point of new of a section of the ruling class today. It is written in the a section of the ruling class today. It is written in the mealy-mouthed way most government documents enjoy, and it is often downright dull.
The Commission is very clear about its main problems. It gives an example of a skilled engineering fitter’s pay packet in a factory in the North East in December 1967. What worries the Commission is the way the pay is made up:



Table 1




Time rate for the industry for a
40-hour week (negotiated between
the Employers’ Federation and
the Confederation of Unions)
£11   1   8d.




Overtime (8 hours at double time)
  £4   8   8d.




Night shift premium
  £3 13 11d.




Lieu bonus, negotiated between
management and shop stewards
in the factory.
£11 14 11d.




Total pay before deductions
£30 19   2d.



In the words of the Commission, “Britain has two systems of industrial relations.” The first system is the official system in which the trade union officials meet officials of the employers’ associations, and settle disputes, negotiate wages, and so on.
But there is more to life than what was written into rulebooks and procedures 50 years ago. It is that “ more ” that terrifies the bosses and the union leaders alike.
The old, official, system has decayed. Since the end of the 1930’s, real bargaining over wages has slipped out of the hands of the full-time officials and has been taken over, at the workplace level, by shop stewards. For very many workers today, like the worker whose pay-packet is shown in Table 1, a considerable part of their weekly wage comes from local bargaining, from unofficial bargaining, from shop stewards more than union officials.
It is the same with strikes. Apart from the mining industry, there is a steady rise in the number of strikes. In 1957 there were 635 strikes (in the official statistics), in 1960 there were 1,166. and in 1967 there were 1,694 ,in all industries except coal-mining.
But what sort of strikes?
Table 2 shows the numbers of official strikes from 1960 to 1966. The figures show that they are not increasing in number.



Table 2




Numbers of official strikes



1960


68



1961


60



1962


78



1962


78



1963


49



1964


70



1965


97



1966


60



So it is the unofficial strikes which have nearly trebled in number since 1957. In fact, they have probably more than trebled, for the short strikes (which are the most common) are not even counted in the statistics.
It isn’t really the numbers of strikes that worry the employers so much. What really worries them is that they can’t control the situation. They want a wages policy, so that they can increase their profits at the expense of the working people. But they can’t get a wages policy that works if it is being spoiled all the time in the factories.
And that is what is happening. In piece-rate arguments, in clashes over overtime, teabreaks, washing-time allowances, travel allowances and a host of other workplace matters, rank-and-file workers and their shop stewards keep pushing up the wage rates.
They do this independently of the unions, and independently of the government. They do it to such an extent that it creates one of the biggest headaches for British employers and for the government’s wages policy.
So, says the Commission the biggest problem in British industry is that things are not controlled, in other words not controlled by the managements.
What the Commission wants to do is to restore “order” to British industry. The bulk of the Report is taken up with a long discussion of what they can do.
Many of the employers’ organisations, the Tory Party and others, have demanded that unofficial strikes be made illegal in some way, or at least give employers the opportunity to take civil action in the courts.
The Commission is terrified of this kind of idea, though they do say that if their proposals don’t work then it may be necessary to “look again” at the idea of legal controls.
Their reasons for rejecting legal action are, first, that employers at the moment are afraid of using the law against unofficial strikers because they know that if a striker is fined or jailed the result will only be more strikes, go-slows, overtime bans and so forth.
Secondly, the Commission are convinced that legal action will not work. The best part of the Report is a two-page Appendix, written for them by Sir Harold Emmerson, who was a senior Ministry of Labour official during the last war.
Emmerson tells how, in 1941, 4,000 Kent miners went on illegal strike in support of a wage claim. 1,000 of the men were issued with summonses, under the wartime National Arbitration Order, and extra JPs and police had to be drafted to serve the summonses.
The result of the trial, in which the men pleaded guilty, was that three union officials were imprisoned with hard labour. 335 were fined £3 (or one month in gaol) and about 1,000 were fined £1 (or 14 days).
In protest, the men stayed out – and the men who could call off the strike were in gaol. After five days the colliery management were forced to sign an agreement, in the prison, with the union officials, giving the men everything they had asked for. But the men refused to go back to work till their officials were released, and after 11 days the law caved in.
No government can cheerfully face this kind of situation again. If the law is brought into disrepute because it cannot be enforced, then the whole basis of “authority” is made a laughing-stock. And no “authority” can bear to be laughed at – people who can laugh at a government will feel strong enough to overthrow it
So the Royal Commission doesn’t recommend such use of legal action. Instead they suggest that, to control workshop bargaining, firms should he required to register their factory agreements with the government.
A new Industrial Relations Commission (a sort of second Aubrey Jones) will be set up to investigate these factory agreements. This way, it is hoped, shop floor bargaining, unofficial strikes and shop stewards will somehow be “regulated” more to the satisfaction of the employers and the government.
Other recommendations are also intended to serve the same purpose. More unions should be urged to merge, or come to agreements among themselves, to reduce the power of multi-union committees of shop stewards. Full-time union officials ought to try to get control of the unofficial stewards’ committees.
 
Immune
Only in one respect does a majority of the Commission recommend a change of any weight. Up to now, any “combination” of workers – not only recognised union, but also unofficial stewards’ committees, “breakaway” unions, etc. – has been immune from various sorts of legal penalty.
Now, it is proposed that only unions which are registered with the authorities should have this “privilege.” In other words, it will now be possible, if the Commission’s ideas are put into practice, for anyone who thinks he has been hurt by a strike to sue those involved, if the strike was not called by a registered union
This will lay shop stewards open to the risk of prosecution. In nearly every strike in the country, there will be the risk of civil or criminal proceedings being taken.
The aim of this Report is to find a way of getting rid of the class struggle, as it is seen on the shop floor, or at least bringing it under control. But we can be sure that the proposals they have made will not work, and that they will not satisfy big business.
As capitalism gets into bigger and bigger crises in the years ahead, business will demand much more government add legal control over unofficial strikes. It may be soon, it may take several years. But the result will be a sharpening of the class struggle. There are bigger battles ahead than we have had for a generation.
These battles will create the possibility of mass working-class action to overthrow capitalism and build a socialist society. Socialists and militants should be organising now in readiness for those battles.
 

 Barker: Theories of Russia (Part 2)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Theories of Russia

Colin Barker
Theories of Russia
*
(4) “Degenerated Workers’ State” Theory
An obvious starting point for a discussion of Marxist theories of Russia is the work of Leon Trotsky. If Trotsky’s answers are not in my view entirely satisfactory, his work does have the merit that it asks the right kind of questions. Trotsky tries to explain the development of Stalin’s Russia and its internal dynamics in terms of the interaction of classes and groups in post-revolutionary Russia, and in terms of the country’s place in the world capitalist economy. Trotsky’s ideas are repeated and followed, today, by several writers, most notably Ernest Mandel.
Trotsky defined Russia as a ‘degenerated workers’ state’. This is a formulation which echoes Lenin’s account, in 1921, of the social character of the state at the end of the Civil War [10]:
‘Comrade Trotsky speaks of a “workers’ state’. May I say that this is an abstraction ... it is ... a patent error to say “Since this is a workers’ state without any bourgeoisie, against whom then is the working class to be protected, and for what purpose?” The whole point is that it is not quite a workers’ state. What we actually have is a workers’ state, with the peculiarity, firstly, that it is not the working class but the peasant population that predominates in the country, and, secondly, that it is a workers’ state with bureaucratic distortions.’
Only, Trotsky insisted, the ‘bureaucratic distortions’ of which Lenin spoke had multiplied a hundred-fold.
The Russian bureaucracy, the ruling stratum, said Trotsky, is not a ruling class. It does not enforce its own independent will on Russian society, its own goals on production:
‘Class has an exceptionally important and moreover a scientifically restricted meaning in Marxism. A class is defined not by participation in the distribution of the national income alone, but by its independent role in the general structure of economy and by its independent roots the economic foundation of society. Each class works out its own special forms of property. The bureaucracy lacks all these social traits. It has no independent position in the process of production and distribution. It has no independent property roots. Its functions relate basically to the political technique of class rule. The existence of a bureaucracy in all its variety of forms and differences in specific weight, characterises every class regime. Its power is of a reflected character. The bureaucracy is bound up indissolubly with a ruling economic class, feeding itself upon the social roots of the latter, maintaining itself and falling together with it.’ [11]
Rather than being a class in the Marxist sense of that term, the bureaucracy is a ‘parasitic caste’, a ‘tumour’ on the body of Russian society. ‘A tumour can grow to a tremendous size and strangle the organism, but a tumour can never become a living organism.’ [12] Neither its property relations, nor its privileges, make it a class exploiting society, it remains merely parasitic on a mode of production independent of its determination:
‘The bureaucracy has neither stocks nor bonds. It is recruited, supplemented, and renewed in the manner of an administrative hierarchy independently of any special property relation of its own. The individual bureaucrat cannot transmit to his heirs his rights in the exploitation of the state apparatus. The bureaucracy enjoys its privileges under the form of an abuse of power. It conceals its income; it pretends that as a social group it does not even exist. Its appropriation of a vast share of the national income has the character of social parasitism.’ [13]
‘... the privileges of the bureaucracy by themselves do not change the basis of Soviet society, because the bureaucracy derives its privileges not from any special property relations peculiar to it as a class, but from those property relations which have been created by the October evolution and which are fundamentally adequate for the dictatorship of the proletariat. To put it plainly, in so far as the bureaucracy robs the people ... we have to deal not with class exploitation, in the scientific sense of the word, but with social parasitism, albeit on a very large scale.’ [14]
The bureaucratic caste should be understood as having raised itself up as a balancing force, mediating the central conflicts within Russian society – conflicts between workers and peasants, between town and country, between different layers of the working class, between the whole of Russian society and the capitalist world market, etc. Mandel similarly insists: ‘... the ruling bureaucracy is recognised as a privileged petty-bourgeois stratum of the proletariat and not as a new socially ruling class’. [15]
The power of the bureaucracy is a phenomenon produced by the backward character of Russian economy and society, arid its continued backwardness in turn is a product of the failure of the revolution to spread:
‘The basis of bureaucratic rule is the poverty of society in objects of consumption, with the resulting struggle of each against all. When there are enough goods in a store, the purchasers can come whenever they want to. When there are few goods, the purchasers are compelled to stand in line. When the lines are very long, it is necessary to appoint a policeman to keep order. Such is the starting point of the Soviet bureaucracy.’ [16]
Thus the bureaucracy regulates conflicts occurring, above all, in the sphere of consumption and distribution. As such, it is itself a privileged stratum, battening on society, living off as well as moderating and regulating the conflicts produced by the economic situation of backwardness and relative poverty.
The ‘bureaucracy’ has arisen gradually out of the need of the revolution due to its poverty and isolation, for ‘bureaucratism’. It has now developed a distinctness, and a set of interests of its own. Those interests, which it now enforces on the rest of society, are above all the expansion and preservation of its own privileged situation, above all its privileges in the sphere of consumption. By comparison with the workers and peasants, the bureaucrats live in luxury, and the defence and expansion of their luxury is the purpose of their rule. Mandel amplifies the argument; the bureaucracy is not the owner of the means of production, in either the juridical or the economic sense. It cannot use the control over the means of production which it monopolises either (a) for the acquisition of private property or b) ‘for any other specific economic purpose outside the consumption sphere.’ [17]
‘Why doesn’t the “central administrative elite” admits workers’ control and social control over the planning mechanism, if not because it is afraid of losing its material privileges?’ [18]
This interest in their privileged consumption of consumer goods is what binds the bureaucracy together with a common social interest.
However ‘degenerated’ the political forms of Russian society, however undemocratic its government, the bureaucracy still maintains an important element inherited from the 1917 revolution, in the shape of planning and especially of nationalised state property. This element it is still compelled to defend and maintain, for fear of the working class. It is this, the maintenance of state property, which makes the regime still a degenerated workers’ state. The Russian ‘degenerated workers’ state’ is a form of society different from and superior to capitalist society. In Mandel’ s term, it is a form of society ‘transitional’ from capitalism to socialism. It is still, as it were, balanced between capitalism and socialism, neither advancing towards socialism because of the bureaucracy, yet not returning either to a capitalist regime of private property. Such a society, in transition between capitalism and socialism, does not represent any form of socialism, says Mandel, but has its own specific relations of production. [19] The economic order of ‘transitional society’, says Mandel, is ‘governed by the conflict of two antagonistic economic logics: the logic of the plan and the logic of the market’. [20] What has been superseded in Russia, via the ‘abolition of private ownership and transition to socialised planned economy’ is the ‘spontaneous distribution of economic resources among the various branches of production through the law of value’. Thus, ‘Conscious distribution of economic resources through the plan is now the decisive characteristic of the new production relations.’ But, commodity-money relations still continue to play a part in Russia, especially in determining shares of the ‘given consumption fund.’ Consumer goods still retain the commodity form. Thus production is governed by the plan, but consumer distribution by the market. These two, competing sets of laws (plan and market) correspond to two different class interests: on the one hand, the class interests of the proletariat (the plan) and on the other hand those of the bourgeoisie and of the classes and strata working on the basis of private enterprise and private profit. [21] Although the law of value still operates at the level of consumer goods, and thus has an influence on the Russian economic system, it does not rule the economy.
The Soviet regime has a ‘dual character’: it is
‘socialistic, in so far as it defends social property in the means of production, bourgeois, in so far as the distribution of life’s goods is carried out with a capitalistic measure of value and all the consequences ensuing therefrom.’ [22]
Such a regime, Trotsky suggested (and Mandel repeats) must be intrinsically unstable. The bureaucracy’s situation, Trotsky suggested, is like that of a sphere on the point of a pyramid: it must roll down, and soon, either to the side of socialism (via a workers’ revolution) or to the side of capitalist restoration.
‘Two opposite tendencies are growing up out of the depth of the soviet regime. To the extent that, in contrast to a decaying capitalism it develops the productive forces, it is preparing the economic basis of socialism. To the extent that, for the benefit of an upper stratum, it carries to more and more extreme expression bourgeois norms of distribution, it is preparing a capitalist restoration. This contrast between forms of property and norms of distribution cannot grow indefinitely. Either the bourgeois norm must in one form or another spread to the means of production, or the norms of distribution must be brought into correspondence with the socialist property system.’ [23]
 
Changes in Trotsky’s Argument
Trotsky’s analysis was constructed in the midst of the very turbulent events of the late 1920s and the 1930s. In the process, Trotsky altered some of his key formulations from one period to another. This is apparent in respect of several issues: the definition of a workers’ state – and thus of a ‘degenerated workers’ state’; the means by which the bureaucracy’s rule might be ended; the existence of otherwise of ‘planning’ in Russia; and the character and dating of ‘Thermidor’ in Russia. The issues are interrelated.
(1) In 1931, Trotsky insisted that the system in Russia should stil1 be characterised as a “workers’ state’. His grounds for arguing this were – in terms of method – the classic Marxist ones:
‘The recognition of the present Soviet state as a workers’ state not only signifies that the bourgeoisie can conquer power only by means of an armed uprising but also that the proletariat of the USSR has not forfeited the possibility of subordinating the bureaucracy to it, of reviving the party again, and of regenerating the regime of the dictatorship – without a new revolution, with the methods and on the road of reform.’ [24]
Empirically, this account is already without foundation: by 1931 the NEP had been abolished, and the Five-Year Plan launched. The Stalinist faction in the party had become totally triumphant, the remaining vestiges of independent trade unionism had been destroyed, wages had been slashed, draconian labour legislation had been introduced, opposition was being criminalised, etc. Nonetheless, from the standpoint of method, Trotsky’s formulation is different from that which comes later, in Trotsky’s writings of the mid-1930s (The Revolution Betrayed, etc.). Here, in 1931, what makes Russia a ‘workers’ state’ is the continued possibility that the workers can take control of society again, without the need to take the road of revolution.
(2) In October 1933, Trotsky abruptly changed his position. Till then, he had resisted calls for the formation of a new Communist Party, urging the Opposition to work for reforms from within the existing party. Now, however, with the Left Opposition totally excluded from the party, both nationally and internationally, no ‘constitutional’ ways were left open. The victory of Hitler in Germany convinced Trotsky that the Communist International was now totally bankrupt.
‘After the experiences of the last few years it would be childish to suppose that the Stalinist bureaucracy can be removed by means of a party or soviet congress. In reality, the last congress of the Bolshevik arty took place at the beginning of 1923, the Twelfth Party congress. All subsequent congresses were bureaucratic parades. Today, even such congresses have been discarded. No normal “constitutional” ways remain to remove the ruling clique. The bureaucracy can be compelled to yield power into the hands af the proletarian vanguard only by force.’ [25]
Initially, Trotsky spoke only of ‘measures of a police character’, which he did not define. But, by the mid-1930s, Trotsky was calling for a new revolution in Russia. The Revolution Betrayed ended with a declaration of the inevitability of such a revolution.
‘... the further course of development must inevitably lead to a clash between the culturally developed forces of the people and the bureaucratic hierarchy. There is no peaceful outcome for this crisis. No devil yet voluntarily cut off his own claws. The Soviet bureaucracy will not give up its positions without a fight. The development leads obviously to the road of revolution.’ [26]
(3) In evaluating the development of their own revolution, the Bolsheviks regularly looked for analogies to the events of the Great French Revolution of the late 18th century. Thus, in early 1921, Lenin had compared his situation with that of Robespierre in 1793–4, in the period when he had been contemplating the introduction of ‘‘ NEP. So too, the Oppositions were on the constant lookout for the moments of degeneration of the French evolution, in particular for ‘Thermidor’ and ‘Bonaparte’. (On the 9th Thermidor (27 July 1794) the Jacobin dictatorship was overthrown by the Convention and replaced with a more right-wing regime, from 1795 the Directorat. This presided over a political and social reaction, and paved the way for Bonaparte’s dictatorship from 1799.) One of the reasons that Trotsky resigned the position of Commissar for War in 1925 was to remove suspicions that he was out to play the role of the Soviet Bonaparte.
Trotsky had announced the danger of a ‘Thermidorean reaction’ for quite some time. In the 1920s, the “Democratic Centralists” (a left opposition group, led by V.M. Smirnov) had declared that Thermidor had already happened, that the working class had already lost power and the conquests of the October Revolution had already been liquidated. At that time, Trotsky had opposed their conclusions.
Indeed, he had seen the victory of the Stalin group over Bukharin and the ‘right’ in 1928–29 as a blow against the danger of Thermidor. He attacked those who condemned Stalin’s regime as Thermidor triumphant. [27] The real danger of Thermidor, he thought, came from the ‘right’ in the shape of he danger of an alliance of kulaks and NEPmen. Hence his advice to his followers that they should ally with Stalin against Bukharin if necessary, but never with Bukharin against Stalin. Thermidor Trotsky defined as a process of civil war and counter­revolution, by which power passed from one class to another. The state still held the means of production, and the bourgeoisie had not got hold of them.
In 1934–5, however, having already concluded that only a revolution could purge the Russian bureaucracy, Trotsky revised his whole conception of Thermidor. The “Democratic Centralists” had been correct in having seen Thermidor as an accomplished fact, though the lessons they had drawn had been incorrect. The initiation of the purge trials and the terror following after the murder of Kirov in 1934, plus the swing in the Comintern to the (right) politics of the ‘popular front’ now convinced him that the regime was ‘Bonapartist’, with Stalin as the equivalent of Napoleon I. Since, historically, Bonaparte came after Thermidor, it must be that Thermidor had already happened. It had begun in 1924, but had been a slow and not immediately perceptible process:
‘Today it is impossible to ignore the fact that in the Soviet Revolution as well, a shift to the right took place a long time ago, a shift entirely analogous to Thermidor, although much slower in tempo and more masked in form ... Socially the proletariat is more homogeneous than the bourgeoisie; but it contains within itself an entire series of strata which become manifest with exceptional clarity following the conquest of power, during the period when the bureaucracy and a workers’ aristocracy connected with it, begin to take form. The smashing of the Left Opposition implied in the most direct and immediate sense the transfer of power from the hands of the revolutionary vanguard into the hands of the more conservative elements among the bureaucracy and the upper crust of the working class. The year 1924 – that was the beginning of the Soviet Thermidor.’ [28]
But, if Thermidor had already happened, and a Bonapartist regime existed in Russia; and if a revolution was now needed to remove the regime – what was left of the workers’ state? In terms of the previous definitions Trotsky had used, the answer must be: Nothing at all.
In the mid-1930s, however, Trotsky did not draw the conclusion that the workers’ state in Russia had been destroyed. Rather, he changed his definition of a workers’ state, and changed his idea of Thermidor. To deal with the latter first: Thermidor, which had been defined as a process of counter-revolution, by which another class came to power, was now re-defined as a process of ‘reaction within the revolution’. No longer involving civil war etc, it was now a slow and masked process.
Thermidor was a reaction, but one based still on the achievements of 1917: the bureaucracy still based itself on the dictatorship of the proletariat. As for the second, the definition of a workers’ state, this no longer rested on the question of the rule of the proletariat itself. What counted now was the existence of nationalised property. As long as that was maintained, Russia remained a ‘degenerated workers state’:
‘The nationalisation of the land, the means of industrial production, transport and exchange, together with the monopoly of foreign trade, constitutes the basis of the Soviet social structure. Through these relations, established by the proletarian revolution, the nature of the Soviet Union as a proletarian state is for us basically defined.’ [29]
How could the working class still be said to be the ruling class in Russia, in the conditions of the Stalin period? Trotsky here drew on an analogy with the rule of capital, which has proved capable of remaining the dominant social principle under a whole variety of political regimes:
‘The social domination of a class (its dictatorship) may find extremely diverse political forms. This is attested by the entire history of the bourgeoisie from the Middle Ages to the present day. The experience of the Soviet Union is already adequate for the extension of this sociological law – with all the necessary changes – to the dictatorship of the proletariat as well ... Thus the present day domination of Stalin in no way resembles the Soviet rule during the initial years of the revolution. But this usurpation was made possible only because the social content of the dictatorship of the bureaucracy is determined by those productive relations that were created by the proletarian revolution. In this sense we may say with complete justification that the dictatorship of the proletariat found its distorted but indubitable expression in the dictatorship of the bureaucracy.’ [30]
Thus, on the one hand, a new layer of extremely privileged bureaucrats and the like has emerged in Russia, their rule personified by Stalin – a layer amounting, indeed, to a new aristocracy:
‘It is time ... to recognise ... that a new aristocracy has been formed in the Soviet Union. The October Revolution proceeded under the banner of equality. The bureaucracy is the embodiment of monstrous inequality. The Revolution destroyed the nobility. The bureaucracy creates a new gentry. The revolution destroyed titles and decorations. The new aristocracy produces marshalls and generals.’ [31]
But this aristocracy is still, in a sense, an aristocracy of labour. The nature of the state it rules is still a “workers’ state’, in so far as this ‘new aristocracy’ still defends nationalised property Hence the revolution against the bureaucracy would be a ‘political’ revolution, but not a ‘social’ revolution.
‘It is not a question this time of changing the economic foundations of society, of replacing certain forms of property with other forms. History has shown elsewhere not only social revolutions which substituted the bourgeois for the feudal regime, but also political revolutions which, without destroying the economic foundations of society, swept out an old ruling upper crust (1830 and 1848 in France, February 1917 in Russia, etc). The overthrow of the Bonapartist caste will, of course, have deep social consequences, but in itself it will be confined within the limits of political revolution.’ [32]
(4) Russia represented, at base, the continuation of planned economy’, although with the distortions associated with the retention of the commodity form in the distribution of consumer goods. Such is Trotsky’s argument in 1936.
Yet, a few years earlier, he had argued that there was no planning in Russia precisely because planning has to be democratic in form, since it demands a continuous process of mass correction by workers, who have to be free to point out the faults in planning or in a particular aspect of a plan. Otherwise is merely irrational administration. [33]
(5) Here, it is norma1ly assumed, the story stops. After 1936, Trotsky has a definite theory of the character of Russian society, to which he holds until his death in 1940 at the hands of a Stalinist agent. It is at this point, with the characterisation of Russia as a ‘degenerated workers state’, that Trotsky’s epigones stop, at any rate.
Yet it is clear that up to the moment of his death, Trotsky remained uncertain. At one time it was a matter of principle for him what one called Russia: thus membership of the Left Opposition was conditional on the acceptance of the theory of the degenerated workers’ state. But later, Trotsky was opposed to a split with the ‘anti-defencists’ (those who argued that there was no case for the defence of the Soviet Union by revolutionary socialists, on the grounds that it was no longer a workers’ state, degenerated or otherwise).
In his book, Stalin, he moves towards a new evaluation of the Russian bureaucracy, as a ruling class. Thus he writes:
‘The substance of the Thermidor was, is and could not fail to be social in character. It stood for the crystallisation of a new privileged stratum, the creation of a new substratum for the economically dominant class. There were two pretenders to this role: the petty bourgeoisie and the bureaucracy itself. They fought shoulder to shoulder (in the battle to break) the resistance of the proletarian vanguard. When that task was accomplished a savage struggle broke out between them. The bureaucracy became frightened by its isolation, its divorcement from the proletariat. Alone it could not crush the kulak nor the petty bourgeoisie that had grown and continued to grow on the basis of the NEP; it had to have the aid of the proletariat. Hence its concerted efforts to present its struggle against the petty bourgeoisie for the surplus products and for power as the struggle of the proletariat against attempts at capitalistic restoration.’ (my emphasis, CB) [34]
This formulation does not sit squarely with Trotsky’s earlier account. Here the bureaucracy is seen as struggling with the petty bourgeoisie ‘for the surplus products’ and trying to present this struggle as a fight by the workers against capitalistic restoration. Previously, this was not a matter of ‘efforts to present’ this struggle in this way: Trotsky had taken it for granted that this was the content of the struggle. The formulation is significant, given Trotsky’s own formal definition of the class struggle in another work of his last period:
‘The class struggle is nothing else than the struggle for surplus-produce. He who owns surplus-produce is master of the situation owns the wealth, owns the State, has the key to the Church, to the sciences and to the arts.’ [35]
In an article which was found in an unfinished state on Trotsky’s desk after his death, the following remarks appear:
‘The nationalisation of railways and oil fields in Mexico has of course nothing in common with socialism. It is a measure of state capitalism is a backward country which in this way seeks to defend itself on the one hand against foreign imperialism and on the other against its own proletariat. The management of railways, oil fields, etc., through labour organisations has nothing in common with workers’ control over industry, for in the essence of the matter the management is effected through the labour bureaucracy which is independent of the workers, but in return, completely dependent on the bourgeois state. This measure on the part of the ruling class pursues the aim of disciplining the working class, making it more industrious in the service of the common interests of the state, which appear on the surface to merge with the interests of the working class itself. As a matter of fact, the whole task of the bourgeoisie consists in liquidating the trade unions as organs of the class struggle and substituting in their place the trade union bureaucracy as the organ of the leadership over the workers by the bourgeois state. In these conditions, the task of the revolutionary vanguard is to conduct a struggle for the complete independence of the trade unions and for the introduction of workers’ control over the present union bureaucracy, which has been turned into the administration of railways, oil enterprises and so on.’ [36]
The formulations in the opening sentences of this discussion are entirely new for Trotsky. Might they hare been forerunners of a new theoretical formulation? We shall never know. What is clear is at they are not easily compatible with his account of nationalised industry in Russia as the evidence for a ‘workers’ state’.
It would, obviously, be ridiculous to make too much of any of this. Trotsky himself seems to have remained convinced that the regime in Russia was very unstable. And that very instability of the regime, he suggested, provided a crucial reason for not calling the bureaucracy a ruling class: its collapse was imminent:
‘A totalitarian regime, whether of Stalinist or fascist type, by its very essence can be only a temporary transitional regime. Naked dictatorship in history has generally been the product and symptom of an especially severe social crisis, and not at all of a stable regime. Severe crisis cannot be a permanent condition of society. A totalitarian state is capable of suppressing real contradictions during a certain period, but it is incapable of perpetuating itself. The monstrous purges in the USSR are most convincing testimony of the fact that Soviet society organically tends towards ejection of the bureaucracy. Symptomatic of this coming death agony, by the sweep and monstrous fraudulence of his purge, Stalin testifies to nothing else but the incapacity of the bureaucracy to transform itself into a stable ruling class. Might we not place ourselves in a ludicrous position if we affixed to the Bonapartist oligarchy the nomenclature of a new ruling class just a few years or even a few months prior to its inglorious downfall?’ [37]
The future of the ‘Bonapartist’ regime would most certainly only be a brief one. Its future could be posed in terms of a definite alternative:
‘... either the bureaucracy, becoming ever more the organ of the world bourgeoisie within the workers’ state, will overthrow the new forms of property (state ownership, CB) and plunge the country back to capitalism; or the working class will crush the bureaucracy and open the way to socialism.’ [38]
 
Trotsky’s Theory: Critique
Trotsky’s characterisation of Russia as a “degenerated workers’ state”, together with his arguments for this formulation, are no longer simply the property of the revolutionary wing of the socialist movement, nor of “Trotskyism”. The arguments have been taken up by a wing of the reformist, “Euro-communist” current in the West European Communist Parties, who – precisely because they wish to demonstrate their “democratic” credentials – wish to distance themselves, at least partially, from the regimes in Russia and other East European countries. The arguments have also been deployed by conventional academic sociologists and political scientists.
I shall argue that Trotsky’s characterisation of Russian society is quite inadequate. Indeed, those who still hold to it today are seriously impeded from understanding, not only modern Russia, but the whole tendency of world development.
 
A workers’ state?
As we have seen, Trotsky’s reasons for calling Russia a “degenerated workers’ at changed in the 1930s. His criteria alter: and one set of criteria are very different from the other. According to his first approach, what made Russia a “workers’ state” was the control which the working class exerted over the state. Hence a “degenerated workers’ state” was one where, although direct control over the state has fallen out of the hands of the working class, it can still be recovered by means of (relatively) peaceful reform. The institutions through which the working class can exercise direct control over the state still exist, and all that is required is that the workers use those institutions fully.
According to the second approach, however, what makes Russia a “workers’ state” is the continuing existence of nationalised property in industry. Trotsky no longer assumes that the workers can win control by means of reforms: he insists that a revolution is needed. The continuance of state property, alone, is now the criterion for a “workers’ state.”
The two approaches are contradictory, and incompatible. The first one is completely in line with previous Marxist theorising about the social character of state power; the second is not. Yet it is the second approach which has become identified with “Trotskyism”, and which must obviously be the focus of discussion.
If we follow the second approach, Marxist theory must be revised. The classic Marxist tradition must be wrong in some of its fundamental assumptions. For instance, The Communist Manifesto of 1848 declared that “the first step in the revolution by the working class is to raise the proletariat to the position of the ruling class.” In line with this thought, Marx and Engels declared that the Paris Commune of 1871 was an example of the “dictatorship of the proletariat” (i.e., it was a “workers’ state”). Yet the Paris Commune nationalized nothing. Indeed, the 1917 revolution in Russia, and the Bolshevik dictatorship of 1917–18 could not be seen as anything to do with a “workers’ state”, for it was not till some time after the October uprising that the means of production in industry were statified. And the biggest extension of state ownership occurred under Stalin, from 1929 onwards, when the peasants lost their land and the private sector in small manufacture and in trade was wiped out.
According to this second approach of Trotsky’s, the working class can be the ruling class in society, without having any direct control over the means of production or the state. Indeed, the working class is explicitly declared to need a revolution to win such control. The sole ground for declaring that the working class is still the ruling class is that the state legally owns the means of production. Thus the working class can be a ruling class without having any power.
 
The ‘political’ revolution
In The Revolution Betrayed, Trotsky considers two possible futures for the Russian regime. The first is that the Stalinist bureaucracy is overthrown by a revolutionary socialist party; the second is that a bourgeois party overthrows the ruling Soviet caste. In the first case, he suggests, the party would begin with the restoration of democracy in the trade unions and Soviets, and with the restoration of freedom of Soviet parties. It would purge the state apparatus, place massive limits on inequalities in income, open up public life to free discussion, etc. But, as far as property relations are concerned, revolutionary measures would not be needed – planned economy would be maintained, although with major reforms. In the second case, a bourgeois party would find plenty of servants for itself in the existing bureaucracy. It might purge the state apparatus, but not as thoroughly as a revolutionary party would. Its chief task would be the restoration of private property in the means of production. Hence, Trotsky concludes, a workers’ revolution would be a ‘political’ revolution only; while a bourgeois counter-revolution would be a ‘social counter-revolution’. The conclusion, of course, is entirely consistent with his argument that state property defines Russia as a (degenerated) workers’ state.
Let us leave aside the (perhaps metaphysical) question as to whether, in terms of Marxist theory, there can be a ‘political revolution’ in a workers’ state. Such events, as Trotsky says, are relative commonplace in the history of capitalist class society. Classically, reference can be made to the French ‘revolutions’ of 1830 or 1848: here, while the form of government changed to greater or lesser degree, the form of the state remained the same. In Engels’ term, the state remained ‘special bodies of men, prisons, etc.’ independent of the people and serving the capitalist class. Similarly, and more extremely, with Hitler’s access to power in 1933. The institutions of the state, and their independence from popular control, remained broadly the same.
As Trotsky remarks, were a ‘bourgeoisie’ to come to power in Russia, it could use the existing state institutions, the police, the regular army, be prison system, etc.
What of a workers’ revolution in Russia? It clearly could not use the GPU, the regular army, the bureaucracy, either as a means to come to power, nor as a means of holding power. It would, in Lenin’s phrase, have to smash the existing state institutions, and develop new ones (workers’ councils, people’s militia, etc) suitable to its rule. Trotsky avoids this question by saying ‘Such a party would begin with the restoration of democracy in the trade unions and the Soviets. But there are no trade unions and Soviets in Russia. Even the non-revolutionary workers’ movement in Poland, Solidarity, in 1980 has been forced to develop new trade unions, not to reform the state’s official ‘trade unions’. A workers’ revolutionary party in Russia would face the task, not of reforming the existing state institutions, but of destroying them and replacing them with quite different institutions. It is difficult to see how a state that must be smashed by the working class could be a ‘workers’ state’.
The argument that, just as capitalism is compatible with a variety of forms of political rule (e.g. military government, fascist government, ‘bourgeois-democratic’ government, etc.), so too socialism is compatible with a variety of state forms is one that Trotsky used, and which have been taken up by other writers following in his footsteps – e.g. David Purdy of the Communist Party of Great Britain. [39] (Poor old Trotsky must be spinning in his grave at the thought of some of his new-found supporters) The clear implication of this argument is that ‘socialism’ has no necessary connection with any form of working-class power an idea which has certainly gained a good deal of currency since the development of Stalin’s rule in Russia, but an idea, equally, which is very much opposed to the revolutionary Marxism of Marx himself, of Engels, Lenin, Luxemburg and indeed Trotsky himself.
Indeed, Trotsky’s conclusion, that a merely ‘political’ revolution is needed in Russia – i.e. not a ‘social’ revolution – is a very dubious one. [A] The agrarian revolution, through which the feudal estates fell into peasant hands and through which the serfs became free peasants, was a social revolution. A revolution in Russia would, assuredly, involve the transformation of the collective farms into the real property of the collective farmers, and the ending of compulsory deliveries by the farmers to the state. Would not this be a ‘social’ revolution?
A ‘political’ revolution assumes that – while individuals, groups or ruling layers change – the same social class retains power. Those who now hold power in Russia, therefore, are of the same social class as the workers: the bureaucrats, the managers, the heads of the police apparatus, etc are workers. Hence, there is no class struggle in Russia. The trouble with this conclusion is that it is the conclusion drawn, not by Trotsky, but by Joseph Stalin – whom Trotsky attacked savagely for this nonsensical assertion.
 
A ruling class?
Trotsky’s argument depends on the validity of the assertion that the ruling bureaucracy in Russia does not constitute a ruling class, but only a ‘parasitic caste’. Will this argument stand up?
First, the term ‘caste’ is a very inappropriate term. A class is, in Marxist terms, a group of people occupying a definite place in the process of social production, in opposition to another class. A caste on the other hand, is a juridical group. Castes and classes, in fact, may overlap. A caste is an extreme version of Max Weber’s ‘status group’. A caste is the outcome of the relative immobility of the economy, of a rigid division of labour and a very slow rate of development of society’s productive forces. Hence, typically, the caste system is a feature of a relatively static society, such as pre-industrial and pre-capitalist India. It is hardly an appropriate term for the group of party leaders and officials, managers and bureaucrats who steered the Russian economy through the fantastic convulsions and economic growth of the period of forced industrialisation and forcible collectivisation of agriculture. A caste is a rigidly structured group, resistant to social mobility, whereas in the 1930s – the period of Trotsky’s analysis – the bureaucracy experienced an immense turnover of personnel in the purges. It was never a clearly demarcated group of people, marked off from the rest of the population by juridical and legal privileges.
Never mind: the terminology is not important. Trotsky was casting around for an image or analogy through which he could express the fundamental idea, which was that the ruling group in Russia was not a class. It is this idea which has to be considered.
Much more significant is Trotsky’s characterisation of the bureaucracy as ‘parasitic’. The bureaucracy, he insisted, played no independent role in production. Its only specific ‘interest’ as a group lay in is concern with its material privileges: it had an interest in maintaining inequalities in the sphere of distribution. Russian management, Mandel repeats, is fundamentally concerned to “maximise income” for itself (Critique, 3, p. 26). Mande1 also asserts that ‘the maximisation of private consumption interests of the management bureaucracy is ‘the main motor for the realisation of the plan.’ (Ibid., p. 12) Thus, the bonuses etc available to managers who fulfil and over-fulfil the plan targets are a kind of incentive system which keeps the plan rolling along.
Now there is no question but that the Russian bureaucracy is materially privileged. This is widely documented, and is the subject of considerable complaint by ordinary Russian citizens. It is also the source of many subversive jokes in Russia and the other East European countries. What seems more doubtful, however, is the idea that the bureaucracy’s interests in material privilege explain their behaviour. The reality of the situation appears to be, surely, that they play a very important role in the whole social reproduction process. It is not surprising that those who control the process of production in Russia, who formulate the plan targets and enforce them on the rest of society, who extract surpluses from the workers and collective farmers and determine how these surpluses are to be used, should also ‘compensate’ themselves for their trouble with a much higher standard of living. But they can only do so, precisely because they do control the production process, formulate and enforce plan targets, extract surpluses, determine investment patterns, and so on. And such of this activity of theirs cannot be explained in terms of their interests in material consumption for themselves.
The central objectives of the Five Year Plans, ever since 1928, have been concerned with the expansion of heavy industry, of the accumulation of means of production. What the Russian working class was forced to expand was not the production of furs and perfumes and Rolls Royce cars, but steel mills, tanks, aircraft, nuclear weapons, chemicals plants and the like. No economy – not even Hitler’s Third Reich – has ever so totally subordinated all other production goals to the single-minded pursuit of the expansion of capital goods industries, no other economy has ever so strongly enforced the ‘guns not butter’ economy on its population. The Russian bureaucracy under Stalin forced down the living standards of the great mass of the working class and the rural population alike, in the interests of crash industrialisation. None of this can possibly be explained in terms of the bureaucracy’s interest in mere ‘material privilege’ and ‘luxury’. Why, after all, did Russia succeed in becoming the world’s second-ranking industrial power? How did economic development happen? Was it achieved in spite of the ruling bureaucracy? As Ticktin remarks (Critique, 1, p. 35): ‘Growth does not happen mystically’. For such an enormous process of industrialisation to be carried on, and the whole economic and social life of Russia to be so totally subordinated to it, someone had to direct that process, and that someone was the ruling order. Far from playing no role in the process of production, the Russian bureaucracy clearly played an absolutely fundamental role.
The issue is not simply that the ‘elite’ in Russia gets consumer privileges (though of course it does) but that the ‘elite’ is in control of the economic goals of the society. In any case, the manager’s interests are not simply those of getting bigger bonuses: success in stepping up production in his factory gives the manager the chance for promotion, to a position with more power. That matters is his position from which privileges flow. The great majority of the surpluses produced by the Russian labour-force do not flow into luxury production or acquisition: they are re-invested in further economic expansion. The surplus product is administered by the bureaucracy, and the workers have no say in this administration. When Mandel asks, ‘Why doesn’t the “central administrative elite” admit workers’ control and social control over the planning mechanism, if not because it is afraid of losing its material privileges?’ he supplies a silly answer to a good question. Is ‘fear of losing material privileges’ the only reason why the military wing resists the development of consumer goods industries, which might slow down the Russian arms industries?
To emphasise merely the privileged position of the bureaucracy in the field of consumption and distribution of consumer goods is to ignore, totally, questions about the content of the ‘plan’ which the bureaucracy enforces on Russian society. Ticktin’s comment seems perfectly apt:
‘In so far as they act in their own self interest it is mediated by their occupation which amounts to administering the society. A member of the capitalist class acts in his own interests when he accumulates surplus value. The essential point is that they perform a certain social function in production which leads to the formation of a production relation ... they do perform an essential role in the existing system. If they were removed there would be either total collapse or another system.’ (Critique, 1, 1973, p. 3)
In terms of their function, in short, it is difficult to see how it can be denied that the Russian rulers form a class, in opposition to other classes – in particular, in opposition to the working class in industry and the collective farmers. They are much more than mere ‘parasites’.
In any case, while the bureaucracy does play a role in the process of distributing consumer goods (unequally) among the Russian citizenry, it is odd for a Marxist to focus on distributional relations. It was Marx’s argument – in contradistinction to ‘bourgeois political economy’ – that the starting place for an understanding of relations of distribution was the social relations of production existing in a society:
‘Distribution is itself a product of production, not only in its object, in that only the results of production can be distributed, but also in its form, in that the specific kind of participation in production determines the specific form of distribution, i.e. the pattern of participation in distribution ...
‘In the shallowest conception, distribution appears as the distribution of products, and hence as further removed from and quasi-independent of production. But before distribution can be the distribution of products, it is: (1) the distribution of the instruments of production, and (2) which is a further specification of the same relation, the distribution of the members of the society among the different forms of production. (Subsumption of the individuals under specific relations of production.) The distribution of products is evidently only a result of this distribution, which is comprised within the process of production itself and determines the structure oi production. To examine production while disregarding this internal distribution within it is obviously an empty abstraction.’ [40]
In line with this, we can then ask the following questions about the role of the Russian bureaucracy in the economy:
‘Does the bureaucracy only administer the distribution of the means of consumption among the people, or does it also administer the distribution of the people in the process of production? Does the bureaucracy exercise a monopoly over the control of distribution only, or over the control of the means of production as well? Does it ration means of consumption only or does it also distribute the total labour time of society between accumulation and consumption, between the production of means of production and that of means of consumption? Does not the bureaucracy reproduce the scarcity of the means of consumption, and thus certain relations of distribution? Do the relations of production prevailing in Russia not determine the relations of distribution which comprise a part of them?’ [41]
And the answers to all these questions must surely be, ‘yes’. In which case, in terms of Marxist thought, we have undeniably declared the Russian bureaucracy to play the role of a ruling class. It plays a distinctive role, in opposition to and in domination over, other classes, within a definite system of social production and reproduction.
This conclusion, that Russia has a ruling class, has met with various objections, to which we must turn in a moment. First, let us clear up one potential confusion between the argument here, and that put forward by M. Djilas in The New Class. Djilas also suggests that there is a class in power in Russia, but defines it as follows:
‘The new class may be said to be made up of those who have special privileges and economic preferences because of the administrative monopoly which they hold ... Membership in the new party class or political bureaucracy is reflected in larger economic and material goods and privileges than society should normally grant for such functions.’
Here the emphasis falls – as in Trotsky’s and Mandel’s analysis – on the ‘perks of office’ as the key element in the definition of the ‘new class’. As Alec Nove [42] points out, this approach is associated with a quite restricted, and narrow, definition of the surplus product in Russia – the surplus is that part of production that the ‘new class’ diverts to its own personal use. In reality, despite the difference in terminology (what Trotsky calls a ‘caste’, Djilas calls a ‘class’), Djilas’s formulation is not very different from Trotsky’s. On the other hand, in the conception for which I am arguing here, the ‘surplus’ includes all the ‘profit’ (including the turnover tax) generated by productive labour and appropriated by the state. This surplus is used for a variety of purposes, ranging from the construction of hospitals and schools, through industrial investment, to the production of intercontinental ballistic missiles. It is the production, extraction and use of this total surplus product that is crucial; it is this which is monopolised by the party apparatus, the bureaucracy, the ruling group, the elite, the ruling class, or whatever term we prefer.
One objection to the idea that there are classes in Russia, and thus that there is a ruling class, comes from the ‘Weberian’ school of sociology. Thus Parkin [43] argues that Eastern bloc countries are not class stratified because political rather than market criteria determine distribution patterns. Similarly, Giddens [44] argues that because the economy is subordinated and under the control of the polity the market is not allowed free play and thus ‘class structuration’ cannot occur. The market is not the agency of distribution of rewards, hence these societies are not class societies. Similarly Goldthorpe:
‘In Soviet society the economy operates within a monistic or totalitarian political order and is, in principle at least, totally planned, whereas in advanced Western societies political power is significantly less concentrated and the economy is planned in a far less centralised and detailed way. From this it results that in the West economic, and specifically market forces act as the crucial stratifying agency within society. They are, one could say, the major source of social inequality. And consequently, the class situation of individuals and groups, understood in terms of their economic power and resources, tends to be the most important single determinant of their general life-chances. That is why we can usefully speak of Western industrial society as being class stratified. However in the case of Soviet society, market forces cannot be held to play a comparable role in the stratification process. These forces of course, and differences in economic power and resources between individuals and groups have, as in the West, far-reaching social and human consequences. But, one would argue, to a significantly greater degree than in the West, stratification in Soviet society is subject to political regulation; market forces are not permitted to have the primacy of the degree of autonomy in this respect that they have even in a managed” capitalist society.’ [45]
The difficulty with this approach is not that the authors in question are incorrect in their empirical assessment of the situation. But, they are working entirely within a Weberian framework. In that framework, as Weber himself emphasised, the term ‘class’ is indissolubly tied to the term ‘market’. In non-market situations, the typical form of stratification is the ‘status-group’ (German: Stand, or ‘estate’). The whole ‘Weberian’ discussion of stratification is focussed on the sphere of distributional inequalities, rather than on relationships within production. By definition, therefore, the absence of markets immediately means that there is an absence of classes. Hence Weber, quite consistently with his theory, declares that slaves did not constitute a ‘class’ in his (restricted) sense. This whole ‘Weberian’ argument is irrelevant, in a sense, to the discussion here, since the very terms of the discussion are quite different: strictly, Weberianism cannot even recognise the issue of exploitation, the production and use of surplus product, etc. [B] It would also be entirely logical for a consistent Weberian to deny the existence of ‘classes’ in medieval Europe (and especially in the countryside), in Greece and Rome (except where trade relations are the focus of attention), in Inca Peru and Pharaonic Egypt, etc., etc.
 
Property Relations
The centre of Trotsky’s argument for the “workers’ state’ character of Russia is his account of property relations. Private property in the means of production has not been restored, he says, hence – although “degenerated” – the regime still retains some of the gains of the 1917 revolution and is still a “workers’ state”. Because private property has not been restored in Russia, the rulers of Russia cannot be counted a class. Relations between the bureaucracy and the working class cannot be class relations, cannot be relations of exploitation. Hence Trotsky’s use of the term ‘caste’ to define the bureaucracy, and his account of its relation to society as one of ‘parasitism’.
Must there be private property – in the sense of property belonging legally to individuals – for there to be class relations and class exploitation? Is state property evidence of the absence of classes? The answer, surely, is no.
In the Middle Ages, in Europe, the largest landowner was the Catholic Church. The Church held enormous tracts of land, on which hundreds of thousands of peasants worked. The relations between the Church and ‘its’ peasants were exactly the same a as those existing between the owners of the feudal manors and their peasants. By means of labour-services, rent in kind and rent in money, both Church and feudal lord alike forced the peasantry to contribute surplus labour and surplus products. Both Church and lord exploited the peasantry. Both were feudal. Yet no bishop or cardinal of the Church had any ‘private’ property rights. They exploited the peasantry by virtue of their office in the Church, which was the collective owner of the land, and the collective exploiter of the rural population. The bishop or cardinal could not bequeath his property rights, which attached to his office, to his children – indeed, he wasn’t even supposed to have any children! In the sense in which Trotsky uses the term ‘private property’, the Church lands were not private property. Yet they were clearly organised on the basis of feudal exploitation. It thus appears that feudal relations of production were capable of expression in terms of two juridically distinct forms of property: one private, the other institutional. In this case, what is fundamental are the relations of production; the juridical relations are secondary. From the standpoint of the peasantry, and of their struggle against their lords, the juridical distinction is a very secondary one.
Within Marx’s writings, the idea of class society without “private ownership” is clearly recognised. If it is not developed much, it is quite likely because Marx (and Engels) took it for granted. What Marx termed the “Asiatic mode of production” – a mode of production by no means confined to Asia – is identified and discussed. It is a notion that can usefully be applied to a variety of civilisations, including Egypt under the Pharoahs, Sumerian civilization, the pre-Hellenic Greek states, Inca Peru, etc. Also, within what Marx terms the Ancient mode of production (that characterising the classical period of Greece and Rome) slavery took both “private” and “state” forms – the former in Athens, the latter in Sparta.
It is, of course, true that questions of private rather than state or institutional ownership have been given considerable emphasis in Marxist theory. Several reasons for this may be identified. First, Marx developed his theory and method in the course of a study of western societies, in which – both in pre-capitalist Europe, and in the capitalist society of his own time – private ownership appeared to be the major social and economic institution around which social conflicts were structured. (Though it is still remarkable how little importance Marx gave to the question of juridical ownership in the three volumes of Capital, his master work.) Secondly, the historical fate of “Marxism” has to be considered. After Marx and Engels died, “Marxism” became the creed of the (reformist) Second International, of social democratic parties who identified the expansion of state activity and state ownership with the expansion of "socialism”. And the Russian regime itself (due to its peculiar origins in a workers’ revolution) adopted “Marxism” as a state ideology, in which it was obviously convenient to draw the essentially apologetic assumption that “class antagonism can emerge only from conflicts around ownership”: there is no private ownership in Russia, ergo Russia is a society characterised by social harmony, ergo anyone who fundamentally disagrees with the regime is a “deviant” element.
Engels, it is true, constructed his account of the rise of class division and of the emergence of the state totally around the notion of the development of private property. His discussion, however, is totally centred on European developments, saying not a word about “Asiatic” production; and his account was constructed before the emergence of the archaeological evidence concerning the pre-Hellenic Greek civilisations of Mycenae, etc. [46]
Both Marx and Engels, however, recognised that class exploitation can exist within both private and institutional (state) forms – and, crucially, in respect of capitalist societies. Both of them discuss the concept of ‘state capital’. [47] It was Marx’s argument that to try to discuss ‘private property’ in isolation from the social relations of production was to attempt discussion of meaningless abstractions. This was the heart of his critique of Proudhon’s attempt to define private property:
‘In each historical epoch, property has developed differently and under a set of entirely different social relations. Thus to define bourgeois property is nothing less than to give an exposition of all the social relations of bourgeois production. To try to give a definition of property as of an independent relation, a category apart – an abstract eternal idea – can be nothing but an illusion of metaphysics or jurisprudence.’ [48]
In respect of the analysis of ‘ownership’, we may also draw on the observations of writers in the ‘Althusserian’ school (a school, admittedly, whose work has been somewhat lacking in general value). Although not original in their arguments, writers like Poulantzas, Carchedi and Bettelheim have correctly emphasised that the analysis of class in terms of legal ownership relations is fundamentally sterile. Poulantzas, for example, in Classes in Contemporary Capitalism, insists that the bourgeoisie must be defined, not in terms of the formal legal categories of ownership, but in terms of the substantive dimensions which characterise the social relations of production. Of these, Poulantzas distinguishes two dimensions of especial significance:

Firstly, ‘economic ownership’, defined as ‘real economic control of the means of production, i.e. the power to assign the means of production to given uses and so to dispose of the products obtained’. This, he suggests needs to be distinguished from legal ownership, sanctioned by law and belonging to the ‘superstructure’. ‘Economic ownership’ and ‘legal ownership’ may or may not coincide.
 
Secondly, ‘possession’, or the capacity to put the means of production into operation.

On these grounds, Poulantzas concludes that the managerial salariat in western capitalist industry should be counted among the members of the bourgeoisie, even though ‘economic ownership’ and ‘possession’ are partially dissociated. [50] On exactly the same grounds, we may count the ruling stratum in Russia as a ruling class.
Nonetheless, those who oppose the application of the term ‘class’ to the situation of the rulers of Russia and other East European societies (and, by extension, to China and other ‘Third World’ countries) continue to emphasise the absence of private ownership of the means of production as if it were the crucial question. Thus, for example, Mary McAuley:
‘One of the characteristics of a ruling class – as spelt out by Marx – is its tendency to perpetuate itself, to pass its wealth and privileges on to its children.’ [51]
[C]
and
‘The inheritance of wealth and property is accepted by Marxists as one of the features of a class society, one of the means by which class divisions are preserved.’
To which one has to say, quite simply, that Mary McAuley has muddled up Marxist and Weberian modes of analysis.
It is, of course, true that the individual member of the ruling group in Russia does not own the means of means of production in Russia. Hence be definition, he cannot pass this on to his children. In this individual sense, clearly there is not a hereditary relation to property or to position. (It might be noted that this makes the use of the term ‘caste’ especially inappropriate.) Brezhnev’s son will not become the party’s General Secretary when Leonid kicks the bucket. All he will inherit will be a rather useful set of social connections, a very favourable set of educational experiences, and a bundle of consumer privileges – but not a portfolio of stocks and shares in Russian industry. The whole privileged stratum in Russia does pass on its social advantages to its children, much as Social Classes I and II in Britain do, but obviously without the inheritance of property in the means of production. To the degree that, since Stalin, the ruling stratum has attained greater stability and security, this inheritance of social and educational advantage has become more marked (just as the rate of social mobility has slowed down).
In any case, this is not fundamentally the issue. In Britain, the chairmen and directors of nationalised industries cannot pass on their positions to their children, yet on any count they would be included by “Marxists” in the British “ruling class”.
The key question remains that of the social relations of production, not those of distribution or of recruitment to ruling positions. The question of how individuals enter the ruling group is secondary in significance to the question, what do they do as rulers, and what are their relations with the rest of society?
In Russia, the state owns the means of production. The decisive question in this circumstance, is what is the nature of the state, what are its political processes; and its power relations, etc – for these are, with state ownership, an essential determinants of the relations of production. If the state is the legal repository of the means of production, who ‘owns’ the state? What is at issue is not the position and situation of the individual bureaucrat, but that of the ruling group as a collectivity. This ruling group, beyond a doubt, disposes of the means of production in Russia, maintaining the majority of society in a condition of dispossession. The point is made very clearly by Claude Lefort:
‘... the bureaucrats form a class only by reason of the fact that their functions and their rules differentiate them collectively from the exploited classes, only because they are interlinked with a directing centre which decides what is produced.’
It is because the production nations of Russian society are dominated by the state, with workers reduced to simple ‘executants’ of orders, that the bureaucrats have a class position:
‘It is not as individual actors that they weave the network of class relations; it is the bureaucratic class in its generality ... by reason of the existing structure of production which converts the activities of individual bureaucrats (privileged activities among other such) into class activities ... The bureaucratic community is not guaranteed by the mechanism of economic activities; it is established by the integration of the bureaucrats around the state, in the total discipline with regard to the directing apparatus. without this state. Without this apparatus, the bureaucracy is nothing.’ (Claude Lefort, Elements d’une critique de la bureaucratie, Geneva 1971, cit. Alec Nove, Is there a ruling class in Russia? in Political Economy and Soviet Socialism, 1979, p. 202.)
What we have in the case of the system in Russia etc. is not a state which ‘represents’ a ruling class – in the sense that Marxists have argued (often rather crudely) that the state in Western capitalism represents the interests of a (relatively separate) capitalist class – we have rather a state which is the ruling class. It is the state itself which directly exploits the working population, extracting surplus products from them, disposing of those surplus products as it sees fit, and maintaining its power over the society it rules and exploits. What the precise social character of that ruling class is, of course, remains still to be determined (see below).
It may be objected, of course, that the precise boundaries of this ‘class’ are difficult to determine. It would be ridiculous to treat every petty clerk and official as a member of the ‘ruling class’. Many such officials are not even ‘privileged’ in material terms by comparison with the better-paid skilled workers, especially those working in the (privileged) defence industries. Since the whole state mechanism is organised as a pyramidal bureaucracy, it is clearly those at the ‘top’ of the pyramid who most clearly form – as individuals – the members of the Russian ruling class. There is one, centrally administered hierarchy controlled by the party leadership, in which personal status and power depend on rank. The centralised, disciplined party selects its own cadres, This function, as Alec Nove points out, is carried out by the personnel or establishment department of the party Central Committee. In this light, we can broadly define the personnel of the ruling class in Russia as those holding appointments deemed significant enough to figure on the Central Committee’s establishment list – the Nomenklatura, or, quite literally, the ‘establishment’:
In the USSR, despite distinctions between party, government, social organisations, etc., there is an important sense in which all are part of one great single hierarchy. The common link is the system of nomenklatura. This is the great list of appointments of any importance in any sphere of Soviet life and a list of persons fit to hold them, together with the designation of the party committee in whose patronage the given appointment is. The party’s personnel departments assign people to jobs in all the subhierarchies. It is as if the establishment division of the British Treasury guided or approved all appointments, from the editorship of a provincial newspaper or a trade union secretaryship in Scotland up to a ministerial appointment and down to a managerial post in the Midlands. [52]
Thus, it would be reasonable to treat the boundaries of the nomenklatura as the boundaries of the ruling class. In any case, the fact that the definition of boundaries between one class and another is empirically difficult in Russia is neither here nor there: social science has exactly the same kinds of problems with boundary definitions in respect of the analysis of classes in Western societies. Imprecision in the definition of margins is not an argument against class analysis; it is merely an accepted area of difficulty in conducting such empirical analysis.
 
A ‘transitional’ society?
To return to Trotsky. Part of his argument was that Russia was a society in ‘transition’ from capitalism to socialism, whose future was still undecided. The bureaucracy’s rule represented, for Trotsky, the growing danger that Russia might experience the restoration of capitalism (meaning, for Trotsky, the restoration of private ownership of the means of production). The Stalinist bureaucracy represented the first step towards such a capitalist restoration:
‘Without the aid of a proletarian revolution in the West, he (Lenin, CB) reiterated time and again, restoration is unavoidable in Russia. He was not mistaken: the Stalinist bureaucracy is nothing else than the first stage of bourgeois restoration.’ [53]
As a ‘transitional’ society, Mandel suggests, Russia has less ‘structural stability, or fixity’ than one of the historically progressive modes of production. It may regress to the old system (private capitalism) or advance to the new (socialism under workers’ power). [54] Trotsky’s whole account of Russia, similarly, was founded on a powerful sense of its massive instability: he compared. it, indeed, to a pyramid standing on its head, certain to topple over either in the direction of workers’ revolution or in the direction of capitalist restoration. The war, he predicted, would settle its fate:
‘In the heated atmosphere of war one can expect sharp turns towards individualistic principles in agriculture and in handicraft industry, towards the attraction of foreign and “allied” capital, breaks in the monopoly of foreign trade, the weakening of governmental control over trusts, their conflicts with workers, etc. In the political sphere these processes may mean the completion of Bonapartism with the corresponding change or a number of changes in property relations. In other words, in the case of a protracted war accompanied by the passivity of the world proletariat the internal social contradictions in the USSR not only might lead but would have to lead to a bourgeois-Bonapartist counter-revolution.’ [55]
Part of Trotsky’s argument against calling the bureaucracy a class was precisely his expectation that the existing system could not last in Russia for long. Yet more than forty years have passed since Trotsky murder, and the system has survived and expanded. Its internal instability, on which Trotsky’s theory is predicated, looks decidedly absent!
The whole analogy between the bureaucracy and ‘Bonapartism’, on which Trotsky’ s account rested, was plausible at one time. The idea that the state in Russia was balancing between great autonomous social forces, especially the working class and peasantry, living off the contradiction between these social forces and maintaining its privileged position thereby, does (broadly) fit a period in post-1917 Russian history. It makes sense – for the 1920s. This was the period when the state was in a relation of permanent tension with the masses of the independent peasantry, when (especially before 1926, and the shift towards industrialisation) the state was not imposing any particular production goals on Russian society other than simple economic ‘recovery’. It does not make sense after 1928, when the state systematically began to attack the peasantry, and especially from 1929-30, when the state took away the peasants’ land. Nor does it make sense after 1928, when the First Five-Year Plan began to be operated, and especially from 1929, when the Plan was ratified and then had its targets raised. Neither of these developments – the forcible collectivisation of agriculture, or the forced industrialisation – shook the power of the central political apparatus of Russia; rather, that apparatus strengthened its control over society through these developments.
Is Russian society ‘transitional’? Are its institutions – as in a classic situation of ‘dual power’ – ‘grouped around antagonistic power-centres’ whose relations with each other ‘are not regulated by legitimate and universally recognised mechanisms but by a more or less open struggle’? Is Russia on the brink of a restoration of private capitalist ownership? Such a view, perhaps, could be upheld in relation to Russia in the 1920s, when a disastrous imbalance between town and country, between industry and agriculture, clearly could not be maintained for ever. But not thereafter. Forced collectivisation and industrialization gave the state power its own economic base, forcing into existence a division of labour and a set of class relations in Russia which – despite the shocks of the Second World War – proved capable of being integrated into a unified system of social institutions, a pattern of social relations of production which have to date demonstrated their capacity to reproduce themselves. It is surely the relative stability of Stalinist and post-Stalinist Russia which needs to be emphasised, not its permanent instability. From the end of the 1920s, the Russian bureaucracy can no longer be adequately represented as ‘balancing’ between the working class and the peasantry: it attacked both, simultaneously, without an attack on one class involving it in concessions to the other. Both classes were deprived of their particular means of institutional defence against the regime’s exactions: the peasantry lost their control over the land, and the working class lost the tattered remnants of its trade unions and legally sanctioned protections of working conditions.
In this light, Trotsky’s argument that the maintenance of a state form of property in Russia is due to the bureaucracy’s fear of the working class appears extraordinary:
‘It (the bureaucracy) continues to preserve State property only to the extent that it fears the proletariat. This saving fear is nourished and supported by the illegal party of Bolshevik-Leninists, which is the most conscious expression of the socialist tendencies opposing that bourgeois reaction with which the Thermidorean bureaucracy is completely saturated. As a conscious political force the bureaucracy has betrayed the revolution. But a victorious revolution is fortunately not only a programme and a banner, not only political institutions, but also a system of social relations. To betray it is not enough. You have to overthrow it.’ [56]
Somehow, the working class has been strong enough to force the bureaucracy not to legalise private property, yet that same working class was not strong enough to prevent the loss of its entire right to independent trade unions, not strong enough to prevent its standard of living from being massively depressed, not strong enough to stop millions of its numbers from being sentenced to long sentences in slave labour camps ... The argument is ridiculous, yet is necessary to Trotsky’s assertion that the existence of state property is a proof of the existence of a “workers’ state”.
The truth of the matter is that in Russia, where and ‘politics’ are fused together inextricably, the political expropriation of the mass of the population is also its economic expropriation. With state property absolutely predominant, political and economic power relations are one and the same.
 
A ‘planned society’?
It is sometimes alleged, in support of the “workers’ state’ hypothesis, that Russia has a ‘planned economy’. But does it? There are, it is true, people employed as ‘planners’. And, they issue directives to industries. But, does this amount to ‘planning’? On some occasions Trotsky himself seemed to believe so, on others not. What is clear is that ‘planning’ as an organised activity is of declining significance in the Russian economy. Each successive ‘Plan’ in the 1930s was shorter than the previous one. Since 1945, indeed, there is no evidence that any kind of ‘plan’ has in fact been constructed, in the sense of a detailed specification of inputs and outputs. (Cf. Grossman in Problems of Communism, March–April 1976). In the 1930s, the Plans themselves were not even internally consistent, even in terms of the gross magnitudes they assumed (cf. Hunter, Slavic Review, vol. 32, 1973). The First Five Year Plan, to cite a particularly glaring instance, assumed a rise in popular living standards The Plan targets, in any case, have never been implemented: while it has been characteristic that planned growth in production of means of production has been quite regularly exceeded [D], planned growth in housing and in means of consumption has not been anything like achieved. All that can be claimed for the Russian economy, with any truth, is that it has grown, though with increasing difficulty, and not by any means as fast as the best performances in the capitalist west (e.g. Japan, West Germany); and that the ‘planners’ maintain an unyielding and unplanned commitment to heavy industry and armaments as priority sectors, to whose growth everything else is subordinated. The Russian economy may reasonably be called a non-market administered economy, but by no means a planned economy.
In any case, to treat the existence of a ‘plan’, without reference to its content, is hardly a demonstration of the “workers’ state” character of the economy. After all, Hitler’s destruction of the Jews in Germany and Eastern Europe was a ‘planned’ operation, carried out with bureaucratic meticulousness. The whole argument about the ‘planned’ character of the Russian economy totally ignores the crucial issue: to what ends was ‘planning’ carried out, in what ‘interest’?
 
Political Consequences
Trotsky’s analysis have an air of unreality at times. In the early 1930s, he still refers to the existence of ‘capitalist’ tendencies among the peasantry, at the very time that millions were dying of starvation, and the state was exacting massive ‘tribute’ from the collective farms, exporting grain taken from the farms, etc. He praises the achievements of the Five Year Plan, its expansion of the productive forces in Russia, without connecting that very expansion with the fantastic level of exploitation required to achieve it. Given the mistaken character of Trotsky’ s analysis, it is small wonder that the larger part of his supporters in Russia in practice ‘capitulated’ to Stalin, in the utterly mistaken belief that in carrying out a breakneck industrialisation of Russia, Stalin was following the programme of Trotsky’s Left Opposition. Seeing the danger of a capitalist restoration based on the peasantry as the chief danger, they approved of the forced collectivisation of agriculture. Seeing the guarantee of the ‘workers” character of the state in state property, they saw Stalin maintaining and extending state property; if they disapproved of his methods, they found his aims correct. No wonder that they were largely disoriented. Among the oppositionists, its was especially those, like Rakovsky, who disagreed with Trotsky, and saw a new class emerging on the basis of state property, who refused to capitulate. [E]
Those who still maintain Trotsky’s position today find themselves, willy-nilly, placed into a situation where they have, partially, to be apologists for the Russian regime. Particular features of Russian society are treated as ‘fundamental’ distinguishing marks. Thus Mandel declares that ‘Permanent job security and the absence of a labour market are not just side issues or some secondary aspect of the social system. They are part of the basic relations of production in the USSR’ (Critique, 3, p. 26). Apart from the fact that Mandel is wrong in supposing there is no unemployment in Russia (it is extensive, in the backward regions and small towns – cf. Mervyn Matthews, Class and Society in Soviet Russia), it would be wrong to treat this situation as peculiar to Russia. According to Ticktin (Critique, 6, p. 37) Spain – which few would want to call a “workers’ state”! – also has a law compelling employers to keep their workers on unless they are found other jobs. Job security in Japan is also very extensive. In Europe vs. America (1970, p. 31) Mandel asserted that, in Russia, ‘Invention and scientific discovery, the technological revolution and industrial innovation, have almost been synchronised’ – a statement which would nearer the truth if the word ‘almost’ were replaced with the word ‘not’. Russia, more than western capitalist countries, has immense difficulty in implementing technological change, for the social relation governing Russian industry provide powerful disincentives to managers to take the risks associated with innovation: hence Russian imports of advanced western technology, and hence Russia’s crisis of productivity. In the 1950s, Mandel was even bold enough to assert ‘The Soviet Union maintains a more or less even rhythm of economic growth, plan after plan, decade after decade, without the progress of the past weighing on the possibilities of the future ... All the laws of development of the capitalist economy which provoke a slowdown in the speed of economic growth are eliminated.’ (Quatrième Internationale, 1956, cit. C. Harman, Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe, 1974, p. 254) This theme is absent from Mandel’s more recent writings on the subject, and no wonder: the Russian rate of growth has slowed down immensely, it has been apparent for some years that it suffers from cyclical crises of stagnation and boom, the rate of profit on Russian investment is dropping fairly steadily, and the whole economic mechanism is moving inexorably into the grip of a long-term stagnation. (See below). The alleged superiority of the Russian economy, on any measure yet proposed, remains to be proved.
 
New Developments
Trotsky’s theory, in short, appears to be very seriously defective. In the period of Trotsky’s own lifetime, it was already seriously faulty. After his death, however, its weaknesses became very glaring.
As we have seen, Trotsky expected, on the basis of his assumption of the instability of the regime, that the Stalinist bureaucracy could not survive the shock of war. Yet, in reality, the regime emerged from the war greatly strengthened, and with Stalin’s personal prestige raised still higher by the war victories over Hitler’s armies. State property had not been overthrown, nor had the workers even threatened the regime with revolution. As Stalin’s armies drove west, whole new countries were drawn into the net of the Russian empire. The territory of the USSR itself was expanded into Eastern Poland. And, in the countries of Eastern Europe which were ‘liberated’ by the Red Army, regimes were established along identical lines to that in Russia. The significance of this for Trotsky’s theory was immense. For the cardinal point, for Trotsky, had always been that the regime in Russia had been established as the result of a workers’ revolution in 1917, which had afterwards degenerated. But now, in Eastern Europe, there were regimes established along exactly the same lines as Stalin’s in Russia, but without workers’ revolutions. If these were “workers’ states”, then workers’ states could be established without working class revolutions, in which case Marxism was no longer a theory of workers’ revolution, the Stalinist bureaucracy would have to be declared to be progressive rather than retrogressive, etc. If they were not workers’ states, then there was no ground left for believing that Russia itself was a “workers’ state”. In 1949, in China, the Communist Party came to power, again without a revolution, thereby adding to the problem a country with a population of 600 millions. Trotsky’s followers fell into weird confusions, first declaring the regimes of Eastern Europe to be military dictatorships, and then inventing a new category, ‘deformed workers’ states’ to account for them. Trotsky’s widow, Natalia Sedova, broke off relations with the official Trotskyist movement, declaring that the developments in Eastern Europe had shown that Trotsky’s analysis no longer fitted the facts of the situation, and that Trotsky himself would have stuck to his revolutionary guns, and changed his theory. Since then, the problems have further accumulated: numbers of Third World countries have statified production, without any sign at all of working class revolutionary activity, and ‘deformed workers’ states’ have been proclaimed in Vietnam, Burma, Iraq and various other countries, including of course Cuba (and recently Nicaragua). The whole theory has fallen apart, along with the Fourth International.
The tragedy of Trotsky’s theory is the way he lost his theoretical bearings in the late 1920s. One of the saddest things about his writing on Stalinist Russia is how inferior, theoretically, it is to his own brilliant work on Tsarist Russia. In his work on the earlier period, he recognises – more clearly and more sharply than anyone else had done – the precise role of the Tsarist state itself in speeding up the process of industrialisation, in shaping Russian society in line with the pressures exerted on it by its external relations with the more advanced capitalist powers. It was in the context of his theorising of Russian development under the Tsars that he developed his general theoretical account of ‘combined and uneven development’. Yet all those brilliant insights disappear when he comes to consider the Stalinist regime.
Why? Fundamentally, I think, because he was mesmerised by the 1917 revolution, by the first successful workers’ revolution in history. He was mesmerised, too, by the fact that the state ownership of industry, which had followed the Russian revolution of 1917, and had been assumed in the 1920s to be part of the revolution’s ‘socialist’ achievements, was still maintained. Writing in the 1920s and 1930s [1*], he assumed that the state ownership of industry was something that could only be achieved through a workers’ revolution; hence it must be counted as one of the ‘gains’ of a workers’ revolution. The mistake is understandable: most ideologues for capitalism in the inter-war period would have assumed the same. Yet Trotsky, like capitalist ideologues of the period, was an inadequate political economist: he neither saw, nor understood, the development of statised means of production in the West (until, perhaps, his very last article, cited above, in which he referred to state ownership in Mexico). almost to the very end of his life, he assumed that state property was, somehow, an aspect of ‘socialism’, that the continuance of state property per se in Russia must be, somehow, a manifestation of some remnant of workers’ power, that state property and the existence of a ruling class were incompatible, that – though a revolution was needed to bring down the Stalinist bureaucracy – the social content of such a revolution would somehow be different from the social content of the revolution he also looked for in the West. In his time, Trotsky, more than any other man, contributed enormously to a critical understanding of the real situation in Russia; but the effort was fundamentally flawed by ‘one serious limitation – a conservative attachment to formalism, which by its nature is contradictory to Marxism that subordinates form to content.’ [57]
The conclusion, I think, is inescapable: Russia is a class society, in the full Marxist sense of that term. There are fundamentally two main classes in Russian society, each standing in a different, and opposed, relation to the means of production. One of these classes forces the other to produce surpluses, which it appropriates and disposes of.
But then, what sort of class society is it?
(Next part)>

Footnotes
A. Ernest Mandel, one of Trotsky’s chief postwar epigones, gets very close to admitting this (Critique, 10–11, 128), as he desperately tries to maintain the distinction in a series of rather barren conceptual separations:
‘The concept “political revolution” certainly does not mean “revolution only in the realm of political rule”. It means: revolutions which do not involve the rule of a new class, replacing the old one, which involve changes in economic relationships but no fundamental changes in the economic structure (one could say system of production (Productionweise) but this concept is inapplicable to the transitional societies).’
He further elaborates: what is needed is the overthrow of the bureaucracy’s monopoly of power and its ‘control over the social surplus product’. He defends the idea of ‘political revolution’ against theories of ‘cultural revolution’ (à la Mao Tse-Tung) which leave untouched political power relationships. which is okay, except that it leaves untouched the original argument, by Trotsky, that the ‘social’ content of the workers’ state has already been achieved. Hillel Ticktin (Ibid., p. 135) remarks on Mandel’s difficulties, with obvious delight: ‘Mandel ... has indeed crossed his Rubicon by declaring that the political revolution is also social and economic ...’
B. For a useful critique of the whole ‘Weberian’ approach, see Rosemary Crompton and Jon Gubbay, Economy and Class Structure, Macmillan, 1977.
C. Out of interest, I wrote to Mary McAuley asking her to cite ‘chapter and verse’ for the “spelling out” she attributes to Marx, as I was unaware of this discussion by Marx. In her reply, she stated that he could no do so. Additionally, she stated that she had now changed her mind about Russia, and had accepted: the arguments of Rudolf Bahro, that Russia was ‘best understood as form of “Asiatic” society. (On Bahro, see below.)
D. The exceeding of Plan targets is sometimes taken as a sign of the superiority of the Russian economy, when actually it is a sign of its planlessness, especially in combination with under-fulfilment of other targets.
E. Alec Nove (A Note on Trotsky and the ‘Left’ Opposition, in Political Economy and Soviet Socialism, 1979 (p. 56), cites a declaration sent by Rakovsky and others to the 1930 Party Congress:
From a workers’ state with bureaucratic deformations, Lenin’s definition of our form of government, we are developing into a bureaucratic state with proletarian-communist relics. Before our very eyes there has been and is being formed a large class of rulers, with its own inner subdivisions, growing through calculated co-option (through bureaucratic appointments or fictional elections). What unites this peculiar sort of class is the peculiar sort of private property, tamely, state power ... “The bureaucracy possess the state as private property”, said Marx in Critique of Hegel’s state law.
* * *
Note by ETOL
1*. In the mimeographed version “1950s”, but from the context it is clear that it should be “1950s”.
* * *
References
10. Lenin, 1921, cit. T. Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 4. p. 126.
11. Leon Trotsky. The class nature of Soviet society, cit. B. Knei/Paz, Social and Political Thought of Leon Trotsky, p. 288.
12. Trotsky, The class nature of the Soviet state, London 1967, p. 13.
13. Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution, pp. 249–50.
14. Trotsky, The class nature of soviet society, cit. Knei-Paz, p. 89.
15. Ernest Mandel, Critique, 3, p. 25.
16. Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed, p. 112.
17. Mandel, Critique, 3, p. 16.
18. Ibid., p. 26.
19. Mandel, Critique, 12, p. 117.
20. Mandel, Critique, 3, p. 9.
21. Ibid.
22. Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed, p. 54.
23.
Ibid., p. 244.
24. Leon Trotsky, Problems of the development of the USSR in Writings of Leon Trotsky, 1930–31, p. 225.
25. The class nature of the Soviet State, Writings of Leon Trotsky 1933.
26. The Revolution Betrayed, p. 287.
27. See Knei-Paz, op. cit., pp. 395–6.
28. The workers’ state, Thermidor and Bonapartism, Writings of Leon Trotsky 1934–5.
29. The Revolution Betrayed, p. 248.
30. The workers’ state, Thermidor and Bonapartism, op. cit., pp. 166–7.
31. Trotsky, I Stake My Life!
32. The Revolution Betrayed, p. 288.
33. Trotsky, Writings, 1932–33, p. 224.
34. Trotsky, Stalin, p. 408.
35. Trotsky, The Living Thoughts of Karl Marx, p. 9.
36. Trotsky, Trade Unions in the Epoch of Imperialist Decay, New Park, 1968, pp. 15–16.
37. Trotsky, The USSR In War, In Defence of Marxism, pp. 16–17.
38. Trotsky, The death agony of capitalism and the tasks of the Fourth International.
39. For “Euro-communist” acceptance of Trotsky’s arguments, see. e.g., David Purdy, The Soviet Union: State Capitalist or Socialist (published by Communist Party of GB) or Carrillo, Eurocommunism and the State. Purdy cites Mandel as his key authority. For academic writing, see the work of David Lane (footnote 2, above).
40. Marx, Grundrisse, pp. 95–6 (Penguin).
41. T. Cliff, Russia: A Marxist Analysis, London 1964, p. 138.
42. Alec Nove, op. cit. (footnote 3).
43. F. Parkin, Class Inequality and Political Order.
44. A. Giddens, The Class Structure of the Advanced Societies.
45. J. Goldthorpe, Social Stratification in Industrial Societies in P. Halmos, ed., The Development of Industrial Societies, Sociological Review Monograph 8, October 1964; reprinted in Bendix and Lipset, ed., Class Status and Power, 2nd ed.
46. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. There is a very useful critique of Engels by a French Marxist anthropologist, possibly Godelier or Terray. but I have (apologies) temporarily lost the reference.
47. Engels, in Anti-Dühring. Marx, most explicitly, in his critique of Adolph Wagner (in T. Carver, ed., Marx: Texts on Method, p. 200).
48. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy.
50. Poulantzas, Classes in Contemporary Capitalism: the definitions are on pp. 18–19 and the discussion is on pp. 116–30, 180–1. See also Charles Bettelheim, Class Struggles in the USSR: First Period 1917–23, Preface.
51. Mary McAuley, op. cit., pp. 309–10.
52. Alec Nove, History, Hierarchy and Nationalities: Some Observations on the Soviet Social Structure in Political Economy and Soviet Socialism, pp. 8–9.
53. Trotsky, Stalin, p. 429.
54. Mandel, Critique, 3, p. 6.
55. Trotsky, War and the Fourth International, cit. Cliff, Russia: A Marxist Analysis, p. 41 – my emphasis, CB.
56.
The Revolution Betrayed, p. 238.
57. Cliff, op. cit., p. 145.
 

 Barker: Theories of Russia (Part 1)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Theories of Russia

Colin Barker
Theories of Russia
*
[Introduction]
How are we to understand Russian society, its pattern of development since 1917, its present situation and its future? This question has been a matter of endless dispute, in Russia, in the West, among both academic and political figures. It is – despite the fact that at times some of the arguments seem to be akin to the medieval arguments about the numbers of angels that could dance on the end of a pin – of theoretical and practical significance.
Some years ago, Daniel Bell published an essay, Ten Theories in Search of Soviet Reality. [1] And that essay left out quite a few of the possible theories ...
In this discussion, I shall focus closely only an a few of the totality of theories proposed, in particular on some of the accounts which have been given by oppositional Marxists. The ideas in these theories are by no means particular to Marxists. For example, David Lane follows the arguments of Trotsky and Mandel quite closely [2]; Alec Nove’s discussion is very relevant to themes in Marxist writings, etc. [3]
First, though, I shall consider a few broad alternatives to the Marxist approaches. I shall discuss these very briefly and schematically.
 

(1) Psychologistic Theories
These exist in both Western and Russian variants.
The Western variants look to the psychology of the Russian people. They seek to explain the emergence of a totalitarian system in Russia in terms of various factors in the individual psychology of the Russian citizen. Thus, for example, the Russian method of swaddling babies up very tight is taken to explain the willingness of adults to accept political repression ... In similar ways, troubled relations between sons and fathers, a Russian fascination with death, a fear of homosexuality and the like are taken to explain political developments in Russia. Even Daniel Bell, who discusses these accounts with a modicum of sympathy, admits they are not too helpful. [4]
The Russian authorities have developed their own variant of this kind of theory, in that they attempt to explain the Stalin period in terms of the individual psychology of one man, Joseph Stalin. This theory was launched by Nikita Kruschev, in his 1956 ‘secret speech’. [5] In this speech, Kruschev denounced the arbitrary terror associated with the Stalin period, and explained in terms of the ‘cult of the personality’. There is no doubt, of course, that there was a cult of Stalin’s personality – as there was of Mao’s [6] in China, of Castro’s in Cuba, etc. Similarly with Hitler, etc. But the very existence of such a ‘cult requires to be explained, and not merely described. What are the structural preconditions for the emergence of a cult, by which a living human being is treated as semi-divine by his subordinates? Why should such a massive concentration of power in the hands of one man occur? Why were his praises sung, in the most exaggerated language, by thousand of hack poets, journalists, novelists, painters, etc? Why were dissident voices stilled so abruptly by a massive apparatus of repression? Why, indeed, were loyal voices stilled too? To these questions, Kruschev and similar official Russian commentators have provided no answers – as they could hardly do, as they have themselves been deeply implicated in these circumstances; to probe these questions too deeply would be to question the roots of the present set – up in Russia and her East European satellites. Today, it is worth noting, criticism of Stalin has again been muted.
 

(2) Purely ‘Political’ Theories
Here I refer to those theories which explain Russia – particularly Russia under Stalin – as in some way of another ‘totalitarian’, by contrast with the ‘democratic’ or ‘pluralist’ West. There are Marxist variants of this kind of theory, to which I shall return later. [7]
What characterises these accounts is their focus on the political structure of Russian society (and, since 1945, on the politca1 structure of East European countries as well). The focus falls on the dominant hierarchical relations, the prevailing terroristic control of dissent, the permanent search for ideological uniformity, the absence of any institutions not subject to control by the highly centralised state. (In the field of literature, such accounts are matched by works like George Orwell’s 1984.)
Accounts of this kind often provide very useful descriptive material on social and political relations in Russia. In terms of explanation, however, they tend to be rather thin. Too often, also, they are structured around a rather idealised contrast between the ‘totalitarian’ East and the ‘democratic’ West.
Being chiefly descriptive, these accounts tend to be very static and lacking in a sense of historical development. They tend not to probe the social, economic and political contradictions of these societies except at a very formal level, and prove not easily capable of handling such matters as the uneasy shift towards ‘liberalisation’ in post-Stalinist Russia and Eastern Europe, the various popular revolts in Eastern Europe, or indeed the pattern of day-to-day conflicts within the Russian sphere. Partly, their static quality arises from their lack of adequate accounts of the lives of the ordinary citizens of Russia – the workers, peasants, etc. – lives whose practical political significance is currently being demonstrated in Poland.
Essentially, what is missing from these ‘political’ accounts of Russia is any account of the mainsprings of social organisation and social action. Why does the state and the party act as it does? Why is it organised as it is? To what ends is ‘totalitarian power’ actually exercised? If reasons are provided, they tend to be in psychologistical-reductionist terms like a ‘desire for power’. Thus these theories have a tendency to present form without content.
 

(3) Economic Growth Theories
Here, Russian developments are explained in terms of the ‘strains’ of economic growth.
Involved in this kind of theory is a rather crude kind of economic determinism, which – as suggested in an earlier lecture – is a recurrent feature of ‘industrial society’ theorising. Barrington Moore’s work provides a couple of examples of this kind of thinking, in two variants.
In an article, Strategy in Social Science [8], Moore criticises his own earlier work, Soviet Politics: The Dilemma of Power. In that earlier work he suggests, he thought he had ‘proved’ that Russian experience showed the need for inequalities of income, prestige, authority in any kind of industrial society. Thus, essentially, in this earlier work he had fallen into the trap of a good deal of functionalist theory, in a sense justifying Russian society by reference to the alleged ‘needs’ of industrial society. In his self-critique, however, he rejects this earlier argument. All that Russian experience ‘proved’, he now suggests, was ‘the necessity for such inequalities at a particular stage of industrial and technological growth’.
Unfortunately, this still hedges the key questions. Was this ‘stage’ of industrial and technological growth itself ‘necessary’? Why and how was this ‘stage’ reached? Were there no alternatives? The odour of economic determinism still seems to hang heavy. [9]
(Next part)
References
1. Daniel Bell, Ten Theories in Search of Soviet Reality in The End of Ideology.
2. David Lane, The End of Inequality?; The Socialist Industrial State; Politics and Society in the USSR.
3. Alec Nove, Is There a Ruling Class in the USSR? in Political Economy and Soviet Socialism.
4. Daniel Bell, op. cit.
5. Kruschev’s ‘secret speech’ to the 20th Party Congress, February 1956, has been extensively published in the West, e.g. in Henry N. Christman, ed., Communism in Action: A Documentary History, Bantam, 1969.
6. The cult of Mao Tse-tung is described in Ygael Gluckstein, Mao’s China. In the period of the Cultural Revolution, the Chinese press reported that the ageing Party Chairman swam nearly 15 kilometres in the Yangtse river in just over an hour. This feat led the President of the World Professional Marathon Swimming Federation. Señor Carlos Larriera, to invite Mao to participate in two ten-mile swimming races in Canada, since his reported time was almost four times as fast as the then world record for 10 miles ...
7. See the later discussion on ‘new class’ theories, below, pp.
8. Barrington Moore Jr, Strategy in Social Science in Political Power and Social Theory.
9. There is a useful critical discussion of ‘modernisation’ theories as applied to Russia in Mary McAuley, Politics and the Soviet Union, esp. pp. 112–3.
 

 Barker: Theories of Russia (Part 4)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Theories of Russia

Colin Barker
Theories of Russia
*
7. “New Class” Theories
The second group of theorists who recognise that Russia is a class society take a very different position from that of Bettelheim. They recognise that there is, effectively, no dominant market relation within Russia, that the economy is a highly centralised, administered economy, ruled by a bureaucratically organised class. Without exception, they also differentiate themselves from the position developed in the 1930s by Trotsky: they do not see in the existence of state property or ‘planning’ an element of socialism but a particular form of class oppression and exploitation. They also reject the idea that Russia is in any other sense capitalist.
The theorists in this group are of especial interest, for a number of them are dissident East European intellectuals, some of whom have been persecuted for publishing their critiques of the political and social systems in their countries. Svetozar Stojanovic and others of his colleagues round the Yugoslav journal Praxis have been deprived of their university posts; Rudolf Bahro was imprisoned for publishing his book in West Germany; Kuron and Modzelewski were gaoled for publishing their Open Letter to the Party, and are now once again in danger from the Polish regime for their activities around KOR, the Committee for the Defence of Workers; others with similar views in Hungary and Czechoslovakia have also been removed from their posts, or are now in exile in the West. [77]
The arguments these writers propose have also been taken up, with some variations, by writers in the West, including Ticktin, Fantham and Machover, Carlo and Melotti. [78]
Some of these writers appear aware, others not, that their ideas were, in a sense, prefigured in the writings of dissident members of the Fourth International at the end of the 1930s, in particular Max Shachtman and James Burnham. [79]
Space does not permit a full treatment of the ideas of each of these writers. I shall focus on a a number of common themes in their arguments, illustrating the themes with quotations from them where it seems appropriate. It would be a mistake, however, to think that they are in total agreement with each other, and where it seems useful I shall point to differences between them.
For number of these writers, the starting point of their analysis is a comparison between the ideals of revolutionary Marxism, as they are still (to some degree, and in a more or less perverted fashion) preached by the rulers of Russia etc., and the reality of life in these societies. On every possible measure, the critics declare that the gap between ideal and reality is enormous. In the circumstances of political life in these countries, Marxism itself has been massively transformed as part of the process of the degeneration of the revolutions, Thus, for instance, Stojanovic (p. 8):
‘The transformation of Marxism from revolutionary critique to the conservative-apologetic ideology of the new ruling class proceeded parallel with the oligarchic-statist degeneration of the communist party and the revolution.’
Rather in the manner of Bettelheim and others, Stojanovic sees the key to this theoretical degeneration as lying in the view taken of the task of a socialist revolution. For Stalinism what matters are changes in the spheres of ‘material and cultural construction’ rather than in social relationships themselves. The Stalinists recognise no structural or other contradictions in the new form of society; if there are ‘problems’, these are the result of ‘hangovers’ from the pre-revolutionary period. ‘The humaneness of productive and other relations among people was the criterion of social progress for Marx’, but for the present-day rulers of these societies the basic measure becomes the development of the forces of production, understood statistically, in terms of increased rates and quantities of output.
For many of these writers, Marx’s concept of ‘alienation’ provides them with their key entry point into the critique of Stalinism and post-Stalinism. The standpoint from which they assess these actual societies is that of socialist or communist society in Marx’s sense; from this standpoint they find what Bahro terms ‘actually existing socialism’ totally wanting. All of he East European writers, in greater or lesser measure, demonstrate that they have been greatly influenced by the early writings of Marx, many of which have only been published in the last couple of decades. Marx’s Economic and Economic Manuscripts of 1844 have proved to be a brilliant source of inspiration to the dissident communists of Eastern Europe. Indeed, the larger part of the work of the Praxis group in Belgrade has been devoted to the elucidation of these early writings, and their significance for a revival of genuine Marxist thinking.
What the history of the twentieth century has shown clearly is that alienation is not simply linked to the institution of private property in the narrow legalistic sense. It is quite as much a characteristic of societies like Russia in which private property has been largely abolished:
‘It has turned out that the place of private property can be taken not only by social property, but also by a new form of class property – statist property, and along with it a new form of economic-political alienation no longer in socialism, but rather in statism.’ (Stojanovic, p. ?)
The application of this argument leads to a quite unambiguous conclusion:
‘The most prominent ... ideological-political myth of our age, is the statist myth of socialism ... With the degeneration of the October Revolution a new exploitative class system was created, a system which stubbornly tries to pass itself off as socialism.’ (p. 3?)
What we are dealing with, Stojanovic insists, is not any transitional form of society, which might be termed ‘state socialism’, where the state and nationalised property represent an initial and indirect form of social ownership, where state property is held through the representatives of the working class and in the interests of the working class, The system in Russia and elsewhere is one where a bureaucratic state is master of society, disposing of ownership in its own interests.
Stalinist state ownership is collective ownership on the part of the bureaucratic state apparatus. It is a new form of class society, for which Stojanovic proposes the term ‘statism’. Many of the same ideas also appear in the work of Rudolf Bahro. Like Stojanovic, he centres his analysis on alienation, a phenomenon arming, he emphasises, in the context of the division of labour – and in particular the division of mental and manual labour. It is this division, Bahro suggests, which is the common feature of all class societies, and which provides him with the basic starting point for his critique of social relations in Russia and other countries of ‘actually existing socialism’. Like Stojanovic, Bahro declares that these are class societies, and he draws extensively on the Idea of ‘the Asiatic mode production’ to argue the relevance of this perspective.
Rakovski rejects taking ‘alienation’ as a starting point, but comes to conclusions similar nonetheless to those of Stojanovic and Bahro. Russia and the other East European countries are examples of
‘a modern non-transitional society where there is no capitalist private property but where the means of production are not at the collective disposal of the producers; where there is no bourgeoisie or proletariat but the population is still divided into classes; where economic priorities are not normally determined by the market, hut neither are they chosen by means of rational discussion among the associated producers, and so on. (Rakovski, p. 15)
‘Soviet-type societies’, he concludes, ‘are sui generis class societies existing alongside capitalism.’ (p. 17)
Some of these writers limit their discussion to Russia and the satellite countries in Eastern Europe. Others, however, extend the discussion to other backward countries. They suggests that the kind of structure that emerged initially in Russia represents, in effect, a new ‘mode of production’ quite different from capitalism through which backward countries have found a new road to industrialisation. Thus, for example, Bahro:
‘The Russian revolution showed that these peoples (of the colonial and semi-colonial countries, CB) could not escape their pariah role simply by political and military liberation struggles and revolutions. The specific task of these revolutions is the restructuring of the pre-capitalist countries for their own road to industrialisation, the non-capitalist one that involves a different social formation from that of the European road.’ (p. 126)
The following of the non-capitalist road requires a particular kind of social and political mobilisation for the ‘forced march’ to industrialization – where industrialization is the precondition for the participation by those nations in the gathering of the fruits of the modern world:
‘... only those nations whose history, and the immensity of their demand gives them the capacity to organise themselves for the forced march into the modern era, have a prospect of maintaining their identity and bringing the treasures of their cultural tradition into that global human culture that is already in the process of arising.’ (p. 128)
The role of the state in this different industrialisation process is crucial. Drawing on various remarks by Engels and Marx, Bahro suggests that the state is more, much more, than merely an instrument of class repression – although it is that too. The state – as can be seen from the example of the Asiatic mode of production – is also the organiser, the ‘taskmaster of society in its technical and social modernisation (p. 129). For Bahro, as for Fantham and Machover, what is at issue is not just Russia or the other countries that call themselves ‘socialist’. The state plays this mobilising, taskmaster role in net just the USSR or China, but also in Burma, Algeria, Peru, Zaire – and
‘even Iran, where a Shah stemming from an era before classical antiquity is conducting his own “white revolution” – this only underlines the fundamental value of the state in this context.’ (p. 129)
Similarly, Carlo argues that the idea of ‘bureaucratic collectivism’ is applicable not just to Russia, but also to Egypt. (Fantham and Machover, while accepting the general drift of the argument, disagree over the examples of Egypt and Iran, which they regard as ‘capitalist’. On the other hand, Fantham and Machover treat China as an example of ‘state collectivism’, while Carlo does not.)
Several of these writers suggest that their theories have significant implications for Marxist historical theory generally. In particular, they reject the idea, propounded most strongly by Stalinist versions of historical materialism, that there is an invariant succession of ‘modes of production’ through which every society must pass. Bahro refers to the notion, much favoured by Russian propagandists, of the ‘regular succession of five formations: primitive communism, slavery, feudalism, capitalism, socialism-communism.’ Such a simple, unilinear scheme could only be imposed on historical development at the cost of massive distortion (pp. 61ff.). Similarly Rakovski:
‘Within the traditional structure of historical materialism there is no place for a modern social system which has an evolutionary trajectory other than capitalism and which is not simply an earlier or later stage along the same route.’ (p. 17)
And Fantham and Machover, generalising rather more, suggest that what has occurred has been what they term a ‘bifurcation’ in human history:
‘A series of societies in the under-developed world have branched off into a non-capitalist path, a path which runs not between capitalism and socialism, but parallel to capitalism; a path along which these societies can industrialise and to some extent catch up with the more advanced parts of the world.’ (p. 4)
Fantham and Machover illustrate what they argue is the fundamental structure of these ‘state collectivist’ societies, existing parallel to capitalism, with a Tableau Economique (reproduced below) illustrating the major economic flows within the system.








Fantham and Machover’s Tableau Economique (Fantham and Machover, p. 10)



Of the seven categories of ‘flow’ they list, only 2 and 3 – imports and exports to the world market, and the of goods by peasants from their private plots – are commodity exchanges. As for the others:

industrial producers goods – these transactions occur entirely within the domain of the bureaucracy which owns them. These goods remain in the bureaucracy’s hands, and are merely transactions from one part of the bureaucracy to another. Prices are merely notional book-keeping devices.
 

 State purchases of grain etc. from peasants – this purchase is compulsory, and at prices determined unilaterally by the state. Grain is more confiscated than bought.
 
States sales of consumer goods – the state determines the prices and supplies of these independently of any ‘market’ considerations. Consumer ability to pay is a function not of price but either of time spent queuing for them, or of access to special shops provided for the elite.
 
Labour power is not bought and sold on a ‘free market’, but is ‘sold’ in a compulsory transaction, in which the worker is compelled to participate, and in which the state is obliged to provide a job.
 
sale of machinery etc. to peasants – there is no commodity exchange as prices and supplies are unilaterally determined by the state.

Thus, ‘in the USSR capitalism exists, if at all, only as a residual element and as a subordinate mode of production at the margins society.’ (p. 10) The same model can be applied to other ‘state collectivist’ societies.
These writers tend not to develop their account of the economic functioning of the Russian and other similar societies, or to do so rather differently. Carlo emphasises the enormous stress placed, in practice, on the development of what Marx called ‘Department I’ industries – industries producing, not means of consumption, but means of production. Ticktin focuses rather on the massive extent of ‘waste’ production; the tendency to produce goods that no one wants, the low quality of goods produced, the difficulties experienced in those societies with technological innovation etc.
There is a partly explicit, partly implicit account of the development process in these writers’ work. In this account, these systems are ‘progressive’ in the early stages of their development, but the highly bureaucratised economic mechanism becomes increasingly an impediment to further development. These national economies tend to run into various kinds of limits to development, which can only be solved through more or less radical re-structuring of their entire economic and political mechanisms. Some of the authors look forward to a socialist revolution, others suggest that two options for the future exist: a socialist revolution or a capitalist one. The latter possibility – a capitalist re-organisation of the these countries – is possibly inscribed in the tentative development towards market-type ‘economic reform’ of the kind associated with writers like Ota Sik in Czechoslovakia, Liberman in Russia, or Brus in Poland.
The broad thesis concerning economic development is, however, clear: these societies are ‘progressive’ in their youthful stages, and a barrier to development in their later stages. Thus Fantham and Machover suggest that China may be still in its ‘progressive’ phase, while Russia is not. (Presumably Russia’s ‘progressive’ phase occurred at the height of the Stalin period, when the forces of production grew most rapidly.)
Some writers in this school look definitely to the revolutionary overthrow of this system of social relations by the working class; others are either less loss clear or assume a more reformist or evolutionary path of development.
Some of these writers use the terminology associated with the capitalist mode of production to describe social and economic phenomena, others suggest that this terminology is inappropriate. Ticktin, Fantham and Machover and others, for example, use the term ‘working class’ in an unqualified way. Carlo on the other hand, suggests that the term may be strictly in appropriate, since his argument is that the Soviet worker produces surplus-product but not surplus-value, and is not involved, strictly, in a ‘wage-relation’ with the single ‘employer’, the State.
‘Technically speaking, a new term should be used. But since what is important is the content and not so much the form, it is possible to speak of Russian proletariat as workers while keeping in mind the distinctions between the capitalist market economy and the Soviet one. If, from the economic-structural point of view, the Soviet and the western proletariat differ, from the political viewpoint their interests converge. Both these classes are fundamental to the two systems, and are exploited by them. Both can only liberate themselves through a socialist revolution.’ (p. 20)
Similarly Bahro – rather more definitely – stresses the inapplicability of the term ‘working class’ to describe the direct producers in Russian industry. Since in his account the term ‘bourgeoisie’ is no longer appropriate, the logic of the analysis is that its correlate, the ‘working class’, should not be employed either:
‘Individuals only form a class in so far as they stand in a common antithesis to another class with respect to their positions vis-à-vis the conditions of production and existence. Classes are fundamentally correlative categories, and fit together with all the other elements of the social formation, in particular, of course, with the dominant elements. They can only be defined in terms of the overall disposition of a society. The proletariat loses its specific socio-economic identity together with the bourgeoisie, so that in the post-revolutionary situation it is necessarily completely different criteria, in fact criteria of internal structuring, that become relevant.’ (pp. 184–5)
Bahro also suggests that this difference is registered in the different character of class movements and class organisations among the exploited:
‘The essence of our internal situation is precisely expressed in the way that the working class has no other cadres and no other organizations than that by which it is dominated. In so far as the workers confront the state as the general capitalist, i.e. in the very respect in which they still maintain their old identity as wage-workers, they stand in this confrontation without an other leaders than a few spokesmen who arise spontaneously and are quite untested. The unions, the original fighting organisations for their particular class interests, appear almost exclusively in a supporting function for the state machine ... Deprived of these associations which are adapted to their immediate interests, the workers are automatically atomized vis-à-vis the regime. They are in any case no longer a “class for itself”, and not at all so in a political sense.’
 
Discussion
The first and most important that that needs to be remarked about the writers in this school is that, at their best, they produce some extremely valuable descriptive documentation on contemporary social relations in the Eastern bloc. Their insistence on the class character of these social relations, it seems to me, is completely correct, as is their insistence that, in Carlo’s words, the means of production ‘belong to the bureaucracy considered collectively as a class’.
The key difficulty faced by these theorists arises from their argument that what is involved is a new ‘mode of production’, a ‘non-capitalist road to industrial society’. For their accounts of the relations of production in these societies are unsatisfactory. Their descriptions are a great deal more interesting than their explanations.
For Bahro and for Stojanovic, the starting point of their analysis is the alienation of the direct producer from the means of production. It is from the standpoint of alienation, which they (correctly) see as endemic in ‘statist society’ (Stojanovic) or ‘actually existing socialism’ (Bahro), that they criticise these societies.
The problem with this choice of a standpoint for criticism not that it is wrong. Indeed, it is indispensable if a thoroughgoing critique of class society is to ho developed. Without that standpoint, Marx’s critique is reduced to a very paltry criticism of ‘private property’ understood in the narrowest and most legalistic framework The concept of alienation only makes sense precisely because it assumes the possibility of a quite different form of society, in which the ‘associated producers’ do actually control (or even begin to control) the whole process of their own social reproduction. That is, the concept of alienation presumes the possibility of a genuine socialism, and an outline notion of that genuine socialism provides the Marxist critic with a vantage point from which to criticise existing reality. This, essentially, is the procedure of both Stojanovic and Bahro: from that vantage point, the reality of social, political and economic life in Russia and similar countries is found totally wanting. As Bahro writes:
‘our system promises them (the workers) no real progress towards freedom, but simply a different dependence to that on capital.’ (p. 38)
Rather than criticise the standpoint of alienation per se, I want to suggest that it is insufficient. To describe a society as having a system of class relations, of exploitation, is certainly to make important points about the structure of that society. But it does not adequately define it. What is further needed is the development of a ‘political economy’ of that society – or, if you prefer, an adequate sociology. Now, it is precisely the point of ‘political economy’ (and of the critique of political economy developed by Marx) that it permits a differentiation to be made between different historical forms of society. Thus, for example, while both feudalism and capitalism are cases of class exploitation, each must be differentiated from the other if our understanding of them is to be developed. The point of political economy is that it enables us to determine the particular pattern of social relations characterising a particular form of society (or ‘mode of production’), to consider its Taws’ of development, to establish its inner workings, and to examine what may be its potential limits of further development. At this second level of analysis there is a significant difference between the extortion (by force, ultimately) of labour-services and taxes by an Egyptian Pharoah and the exploitation of wage-labour by Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. Both are characterised by alienation and exploitation, but in different social forms.
It is characteristic of theorists of ‘state collectivism” etc., that they develop little or nothing by way of a ‘political economy’ of these societies. Thus Bahro, for instance, place his key emphasis on a comparison between Marx’s ideal of socialism-communism, and the current reality of ‘actually existing socialism’, How exactly does a society following ‘the ‘non-capitalist road to industrial society’ actually function? What constraints exist, within that society, to limit development in particular directions? What drives such a national economy forward at such a rapid pace, and is this forward drive capable of infinite continuation? If, as Marx argued, the capitalist mode of production is characterised by a tendency for the rate of profit to fall, which tendency provokes crises in the functioning of the mechanism of social reproduction, is any equivalent contradictory mechanism to be found at work in the ‘non-capitalist road’? To such questions, unfortunately, Bahro’s work provides no real answers, and to that extent his critique lacks power.
Stojanovic suggests that that the bureaucratic state in ‘statist society’ disposes of surplus production in its own interests. But what are these interests which he assures us the ruling class pursues? He does not specify them.
Carlo notes, indeed emphasises, that the bureaucracy imposes a definite pattern on the development of production in Russia, and in other ‘bureaucratic collectivist’ societies. The consumption of the mass of the population is continually subordinated to the development and further expansion of Department I industries, producing means of production. Carlo is, in terms of description, absolutely correct. But why is this pattern followed? To this question, Carlo provides no hint an answer.
Ticktin does claim to provide a ‘political economy’ of Russia, but in reality does not do more than describe a series of elements. His conclusion is that ‘the central economic feature of the USSR today is its enormous wastefulness’. In pointing to the high level of ‘waste’ in Russian production and distribution, Ticktin is undoubtedly correct: the Russian press is full of examples. But can one treat ‘waste’ as the ‘central economic feature’? That would be to define the economy as ‘waste-producing’. This is manifestly absurd: after all, people do not starve in millions in Russia (even if they did in 1921–2 and in 1933 – in both cases, for very different reasons than ‘waste’). Economic growth does continue. Capitalism, too, is after all very wasteful, but we would hardly be satisfied with an account of capitalism as ‘waste-production’ pure and simple. [I]
Bahro does at one point ask, what are the ’driving forces’ of his ‘non-capitalist industrial society’. He identifies two elements in the situation: the working class and the bureaucracy. In respect of both, the aspect of their behaviour that he emphasises is that which tends to hold back development: the workers are less productive than their counterparts in the west, and remain so as a result of their alienation in production; the bureaucrats act as tools of ‘simple’ rather than ‘expanded’ reproduction. Thus the elements Bahro stresses are those productive of stagnation rather than expansion. But then, how does economic growth happen at all? Given the historically quite high rates of growth achieved by states on Bahro’s ‘non-capitalist road to industrial society’, how on earth did they manage these? How did impulses which drove them forward originate? However much of a mess the bureaucratic mechanism may have made of planned production, however much ‘waste’ was involved, there was – and to a degree still is – a genuine process of economic expansion, imposed on society from the top. Bahro’s treatment of the ‘driving forces’ is, in reality, quite one-sided: it resembles an account of a motor car which notes the brakes, the rust, the squeaks, but altogether omits to mention the engine. The same, too is true of Ticktin.
The problem arises, in part, from a methodological assumption which these authors make, and which requires to be questioned very seriously. In order to sustain the idea of a ‘non-capitalist path ... parallel to capitalism’, but co-existing with capitalism, they must limit the notion of ‘society’ to strictly national boundaries. In this these theorists treat Russia and the East European countries in the same manner as does Bettelheim, in the crucial sense that they limit their analysis of these countries to their ‘internal dynamics’. They attempt to explain them in isolation from their environment in the world system, or to treat that environment as a strictly secondary element in the analysis. They treat the geographical boundaries of each country as the effective limit of the ‘social system’ in each country. The theory of ‘sate collectivism’ (or whatever title is is preferred) demands the treatment of industrialisation as a process occurring in nation-states as more or less autonomous ‘societies’. Fantham and Machover, for example, look forward to the ending of the ‘bifurcation’ of modes of production – into capitalism and parallel state collectivism – through the development of ‘one universal society’:
‘Eventually we envisage socialism on a world scale which will end the historical bifurcation we have alluded to above. Under socialism the three parts of the world (developed world, collectivist world, undeveloped world) will converge into one universal society.’ (p. 13)
What this theory cannot but play down is the degree to which ‘one universal world’ has already been created, out of processes already begun as far back as the sixteenth century. That this ‘one universal world’ is riven with conflicts and contradictions is beside the point; its ‘one-ness’ as a simple system of interacting parts, or roles, institutions etc is apparent to the most casual observer. Strictly speaking, there is no such thing, any longer, as ‘Russian society’ or British society, etc. The ‘three parts of the world’ to which Fantham and Machover refer are indeed parts of one world, not three separate worlds. It is precisely the achievement of civilization in the past few centuries to have joined up the various parts of the world into a single world society in which the various nations, states, corporations, classes and the like are ‘parts.’ National frontiers can no longer contain the immense productive forces released by the industrialisation processes of the past two centuries. From its beginning, modern production presupposes the creation of a world economy. And this world economy needs to be grasped as a whole, and not merely (as do Fantham and Machover, and others) as a sum of its parts. The importance of this perspective can hardly be over-emphasised – even I is played down or ignored by these theorists. ‘Society’ today cannot be treated as a nationally bounded unit, except for very specifically defined analytical purposes – and certainly not from the standpoint of the definition and delimitation of a ‘mode of production’. We live in a world society, defined in part by its lack of a single political centre, and by the rule of competition between its constituent parts.
Certainly no merely national part of that world society can be adequately considered in isolation from the whole of which it constitutes but one element. [J]
If, however, we bring world economy into the centre of our analysis, a number of the problems faced by the theorists of ‘state collectivism’ can in principle be solved – as they themselves cannot solve them.
Carlo, for instance, is able to describe, but not explain, why how in Russia the production of means of production is given permanent (and growing) precedence over the production of means of consumption. Within Russia considered in isolation from the rest of the world, the activity of Russia’s rulers appears absurd and arbitrary. Were they to expand the production resources devoted to feeding, clothing, housing their people, and generally improving the quality and quantity of the consumer goods, many of the endemic problems of their economy would go away. These authors have, correctly, pointed to the low morale of the workforce, the lack of material reward for higher productivity, the permanent barrier to expansion of productivity, as a feature of these societies. Why do the rulers not meet the demands of their people for consumer goods? To preserve themselves in power? But the people would keep them in power much more readily if they satisfied the people’s everyday wants ... If we consider Russia in splendid isolation from the rest of the world, its rulers appear to be merely irrational. If, on the other hand, we treat the interaction between NATO and the Warsaw Pact as a significant element in the determinants of the behaviour of Russia’s rulers, their behaviour begins to acquire a certain logic: catching up with (or, these days, keeping up with) the West is a critical policy determinant. If we make this move, however the behaviour of Russia’s rulers is partly explained by ‘exogenous’ factors, namely their relation to the rest of world society. And a key underpinning of the theory of ‘state collectivism’ disappears.
Rakovski argues against the ‘convergence thesis’, according to which Russia etc are becoming more and more like the United States etc. ‘Soviet-type societies’, he insists, cannot be understood as variants of capitalist societies. Against (unspecified) western Marxists, who have pointed to similarities in the social structures of the two regions, Rakovski emphasises the differences between the societies of East and West on a number of dimensions. To summarise his conclusions briefly:

The hierarchical division of labour at the level of the enterprise appears to be similar in East and West, but in the West the enterprises are in competition with each other, while in the East they are not;
 
Technological developmental patterns in the two societies are different: while in both technology undoubtedly advances, the competitive structure in the western societies provokes more rapid technological advance than does the bureaucratised structure of ‘Soviet-type’ societies;
 
In both societies the structure of consumption is unequal, but in the west inequality is organised through market principles, while in the East it is organised politically;
 
While both societies experience economic cycles (a point not recognised by all writers in this school, and evaded totally by Mandel) the form of these cycles is different in each system.

Hence, although at a very general level, ‘convergence’ appears a plausible thesis, closer examination throws it into doubt. [K]
There is no question but that these differences do exist between, say, Russia and the United States. One could also point out that within each ‘system’, too, there are significant differences between different countries – between, say, the United States and Japan in terms of security of employment; or between Russia end Hungary in terms of the use of ‘market’ principles a in the domestic economy. The question remains, however, whether it is useful to talk about these various national economies in one frame of reference, or whether ‘bifurcation’ is a more adequate thesis.
In the form in which it posed, Rakovski’s argument is correct. The ‘convergence thesis’, in the form in which it has normally been presented, does not stand up to examination. However, it to exactly the way in which the theory of convergence has been posed that does demand critical attention. The assumption of the convergence theorists – and of its critics like Rakovski or Goldthorpe – has been that each ‘society’ should be considered in terms of its ‘internal’ development, in isolation from world society, as if it were developing in total autonomy. What ‘convergence theory’ has tended to suggest is that the form taken by western technology tends to draw all national societies into a common path of social development: as such, it is a variant of the ‘technological determinist’ approach. It is exemplified in some modern western writing. [83] What the theory does not ask is why there should be such a compulsion to develop technology in the way it is developed. And this question cannot be answered at the national level alone, country by country.
The single area of world production which, in the modern era, uses the largest proportion of scientific and technological know-how, in which the most rapid development of technique is registered, and which is the largest single employer of scientific personnel is ... ‘defence’. Technical development in the ‘defence’ industries syphons off an amazingly high proportion of scientific and technical developmental effort in the advanced countries. And this permanent shaping of overall scientific and technical development by the war-industries is itself incomprehensible without reference to the international relations between states and blocs of states which have defined the parameters of the world since the end of World War Two. The very pattern of ‘challenge-response’ which permeates the arms race between the great powers (and which is replicated in powers of the second and third rank as well [L]) forces onto all the participants in the modem world system a common set of imperatives. If these imperatives are immediately military, they nonetheless reach back into the separate national economies as a crucial set of determinants of production, of production relations, of state forms, etc.
And, in this sense, a kind of ‘convergence’ is indeed forced onto every nation-state – not by any autonomous technological imperative, but by the inter-relations between the states. Of course, this is not a case of ‘simple convergence’ of the kind hypothesised by writers like Clark Kerr. It is better grasped in the kind of terms in which Trotsky tried to understand development in Tsarist Russia, as s situation of ‘combined and uneven development’. The pressures of the world system are felt directly in each ‘part’ of that system, and are responded to differently too. Each ‘part’ is organised differently to meet the challenges of the rest of the system. To this extent, Rakovski’s emphasis on differences is correct – but is also partial, for it misses the element of ‘unification’ which gives these differences their full meaning.
Again, Rakovski and others discuss the ‘economic reform’ period in Russia and Eastern Europe. Rakovski suggests that the whole ‘reform’ movement ran out of steam, but does not ask why it should have been so unacceptable to the central political apparatuses. One of the effects of a thoroughgoing economic reform of the kind proposed by writers like Ota Sik would have been a reduction in the ability of the political centre to pull economic resources constantly in the direction of heavy industry and especially armaments production. Rakovski does not once mention the crucial role of arms production in the overall functioning of ‘Soviet-type societies’. [M] The maintenance of pride of place for ‘defence’ industries in Russia in particular depends on the maintenance of what Rakovski terms ‘a permanent disequilibrium’ in economic, social and political life, which he associates with the Stalin period only, whereas it has in reality been a continuous feature on the Russian and similar national economies since the end of the 1920s. That permanent disequilibrium tendency is incomprehensible without reference to the ‘external’ relations between these ‘Soviet-type’ states and the rest of the world. But Rakovski never mentions these external relations.
Carlo argues that the law of value ‘can operate only in small mercantile production and in capitalism but not in a planned economy’ (p. 75). As far as it goes, the argument is correct. But ho fails to ask ‘what are the concrete determinants of the ‘plan’ (and, to follow through our argument about world economy, is there a ‘planned economy’?) The argument is reminiscent of that proposed by J.K. Galbraith in The New Industrial State. In the United States, Galbraith suggested, at least in the dominant sector of the large corporations, ‘planning’ by large companies, together with the state, was now predominant. The ‘market’ and competition had been overcome by ‘planning’. Whatever empirical truth there was in his observations regarding the USA itself (and there was not that much, even there), Galbraith quite ignored, the international dimension, leaving out of his discussion such phenomena as multi-national corporations, the import-export balance and the whole interrelation between economic ‘planning’ and the foreign policy of the US government. Like other writers, Galbraith treated ‘planning’ as an alternative to competition, treating the rise of ‘planning’ by the state and by corporations as a sign of the ‘overcoming of the market’. In reality, however, such planning is not the reverse of competition, but is precisely a means for engaging in it. Corporations, and states, plan in order to be more effective competitors. Planning is for competition, not against it.
One writer in this school comes closest to the conception for which we are arguing here, although does not integrate his real insights into a theory. Bahro notes ‘the fact that it is still European and American capitalist industrialisation, now joined also by the Japanese, that sets the rest of the world its problems’ (p.127?, emphasis in original), Have noted (quite correctly) the importance of the role of the state in the industrialization of many backward countries, he remarks that the ‘cause’ of this state role is
‘in the last analysis not of an internal nature but of an external one ... (M)odern capitalism and imperialism has borne the germs of dissolution into the stagnant hearths of earlier civilizations, destroyed their social balance and provoked their reorganization. (p. 129)
The first among the ‘historical roots for the subjection of Soviet society to a bureaucratic state machine’ that Bahro identifies, quite correctly, is ‘The pressure of the technological superiority of the imperialist countries, enforced by their policy of military intervention and encirclement.’ (p. 131)
Further, he asks, why should it be that the Stalinist superstructure so obstinately persists, when the industrialisation process has been basically achieved, when the material preconditions of socialism have actually been realised within Russia? He answers his own question:
‘Above all, (because) the measure of accumulation needed for socialism is not determined within the system itself, but rather in so-called economic competition with capitalism.’
And he continues this insight with a brilliant image:
The dilemma of Soviet economic policy is reminiscent of the children’s tale of the hare and the tortoise, where the tortoise bends the rules of the game. Each time the Soviet economy pauses for breath after a bout of exertion, it hears a voice from the end of the course shout ‘I am already here!’ The tremendous burden of military expenditure, which is kept on a par with that of NATO only at the cost of a far greater share of national income, might well be the decisive handicap. The arms race is the real issue at stake in ‘economic competition’. (p. 134)
Bahro appears to supply all the needed materials for a conception of the dynamics of of Russian development, and of the relations of production in Russia, which goes beyond his own idea of the ‘non-capitalist read to industrial society’. Alone among this school he recognizes the significance of ‘external’ relations for understanding Russia:
One part of the present problem is that a form of regulation that figured in the west only as transient and somewhat abnormal could play a decisive role given the unformed character of the developing Soviet economy, which moreover was forced throughout its life to be a kind of permanent war economy. The military-industrial complex in the USA finds its involuntary pendant in the military-bureaucratic complex in the Soviet Union, which together with its security organs proves to be a tremendous brake on internal political progress. (p. 135)
We shall return to this general issue when we look at the last of the theories under discussion in this paper.
The key weakness in the ‘state collectivism’ theory is that already identified. It is also the source of other weaknesses, with which we can deal more rapidly.
As we’ve seen, several of these authors insist on the rejection of a ‘unilinear’ scheme of historical development of the kind defended by Russian propagandists. It is not that they are formally wrong about this, but that their solution to the question is inadequate. The thesis deriving from Trotsky and Lenin, and before them from Marx, of ‘combined and uneven development’, enables us to handle the problem with which these writers try to grapple, without falling into their trap of treating national boundaries as system boundaries. The very idea of combined and uneven development leads us to expect that the form of industrialization in different countries will indeed be different, while also enabling us to discuss the differences in one single frame of reference, that of the development of a unitary world economy.
Secondly, these theorists tend to elide historical events and developments in a very unsatisfactory way. Bahro, for instance, writes of the 1917 revolution in Russia in the following manner:
‘The October revolution ... was and is above all the first anti-capitalist revolution in what was still a predominantly pre-capitalist country, even though it had begun a capitalist development of its own, with a socio-economic structure half feudal, half “Asiatic”. Its task was not yet that of socialism, no matter how resolutely the Bolsheviks believed in this, but rather the rapid industrial development of Russia on a non-capitalist road.’ (p. 50)
This is, firstly, to ignore the internationalist assumptions of the Bolsheviks in 1917, which they did not formally abandon (the party leadership, anyway) until 1924; and, secondly, it is to read as the ‘task’ of the 1917 revolution what only became the actual practice of the Russian state at the end of the 1920s, twelve years later. Those twelve years, from 1917 to 1929, were ‘a long time in Russian politics’. Bahro provides no material for evaluating those twelve years, or for determining the significant turning points in that period. Indeed, most of these writers are notably thin in their treatments of history.
Thirdly, because of the national focus of their discussion, these writers are forced to treat such phenomena as Stalinist industrialization and the forced collectivisation of agriculture as ‘progressive’, in that they were necessary preconditions for the opening of the way to the socialism that the theorists of ‘state collectivism’ etc. espouse. This argument can only be sustained, indeed, if development is conceptualized as a process occurring in autonomous national ‘societies’. The logic of their position (though none of them explicitly discusses the question is that the idea of ‘socialism in one country’ was correct, and in this sense the theories discussed here are semi-apologetic in their attitude to Stalin. Thus, for instance, Bahro:
‘In the countries of actually existing socialism ... the state machine played a predominantly creative role for a whole and decisive period. The Stalin apparatus did perform a task of “economic organization”, and also one of “cultural education”, both of these on the greatest of scales.’ (p. 39, Bahro’s emphasis).
(On the other hand, Stojanovic, who is only concerned with the present situation, and not with generalising a theory of ‘statist society’ beyond the level empirical description, does not adopt this stance: he insists that Stalinism did not represent the highest degree of progress possible in Russia.)
Bahro, in fact, argues in a totally contradictory manner about the ‘progressive’ character of the countries taking the ‘non-capitalist road’. On the one hand he argues the necessity of a despotic state power:
‘What they initially require most of all for their material reconstruction is a strong state, often one that is in many respects despotic, in order really to overcome the inherited inertia. And such a state power can only draw its legitimation and authority from a revolution, and thus put a stop to the decay and corruption characteristic of the old “Asiatic mode of production”.’ (pp. 58–9)
On the very next page he asserts the ‘unconditional need to rebel for themselves’ which the peoples of backward countries have ‘if they are to reshape their society’. In terms of his own analysis and argument, the two propositions are incompatible: a strong state implies the inability of people to ‘rebel for themselves’ and a powerful block to the power of a people to ‘reshape their society’ themselves. Similarly, his advocacy of the ‘progressive’ character of a strong state hardly squares the further development of his argument, assuming that he means what he says:
‘If a socialist or communist order, as we have had since to realise, cannot be based on material preconditions that are merely provincial in character, then the task of overcoming the lack of civilization which Lenin referred to must be fulfilled by the revolutionary peoples themselves, by creating the labour discipline they need in the course of their struggle, this being the major world-historical task in preparing for socialism.’ (pp. 60–1, my emphasis, CB)
Yet, as against this emphasis on the activity of the revolutionary people themselves, Bahro can write the following about the forcible collectivisation of agriculture:
‘In Soviet Russia the peasants were the strongest class in the population, and up till 1928 the sole class to reap the benefits of the social revolution. They had to be the object of a second revolution.’ (p. 102)
Where, now, is the need of the peoples of backward countries to ‘rebel for themselves’? What was needed, says Bahro, was the mass expropriation, the mass impoverishment, of the majority of society ...
The reality is that, because these developments are discussed in a national context, judgments of their ‘progressive’ or ‘reactionary character tend to be highly arbitrary. Characteristically, the writers in this school cannot agree among themselves as to the applicability of the concept of the new mode of production in different countries: Carlo denies it applies to China, while Fantham and Machover say it does; Bahro sees it in Iran, while Fantham and Machover do not; Carlo sees it in Egypt, Fantham and Machover do not. Nor can they agree about the progressive character of the development: Schactman treats Russia as more reactionary than western capitalism; Bruno Rizzi calls these societies ‘slave societies’ but declares they will progress to communism. Some of them see the future options for these societies as being a choice between capitalism and socialism, others see only the socialist option. Those who argue that the development of capitalism is possible (e.g. Fantham and Machover) suggest that this would require a revolution, but fail to explain how Yugoslavia shifted from a ‘Stalinist’ model to a highly decentralized ‘market’ model without major internal disturbances. Fantham and Machover deny that e.g. Russia is ‘imperialist but offer no arguments for this assertion.
The truth is that, because the theory in an arbitrary construction, the conclusions that flow from it are liable to be arbitrary too. Cliff’s comments on Shachtman and Rizzi apply also to the other writers in this school:
‘Actually, if the Bureaucratic Collectivist economy is geared to the “needs of the bureaucracy” – is not subordinated to capitalist accumulation – there is no need why the rate of exploitation should not decrease in time, and as the productive forces in the world are dynamic – this will lead, willy-nilly, to the “withering away of exploitation”. With the dynamism of highly developed productive forces, an economy based on gratifying the needs of the rulers can be arbitrarily described as leading to the millennium or to 1984. Bruno R’s dream and George Orwell’s nightmare – and anything in between – are possible under such a system. The Bureaucratic Collectivist theory is thus entirely capricious and arbitrary in defining the limitation and direction of exploitation under the regime it presumes to define.’ [84]
 
An Interim Position: Kuron and Modzelewski [85]
Kuron and Modzelewski are by far the most interesting of the East European Marxist critics, if for no other reason than that they attempt to put some empirical flesh on their arguments. They show, by using official Polish statistics, that the Polish working class is massively exploited, in that only about one third of the value of their production returns to them as a (very inadequate) consumption fund, while the remainder passes into the control of the ruling class. They insist that what is at issue is not simply the privileged life-style of the rulers of Poland, but their use of the surplus-product. Every ruling class, they suggest, ‘aims at maintaining, strengthening and expanding its command over production and over society; to that end, it uses the surplus product, and to that end it subordinates the very process of production.’ (p. 16)
The class goal which the ‘central political bureaucracy’ imposes on production is not profit for the individual enterprise, but ‘the surplus product on a national scale’. The transactions between the different enterprises and industries are not real acts of buying and selling, as the bureaucracy is the owner of all industry: hence prices ‘are only a tool that serves to count goods, hence their relationships need not correspond to the relationships between the values of the goods.’ (p. 17) The only element involved in production which the bureaucracy does not own is labour power, which it buys from the workers. It buys as a totally monopolistic buyer, who pays out in wages what it reckons the working class needs as a living standard. The class goal of the bureaucracy in production is the expansion of ‘the surplus product in its physical form and the expansion of production, i.e. production for production sake.’ The share of individual consumption in the 1950s and 1960s, they show, fell, as a proportion of the national product.
Kuron and Modzelewski are also exceptional among the East European writers in their perception and documentation of tendencies to economic crisis in the bureaucratic state system they eloquently describe. And, they emphasise, the bureaucracy’s production goal, production for the sake of production, is at the root of the crisis. They draw from their analysis the conclusion that ‘the economic crisis cannot be overcome within the framework of the present production relations ... A solution is possible only through the overthrow of prevailing production and social relations. Revolution is a necessity for development.’ [N] They go on to emphasise that the working class must be the key force in such a revolution: ‘The revolution that will overthrow the bureaucratic system will be a proletarian revolution.’ (p. 54) They assess, relatively optimistically, the international chances for success of such a revolution, arguing that a revolutionary outbreak in one country in Eastern Europe will have the potential to set the others alight as well. [O]
Kuron and Modzelewski’s analysis and argumentation are, it seems to me, exemplary. I would not wish to quarrel seriously with any of their arguments. Yet, considered purely as a sociological account, their Open Letter contains – from the standpoint of this paper – one significant flaw. They do not provide a motive for the class goal they ascribe to the ‘central political bureaucracy’.
They describe that goal as ‘production for production’s sake’. As Marxists, they presumably chose that phrase deliberately. It is a phrase that occurs in Marx’s Capital, volume I, in the context of a discussion of the classical economists’ vision of capitalism:
‘Accumulate, accumulate’. That is Moses and all the prophets ... Therefore, save, save, i.e. reconvert the greatest possible portion of surplus-value or surplus product into capital! Accumulation for the sake of accumulation, production for the sake of production: this was the formula in which classical economics expressed the historical mission of the bourgeoisie in the period of its domination.’ (Penguin edition, p. 742)
As Marx emphasised, it was through competition that this ethic of ‘saving’, of accumulation, of production for the sake of production, was enforced onto each separate member of the bourgeoisie.
The two Polish authors describe a hectic process of accumulation and of production for production’s sake, the subordination of popular consumption to the expansion of the industries of Department A (production of means of production). They declare that this hectic process is at the root of Poland’s growing economic crisis. But they do not discuss by what mechanism this ‘class goal’ is imposed on Polish production As they themselves emphasise, no such mechanism can exist within Poland, where prices are merely administrative, and there is no competitive market between enterprises, all of which are commonly owned by the state, The only hint of a motive is the following remark:
‘The material power of the bureaucracy, the scope of its authority over production, its international position (very important for a class organised as a group identifying itself with the state) all this depends on the size of the national capital. Consequent1y, the bureaucracy wants to increase capital, to enlarge the producing apparatus, to accumulate.’ (p. 17)
There are two possible readings of Kuron and Modzelewski’s work. Hence my placing of it at this point in the discussion of the various theories of Russian and similar societies. The first is that the writers present a version of the ‘new class’ theory – Antonio Carlo, for one, claims them for this school. If this claim is correct, then strictly they have used language incorrectly: they should not use a term like ‘national capital’, they should not say the bureaucracy wants to ‘increase capital’. For ‘capital’ has a very definite meaning in Marxist discourse and implies a whole set of other associated social relations. As it is the argument of the ‘new class’ theorists that Russia etc are not capitalist, the term ‘capital’ cannot be a central plank of their analysis. If it does belong to this school, then Kuron and Modelewski’s work suffers from the same fault as the rest, that it fails to explain why these states have developed as they have. What we then have is a clock without a spring.
The second possible reading – and, without being partisan, the one that best fits their text – is that they are enunciating an incomplete version of the theory of ‘bureaucratic state capitalism’, and that their remark about the ‘international position’ of the bureaucracy is the key to the missing motive.
Let us, anyway, now finally consider this last theory.
(Next part)>

Footnotes
I. In an as yet unpublished paper, Mike Haynes questions whether the focus on waste as a defining feature of the Russian economy is, anyway, justified. Critics like Ticktin. who make much of the ‘waste’ issue, draw entirely on the official Russian press, which itself focuses on issues of ‘waste’ in production and distribution. On the other hand, the Russian press does not discuss at all critically the overall (‘macro’) functioning of the economy. By contrast, in the west the press discusses the ‘macro’ functioning of the economy ad nauseam, but provides very little information in the internal (‘micro’) functioning of enterprises. ‘Waste’ is not documented in the west. Haynes’s suggestion is that perceived differences between East and West are partly due to the information available.
J. Some of the conceptual issues involved are discussed in Barker and von Braunmühl. [80] The significance of ‘external’ determinants of the actions of nation-states is argued strongly in Theda Skocpol’s critique of the work of Barrington Moore, and in her comparative history of social revolutions. [81]
K. The point is not dissimilar to that argued by the neo-Weberian Goldthorpe. [82]
L. See, if nothing else, Michael Kidron and Ronald Segal, The State of the World Atlas (Pan Books, 1981)
M. Ticktin refers to it as ‘massive’ in one place, to suit a particular argument, but denies its significance in another place where it does not suit him. Fantham and Machover, aware of the threat posed by the issue of arms production to their theory, dismiss the questions hurriedly. Stojanovic, who makes no attempt to developed any kind of ‘political economy’, does not refer to the question. Nor does Carlo – his Sinophilia might be upset if he were to probe this questions too closely, for the Chinese ‘defence’ burden is enormous. For Bahro see below.
N. Both Kuron and Modzelewski, who were imprisoned for the publication of their Open Letter To The Party, are active in KOR, the Committee for Defence of Workers, which was set up in 1976 and has played an important advisory role to Solidarnosc in the 1980–81 period. KOR has been attacked by both the Catholic Church hierarchy and by the regime (and by the Russians). However, according to press reports, Kuron at least declares that he no longer holds to the political position he declared in the early 1960s. His political views are now ‘reformist’. It is not known whether he would also argue for a revision of his analysis of the structure of society. Modzelewski recently resigned (March 1981) as an adviser to Solidarnosc in Gdansk; his current political views are unknown.
O. A revised estimate of the danger from Russia may well underpin Kuron’s reported political shift. He has certainly issued documents aimed at Polish workers in the recent past urging them to be ‘very careful not to go too far’ and to risk provoking a Russian invasion. Whether this is revolutionary Realpolitik, or actually a real shift to a reformist perspective, we cannot possibly judge.
* * *
References
77. Svetozar Stojanovic, Between Ideals and Reality: A Critique of Socialism and its Future, translated by Gerson Sher, Oxford 1973; Rudolf Bahro, The Alternative in Eastern Europe, translated by David Fernbach, New Left Books, 1978; Mark Rakovski, Towards an East European Marxism, Allison and Busby, 1978; A. Zimin, On the Question of the Place in History of the Social Structure of the Soviet Union in R. Medvedev, ed., Samizdat Register I, Merlin, 1977.
78. Hillel Ticktin, Towards a Political Economy of the USSR, Critique, 1, 1973; The contradictions of Soviet Society and Professor Bettelheim, Critique, 6, 1976; Class Structure and the Soviet Elite, Critique, 9, 1978; John Fantham and Moshe Machover, The Century of the Unexpected: A New Analysis of Soviet-Type Societies, London: Big Flame publications, 1979; Antonio Carlo, The Socio-Economic Nature of the USSR, Telos 21, 1974; Umberto Melotti, Marx and the Third World, Macmillan, 1978.
79. Max Shachtman, The Bureaucratic Revolution, New York, 1972; Bruno R (Rizzi), La Bureaucratisation du Monde; James Burnham, The Managerial Revolution.
80. Colin Barker, A note on the theory of capitalist states, Capital and Class, 4, 1978 and The State as Capital, International Socialism, series 2, no. 1, 1978; Claudia von Braunmühl, On the Analysis of the Bourgeois Nation State within the World Market Context. An Attempt to Develop a Methodological and Theoretical Approach in John Holloway and Sol Picciotto, ed., State and Capital: A Marxist Debate, Arnold, 1978.
81. Theda Skocpol, A Critical Review of Barrington Moore’s Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, Politics and Society 4 : 1. 1973; States and Social Revolutions, Cambridge, 1979.
82. John Goldthorpe, op. cit. (see note 45).
83. For example, Clark Kerr et al., Industrialism and Industrial Man.
84. Tony Cliff, The Theory of Bureaucratic Collectivism – a critique, International Socialism, 32, spring 1968, p. 16.
85. Jacek Kuron and Karol Modzelewski, An Open Letter to the Party, translation published by International Socialism, London, 1968.
 

 Barker: Theories of Russia (Part 3)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Theories of Russia

Colin Barker
Theories of Russia
*
(5) “Class” Theories
Among those theories which assert that Russia is a class society, three different positions can be distinguished. These positions are sometimes confused with each other, though each is actually distinct from the others. The operative assumptions of each of the three approaches are different. [F]
First, there are those theories we shall call ‘state capitalism’, and which are associated, pre-eminently, with the writings of Charles Bettelheim. Elements of this approach also appear in the writings of Amadeo Bordiga, and in the account of Russian society provided by members of the Chinese Communist Party after the outbreak of the Sino-Soviet split. At the centre of this approach is an argument that capitalism has been restored, or has become dominant in the USSR and the East European satellites, on the basis of capitalist market relations within these countries.
Second, there is the theories which deny that Russia is capitalist, but also deny that it has anything in common with socialism. (Thus it rejects the “degenerated workers’ state” position.) Some writers in this camp (e,g, Bruno Rizzi, Max Shachtman, Antonio Carlo) call the form of society existing in Russia “bureaucratic collectivism”; others employ different terminology (e.g. Rudolf Bahro refers to ‘actually existing socialism”, some Yugoslav writers refer to “statist society”, Castoriadis calls it “bureaucratic society” etc). What these writers hold in common is that Russia and her satellites represent a new form of class society, which cannot be represented by the terms ‘capitalism’ or ‘socialism’ at all. Some extend their argument to other developing countries; others, in particular those who distinguish between Russia and China (treating Russia as a class society, but China as different), do not.
Third, there are the theories which we shall call ‘bureaucratic state capitalism’, associated with the work of Tony Cliff, C.L.R. James, and Raya Dunayevskaya. According to this approach, the character of Russian society cannot be grasped if Russia is considered in isolation from the rest of the world. Internally (in contra-distinction to the first approach of Bettelheim etc.) market relations do not predominate. But, in terms of is relations with the rest of the world – and especial in terms of its military competition with the West – the system is part of world capitalism, and can only be understood as a capitalist part of that system. This theory, quite explicitly in the case of Cliff’s work, draws on the tradition of Trotsky (in particular his idea of ‘combined and uneven development) but draws radically different conclusions from Trotsky’s.
We shall discuss the three theories in the order in which we have introduced them.
 

(6) Bettelheim’s “State Capitalism”
Bettelheim’s argument is developed in a number of works, some still ‘in progress’. His key theoretical formulations appear in Economic Calculation and Forms of Property. [60] His general conclusion in relation to Russia and Eastern European societies, that they have reverted to capitalism, is developed historically in his Class Struggles in the USSR, a work who first two volumes, covering the periods 1917–1923 and 1925–1930, have so far appeared. [61]
Marxists have regularly asserted that between capitalism and communism there lies a period of transition. There is no immediate leap from one mode of production to another. Rather, there is a more or less long-drawn-out period of struggle between the two forms. It is on this transition period that Bettelheim’s analyses are focused.
The character of this transitional period, and the pattern of its development, is not reducible to the mechanical working out of some law of development. In particular, what determines the pattern of development is not simply the level of development of the productive forces, as a ‘vulgar Marxism’ asserts. [G] Rather, the character of the transition period is determined by the specific outcome of class struggle. If you like, what men and women actually do, how they succeed or fail in making new forms of social relations predominant in society, is the crucial question. A period of transition is one in which, while the possibility that a new mode of production may be established through the class struggle exists, that development is by no means guaranteed: rather the possibility also exists that the society may revert to the earlier mode of production. It is this latter development which Bettelheim believes to have occurred in Russia. In the historical account which he has offered to date, the primary emphasis in explaining this reversion to capitalism falls on the theory and practice of the Bolshevik Party, whose ”Marxism” he finds to be seriously defective – above all, in its ‘economistic’ reading of social development.
A key distinction between capitalism and communism lies in the mode by which the overall social process of production is governed. Under capitalism, production is dominated by the “law of value”; under communism, production is governed by the decisions of the associated producers, according to a plan. The dominance of the “law of value” in capitalist society is ensured by a particular structure of social relations of production, founded in the production of commodities. Production is carried on in separate, independent enterprises, related to each other through competition and exchange. There is no overall determining centre (democratic or otherwise) through which the overall development of production is shaped. Rather, each independent unit, or enterprise, competitively pursues its own interests. The inter-relations between these units, or enterprises, are determined by an essentially blind, or anarchic in the strict sense, set of laws independent of the wills of the various participants. Although capitalist production is social, in the sense that through it the interdependence of individuals is in practice asserted and maintained, the form of this social production is one that lies beyond the control of the participants in the process.
Additionally, capitalism is characterised by the separation of the direct producers (the working class) from the means of production. Not only do the workers produce goods whose social character is of commodities (that is, goods which not only have a character as values’ for others, but also have a character as ‘values’ – that they are systematically compared with other commodities on the basis of the socially necessary time taken to produce them); their separation from the means of production places them in a situation, vis-à-vis those who ‘own’ the means of production, in which they can be forced to produce surplus-value, i.e. to produce commodities of greater value than the value of their labour-power. Capitalism is thus a system of social production in which relations of exploitation are combined with relations based on the law of value, enforced on the participants by the competitive relations existing between the units, or enterprises, within which the production process occurs.
It is Bettelheim’s argument that capitalist relations have been restored in modern Russia. The mere legal abolition of private ownership of the means of production in Russia (the feature emphasised by Trotsky, for example) is not decisive: what matters is the continuance and reinforcement, within Russia, of social relations within and between state enterprises which take the same form as those characteristic of capitalism.
Between state enterprises, Bettelheim suggests, there continue to exist commodity relations; and, between these enterprises and the working class, there continue to exist relations of wage labour, whereby surplus value is produced by the workers and appropriated by these who – in economic terms, if not in juridical terms – ‘own’ those enterprises. A class of non-labourers appropriates the surplus-labour produced by the class of labourers. The system of state enterprises in Russia is the collective private property of a ‘state bourgeoisie’. The ‘double separation’, characteristic of the capitalist mode of production, is found in Russia: the workers are separated from their means of production whose possession is in the hands of the managers and directors of the enterprises in which they work, and labour-power enters the production process in the form of a commodity so that labour is separated from labour-power; and, the enterprises are separated from each other in the sense that the organisation of production takes place independently at the level of each enterprise, the inter-relations between these enterprises taking the form of commodity relations, based on monetary calculations.
Tendencies in this direction – towards the restoration of capitalist relations – were present in the Russian economy from the time of the time of’ the 1917 revolution. They have now become predominant. Proposals by ‘reform economists’ in Russia and Eastern Europe for increasing use of ‘market’ mechanisms represent a further continuation of the process of restoration of capitalist relations.
Bettelheim is by far the most sophisticated of the writers who propose this particular ‘state capitalist’ theory of Russia. Until the remainder of his historical account is published, we shall have to await full clarification of his reading of the decisive moment at which the restoration process became the predominant one. This question, as Carlo has noted, is one whose answers remain rather ambiguous. It is not clear, for example, whether the period of Stalin’s personal rule in Russia, from 1929 to 1953, is a period in which the capitalist restoration had already occurred, a period in which capitalist and socialist tendencies were still at war, or indeed a period in which socialist relations were predominant and after which the decisive transformation of Russia in a capitalist direction occurred. In some ‘Chinese’ arguments, the decisive transformation is held to have occurred after Stalin’s death, and to be due to ‘Kruschevite revisionism’ – a phenomenon carried much further by the leaders of Yugoslavia (the chief bête-noire of the Chinese in the great period of Chinese polemics against Russia) and by the ‘reformers’ in Eastern Europe. [63]
Not only is there a degree of ambiguity in this approach regarding the moment, or process, of ‘restoration of capitalism’ in Russia, but there is a serious lack of empirically based discussion. Bettelheim’s own work dealing with the present is cast at a very high level of abstraction, and his ‘conjunctural’ work has, in its published form, only reached the end of the New Economic Policy Period in 1929. His thesis that capitalist relations of production have become dominant in the USSR remains, currently, at the level of an assertion.
Bettelheim’s historical account of the development of the rule of the ‘state bourgeoisie’ in Russia has not yet been completed. His second volume ends in 1929, as the New Economic Policy came to an and, and as the Communist Party, under Stalin’s leadership, launched itself into the period of mass collectivisation of agriculture and crash industrialisation. Nonetheless, it is already apparent that general theoretical formulations are guiding Bettelheim s work. He does not fall into the mistake of some of the ‘Chinese’ theorists and attribute all the failings of the regime to ‘Kruschevite revisionism’. He doe’s not appear to be an unqualified admirer of Joseph Stalin, although we still have to await his definitive judgment on the 1930s and after. Nonetheless he does write as an admirer of Chairman Mao, and in particular of the ‘Cultural Revolution’ period in China (1966–67).
In his first volume, he documents the decline of the soviets, the growth of a state bureaucracy the majority of whose personnel were inherited from the previous Tsarist regime, the re-emergence of the secret police, and the concentration, within the single ruling party, of power in the hands of a small group of party functionaries. The circumstances of the ‘First Period’, for Bettelheim, thus opened the way to a development of a new ‘state bourgeoisie’.
What was crucial in the development of this ‘state bourgeoisie’ was the prevalence within the Bolshevik Party of an ‘economistic’ reading of Marxism. What Bettelheim terms ‘economism’ is broadly the same as the ‘vulgar Marxism’ referred to at the beginning of this section. According to this interpretation, the motor of history is the development of the productive forces. On this interpretation, carried to its logical conclusion, the development of a classless communist society will depend on technological progress and economic growth: social relations will change, in consequence of the transformation of the productive forces, and in conformity with them. Bettelheim suggests that virtually the entire party leadership, with the exception of Lenin, held to this interpretation of Marxism. Thus they underestimated the importance of ideological and political issues in the transition to communism, and neglected the emerging ‘state bourgeoisie’ within the Soviet state apparatus itself, and – above all – neglected the danger that this represented. They thought the key problem was the securing of economic growth under state control.
Only Lenin, especially in the last months of his life, fully recognised the problem. According to Bettelheim, in handful of articles and notes, Lenin re-evaluated the New Economic Policy, and re-evaluated the revolutionary potential of the peasantry in a much more positive way, seeing in the development and maintenance of the worker-peasant alliance the basis for a transition to communism. Thus, in a sense, the Lenin of 1922–23 was a crucial forerunner of Mao.
What happened in the 1920s was that the Bolshevik leaders – right and left alike, in different ways – proposed political lines which led to a breakdown of the worker-peasant alliance, thereby provoking a crisis which was finally ‘resolved’ by the forced collectivisation and crash industrialisation. The heart of Bettelheim’s explanation of the crisis of the 1920s thus lies in the ‘political mistakes’ which were ‘due to the feebleness of the Party’s roots in the countryside and also to ideological reasons which led the Party ... to underestimate in practice the aid that should have been given to the peasant masses, a to concentrate nearly all its efforts on industry.’ [64]
The Russian development is thus viewed through the prism of Bettelheim’s reading of Chinese developments:
‘China’s example shows that it is not necessary (and indeed that it is dangerous) to aspire to build first of all the material foundation of socialist society, putting off till later the transformation of social relations, which will thus be brought into conformity with more highly developed productive forces. China’s example shows that socialist transformation of the superstructure must accompany the development of the productive forces and that this transformation is a condition for truly socialist economic development. It shows, too, when the transformations are carried out in this way, industrialisation does not require, in contrast to what happened in the Soviet Union, the levying of tribute from the peasantry, a procedure which seriously threatened the alliance between the workers and the peasants.’ [65]
 
Critique of Bettelheim
I shall criticise two aspects of Bettelheim’s account: his thesis that the Russian economy today is ‘state capitalist’ in the sense in which he uses the term; and his account of the process by which the ‘state bourgeoisie’ which he sees in Russia came to power. Neither aspect of his theory, I suggest, is at all satisfactory.
 
‘State Capitalism’
At the centre of Bettelheim’s account of the ‘state capitalism’ of Russia is the argument that the various industrial and other enterprises inside Russia are basically similar to western capitalist enterprises, in that they produce commodities; whose relations with each other are governed by the law of value and expressed in terms of money prices; that the enterprises are ‘independent’ of each other; that workers sell their labour-power to the managers of these enterprises, who exploit them; that the main difference between these enterprises and those in the west is the merely formal juridical difference that the enterprises are state-owned. In terms of the actual social relations of production, however, the predominance of commodity production relations between the enterprises, the role of money and the existence of the wage relation between the worker and the enterprise means that – within the Russian economy, considered on its own – capitalist relations now predominate.
As it is formulated by Bettelheim, this theory does not stand up as an adequate account of the internal organisation of the Russian economy, which is simply not assimilable to the model of a capitalist market society.
Are the enterprises in Russia ‘independent’ in the sense that Bettelheim means? Not one empirical study of the modern Russian economy supports such an idea. The enterprises do not set their own prices, or the wages they pay their workers; they do not determine the size 0f their accumulation funds; they do not determine their suppliers, their buyers, or their products. The managers of the Russian enterprises do not have the power to determine these things as autonomous agents, as they should do if Bettelheim’s account were to be at all accurate. In practice, Bettelheim plays down this aspect of the question, and focuses attention rather on the role of bonuses paid for enhanced production, on the use of financial measures as a means of discipline employed by the planners, and control over the enterprise through the banking mechanism. He sees in what the Russian planners term ‘socialist emulation’ a restoration of capitalist relations of competition.
But the reality is that the financial bonuses are not the motor of economic development. According to Ticktin (Critique, 6, p. 23), they amount to no more than about 5 per cent of workers’ pay. Similarly, strictly financial disciplines over the conduct of the enterprises are weak: the key indicators to which managers have to conform are still those of production realised and sold, and – since most goods are still in short supply – these targets are only marginally different from the physical output targets imposed by the planners in the Stalin period.
A factory manager is less interested in his financial bonuses than he is in achieving the targets set for him by the central planners; it is by achieving the plan targets, and winning accolades from the right people, that he may hope to win promotion and thus obtain access to greater privilege and power, What characterises his situation, fundamentally, is not his ‘autonomy’ but his dependence on his superiors, his place in a bureaucratic administrative hierarchy.
The distribution of resources, the relations between enterprises and so on are governed, not by ‘market’ mechanisms, but by administrative decisions, passed down from on high. There is an element of bargaining between planners and enterprise managers, but it is a form of bargaining between levels of a single hierarchy, not the ‘bargaining’ of a market place. In the bureaucratic hierarchy, bargaining is a process between superior and inferior, concerning the content of the instructions to be given and the stringency of control exercised; in a market, by contrast, bargaining is a process conducted between equals. In the period of Stalin’s rule, the administrative mechanism was highly coercive: the economy was organised on the basis of fear and repression, Today the fear of death is not a major motive for managers, and in this sense the carrot of promotion is emphasised more than the stick of the prison camp. But the shift from stick to carrot is not the same as the rise to predominance of market relations.
In Soviet law, it is true, some enterprises, in particular the kolkhoz (collective farm), are legally autonomous. However, the law here performs a masking more than revealing function: the kolkhoz is better understood as a state enterprise than as an autonomous entity. Apart from anything else, it is difficult to imagine a genuinely autonomous enterprise agreeing to sell its produce to the state at prices below the cost of production, as occurred under Stalin. Indeed, the very formation of the collective farms on a mass scale in 1930 was – in reality – the abolition of the autonomy of the peasantry, through the forcible appropriation of their property by the state. There is it is true, still a real market in agricultural (and especially horticultural) produce, especially that produced on the peasants’ (limited) private plots – and these tiny plots are, in reality, much more productive than the big state and collective farms. Nonetheless, this market is very limited in its scope. The kolkhozes were also allowed to ] their surplus products (those not required on the farm, and not taken by the state at low forced prices) on the ‘free kolkhoz market’, but in 1957 only 4.9 per cent of the food-products destined for the non-rural population were sold on the free market. [66] The real situation is not that the farmers act as ‘co-operators’ interested in the development of ‘their’ business, but as (highly alienated) state workers, who prefer to work on their allotments than on ‘their’ land.
Additionally, if as Bettelheim maintains, the enterprises in Russia act as autonomous capitalist units, it is difficult to see how some of them could – as they do – regularly operate at a ‘loss’. That is, in price terms they do not recover the costs of production by selling the goods they produce. The reality is that the price system in Russia, as a totality, is controlled from the centre, and incomprehensible without simultaneous reference to the system of taxes and subsidies. It is difficult, indeed, to see how the term ‘commodities’ can be applied to the products of Russian enterprise, if – like Bettelheim – the limit of the analysis is the set of internal price relations within the Russian domestic economy. In point of fact, this objection applies as much to Mandel’s argument as to Bettelheim’s: consumer goods, by and large, do not conform to the idea of ‘commodities’ any more than do the products of heavy industry. Carlo (op. cit., p. 21) refers to an example which makes the point quite well: the Russian plan called for the production of a type of shoe which Russian consumers disliked, these consumers preferring a different kind of shoe. Yet the efforts of a consumer advocate to get the shoe style changed failed, and old. shoes continued to be produced, and remained unsold. The ‘consumers’ strike’ did not have the effects one would expect in a market society: wages and prices and profits did not fall, the shoe-manufacturing enterprise did not collapse. Sooner or later, the planners must have judged, the shoeless consumer would be forced – in the absence of any other source of footwear – to buy the shoes they didn’t want.
Likewise, the Russian economy considered in isolation does not conform to the ‘market’ model in another crucial respect: the situation of the work-force. There is nothing in Russia which really corresponds to a ‘labour market’ as understood in the west. For a long period, there were extensive legal restrictions on the rights of workers to change their jobs (most obviously in the case of the millions in the forced labour camps run by the political police, but even for ‘free’ workers job-changing without permission was subject to criminal legislation, internal passports, work books, etc.). When workers do change their jobs, they work for a different branch of the same employer, the state.
At the beginning of the 1930s, full employment was achieved in Russia. In these circumstances, one would expect to see wages rising: in Russia, the shift to full employment was associated with a major cut in real wages. They remained below 1928 levels, despite a huge increase in production, until Stalin’s death. It seems clear that the wage dynamic is quite different from that in the west. In the west, wages are controlled, inter alia, by the mechanism of unemployment; in Russia it is administrative mechanisms that determine wage levels, movement of labour between different activities, etc. If a western capitalist model is the test of the existence of capitalist relations in the Russian domestic economy, then, as Carlo remarks, there are not really ‘wages’ in the Russian economy. (op. cit., p. 27)
The conclusion appears inescapable: Bettelheim’s argument that capitalist market relations govern the development of production within the Russian economy cannot be sustained. True, the economic reformers of the 1960s and 1970s have argued for the increased use of market mechanisms in the Russian economy, but the reforms have not in reality had a major impact on the relations within or between enterprises. The Russian economy remains a highly centralised, administered economy, in which money, prices, profits, wages and the like play a different role from that played in a western capitalist economy.
Finally, in terms of the existing published writings of Bettelheim, his attitude to the period of Stalinism proper remains ambiguous. The logic of his argument is that the tendency for capitalist relations of production to become predominant has strengthened since Stalin’s death. Does this mean that the Stalin period was one in which socialist relations were more predominant? Does this mean, in other’ words, that the period in which terror and coercion played a greater role than they now do was preferable? We may get a clearer answer to this question when the third volume of Bettelheim’s history appears. In the meantime, Bettelheim’s argument is open to just this interpretation, especially given his own history as a loyal member of the French Communist Party for many years.
 
Bettelheim’s history
As we have seen, Bettelheim’s history is focused on the theoretical errors of the Bolsheviks, in particular on their ‘economism’. From the standpoint of Marxism, Bettelheim is correct in condemning ‘economism’. It is less clear, ho ever, that the standpoint of his criticism is itself adequate.
The passage quoted above, in which Bettelheim compares Russian developments with those in Mao’s China reveals a certain tendency to slide from ‘the transformation of social relations’ to ‘transformation of the superstructure’. Without wishing to engage in Marxist dogmatics, the slide is significant for Bettelheim’s theory. Bettelheim ‘conflates the relations of production with the superstructure – and especially ... with ideology’. [67]
There is, of course, a good deal of ambiguity in Marx’s own treatment of the question, but it does appear that he regarded the relations of production as the motor of historical change. That is, Marx’s ‘motor of history’ was the pattern of social relations existing between the direct producers and the owners of the means of production. And, since the object of Marx’s historical theorising was the forms of class society, the fundamental role in historical development was attributed to the class struggles emerging around the relationships of exploitation by one class of another. The starting point for historical analysis is the specific form that exploitation takes:
‘The specific economic form, in which unpaid surplus labour is pumped out of the direct producers, determines the relationship of rulers and ruled, as it grows directly out of production itself, and, in turn, reacts upon it as a determining element ... It is always the direct relationship of the owners of the conditions of production to the direct producers – a relation always naturally corresponding to a definite stage in the methods of labour and thereby its social productivity – which reveals the innermost secret, the hidden basis of the entire social structure.’ [68]
This is not a ‘technological determinism’ (or, in Bettelheim’s terms, an ‘economism’), as is best seen with reference to Marx’s concrete analyses. Thus, in Capital, Vol. 1, Marx argues that it was the emergence of capitalist relations of production which themselves engendered the technological transformations associated with the industrial revolution, and not vice versa. Industry, if you like, did not produce capitalism; capitalism produced industry. Thus far, we are in entire agreement with Bettelheim.
However, Bettelheim’s rejection of ‘economism’ leads him to treat the productive forces as a mere effect of the relations of production. The logic of this position is that ‘communism’ can be created in any material-economic setting whatever. All that matters if that the will to do it should exist, and that the ‘correct theory’ guide the process. This seems to be a very different idea from that of Marx and Engels, who saw the development of capitalism, and the immense forward thrust which capitalism gave to the development of human productive powers on a world scale, as a necessary precondition of communist society. Capitalism’s creation of a world market, its immense technological achievements therein, and its development of a new kind of exploited class, the modern working class, were – for Marx and Engels – the historic justification of this mode of exploitation: it alone prepared the way for the possible development of socialism/communism. Without that development, they insisted, ‘privation, want, is merely made general, and with want the struggle for necessities would begin again, and all the old filthy business would necessarily be restored.’ [69]
In this light, the crucial condition for the socialist success of the socialist revolution of 1917 was that it should spread to the advanced capitalist countries of the west – as Trotsky had insisted from 1905, in his theory of ‘permanent revolution’, and as Lenin likewise repeated over and over again after 1917. It was on the world stage that capitalism had created the preconditions for socialist development – not on the single, isolated and backward stage of Russia alone. There is not a word of this in Bettelheim’s 1,100 pages. The German revolution is mentioned only once in the entire two volumes. Nothing is said of the Bolsheviks’ enthusiasm at the overthrow of the Kaiser in November 1918, the enthusiasm with which the Bolsheviks greeted the hope of a revolution in Germany in 1923, the development of the Communist International. Stalin’s theory of ‘socialism in one country’ is taken for granted, and indeed – against all the evidence to the contrary – foisted onto Lenin too.
Bettelheim treats the development of Russia as if it were somehow hermetically sealed off from the rest of the world, and as if the material level of development in backward Russia were quite irrelevant to its evolution. What mattered, alone, was the will of the participants, and the ideas they held. The problem of the ‘weakness’ of the Russian proletariat was not ‘numerical’ but ‘ideological’. [70]
In the framework of ‘socialism in one country’, there were two possible lines of development, evidenced in the debates of the 1920s. Either the system of social relations that characterised the New Economic Policy must be continued (broadly, the policy of Bukharin and the ‘right’), on the basis of ‘snail’s pace’ economic growth; or there must be an industrialisation drive based on capital-intensive heavy industry (Stalin’s final policy solution). Bettelheim, who accepts the idea of ‘socialism in one country’, clearly favours the former, ‘Bukharinist’ solution, for he opposes the extraction of ‘tribute’ from the peasantry and opposes the extraction of surplus-value from the workers.
But, within this framework, there is a massive problem – precisely the problem which meant that Bukharin was defeated. The world capitalist powers were not likely to allow the Soviet state to develop a disarmed, bucolic ‘socialism in one country’. There was an objective basis to the fears expressed by Stalin and others about the dangers of war with the imperialist powers. After all, Russia was invaded by foreign armies in the Civil War period, faced a hostile diplomatic situation all through the 1920s and 1930s, and was again invaded by Hitler’ s armies in the Second World War. ‘Socialism in one country’ was permanently threatened from without. Given ‘socialism in one country’, Stalinist industrialisation was the logical policy.
Bettelheim does not discuss any alternative to ‘socialism in one country’. Yet, in Germany in 1923 and after 1929, in China in the 1925–7 period, in France and in Spain in 1936, revo1utionary possibilities in other countries did exist. And they were thrown away in large measure due to the interventions of the Russian Communist Party leadership. Russia’s isolation was partly self-created and self-reinforced. [71]
On the basis of the productive forces already developed by world capitalism, socialism was possible. In isolated, backward Russia, it was not, whatever the theoretical sophistication and the will of anyone in Russia. Bettelheim’s admiration for Mao’s China – an even more backward country, and one whose social revolution in 1949 was not in any meaningful sense a workers’ revolution – forbids his recognising this. (More recently, Bettelheim’s hopes in China have been dashed: the new leadership has abandoned any illusions in ‘ideological struggle’ and socialism at a snail’s pace, in the face of the country’s perilous international situation and in particular the threat from the highly industrialised Russia.)
Bettelheim’s characterisation of the Russian revolution is all a piece with his account of the capitalist restoration process. Thus he writes:
‘The October revolution was unlike all previous revolutions, except the Paris Commune, by virtue of the fact that it was carried out through the guidance of proletarian ideas.’ [72]
Was it the character of the ideas guiding it that led Marx and Engels to celebrate the Paris Commune? Far from it – indeed, they measured their distance from the ideological stances of many of the Commune’s leaders. It was, rather, the political structure created by the Commune which they stressed: the election of all officials, their recallability, the arming of the people, etc. Similarly with Lenin’s account of the soviet in Letters From Afar, or his recovery of Marx’s revolutionary political doctrine in State and Revolution. What mattered in the revolutionary Marxist tradition was the creation by workers of political institutions through which they could exercise direct power. The same themes recur in the writings of Trotsky and Gramsci.
This conception of working-class power, of Marx’s dictatorship of the proletariat’, is central to the revolutionary Marxist tradition. Political structures like the Paris Commune, or the Soviets, wore seen as the institutional forms through which the working class might itself achieve its own self-emancipation, by its own efforts. [H] In such a perspective, the role of a revolutionary party was to encourage the workers to take the step of creating this political form and to to use it to seize power for themselves.
This conception is different from Bettelheim’s. What is central in his conception is not the direct exercise of power by actual workers, but rather the ideas inculcated into the masses by those who control the state machine. It is the ideas of the party, not the practice of the workers, which is decisive:
‘The Bolshevik Party (was) the party whose ideology, political line, style of leadership, capacity to develop the alliance between the working class and the peasantry and, consequently, relations with the masses, constituted the ultimate guarantee of the proletarian character of the ruling power.’ [74]
Lest we be in any doubt, Bettelheim hammers his argument home:
‘The working-class members of a proletarian party may be relatively few (especially in a country where the working class itself is not large) without that circumstance damaging its proletarian character, which is determined by its ideology and political line.’ [75]
What matters in the degeneration of the Russian Revolution is not fundamentally the isolation and backwardness of the Russian economy, the paralysis of its Soviets, the atomisation of the working class, but the inadequacies of the ideas in the heads of the ruling party. The whole theoretical formulation is thus characterised by an extraordinary degree of idealism, whose practical side is a voluntarism very distinct from the tradition deriving from Marx. Bettelheim’s position is more reminiscent of that of Schapper and others, whom Marx attacked at the final meeting of the Central Committee of the Communist League in September 1850:
A national German approach has replaced the universal conception of the Manifesto ... The will, rather than the actual conditions, was stressed as the chief factor in the revolution The word “proletariat” has been reduced to a mere phrase, like the word “people” was by the democrats ... In place of actual revolutionary development one would have to adopt the revolutionary phrase. [76]
(Next part)>

Footnotes
F. One example of the confusion is provided by Binns and Haynes. In an otherwise very useful article [58], they attack Antonio Carlo’s critique of ‘state capitalism’ [59] as if it were a critique of the third approach. Yet a reading of Carlo reveals that the sole object of his critique is the first approach. He appears, indeed, unaware of the third approach, which does not figure in his discussion or his (very extensive) footnotes. Carlo’s article, besides being an exposition of the second approach, is best read as a useful critique of Bettelheim, etc.
G. ‘Vulgar Marxism’, of course, is rooted in a particular reading of Marx himself. Particular (and rather one-sided) formulations of Marx’s – for example, Marx’s remark in The Poverty of Philosophy that the hand-mill gives you the feudal lord, and the steam-mill gives you the capitalist – provide the foundation for this kind of view. It is expressed most sharply, in the formulations of a number of theorists of the “Second International” [62] and in Joseph Stalin’s Dialectical and Historical Materialism. Stalin, for example, writes:
‘First the productive forces of society change and develop, and then, “depending” on these changes and “in conformity with them”, men’s relations of production, their economic relations, change ... however much the relations of production may lag behind the development of the productive forces, they must, sooner or later, ome into correspondence – and actually do come into correspondence with – the level of development of the productive forces, the character of the productive forces.’ (p. 31)
H. If one wanted a single sentence that summed up the political ideas of Marx, it might well be the opening remark of the Provisional Rules that Marx drafted for the First International, and which the Geneva Congress ratified in September 1866: ‘... the emancipation of the working classes must be conquered by the working classes themselves.’ [73]
* * *
References
58. Peter Binns and Mike Haynes, New theories of eastern European class societies, International Socialism, 2 : 7, winter 1980.
59. Antonio Carlo, The Socio-Economic Nature of the Soviet Union, Telos 21, 1974.
60. Charles Bettelheim, Economic Calculation and Forms of Property, translated by John Taylor with an introduction by Barry Hindess, London: Routledge, 1976.
61. Charles Bettelheim, Class Struggles in the USSR. First Period: 1917–1923,
Second Period: 1923–1930, both volumes translated by Brian Pearce, Harvester, 1976 and 1978.
62. For a useful critique, see Lucio Colletti, The Marxism of the Second International in Colletti, From Rousseau to Lenin, New Left Books, 1972.
63. Cf. Carlo, op. cit., p. 2.
64. Bettelheim, Second Period, pp. 107–8.
65. Bettelheim, First Period, p. 42.
66. Carlo, op. cit., p. 37.
67. Alex Callinicos, Maoism, Stalinism and the Soviet Union, International Socialism, 2 : 5, summer 1979, p. 82.
68. Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow 1962, p. 772.
69. Marx/Engels, The German Ideology, Marx/Engels,
Collected Works, V, p. 49.
70. Bettelheim, Second Period, p. 313.
71. See, for example, F. Claudin, The Communist Movement (Penguin, 1975).
72. Bettelheim, First Period, p. 9, my emphasis, CB.
73. Marx, The First International and After, Penguin, 1974, p. 87.
74. Bettelheim, First Period, pp. 103–4.
75. Bettelheim, Second Period, p. 331.
76. Marx, The Revolutions of 1848, Penguin, 1973, p. 341.
 

 Barker Theories of Russia (Part 5)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Theories of Russia

Colin Barker
Theories of Russia
*
(8) The theory of ‘bureaucratic state capitalism’
The wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for ever fence it out. (Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod)
The theory of ‘bureaucratic state capitalism’ is most completely developed by Tony Cliff. [86] It is also developed by the West Indian Marxist, C.L.R. James, and by the American Raya Dunayevskaya. [87] It is also discussed and developed, by Chris Harman [88], Nigel Harris [89] and Peter Binns and Mike Haynes. [90]
According to this theory, like the previous two we have discussed, Russia is a class society. Those who head the state apparatus constitute a ruling class, and direct a process of exploitation of the direct producers. Unlike Bettelheim, the proponents of this theory do not hold that there is any predominant development of ‘market’ relations within Russia, considered in isolation; while the term ‘planning’ is hardly appropriate to describe the functioning of the Russian national economy, it is an administered economy. The Russian national economy (with the chief exception of the small private plots worked by the rural population in their spare time) constitutes a single unit of production, a single ‘enterprise’, directed and controlled by a bureaucratically organised ruling class.
Unlike the theorists of ‘state collectivism’, however, these writers argue that Russia today is ‘capitalist’. It has been so since the end of the 1920s, from the time of the initiation of the First Five-Year Plan and the forced collectivisation of agriculture. The state acts like any other capitalist, exploiting its workforce, which produces surplus-value (value greater than that required for its subsistence) which passes out of the control of the immediate producers into the control of the ruling class. What makes this class specifically capitalist is not the internal relations of the Russian national economy alone, however; its capitalistic character is determined by its relations with other capitals, in the world economy. It is these ‘external’ relations, between Russia and the rest of world capitalism, which impose on the ruling class the specific aim of accumulation.
Accumulation of capital is the key driving force of the Russian national economy, and to the aim of accumulation are subordinated all other social, political and economic relations. As against Trotsky, Cliff etc. insist that what characterises the relations between the bureaucracy and the rest of Russian society is not the urge of the bureaucrats to expand their personal consumption. Although the rulers of Russia are highly privileged, by comparison with the workers and collective farmers. But that is a secondary issue. The motor of capitalism is not the consumption of the capitalists, but the accumulation of capital. Marx insisted on this:
One part of the surplus-value is consumed by the capitalist as revenue, the other part is employed as capital, i.e. it is accumulated ... it is the owner of the surplus-value, the capitalist, who makes this division. It is an act of his will. That part of the tribute exacted by him which he accumulates is said to be saved by him, because he does not consume it, i.e. because he performs his function as a capitalist, and enriches himself. Except as capital personified, the capitalist has no historical value ... in so far as he is capital personified, his motivating force is not the acquisition and enjoyment of use-values, but the acquisition and augmentation of exchange-values. He is fanatically intent on the valorization of values; consequently he ruthlessly forces the human race to produce for production’s sake ... Moreover, the development of capitalist production makes it necessary to constantly increase the amount of capital laid out in a given industrial undertaking, and competition subordinates every individual capitalist to the dominant laws of capitalist production, as external and coercive laws. It compels him to keep extending his capital, so as to preserve it, and he can only extend it by means of progressive accumulation.
In so far, therefore, as his actions are a mere function of capital – endowed, as capital is, in his person, with consciousness and a will – his own private consumption counts as a robbery committed against the accumulation of his capital ...
Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets. Therefore, save, save, i.e. reconvert the greatest possible portion of surplus-value or surplus product into capital! Accumulation for the sake of accumulation, production for the sake of production: this was the formula in which classical economics expressed the historical mission of the bourgeoisie in the period of its domination. Not for one instant did it deceive itself over the nature of wealth’s birth-pangs. [91]
The less, in reality, the capitalist class consumes itself, the more capitalist its behaviour. What defines the capitalist qua capitalist is his function: accumulation, spurred on by competition.
Why should accumulation for the sake of accumulation be the specific motor of capitalism? For two reasons. Firstly, the workers are separated from the means of production; secondly, there is competition between capitalists. Each of these two conditions is necessary for capitalist production to be dominant. Without the first, the separation of the immediate producers from the means of production, it would be impossible to subordinate consumption to the needs of accumulation – the workers, if they controlled the means of production, would not condemn themselves to misery in the interests of capital accumulation. Without the second, competition, each capitalist (or ‘agent of capital’ as Marx calls him) would lack a motive to permanent expansion of his capital.
It is the argument of the proponents of the theory of ‘bureaucratic state capitalism’ that these two conditions exist as far as Russia is concerned, and that they provide the crucial explanatory element in an adequate history of Russia since the end of the 1920s.
In Russia, the workers have no means of control over the activities of the state, which ‘owns’ the means of production, determines their disposal and use, and directs the overall process of social reproduction. Thus, as in capitalism, they are divorced from the means of production. Thus far, Cliff etc. are in agreement with both Bettelheim and the ‘new class theorists’, and in disagreement with Trotsky and Mandel, who see in the existence of nationalised property the existence of a “workers’ state”. The first condition of capitalism is met.
What, though, of the second condition? Does competition determine the behaviour of the rulers of Russia? If Russia is considered in isolation from the rest of the world, the answer must be no (Bettelheim is wrong, empirically). But once Russia is set back in its place in world economy, the answer is yes.
It is the drive to accumulate which explains the overwhelming predominance of the production of means of production, which characterized the First Five-Year Plan and which has remained the central focus of Russian investment effort ever since. Consumer goods production has remained a very poor relation – whether one considers the production of goods for the consumption of the mass of the population or for the elite. Stalin himself explained very clearly the motive behind this drive:
To slacken the pace (of industrialization) would means to lag behind; and those who lag behind are beaten. We do not want to be beaten. No we don’t want to. The history of old Russia ... she was ceaselessly beaten for her backwardness ... by the Mongol Khans, ... by Turkish Beys, ... by Polish-Lithuanian Pans, ... by Anglo-French capitalists, ... by Japanese barons, she was beaten by all for her backwardness, for military backwardness, for cultural backwardness, for political backwardness, for industrial backwardness, for agricultural backwardness. We are fifty or a hundred years behind the advanced countries. We must make good this lag in ten years. Either we do it or they crush us.’ [92]
Or again:
The environment in which we are placed ... at home and abroad ... compels us to adopt a rapid rate of growth of our industry. [93]
Two factors combine to make the Russian rulers maintain a high rate of accumulation. The first of these is the internal division of labour in which agriculture is still very stagnant while heavy industry is continually expanding. This forces the Russians to enter the world market more and more. The low productivity of labour, and the difficulties Russia experiences with technological development, similarly force the regime to purchase high technology goods from the western capitalist powers. Although the Russian economy is still primarily autarchic (its imports and exports still form a very small proportion of GNP), the longer-run tendency is for is for Russia to become increasingly integrated into the world market. This tendency is much more marked in the case of the East European satellites, to the extent that the willingness of western banks to re-cycle Polish loans is a critical issue for the regime there. Another feature of this purely economic integration of the ‘state capitalist’ regimes into the world market is the growing number of ‘joint’ enterprises which bring together Russian and East European capital (and workers) with western capital – a famous example being the Russian-and-Fiat car factory at Togliattigrad (scene of a strike wave in 1980).
It remains the case, however, that the purely economic factor is of less significance than military competition. This factor was of decisive importance in the crash industrialization period in the 1930s:
As early as 1932, munitions accounted for 21.8 per cent of all iron and steel – a very high percentage, us may be seen by comparison with the percentage of 29.2 for 1938, a year when war preparations were in full swing. Munitions plants accounted for nearly half of a iron and steel used in the construction of machine-building plants, and by 1938 nearly all other machinery plant construction had ceased, munitions construction, accounting for 94.3 per cent of all iron and steel consumed in machine-building construction. [94]
In the postwar Russian economy, thanks to the arms race with the United States, armaments construction has continued to absorb a very high proportion of the investment resources available to the bureaucracy. Military projects always figure at the top of the ‘priority’ projects which are kept going when the ‘plan’ gets stuck in bottlenecks. Russia, of course, is not peculiar in its diversion of productive resources to the manufacture of ever more deadly means of destruction. In the early 1960s, the United Nations calculated that $43,000 million was being spent annually by the world on the military account. This fabulous sum was equivalent to between 8 and 9 per cent of the world’s total output of goods and services at that time, and was very near the value of the world’s annual exports of all commodities. ‘Even more breath-taking is the comparison with investment: arms expenditure corresponded to about one half of gross capital formation throughout the world.’ [95] Because Russia is still more backward than the United States, the domestic cost of maintaining anything approaching ‘parity’ with NATO in ever-changing weapons systems is even higher there than in the west. Bahro’s remark on this (above, p. ?) is all too accurate. [P]
The ruling class of Russia emerged in the 1920s, and consolidated its position, but still in a negative sense. It stood between the working class and political power, but did not yet assert against the rest of society any specific set of social goals of its own. The bureaucracy of party and state in this period was characterised, above all, by its relative inertia and complacency. It acquiesced domestically to pressures from the peasantry, it subordinated foreign communist parties to its own need for security. Both policies were justified by the slogan ‘Socialism In One Country’, a slogan which in the 1920s had a relatively passive meaning. One might, in the 1920s, apply the term ‘degenerated workers state” to the system of social relations in Russia. Workers’ interests still affected policy to some degree, the trade unions reserved some small element of independence of the state, the ‘troika’ still functioned to some extent in the management of the factories, strikes were still legal, the Party member’s wage was still restricted to that of the skilled worker in industry.
At the end of the 1920s these policies and this situation were abandoned, as the state responded in a quite new way to a dual crisis: the peasant problem erupted, and the international situation appeared to worsen. There followed the period of the Five-Year Plans, when a break-neck industrialization was forced upon Russian society, and when land was taken back from the peasantry in the form of a forced collectivisation of agriculture. The rulers of Russia asserted, against both the working class and the peasantry, a quite new policy departure which was uniquely their own. It is from this time that it is proper to speak of ‘bureaucratic state capitalism’ in Russia. The whole national economy was focused around a massive ‘primitive’ accumulation drive, with resources forced out of the population in an orgy of state-organized exploitation. The standard of living of the mass of the population, which had been rising steadily in the 1920s, was now sharply reduced, at the same time that the rate of industrial growth was stepped up to previously undreamed of heights. All the political and social gains made by the Russian workers and the Russian peasant in 1917 were destroyed in the fire of state-directed crash industrialization. The initiation of the Five-Year Plan was the signal for a counter-revolution, organized and led from the centre of the state-party apparatus.
In its essentials, the pattern or social relations established at the end of the 1920s, and the social goals explicitly attached to those social relations, have remained intact up till now. Far from demonstrating the instability that Trotsky expected, the system has survived the shocks of the Great Purges, the Second World War, the expansion of its territory, the development around it of a series of satellite nations in Eastern Europe, the death of Stalin, Kruschev’s ‘secret speech’ revelations, and the continuous burden of ‘Cold War’ expenditure, etc. Bureaucratic state capitalism in Russia has proved capable of reproducing itself, and on an expanded scale, over a half century of crises and dangers.
What happened at the end of the 1920s was not, in reality, a completely unique event. Those who ruled Russia were facing a dilemma that has been faced by by other non-capitalist ruling orders from the second quarter of the nineteenth century onwards. The world expansion of capital, based on the massive productive increases which capital achieved through industrialism, threatened the position of every ruling order. The capitalist powers of Europe and North America, thanks to the industrial revolution, were possessed of the economic and political means to impose an urgent choice on the rulers of the remainder of the world. They might simply submit to the new powers in the world, and become their agents at best, allowing ‘their’ populations and their wealth to be directed and exploited for the benefit of Atlantic capitalism. Their own integrity as ruling classes would thereby be destroyed. In formal or informal terms, they would become nothing more than sub-regions of someone else’s empire, satraps, compradors, servants of alien powers. Alternatively, they could resist this subjection. But, to do so, they must enter the new system of capitalist world economy on its own terms: they must themselves become centres of capital accumulation, re-ordering the mode of exploitation of their own subjects. It is characteristic of pre-capitalist exploitation that its prime motive is the personal consumption of the ruling classes. To maintain their integrity against the massive threat posed by capitalism, that motive must be altered: the accumulation of capital, the expansion of production, the enforcement of industrialism upon their subject population must become predominant. They could only oppose capitalism’s threat by themselves adopting capitalist production. And, to do so, they must measure themselves against the already established capitalist powers, and seek, in Stalin’s own phrase, to ‘catch up and outstrip’ their powerful rivals. To catch up, from a position of backwardness (a relative concept), must mean imposing on their populations an even higher rate and a more organized and ruthless pattern of exploitation than the labouring classes of western Europe and the United States were currently experiencing. From he beginning, a higher degree of centralisation of political power, and the mechanisms by which capital might be accumulated and re-invested, was required.
Some succeeded, some did not. An early attempt to achieve this goal in Egypt failed. In Russia, the Tsars attempted to promote a major industrialization, but the tensions this provoked finally brought them down. In Germany, after the failure of the 1848 revolution, the rulers of Prussia forcibly unified Germany from above and promoted – with the help of a highly centralised banking system – a tremendous industrialization in Germany. In Japan, a section of the ‘feudal’ ruling class – faced with the very tangible power of the United States, especially in the shape of a gunboat – carried through a seizure of state power and used their control to subordinate the people of Japan to the development of industry on the new, capitalist basis. In each case, of course, the particular history is a different one; in each case, however, the general logic was the same.
This was the logic of Stalinist industrialisation. There were two alternatives to it, given the particular history of Russia and its experience of a workers’ revolution in 1917. The first was the ‘Bukharinist’ possibility, whose effect would, in reality, be to maintain the weakness of Russia in an ever more dangerous world environment, and in the end to allow Russia to become the formal or informal colony of another power or powers. The second was the ‘Trotskyist’ possibility, which alone would have meant challenging the very rules of the game: abandoning ‘socialism in one country’ as an aspiration, and seeking by the most effective means possible to assist communist parties in the advanced countries to lead their working classes to seize power, in order to form an international alliance of workers’ states that would aspire to destroy capitalism in the world. The actual, historical rejection of both ’Bukharinism’ and ‘Trotskyism’ left open only the Stalinist path: crash industrialisation and militarisation, the entry of Russia into the world capitalist system – no longer as a subverter, but as a challenger to equal membership with the other great competitors.
The Russian development was, of course, unique in one respect: its particular historical background. In 1917, briefly, the workers of Russia took political power into their own hands through the soviets. They dispossessed the former ruling classes, and centralised industry in the hands of the state (initially, though briefly, their state). The definitive switch to capital accumulation as the driving force of Russian national economic and social and political life, from, the end of the 1920s, required that all remnants of the workers’ achievements in 1917 – and the peasants’ too – be obliterated. It happened: the ‘totalitarian’ regime systematically destroyed every last vestige of workers’ power.
Precisely because of the background of 1917, the turn to capitalist industrialization in Russia was an event of world significance. 1917 had been an inspiration to millions of workers internationally, and had provoked a major re-orientation of working-class politics across the globe. In every country, Communist parties had appeared, linking their understanding of the world and their own fates to the Russian revolution. The degeneration of the revolution of 1917, and its final destruction from 1929, affected them deeply. They remained attached to Moscow, hut to Moscow whose ‘communism’ was now national, and oriented to world capitalist competition. Moscow was now counter-revolutionary. And they became counter-revolutionary too; despite their formal ‘communist’ title, these parties became parties of ‘order’, manifesting their reorientation in major crises in a whole host of countries: In Spain in 1936, in France in 1936, in Italy, Greece and France in 1944–45, in Algeria in the 1950s, in France in 1968, in Chile in 1973, in Portugal in 1975, in Spain in 1980.
Additionally, a capitalist Russia which could survive the terrible shocks of the second world war could also expand its territory and its are of imperial control in the circumstances of its victory. As the Red Army drove Hitler’s forces back across Eastern Europe in the closing stages of the war, it reorganised the governments of those countries, establishing regimes of its own kind and subordinating them to the overall control of Moscow. For a period after the war, indeed, these economies were quite systematically plundered for the benefit of Russian post-war reconstruction [97]; until now, none of them has succeeded in breaking out of the political embrace of the Kremlin. In all essential respects, their economies are imposed copies of the Russian model, their peoples subordinated to the same imperatives.
In the countries of Eastern Europe, the system of ‘bureaucratic state capitalism’ was established without benefit of any workers’ revolution. The end-result was similar, but the historical process was different. In Yugoslavia, by contrast, the Communist Party took power without the aid of Moscow, but again established (until the Stalin-Tito split) a similar form of national economy. In China in 1949 Mao’s army finally came to power without immediately destroying the existing state, but using it to new, state capitalist purposes. Again the routes were different, but the destinations were similar.
In other countries of the ‘Third World’ today, the tendency to state-controlled production is more or less developed, sometimes in formal connection with a ‘Communist’ regime, sometimes not.
The implication of all this is that bureaucratic state capitalism is not peculiar to Russia. Indeed, the phenomenon of state ownership of means of production, state direction of investment, state-controlled exploitation of the work – force is a world phenomenon. Modern world economy is incomprehensible without reference to the role of the various nation-states as agents of capital, of capital as process, of capital accumulation. Far from being an exceptional element in the world, Russia today is a normal part of the contemporary world capitalist system. That system has itself undergone important internal transformations and developments since the 19th century – indeed, since its birth in the later period of European medieval society. The very phenomena which are taken by some to be distinctive elements of the Russian national economy are, in reality, increasingly common elements of capitalist production everywhere. We may briefly identify a few of these.
Firstly, the direct role of the state in production has everywhere expanded massively. Nor is it by any means the case that shifts in the direction of state ownership and direction of capital accumulation are only associated with working-class parties or ‘left-wing’ governments. In Britain, for example, it was the government of Stanley Baldwin which nationalised the electricity generating system, and another Conservative government that nationalised the international airlines. In 1971, Edward Heath’s government nationalised the aero-engine business of Rolls Royce. The constant tendencies towards centralisation and concentration of capital which Marx and Engels noted in the 19th century, and which Lenin, Luxemburg and Bukharin further analysed in the period of the First World War, have continued to an extraordinary degree in our own period. The state is now, in most countries, the largest single employer of wage-labour, not merely in warfare, administration and welfare, but in the sphere of material production itself.
Secondly, the very motive which Marx insisted was the key to understanding capitalist production – the accumulation of capital – has everywhere become the predominant motive. The personal enrichment and the personal income of the legal owners of capital, even in the private sector, are no longer the key determinants of the behaviour of large corporations. In Britain in the period before the First World War, the majority of company profits were still distributed directly to share-holders as dividends. For a long time, now, this has ceased to be the case: the greater part of net profits in large corporations are now not distributed as dividends to share-holders, but ‘ploughed back’ as investment capital into the expansion of the corporations that make these profits.
Thirdly, even within the ‘private’ sphere (let alone the extensive nationalised and semi-nationalised sectors) in western capitalist countries, the clear tendency has been for the formal legal owners of company stocks and shares to pass control over corporate investment, management and development policy to salaried managers. These men undoubtedly act, in Marx’s term, as ‘the personification of capital’, as the agents of capital accumulation, even though in many cases their personal wealth is relatively incidental to their main social function.
Fourthly, as is all too apparent from the particular form taken by the world economic crisis of the early 1980s, the crisis mechanism which Marx analysed in the 19th century has altered its functioning, precisely as a result of the changing character of the capitalist world economy. In the past, the onset of economic crisis, of over-production and mass unemployment, was associated always with a collapse of prices. Recession and deflation were almost synonymous phenomena. Today this is no longer the case: rather, the world economy is characterised by the new phenomenon of ‘stagflation’: stagnation and recession go hand in hand with rising prices. This change is only comprehensible if we take account of the immense centralisation and concentration of capital that has occurred in the world – not only into the hands of the huge corporate enterprises that now straddle the globe as ‘multinational corporations’ but also into the hands of nation-states. In the past, one of the ‘functions’ of economic crisis was, in a sense, to cleanse the economic system of a surfeit of capital: bankruptcies, devaluations of capital, the removal of weaker capitals from the competitive system were the effect of the crisis, which then opened the way to a revival of production and trade. The same logic is of course at work at present: the level of bankruptcies in Britain in the 1980–81 period has been extraordinarily high. But, it has not been ‘high enough’. Companies and concerns which, in world terms, are totally obsolete still survive despite immense financial losses and despite being altogether too small to survive in world competition on their own. British Leyland is a famous example. However, that companies and capitalist accumulation units of this character do survive is due to the willingness of nation-states to keep them going, with massive injections of money capital which have two simultaneous effects: first, the purging effect of the economic crisis is prevented from working fully; and, second, the result is a spiral of inflation that characterises the whole world economy. The real bankrupts today are no longer simply corporations, but nation-states. The scale of state debt today is astronomical, whether we consider the states of the west or the east alike. To date, the stability of the system has depended on the willingness of the national banks and the national governments to continue to lend money to the bankrupts – whether of Italy, or Zaire, or Brazil, or Poland – a willingness which is motivated by a fear of the world consequences of a series of national failures. In all the discussion about the possibility of a Russian invasion of Poland, it has been little noticed that the decision of western bankers have been much more significant, up till now, in determining the fate of the Polish regime than have Russian tanks.
The Russian economy is irrevocably bound into the crisis of the world economy, and suffers from all its major manifestations. The rate of growth in Russia, and in the other East European countries – once the supposed index of their ‘superiority’ over capitalism – have been falling with each successive ‘plan period’. The major sources of ‘surplus population’ which these national economies were able to draw upon in their periods of high and extensive growth are now more or less exhausted; the inefficiency of the internal economic mechanisms, and the mass alienation of their work-forces, hold back their productivity growth, drawing these economies more and more rapidly towards stagnation. If their growth rates, at best, still match the western growth rates (they are better than Britain, but worse than West Germany or Japan), these growth rates are only achieved on the basis of twice the level of investment (in other words, crudely, their rate of profit is about half that obtaining in the west). And the rate of profit in Russian industry is falling – according to figures produced by the Russians themselves. Unable to jack up their productivity by internal means, the rulers of Russia have become more and more dependent on imports of western high technology, imports which have placed an increasing strain on their international payments balances – especially as they have also been forced every few years to purchase large quantities of grain on the world market thanks to the continuing inefficiency of their collectivised agriculture. Increasingly, too, the economies of the East European economies, and of Russia itself, are forced to move in cycles of growth and stagnation. [98]
In some respects, the crisis in the Russian economy is a part and an example of the general crisis of the world economy, to which we referred briefly on the previous page. Nowhere is it more true than in Russia that inefficient units are kept going rather than being allowed to go to the wall. The whole internal bureaucratic mechanism, the extreme centralisation of decision-making and allocation, are more and more an impediment to any kind of economic development. Far from being crisis free, the whole national economy is in a state of permanent crisis. On top of that, there is additionally a specific form of crisis which affects an ‘autarchic’ national economy like the Russian, which tries to ‘go it alone’ – there is a specific crisis, if you like, of ‘socialism in one country’. To understand this, we have to remember that not only is the historical tendency of capitalism to develop the centralisation and concentration of capital, but also capitalism tends to develop a worldwide division of labour. Bureaucratic state capitalism is a response to the first tendency, in that it centralises all national capital into one set of hands, into one unit of capital. But, as it does this by the method of economic autarchy, it also deprives itself of the benefits of an international division of labour. The principle of autarchy means that Russia must manufacture, for itself, all the material inputs into production that it needs. In many cases, the ‘production runs’ involved are relatively tiny, and thus relatively costly in world terms. At a time when world production is increasingly becoming a reality, through the establishment of world production lines (intersected, with increasing irrationality, by national boundaries) in a whole series of fundamental industries (cars, computers, petro-chemicals, food and drink, aircraft, etc., etc.) access to the widest possible markets is the condition for effective and competitive production. If the whole of the Russian and East European economies were to be combined, they would amount to less than 20 per cent of total world production. [Q] The west, with access to the remaining 80 per cent, maintains an insuperable lead in productivity. The original ‘advantage’ which Russia held under Stalin, namely its more advanced centralisation of capital, has been lost through the continuing and enormous degree of centralisation of capital in the West. Today the effect of the policy of autarchy is to intensify the effects of the crisis inside Russia.
And reform is extraordinarily difficult. Any significant movement for reform within Russia immediately confronts the entrenched interests of the managers and beneficiaries of the existing organisation of production. As in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, no significant reform process can be initiated from the top without bringing into action the mass of the population. And, once in movement, the working classes of Russia and eastern Europe are liable – as every experience to date has suggested – to raise their own demands against both the existing regime and against the reformers. The danger of reform, from the standpoint of the ruling classes in these countries, is that behind it lies the real threat of social revolution, Increasingly, these countries are poised between two stark alternatives: on one hand, instability and stagnation, and on the other hand social revolutions that may try to put into practice the very ideas that in public utterances the regime supports but that in practice it utterly negates.
 
Discussion
It is the author’s opinion that the theory of ‘bureaucratic state capitalism’ is fundamentally correct. The discussion of this theory will therefore consider one or two of the theoretical implications of this approach, and will attempt to counter a few of the objections that have been raised against this conception.
The most apparent implication of the theory is that there is a need for further development of the Marxist theory of the state, in particular in terms of the relation between the state and capitalist society. Those who reject the theory of bureaucratic state capitalism do so, usually, on two grounds: they reject the idea that the state can itself play the role of a class; or, while accepting this, they deny that the state can play the part of a capitalist class. We have already discussed the first objection, in our consideration of Trotsky’s theory. The second still awaits a reply, although it is already implicit in our discussion of the ‘new class’ theories.
What is at issue is the question of the boundaries of the social system. So long as the geographical borders of a nation-state are taken to be the boundaries of the system of social relations, or of the mode of production, then clearly a country like Russia cannot be considered to be a capital, at least not in the sense in which that term is employed in Marxism. For capitalist production implies the existence of many capitals, interacting with each other through competition, and thereby imposing – through their competitive interaction – the ‘laws’ of capitalist production onto each other. Capitalism without competition is like an omelette without eggs. It is competition which forces each capital to accumulate on an ever-expanding scale, on pain of death. If Russia and its economy are treated in isolation, then it cannot be capitalist.
But this methodological issue is crucial to the argument. It was, Marx argued, a fundamental aspect of the ‘mission’ of capital to create a world market. National frontiers can no longer contain the dynamic productive forces developed by the capitalist mode of production. Capital’s development is the development of a world society, the development to dominance of a mode of production which is global in its scope. It is the world economy as a whole, and not simply as a sum of its parts, that must be grasped conceptually. At the level of world economy, broad phases of development may be distinguished a ‘mercantile’ phase, up to the late 18th century; a ‘competitive’ phase up to the latter part of the 19th century; perhaps a ‘monopoly’ phase [R] from the turn of the century up to the 1930s; and a state-monopoly phase now. The notion of ‘phases’ is obviously one to be used with caution, and there will be arguments as to the boundaries between any such ‘phases’, their characterisation, etc.
Once account is taken of the significance of the question of world economy, in any case, the question of the state requires to be conceptually transformed. There is a powerful tendency for Marxist (and non-Marxist, for that matter) discussion of the state to limit itself to precisely that: the state. One would think, from a perusal of most critical writing on the question of the relation between state and capital [99], that the problem of the state in capitalist society is a singular one, that capitalism is a form of society with a state. Yet this is obviously not so. It is characteristic of capitalism, as a world system of production and division of labour, that it does not have a single-state system of political rule. Rather, it lacks a single political centre, possessing instead a fragmented, competitive system of states. This political system of nation-states first emerged at the same time that capital first became dominant as an organising principle of economic life, in the late Middle Ages in Europe. (Among historians sensitive to this question, especial note might be taken of the work of Otto Hintze [100] and Immanuel Wallerstein. [101] The system of relations within and between states assumed, from the start, a dual form, replicating in politics the dual relation which Marx noted as characteristic of capitalist production: within the boundaries of the state (and of the factory or enterprise) there prevailed more or less ‘despotic’ relations, through which surpluses were extracted from the working populations; between the various states (and between capitals) reigned ‘anarchy’, an ever-shifting balance of competitive struggle. ‘Anarchy’ and ‘despotism’ (or competition and exploitation) provided the defining features of the economy and of the politics of the emerging capitalist order. From the beginning, therefore, there was a structural homology between the principles of capital formation and those of state formation.
Every state – like every capital – is defined within the capitalist world order by its ‘two-faced’ character. The state is ‘Janus-faced’: it is an agent of both domestic control, of internal ‘order’ and of external competition. Its activity in either sphere, internal or external, is crucially influenced by its activity in the other.
It is this structural homology between state and capital, which has been theoretically ignored or under-emphasised for too long, which precisely makes possible state capital. One factor which has made the state a centre of capital accumulation of increasing significance is the tendency noted before, to the centralisation and concentration of capital, which defines the movement of the whole world system. Another is the particular character of state power itself. Every state is an apparatus, as both Marx and Weber noted, which characteristically disposes not merely of purchasing power, but of force. The very coercive power of every state (perhaps the defining feature of the state qua institution) makes the state unique as an economic actor in its ability to enforce the collection of taxes from its subject population. [102] It is the tax-power of the state which is the key to its borrowing power, and of the power of the state to intervene in its domestic economy. In turn, the power of taxation and intervention possessed by every genuine state is legitimated by two related, but analytically distinct, functions that every modern state fulfils: within its own sphere, it maintains ‘law and order’, in the widest sense, and on the world scale it defends the ‘national interest’ against other states and other, externally-based capitals. [S]
Even so, the key argument of those who oppose the idea that Russia can be considered – as it is by the proponents of the theory of bureaucratic state capitalism – as if it were a single corporation of a capitalist type is, fundamentally, that what Marx termed ‘the law of value’ cannot be said to be operative in the case of Russian production. He who says capitalism, says this critic, says market, commodity, price, labour-market. These cannot be identified as key economic mechanisms in Russia, hence the law of value cannot operate there either. In this sense, whatever Russia might be, it cannot be capitalist.
To take the last issue first: by definition, and in reality, the terminology of the ‘labour market’ can hardly be applied to the case of Russia. There is but one employer, the state, although that employer has many branches and factories and enterprises. The worker may (indeed, does, to a very high degree, to the constant worry of the state) move about from one employment situation to another, but the worker cannot change employers. If there is no labour market, i.e. no possibility of the worker freely altering his or her employer, says the critic, then we have to do with a situation that cannot be capitalist, for. capitalism implies the freedom of the worker, implies a labour-market. There is just one snag with this argument – for a Marxist, anyway – which is that Marx thought quite differently, as did Lenin. For Marx, the slave plantations of the United States were, despite the inability of the slave to change masters, capitalist enterprises. And the reason they were to be counted as such was precisely that they produced for the world market. Similarly, Lenin argued that despite the continuation of servile relations in the Russian countryside, the predominant relations in the Russian countryside were already capitalist, and for the same basic reason. The logic of treating the legal freedom of the worker to change employers as a fundamental feature, a defining element, of capitalist production would be to suggest that in Britain and much of Europe, in the period of the two World Wars, capitalist production was suspended because of the introduction of limitations on the rights of workers to change their jobs. It would also be necessary to argue that the children whose parents effectively sold them into bondage to early capitalist employers were not wage-workers.
More serious is the objection concerning the application of the ‘law of value’ to Russian production. This objection needs to be answered, not merely in relation to Russia, etc., but actually in relation to the whole of world capitalism today.
The law of value, according to Marx, is the key to understanding the workings of the capitalist economy. Value relations, however, are not immediate determinants of ‘surface’ relations such as prices. Indeed, Marx argued in Volume III of Capital that for capitalist production to function at all, there must be a significant distinction drawn between ‘value’ (determined in terms of socially necessary labour-time) and ‘price’ (money equivalent). While prices cannot be understood without reference to values, they can also not be identified with values. The two are systematically different, within any capitalist economy. This distinction between value and price is only magnified by the developments that have occurred within capitalism since Marx’s own time. The tendency for markets to be monopolised increases the ability of firms to manipulate prices to their advantage: large corporations are able, through a kind of ‘monopoly rent’, to so raise prices that they draw to themselves more than their ‘normal’ share of total surplus value. In any case, an increasing proportion of transactions (for example, those registered in national import and export statistics) in the world are transactions occurring within rather than between corporations. (Fully half of all US trade, for example, is between different subsidiaries of the same corporations. [103] Prices are now determined by companies’ needs to jump tariff walls, to transfer profits from high tax to low tax countries, etc. Additionally, in every country the state now intervenes, more or less directly, in the process of price fixing of a whole series of goods. Indeed, many ‘prices’ are – in economists’ terms – hardly prices at all, but better understood as taxes or rents: consider bus and train fares, gas and electricity prices, drug prices etc. ‘Market’, ‘commodity’ and ‘price’ are terms whose applicability in immediate terms to capitalism in the west becomes increasingly problematical. The distance between ‘value’ and ‘price’ is now immense.
Yet the law of value still operates, and still provides the key to understanding the workings of the capitalist system. A simple example may suffice to make the point. It is common in modern supermarkets for the managers to nominate what are sometimes termed ‘loss leaders’, commodities which are offered at ‘bargain prices’ to induce the shopper to enter the store. It may indeed be that the ‘loss-leader’ is indeed sold at a ‘loss’. Is this a ‘de-commodification’ of the loss-leader, and a sign that the supermarket is moving away from capitalist principles? The answer, obviously, is decisively not. What matters is the overall relation between capital invested and profit received in the whole supermarket chain, not the price of an individual commodity. The law of value is determinant only at the aggregate level.
It is necessary to understand what the law of value is really about. ‘Valorisation’ – the reduction of goods to their ‘values’ – is a process by which different, qualitatively different activities are reduced to different quantities of their common substance: socially necessary labour time. It is the process by which a labour activity with a particular use-value (say, tailoring) is reduced to what it has in common with another (say, tank manufacture). The ‘labour time’ in whose terms values are assessed is not a concrete, particular labour activity, but ‘labour in general’, or ‘abstract, general labour’. This process of reduction, of ‘valorisation’ is not merely an accounting device, nor a mere conceptual process in economic theory. It is a real process, through which the products of labour activity force their producers to act in certain very definite ways. The process of valorisation occurs through competition, which is the confrontation of one set of the products of labour with another. In order to remain in competition, each separate producer or collection of producers must maintain their production at a level which enables them, overall, to match those of their competitors. For valorisation to occur, i.e. for the law of value to be predominant, the various products of labour must be forcibly compared with each other, must be systematically piled up against each other.
The example of this process which is most commonly discussed, for obvious reasons, is price competition. But it is not necessarily the only form of competition. Within a given price range, for example, competition by delivery date, or by quality of output, may play an equally significant role – indeed, in the modern world economy, price competition is of declining significance in respect of a whole range of products. What is crucial is that there should be this significant ‘piling up of products’ against each other. If we are to call the USSR Ltd. capitalist, i.e. if it is true that valorisation occurs in Russian production, it must be because Russian products of labour are indeed ‘piled up’ against those of its competitors. Unless this is the case, Russian labour can be called concrete and specific only, but not ‘abstract, general labour’. To be still more specific, it must be the case that living labour (the Russian workers) be dominated by the need to produce surplus-value in competition with their brothers and sisters elsewhere in world capitalism.
It is the argument of the theory of ‘bureaucratic state capitalism’ that precisely this crushing necessity dominates Russian production. Only the predominant form in which the competition occurs is military competition (with purely ‘economic’ competition becoming of increasing significance in the 1970s and 1980s). The products of human labour that are piled up against each other are – to the growing peril of life on the planet – modern armaments. The entire Russian economy is subordinated, ultimately, to the demands of this sector of production. The pressure of military competition forces the rulers of Russia to squeeze ever greater surpluses out of the population, and to direct them to producing ever more costly and ever more sophisticated means of destruction, the final guarantee of Russia’s place in the world. It is this military competition – above all with the west, but also not insignificantly with China – which enforces the rule of surplus-value production throughout the Russian economy. That same rule is also, at base, the cause of the crisis of growth in the economy.
To such an end has ‘socialism in one country’ come.
* * *
Footnotes
P. For both domestic and international reasons, the real weight of the arms expenditure is concealed in Russia even more than in the west. In the official ‘budget’, a good part of ‘defence’ expenditure is hidden in the very large ‘research’ budget. The very distorted Russian price mechanism is a further source of concealment. [96]
Q. I say ‘if they were to be combined’ for the tendency is increasingly for the east European economies to be more and more integrated into western trade and investment flows. Poland and Hungary are prime examples, but the trend is the same, if more muted, in East Germany and Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and Rumania.
R. This was the theme of Lenin’s Imperialism: Highest Stage of Capitalism (1915), a work whose accuracy as an account of the world in his own time has been questioned. A rather different account of the same period was produced by Bukharin, in his Imperialism and World Economy (1915). Bukharin stresses much more than does Lenin, even in the First World War period, the role of the state in the concentration and centralisation of capital, and this emphasis is continued in his The Economics of the Transformation Period, a work written during the Civil War in Russia. My own view is that Bukharin’s work is much superior to Lenin’s, in its relevance both to its own time and to ours.
S. Talking of structural homologies, it might be noted that this places the state in a situation very like that of a protection racket – a comparison of more than humorous significance which I hope some time to develop more fully.
* * *
References
86. Tony Cliff, Russia: A Marxist Analysis, 1964. The first part of this book was originally published in 1955 as Stalinist Russia: A Marxist Analysis, and has been reprinted as State Capitalism in Russia, Pluto, 1974, which is the only form in which it is now in print. Two other works by this author, under a different name, are Ygael Gluckstein, Stalin’s Satellites in Europe, Allen and Unwin, 1952, and Mao’s China, Allen and Unwin, 1957.
87. C.L.R. James, State Capitalism and World Revolution; Raya Dunayevskaya, Marxism and Freedom.
88. Chris Harman, How The Revolution Was Lost, International Socialism, 1970 (?) [Note by ETOL: Actually it was first published as an article in 1967; since then it has been reprintend several times as a pamphlet.]; Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe, Pluto, 1974; Poland, The Crisis of State Capitalism, International Socialism (1st series) 93, 1976.
89. Nigel Harris, Beliefs in Society, Penguin, 1971; The Mandate of Heaven: Marx and Mao in Modern China, Quartet, 1978.
90. Binns and Haynes, op. cit. (above, note 58).
91. Marx, Capital, vol. I, Penguin edition, pp. 738–42.
92. Stalin, Problems of Leninism, cit. Isaac Deutscher, Stalin, 1961, p. 328.
93. Stalin, cit. E.H. Carr and R.W. Davies, Foundations of a Planned Economy, Vol. 1, p. 327.
94. Cliff, Russia: A Marxist Analysis, p. 41.
95. Michael Kidron, Western Capitalism Since The War, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1968, pp. 39–40.
96. Cliff, op. cit., p. 40.
97. Gluckstein (see note 86) provides a wealth of documentation on this.
98. All the matters discussed in this paragraph are documented by Binns & Haynes, op. cit. (see note 58).
99. For example, Engels,  The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State; Lenin, The State and Revolution; Miliband, The State in Capitalist Society; Poulantzas, Political Power and Social Classes; the authors brought together in Holloway and Picciotto, op. cit., with the exception of von Braunmühl (see above, note 80).
100. Felix Gilbert, ed., The Historical Essays of Otto Hintze, New York: OUP, 1975.
101. Especially Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World System: Capitalist Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century, Academic Press, 1974.
102. There are very useful discussions of the significance of taxation in the essays by Gabriel Ardant and by Rudolf Braun in Charles Tilly, ed., The Formation of National States in Western Europe, Princeton UP, 1975.
103. Cited from Binns and Haynes, op. cit., p. 33.
 



Brecht on Theatre
Translated and edited by John Willett
Methuen, 50s
Oh What A Lovely War
Theatre Workshop
Methuen, 16s
Ironhand
John Arden
Methuen, 8s 6d
Brecht’s reputation as a dramatist has been fiercely disputed. Some, including the present reviewer, consider him the greatest playwright of the century; others are repelled by his ‘didactism’ and profess themselves bored by ‘propaganda on the stage’. Generally Brecht’s supporters have been found on the Left of the political spectrum, his most enthusiastic denigrators on the Right. This volume of essays is unlikely to heal the split. Brecht insists that the theatre, like all art (but especially the narrative arts), must be treated seriously, must be regarded as a political force that reinforces or questions men’s assumptions about social life: ‘There is no play and no theatrical performance which does not in some way or other affect the dispositions and conceptions of the audience. Art is never without consequences, and indeed that says something for it’ (p.151). Those who are concerned about the quality of a society must also be concerned about the quality of its artistic activities, both their content and their form.
At the basis of Brecht’s aesthetics lie two simple and interconnected theses: the theatre must be consciously instructive, and the theatre must be fun; the one presupposes the other. For behind Brecht’s complaints against the contemporary bourgeois theatre lies the basic charge that it makes a false distinction between learning and fun. As a Marxist Brecht was concerned to provide a theatre that would continually criticise and instruct, which would show reality in its complexity and with its contradictions and stimulate judgement on it, and which would excite the audience’s reason as well as its emotions. But his ‘didactic and pedagogic’ theatre was also meant to entertain – something little appreciated in Britain, where as fine a company as the Royal Shakespeare could present his comedy Puntila in the style of a pontificating Chekhov gone suddenly coarse (an effort as extraordinary as attempting to produce a circus in the style of Swan Lake). Hence Brecht’s great admiration for Chaplin, and hence the brilliance of the recent visit of the Berliner Ensemble, whose productions (in German) were more fun than anything else in London.
The need to bring the intellect back into the theatre is a theme that runs through all the essays. But what is meant is not that the theatre should be ‘highbrow’; more simply, Brecht expresses a belief in the intelligence of his audience, and refutes the extraordinary assumption of much contemporary theatre (and television, etc.) that learning is not enjoyable. Why, after all, should an explanation of the scientific reasons for believing the earth goes round the sun be out of place in the theatre? In Brecht’s Galileo it occupies a whole scene; the explanation is interesting and amusing, and education and entertainment are united. The theatre, radio, film, etc., ought to be able to ‘master the presentation of modern events and themes, and overcome the problems of showing them’, without just using them as background to ‘a son of background to a sentimental “magazine story”’ (p.77) in which the focus falls on the unchangeable individual. All the discussions, of acting styles, verse forms, lighting techniques, textual adaptations, etc, demonstrate a clear social purpose – how best can the theatre communicate to people, how best can it help critical thought to continue, how can it be most interesting, amusing and effective?
It is impossible to do justice to this book in the confines of a brief review. More than a book about the theatre, it is a continually stimulating discussion of the place of the arts in contemporary society, an approach to a Marxist aesthetics, and highly entertaining too. For those who are put off by (or can’t afford) the theatre, and depend on TV, radio or film, this book is equally relevant. John Willett’s editing and translation are excellent. Very highly recommended.
Judged by Brecht’s criteria, Oh What A Lovely War is mostly success, but partly failure. Presented in the form of a series of loosely linked revue sketches, interspersed with the songs that were sung on the trenches and the contemporary music halls, the Theatre Workshop production was, on one level, a blistering attack on the First World War. It was also one of the most lusty and entertaining pieces of theatre of recent years. But often it worked by means of purely emotional responses; the horrors of war and the stupidities of the jingoistic songs and slogans were conveyed by counterposing them with scenes illustrating the realities of the trench war, but because the whole process was presented as entirely stupid and incredibly funny, the intellect was left almost untouched. A truly revolutionary theatre is one that presents alternatives, that stimulates judgement and action as well as delight. Brecht’s theatre was a didactic one; Oh What A Lovely War preached too convincingly, and thus not well.
John Arden’s adaptation of Goethe’s Goetz von Berlichingen is, like all Arden’s work, technically brilliant. The language sparkles, the characters and scenes are boldly and strongly drawn. In many ways his plays have the technical mastery and sheer theatrical excitement of the best of Brecht or Shakespeare, qualities all too often missing from the work of his contemporaries. His theatre is, in the best sense, poetic; it is fun. His plays delight the senses, surprise and disturb. But, like sensuality without love, they are all groin and no head. The social background (Germany in the peasants’ war) is a series of dramatic events; against this background the representatives of the various classes are similarly dramatic; but the logic of background and character is missing, the events of the play remain essentially incomprehensible. Arden writes excitingly about historical subjects, better certainly than anyone else in England; he does not fall into the Weskerian trap of presenting neat and unconvincing socio-political formulae to the audience; but he does lack a sense of the sense of history.
 



Industrial Relations: What Is Wrong with the System?
Allan Flanders
Faber, 12s 6d (cloth);
Institute of Personnel Management, 8s 6d (paper)
British Trade Unions Today
Clive Jenkins & J.E. Mortimer
Pergamon, 12s 6d
Flanders is concerned with the impact on the ‘British system of industrial relations’ of two interrelated phenomena: the state’s increasing concern ‘to restrain the pace of the upward movement of wages’ and the growing importance of workplace bargaining. Both these tendencies are the products of full employment in the postwar economy. The traditional system of collective bargaining, shaped in different circumstances, no longer meets the needs of British industry. His analysis, if somewhat prolix, is basically accurate – as far as it goes: British capitalism (not a word he uses) needs to have its wages bill controlled, but all proposals for greater centralisation of control ‘to restore order and to advance economic planning’ meet up with the seemingly insoluble problem of bargaining power on the shop floor. He brings together largely familiar data on the need for planning and the rise of workplace bargaining, and attempts to order it in terms of a static classificatory system of concepts. A not useless description of changes is abstracted from the social context and formalised into the narrow but wordy confines of academic ‘industrial relations’. Flanders’ lack of theory – or rather his discipline’s lack and its isolation from sociology – betrays him into woolliness and what is commonly the anti-Marxist’s chief complaint – lack of realism. His solutions are vague and hopeless: a ‘three-tier system of industrial relations’ at state, industry and workshop level is required. For this to be successful there must be ‘greater authority and influence’ for central bodies, and ‘strengthened relations’ between unions and employers’ associations and their respective members. These in turn depend on ‘agreement on policy ... the ultimate sine qua non of successful planning’ Put crudely this means that ‘national’ interests must be put before those of ‘class’; at the local level ‘a realistic basis for cooperation’ must be found. The solutions are ‘compromises’ and ‘golden means’, free bargaining under nationally stipulated conditions (!), ‘a general sense of direction in which to travel’, etc, etc.
His industrial system has no built-in dynamics of change, no inherent structural faults that make all his solutions irrelevancies; he accepts the values of those in whose interests the system operates, nor does he question its assumptions critically or look behind the fact of full employment to its causes and its essential instability. He wishes to be fair about a system that denies justice. Trade unionists and directors will find little to help them here; personnel managers and the other poor wretches in the crossfire may find some comforts.
Jenkins and Mortimer are disappointing, for one might have hoped for more. They know that wolves are wolves, and that calling them sheep will not help. For one thing it is difficult to know quite for whom they are writing – perhaps some inquiring Young Liberal. As a short text on the nature of trade unions their book is better than most, but that does not take us very far. Their trade unions are reacting to changes in a historical void (while at least Flanders does take account of change). But there is fuzz on the edges of their descriptions whenever touchy problems appear: ‘despite the efforts which have been made to shape the constitution (of the TGWU) to provide for democratic control, there have been difficulties’ (p.9; my emphasis); it is also pertinent to ask if all the problems of union democracy are constitutional ... The actions of the union officials in the Fords victimisations in 1963 are muffed over with generalities. And so on. There is useful material in this book (in particular an excellent summary of an analysis of claims submitted to the Industrial Disputes Tribunal and the Industrial Court on page 104), but the Discovery of Britain needs more thought than this, and also less concern to do a cover-up job. To work comrades!
 



Colin Barker writes: National solutions to British capital’s wage problem look about dead. But Devlin on the dockers and Jones on the printers have both highlighted another point of attack, one that wants careful watching. The Economist (7 August) commented on Devlin:
‘In most of the nation’s dock systems history has left in its wake a plethora of little firms, too small to be efficient, too poor not to be slack in discipline in short-term acceptance of restrictive practices, and grasping on long-term improvements in working conditions. Such employers need to be eliminated’ (my emphasis).
Big firms will give more regular employment, more capitalisation, and a tougher fight to the workers. And Jones recommended no wage increases without increased productivity. Taken together with other evidence, it seems clear that at the level of the large companies the heat is really on, with the state rendering such assistance as it can. The oil companies (who are by no means alone) are in process of negotiating ‘productivity agreements’ whose effects, if the Fawley experience is anything to go by, are two: much more work for some more pay, and an enhanced role for stewards (N.B. Devlin recommended official stewards for dockland). ‘End restrictive practices’, ‘Management must win back the initiative’, ‘Improve discipline’, ‘End piecework’, ‘Staff status for manual workers’, ‘Job evaluation’, etc. – these are the likely slogans for next year’s with it managers (most of whom were probaly sceptical about incomes policy anyway). The big firms have the resources for these changes, and the management consultants are raring to go. The effect will be, if I’m right, further to shift the focus of the struggle away from the state and towards the corporate centres. This means more power to the stewards, and the attack will therefore be double-pronged. Shop-stewards’ courses (at full pay for time off, of course) are spreading, Conway (AEU) proposes to make convenors full-time paid officials, and other forms of bribery and corruption are in plentiful supply. The defence of the shop stewards will need everything we have.
 



The Fawley Productivity Agreements
Allan Flanders
Faber, 50s.
The Fawley ‘Blue Book’ agreements have been widely quoted in management and right-wing Labour and union Circles as the most significant breakthrough in industrial relations since the war. ‘What happened at Fawley’ is of great importance, however, not only for management trainees, but for socialists too: although the only example so far of concentrated productivity bargaining in British industry, its pattern is likely to be repeated. Already [1] the same approach is being tried out at the Alcan aluminium works at Rogerstone, is shortly to be tested further at the Steel Company of Wales, and may be used at Pressed Steel at Oxford. And various elements of the ‘Fawley approach’ are already familiar in contemporary British collective bargaining.
What happened? In brief, Fawley management (advised by an American firm of consultants, Emersons) offered the workers at their Esso refinery near Southampton a ‘Blue Book’, whose proposals included two main elements: a ‘productivity package deal’ and an extensive reduction of overtime. A 40-hour week plus increases in the basic rate of some 40 per cent were offered in exchange for a reduction of overtime (in the case of the craftsmen, from 18 to 2 per cent), relaxation of job demarcations, withdrawal of craftsmen’s mates and their redeployment, greater freedom for management in its use of supervision, and the elimination of ‘unproductive time allowances’ like tea- and washing-breaks and travelling-time. The wage-rise was to be paid in five instalments over two years. The rationale behind the offer was quite clear. Esso is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Standard Oil, and the rate of profit in the US oil industry was falling from the middle fifties, with the result that Standard Oil began to work for reductions in labour costs – which, Flanders states, represented more than half the controllable costs at the Fawley Esso plant (capital value in 1962, £81.2 millions). Further, the ‘Blue Book’ amounted to a deliberate bid by Esso management to wrest control back from the shop stewards representing the 2,000 workers employed in the refinery. The stewards had come ‘effectively to control’ the distribution of overtime, which represented a shift in authority from management and union officials to the shop floor. More generally, management wished to retain ‘the initiative’ in its labour relations.
It is clear that to a large extent management gained what it wanted, at least in so far as its purely financial objectives were concerned. While Flanders’ figures do not permit of any close analysis, management had no reason to regret its ‘initiative’: ‘The agreements, far from costing the company anything, showed a profit even in immediate terms’ (p.246). Despite relatively large wage-rises, the intensification of effort required of the (reduced) work-force more than compensated the company: labour costs per unit of output were reduced by the agreements (productivity increased by over 45 per cent, take-home pay by some 30 per cent on average).
But Esso management was less successful in its efforts to curtail the role of the stewards. Before the advent of the ‘Blue Book’ the control of overtime had been the stewards’ province, and overtime had been used as a weapon against management, while general wage negotiations were kept firmly in the hands of the union officials; but now, with the increased importance of detailed bargaining about workplace conditions in wage negotiations, the stewards came to occupy a central place in collective bargaining, the union delegates being unable to move without them (p.204). Management’s freedom of action was now more circumscribed than it had been before, by the stewards, who refused to allow management to go one inch beyond what had been formally bargained, despite vain managerial hopes that the agreements would be read ‘in the spirit rather than the letter’ (!). The shift from conventional to intensive plant-level productivity bargaining had the interesting and important effect of enhancing the stewards’ role and making them more central in factory politics.
Flanders was invited by Esso management to carry out this study, so the book’s general orientation should be clear. As might be expected, it is extremely unsatisfactory. The entire text is written in that special style called ‘managerial wool’, and verges at times on the comic: ‘To tolerate a situation in which workers are compelled to be idle or fill in their time with useless trivialities betrays scant respect for diem as persons’ (p.171). Much is unexplained, especially with regard to management policy: why were Esso so keen to maintain plant-level bargaining rather than join in national employers’ federations? Why did management value its ‘cult of informality’ (whatever that means)? Who were the management ‘group’ who pushed for the ‘Blue Book’ against their more ‘conservative’ colleagues? Was there a power-struggle among management? Flanders explicitly notes that in his chapter on The Course of Negotiations he pays little attention to management policies and disagreements – but then of course he wasn’t ‘invited’ to study managers. His remarks are sometimes so general and vaporous as to be effectively meaningless; and who is convinced (apart from the subject – and his wife perhaps) by explanations in terms of the Refinery Manager’s ‘modesty and humanity’ (p.132)? The whole study is biased towards managerial attitudes and values, to an extent beyond even that of Elton Mayo and his associates. It is a pity that the book should be so full of fog, for the subject matter is crucial. An important book, regrettably written.

Note
1. According to a review article in Electron (ETU journal) September 1964, pp.180-181.
 



Collective Bargaining in the Automobile Industry
Robert M. MacDonald
Yale University Press, 63s.
Within its narrow limits this is a very useful book. MacDonald presents a deal of carefully sifted material on the wage structure of the US auto industry, especially with reference to the impact of the UAW. Because of the limits of his study, there is no discussion of the many issues that are vitally concerning US auto workers at present: automation, unemployment, speed-up, long-term contracts, the alienation of rank-and-file from the union leadership, etc. So, while he highlights the increasing importance of fringe benefits in the worker’s wage, there is no account of the extent to which fringes substitute for part of the wagepacket, rather than representing an addition to the worker’s share of the product. Fringes can be realistically viewed as merely a method in the change of wage-payment, whose effect is to reduce the freedom of the worker. MacDonald convincingly argues that the union’s impact in this area has been considerably less than it likes to claim – management likes fringes, after all! The union has effectively reduced differentials among skilled and production workers, but between these two groups differentials have increased. There is an interesting account of the conflicts between skilled and production groups within the UAW, and the decline of the principle of ‘industrial unionism’ consequent on the growing relative strength of the skilled group in the industry and the union. Of particular interest, though, is the section on ‘competitive relations’ (Chs.6 & 7) where MacDonald demonstrates how the union gained less from the larger and more profitable companies (GM, in particular) than it did for its members in the smaller ‘independents’ (Studebaker, etc.). This he rightly attributes to the greater class-consciousness and forward planning of the GM management, in resisting union encroachment, weakening ‘unofficial’ movements (here with the active connivance of Reuther), and so on. The study is openly oriented towards managerial norms, but without the smokescreen of idealistic brouhaha that is so characteristic of much writing in this field. Thus he evaluates managerial performance in terms of market-success rather than ‘good human relations’ with a refreshing and astringent brutality. In short, a model of scrupulous analysis, regrettably limited in its scope.
 



One-Dimensional Man
Herbert Marcuse
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 42s.
Anything by Professor Marcuse is always interesting, and often a pleasure to read. But ... Modern society, in his eye, is tending more and more towards ‘one-dimensional’ modes of living and thought. Everyone is becoming ‘integrated’ into the system; the philosophers, the sociologists and the rest have abandoned ‘critical thought’ and employ only ‘operational definitions’ which start from the acceptance of capitalist values, or they chase irrelevancies. The trade-union movement is ‘integrated’, or nearly so. ‘Mystification’ is almost total. The world drives blindly on towards war, and no one protests; the only challenge of any sort comes from ‘the substratum of outcasts and outsiders’ (the American Negro) or in the hopeless forms of Zen or existentialism, which offer no real challenge to the irrationality of ‘technological rationality’. Society is a closed system, the universe is totalitarian, and despair is the only acceptable response. We are manipulated and propagandised to the point where we can no longer break out of the circle, for we see nothing to break out from. We live in unfreedom, and we are content with slavery. Freedom of choice is nothing but freedom to choose between brands. Horror is defused by the language we speak – ‘megadeaths’, ‘clean bombs’ and the like. The ‘people’, once seen as die force that would change society, are now nothing but well-fed, obscurely unhappy accepters. It’s not far from 1984. Marcuse’s pessimistic thesis is reinforced by a highly biased selection of examples from social science, philosophy, literature, etc. No other aspects ever appear: Elton Mayo’s is the only sociology of industry, there are no unofficial strikes, there was no Hungarian Revolution, the class struggle is over. There’s no case, it’s true, for outright optimism; but this narrow pessimism, that ignores everything that contradicts it, leads in the end to straight soppiness, however well expressed. Marcuse sees – and describes well – much that is wrong with the system. But his coins have one side only.
 



Industrial Democracy: The Sociology of Participation
Paul Blumberg
Constable, 45s
Can The Workers Run Industry?
Ken Coates (ed.)
Sphere Books, 8s 6d
Blumberg’s book is a plea for greater industrial democracy, directed, seemingly, at other industrial sociologists. The author stands clearly on the side of the angels, against manipulative approaches to the issue of workers’ management of production, battling doughtily with the spectre of Hugh Clegg, sifting and sorting with sociological evidence on workers’ alienation in the despotic authority structures of capitalist production. As a (partial) review of the sociological literature, the book is fine. Beyond this, however, Blumberg’s lack of an encompassing theory leaves serious gaps in his argument. He suggests that workers’ control might be impossible in capitalist production, but does not develop the argument. He falls more or less completely for Yugoslav ‘workers’ management’, side-stepping the debate on the Yugoslav economy and the issues this raises for his subject. He never discusses the relationship between workers’ control (of production) and workers’ power (the state), indeed he seems unaware that there might even be a real problem here. The result is a useful but very incomplete, idealist argument about the desirability of industrial democracy, largely divorced at the theoretical level from actual movements along industrial workers in capitalist society. Others will be able to use the material assembled here, but hopefully to fuller theoretical purpose.
The volume edited by Ken Coates has the virtues and defects of the politics of the tendency it speaks for. In its pages, dull, uniformative slag-prices by Ian Mikardo MP and Ernie Roberts of the AEF tumble together with sharp reporting on a number of industries. Neither illuminates the other.
The Institute for Workers’ Control, in whose name this is copyrighted, is an attempt to revive Guild Socialism for the 1960s. It suffers from all the contradictions of G.D.H. Cole’s movement. Shop-floor militancy is yoked, uneasily, to left-wing reformism in Parliament and the unions. This fundamentally unrealistic and unrevolutionary perspective generates its own illusions. Ken Coates’ Introduction suggests that the TGWU, NUPE and the Foundryworkers are somehow committed to workers’ control; this is constructing reality from paper resolutions. ‘This book,’ he writes,’ reflects many of the disagreements which exist among those who seek change, and makes no attempt to smooth out the edges of these arguments’. But the book nowhere examines what are the ‘arguments’. It is curiously unanalytical in its approach to the key questions that underlie the debate on workers’ control: What is the contemporary role of the union bureaucracies? What is the role of the state in state monopoly capitalism? Are reformism and revolution compatible?
The question of workers’ control is not raised in its totality, as a question of workers’ power. Instead, industry by industry, the case against the existing order is posed. The case is presented in blue-printing terms: what would be better than this state of society would be this state of society. ‘Socialism is both a movement here and now, and a goal to be achieved’. Fragmented, blue-printed goals are described, but the movement is nowhere critically assessed. Enroaching control, ‘structural reformism’, is still the key to practice. When things go wrong, when the government fails to meet up to the opportunities provided for it by the workers’ blueprint, the failure is not analysed. Thus William Meade assesses very realistically the Government’s proposals for worker participation in the nationalised steel industry, but demonstrates no theoretical comprehension of the reasons for this kind of proposal, or of the role of nationalisation in contemporary capitalism. Analysis is replaced by hurt polemics.
But if the book as a whole is unsatisfactory, and the politics behind it are left-reformist, there are some small nuggets for revolutionary readers. John Hughes and Michael Barratt-Brown provide some useful, if unsynthesised, data on current ruling-class economic organisation. Stephen Bodington contributes a nice, imaginative piece on the possibilities for socialist employment of computers. Eric Sherratt on mining, Bob Harrison on motors, and Tony Topham on the docks give gritty accounts of the state of play in these industries (Topham’s piece is especially well researched). And Alan Rooney provides an extended version of his solid work on the aircraft industry (first published in IS 33), giving a most useful and detailed account of one aspect of contemporary state monopoly capital and its modes of operation and organisation.
The book is valuable for its parts, then, rather than as a whole. Revolutionary socialists still await the book they need.
 



MANCHESTER: – Police were ordered by the assizes last week to pay £2,280 damages to three men who acted as pickets during the strike at Roberts-Arundel factory in Stockport for trade union recognition.
All three had fractured noses. One spent several weeks in hospital with severe neck and spine injuries.
The facts only came to light because one of the three, Ron Cook, a Manchester University student, was legally still a minor. A shocking account of his treatment was given to the court. His counsel told the judge:
‘Cook was placed in a van and he was punched twice in the face by a police officer. When he arrived at the police station he was punched in the face.
‘He was placed in a cell with a police officer, a PC Leigh. He was punched in the face and kicked on the body, and the assault persisted until he was asked to beg for mercy.’
The Stockport police settled out of court in the other two cases and in this way sought to hush up the whole dirty business. The Director of Public Prosecutions has to date refused to prosecute.
The internal police report has not yet been published. It seems that the names of the other officers involved are being covered up.
The Stockport labour movement is demanding a full public enquiry. Without it, Stockport people can only assume their police force includes uniformed thugs.
Every form of pressure must be brought to bear to force Stockport police out of their official hiding.
 



MANCHESTER:– Not sacked, ‘displaced’. That’s the unhappy fate of railwaymen at Central and Exchange Stations, due to close on May 5. No one will be made redundant. Therefore no redundancy pay will be given. ‘Suitable alternative employment’ will be offered to all the men. Lists of vacancies at a third city station. Victoria, have been published.
The jobs offered at Victoria are not being filled. Railwaymen find that there are no jobs in their existing grades, or the vacancies are for ‘rest day relief men’.
A ‘rest day’ man fills in another worker on his day off. He can be sent anywhere, told to do anything. It’s a job British Rail can’t usually fill. No one wants it.
If men from Exchange and Central don’t take up the jobs offered, then they can be ‘offered’ work anywhere in the North West Region.
And there is no pay for travelling time.
 
‘Voluntary’
The result will be that many railwaymen will leave in disgust, ‘voluntarily’. That way, BR will save redundancy pay.
Len Neal of BR has stated in the press that he aims to cut the wage bill nationally by £25m this year. Now we know now.
British Rail can only get away with this because of the weakness of the unions. The rundown of labour can only be understood in the context of last year’s ‘Torquay Agreement’.
The men on the Manchester stations say the NUR signed the agreement in exchange for the ‘check-off’ system for union subs. This produces the incredible situation that the LDC representative (railway shop steward) doesn’t know who are the paid-up union members, but the station master does!
As one worker remarked. ‘This is the kind of closed shop we don’t want.’
A railman in Manchester now gets the princely sum of £13 a week, less deductions. Opportunities for overtime have been cut sharply under the Torquay Agreement, as an incentive to men to leave.
To add final insult to injury, the NUR is now talking of raising subs by 1s 6d a week ...
 



The Risings of the Luddites, Chartists and Plug-Drawers
Frank Peel
Cass, 60s
Since the publication of Thompson’s Making of the English Working Class a major re-evaluation of the early 19th century working-class movements has been made possible. The main interpretation, previously, had presented the Luddites, Cato Street Conspirators, Corresponding Society members, and so forth, as mere objects of history, or as men doing no more than reacting industrially to new factory oppression, etc. The role of the spies had been overplayed and the role of conscious political ideas among the participants in the movements of the period much devalued. In this way, in a sense, social history had been made safe.
This book is a re-print of a study carried out in the 1870s by a Yorkshire journalist, who both interviewed people who had participated in the movements and worked through local documents. As such it is a book of great importance. Peel’s account, as Thompson notes in his introduction, fully supports the Thompson line: the Luddites were not half-crazed poor folk, acting irrationally and perhaps led astray by nasty Government agents-provocateurs, but were men linked to revolutionary Jacobin traditions, fighting for Liberty as well as for economic security.
The text is a fine piece of antiquarian journalism, likely to appeal to far more than social historians alone. The author seems never quite able to make up his mind which side he is on: respectability demands that he condemn the Luddites, but the justice of their case turns his pen to a tremendous indictment of the croppers’ conditions. It’s a pity this fascinating book should be so expensive.
 



Industrial Disputes: Essays in the Sociology of Industrial Relations
J.E.T. Eldridge
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 40s
‘The strategic long-term concerns of the players on the industrial relations stage are no doubt to identify and sustain the areas of common agreement and to regulate the areas of disagreement.’
This conception, although not stated until the very end of his book, underlies the whole of Eldridge’s collection of essays.
This is not to say that the book is not useful, though perhaps less to socialists than to sociologists. In general the tone and approach is ‘realist’ rather than hortatory, which makes a pleasant change in this area. And some of the empirical materiaj is interesting – especially that on demarcation disputes in shipbuilding.
Generally, in his account of ‘industrial relations’, the emphasis falls heavily on the official postures adopted by the participants (especially the trade unions), and on a restricted area. Even allowing for a bias inherent in his material (drawn largely from the north-east of England) there is too much emphasis on such matters as demarcation disputes, and much less on such things as wage drift, conflicts over discipline and control, etc.
And the relevance of the ‘sociological’ references is often doubtful. In common with other contemporary sociologists, Eldridge often describes a particular event or relationship, and then ‘generalises’ it by citing some general dictum of a sociologist of the functionalist school (e.g., Coser) as if this provided some additional enlightenment. These dicta rarely, in fact, add much if anything to the data themselves.
Perhaps the most useful section is a review of the literature on strike explanations. This is flawed, however, by a very significant gap. The underlying social relation between employer and worker, the employment ‘contract’ itself, is not discussed. Put another way, there is no account of the Marxist contribution.
All in all, the book represents a useful, if limited gloss on the still much more useful, if dated, Strikes by Knowles.
 




Audrey Farrell was a tiny person with a huge courage recalls Colin Barker
Headingley Cricket Ground, August 1976. Viv Richards is batting for the West Indies. A large group of men in the crowd are loudly passing racist remarks. Around them, shoulders hunch in embarrassed silence. A small woman, eight months pregnant with her fourth child, rises in her seat and gives the racists hell. Her speech provokes applause. The racists fall silent ... Audrey Farrell has died, after a long battle with cancer.
Audrey grew up in Colne, Lancashire, in a family setting that united ILP politics, Methodism and pacifism. She developed two early passions: classical piano and mountain walking. After a social science degree at Keele, she moved to west London to teach music in a comprehensive school for three years, where she and her pupils put on an enthusiastic production of Carmen. From there she moved into what she called the Youth Injustice System, working in an underfunded remand centre where classroom materials were provided through her students’ thieving skills.
She worked hard in Willesden Labour Party and might have made a parliamentary career. But her anti-war stance took her into CND, into a sharpening conflict with the pro-bomb Gaitskellites, onto marches and clashes with the police. The view from a selection of police cells gave her first hand experience of the law and order system she would later dissect so brilliantly.
These activities brought contact with the tiny, but theoretically powerful, International Socialism group, which she first joined in 1961. In the same period the New Left Group introduced her to the historian Raphael Samuel. She worked with him for six months on an intensive study of the history of housing policy in Britain. Raphael was a famously exacting teacher from whom she learned many of the research and writing skills she would later deploy in her own work.
Marrying Jim Kincaid in 1961, she moved to Aberdeen. The growth of the student movement and opposition to the Vietnam War brought her back into political life in the Aberdeen IS branch, and also to a new kind of music – as a pub pianist and rock band leader. The white South African rugby team, the Springboks, came to play in Aberdeen. Hundreds of protesters against apartheid invaded the pitch. Audrey, one of 150 people fined £10 each, invited John Lennon to play at a benefit gig. Lennon couldn’t come, but sent £1,500 to pay all the fines – and to boost the campaign.
In 1971 she was in Coventry, where an exceptionally lively IS branch included numbers of very able and militant shop stewards in a period when the level of class organisation and struggle was at its postwar peak. Till then, Audrey had entertained doubts about Leninist politics. These vanished as she experienced the driving strength of a revolutionary organisation with organic links to mass workers’ movements. The worker members energised those with university training, demanding serious socialist education and theory in the branch’s work, and that those responsible take it immensely seriously.
In 1973 the family moved to Leeds. The first marriage ended and a second with Dennis Farrell would last from 1976 to 1987. Audrey lectured at Park Lane College. A militant union member, she always managed to maintain a Socialist Worker sale when others held back. She was a scourge of employers and union bureaucrats, with an unerring nose for bullshit and a capacity to make others laugh at it with her.
In the 1970s work began on a long manuscript which, after many editings and rewrites, would finally appear as Crime, Class and Corruption: The Politics of the Police (1992). The book is notable for the clarity and directness of its argument: the police are astonishingly bad at dealing with the crimes that affect ordinary people. What they really do, unable to solve the crime problem which arises from capitalism itself, is protect the property and power of the ruling class. The whole book is full of penetrating anecdotes, shafts of humour and the sharpest socialist politics.
As was the book, so was Audrey. Speaking at literally hundreds of meetings, she had the rare (and hard won) knack for communicating ideas freshly and accessibly. Her model was Rosa Luxemburg explaining economics to workers. Her politics influenced everything about her life. They were vivid, passionate and intelligent.
Audrey was a tiny person with a huge courage. Her exemplary commitment to working class struggle and to socialism was matched with a famous sense of humour. To share her company was often to ache with laughter. She sparkled with energy and love of life, even in her long final illness. An immensely loyal friend and comrade, she inspired loyalty and love in her friends, and respect often even from her opponents. Many of her friends recalled that ‘Audrey made you bigger than you thought you could be.’
Her death diminishes us as her life enlarged us.
 



I. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a welcome revival in the Marxist critique of political economy. A good deal of this revival has been concerned with the rediscovery of Marx’s concepts, and much less with their use for comprehending the contemporary capitalist world, If there has been a field where development has been most slight, however, it has been the critique of the capitalist state and its place within the reproduction of capitalism as a whole. Partly, this has reflected the very form that the revival of “Marxist economics” has taken: what Marx did write has been subjected to close (and often useful) scrutiny, wit what he left unfinished has been little developed. (In one area this is an unfair assessment. The debate over the place of “domestic labour” in capitalist society: cf. our bibliography.) Marx intended to continue bin major work with an account of the state and of the world market, though to my knowledge nothing has been preserved even by way of this projected continuation. [1*]
The problem I want to try and discuss here is that of the place of the capitalist state in the capitalist system. Such a project is clearly too large for me to cover this adequately, and all I can hope to do is to indicate some of the problems which seem to require development.
 
II. The general tradition
The starting point for any adequate theory of the state must be the general discussions of the state in the writings of Marx and Engels. At the risk of considerable over-simplification, what they said is reducible to a small number of general propositions:

The state is a product of class society, of a condition in which society has become entangled in irreconcilable contradictions. If any kind of orderly life is to continue in a society rent with internal divisions, the members of that society must lose their power to control the communal affairs of their society to specialised agencies and persons The state is thus not an everlasting and inevitable product of human social relations; rather, it is a product of particular forms of society, whose manner of formation divides their members against each other.
 
The very existence of the state, in this general sense, is therefore an indication of alienated social relations. Certain forms of human social relations, organised around antagonistic divisions, make impossible for all members of society to run their own society communally.
 
The existence of the state involves a particular form of the division of labour, through which some members of society specialise in directing the rest of Society. The state is thus separated from the rest of society.
The means of coercion are no longer the direct property of the whole of society, but are specialised into the hands of the members of the state. Thus the state is a

... public power which no longer directly coincides with the population organising itself as an armed force. This special public power is necessary because a self-acting armed organisation of the population has become impossible since the split into classes ... This public power exists in every state; it consists not merely of armed men, but also of material adjuncts prisons, and institutions of coercion of all kinds, of which gentile society knew nothing.

The state apparatus, the product of Class divisions in society, anything but neutral between classes. It is a crucial element in class rule.
 
The fullest development of the state, whether in terms of the relative growth in its personnel, the relative separation of its organisation and principles from those of class society, or by any other measure occurs with the development of capitalism the most completely alienated form of class society.
 
The destruction of capitalism and the construction of communism requires the smashing up of the existing state apparatus, its replacement by the armed power of the working class, and the beginning of the process of the withering away of the state altogether. A fully developed communist society, its production organised according to the famous principle “From each according to his ability, to each according to his need!” will have no need of a state organisation. It will be a self-governing community, for whose members public and private interests will coincide.

The state is an apparatus of violence, first and foremost, which enforces onto society a “communal interest” or “national interest” which is not the direct product of that society’s members and which maintains the basis of the class divisions. At this high level of generality, these core propositions about the state – and thus about the need to overthrow the state and destroy it as a condition of the realisation of human emancipation through communism – form part of the ABC of Marxism both as a theory of human history and as a theory of human emancipation.
 
III. Some difficulties and unsatisfactory answers
Where problems begin to arise is when we move from this high level of generality to much more specific discussion of the precise relation between state and society within capitalism. It is this area, above all, which Marx himself left very undeveloped, and which subsequent Marxist discussion has, until quite recently, not developed very much further. What we have inherited from Marx are, above all, some brilliant historical accounts of particular crises in the development of the capitalist state, notably in 19th century France, and a superb chapter in Capital, Vol. I on the introduction of legislation in Britain to control the length of the working day. Otherwise, there are. only scattered remarks, like those of Engels in Anti-Duhring on the general theoretical possibility of state capitalism, and very general observations by the young Marx on the alienated character of politics in capitalism. All of these are full of profoundly interesting insights, but hardly constitute a developed theoretical framework.
Indeed, Marx’s. most famous summary statement on the question of the capitalist state is also one of the most misleading:
Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied by a corresponding political advance of that class ... the bourgeoisie has at last, since the establishment of modern industry and of the world market, conquered for itself, in the modern representative state, exclusive political sway. The executive of the modem state is but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie. [2*]
It is a statement with all the brilliant flair of Marx’s best aphorisms. Its very fame, however, has led to its being taken uncritically as the last word on the subject, a last word to which uncritical Marxists have then attempted to find unattainable proofs. Two problems are posed immediately by it.
First, taken literally, the statement is plain wrong. “The executive of the modern state is but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.” The whole bourgeoisie? If we quite ignore any subtleties about divisions within the bourgeoisie of this or that county, the simple tact is that the bourgeoisie is a world class, an international class of exploiters and parasites that runs a world system of production. Capitalism, from its beginning; presupposed a world market. But the state form within the capitalist mode of production is decidedly not a world state, but a system of national states whose relations with each other are antagonistic. The whole bourgeoisie does not have a state, cannot have a state. No single, universal centre of coercion has emerged out of the contradictions of the world society that capital has forged over the past few centuries. When we talk of the capitalist state, we always mean the nation state, or rather the nation-state system. [1] And no nation state, clearly, can be seen as any kind of committee for managing the common affairs of the “whole” bourgeoisie.
Second, Marx’s statement has to be taken-by both would-be Marxists and anti-Marxists alike-to mean that the state is the direct property of the capitalists. A good deal of ink has been wasted in the attempt to defend this proposition. [2] We ourselves have been anything but immune to this idea that the capitalist class directly controls the state and runs it in its own interest. Certainly a mass of “radical sociology” has been devoted to teasing out the supposed ways in which major capitalist interests are inter-linked with the leading personnel of the state through common social origins, common club memberships, common educational backgrounds, common general prejudices, directorships, lobbies, advisory committees, etc., etc. The crucial theoretical problem with all this (admittedly often fascinating) material is that it forgets what sort of a class the capitalist class is, and imputes common interests too easily and uncritically to the bourgeoisie. [3]
The capitalist class is, foremost, the class which drives the competitive accumulation process of capital. It is a class which, as against the working class, is united by its demand for surplus-value. But it is also, at the same time, a class which is internally divided by competition. Exploitation and competition are, indissolubly, the two defining features of the social relations that define the bourgeoisie. In Marx’s phrase, the bourgeoisie are “hostile brothers”. They share a mutual interest in the extraction of the maximum total quantity of surplus-value out of productive labour; but they are equally engaged in permanent internecine strife with each other over the distribution if that surplus-value.
The very structural antagonisms that define the internal relations within the capitalist class make it exceptionally difficult to conceive how, with all the common club-memberships, old school tie connections, inter-marriages and multiple directorships in the world, the capitalists of a particular country are capable of forming a common political will sufficient to enable them to dictate the policies of the state. For the state to be a direct instrument of a class, that class must be capable of forming a cohesive view of its interests and a common will sufficiently strongly to wield such an instrument. If any class in history must, precisely because of the mode of production it supervises, find that requirement difficult, it is the capitalist class.
Three consequences follow: first, that in practice the state must have a degree of “autonomy” from the capitalist class; second, that while we must by no means deduce from this that the state is “neutral” in the class struggle, its class character, its specifically capitalist character, must be demonstrated on other grounds than those commonly used by “radical” sociologists and political scientists; third, that the very “autonomy” of the state from the immediate control of the capitalist class is a source of reformist illusions in the possibility of the working class “using” the capitalist state machinery to achieve the destruction of capitalism.
So we cannot understand the place of the nation-state in the movement of capital, if we rely on the kind of analysis by writers like Ralph Miliband [4], or, indeed, his “opponent” Nicos Poulantzas – who forget the specific character of the capitalist system in order to demonstrate or argue the capitalist character of the state. In Miliband’s case, the problem is that quite simply he treats the capitalist class as a class capable of acting as a purposive subject in history, pursuing common goals, when it is precisely that which cannot be demonstrated. Poulantzas, in practice, despite his many differences with Miliband, regards the problem of formulating a theory of the capitalist state as a problem for “political theory”, as if there were a separate theory of the “capitalist economy” which is relatively irrelevant to the political sphere, as Picciotto and Holloway point out. [5*] He does not treat as problematic the very distinction between “politics” and “economics”, except in the most abstract sense imaginable. And, in his “concrete” studies, Poulantzas, despite much surface sophistication, does fall back on notions about the “interests of monopoly capital” as if these were capable of being read off from history like elephant tracks.
At the most general level, we might say that the problem with what has in practice been the dominant tradition of Marxist discussion of the state and capitalism has been that it has not begun with capitalism, but with class society in general. The alternative, then, is to begin with capitalism as a mode of production.
 
IV. Capitalism and the state: alternative starting points
An adequate Marxist analysis of the state and its relation to capital needs to begin with a consideration of the form that class relations take in the capitalist mode of production, and not merely in “class society” in general. This implies that the starting point for theoretical development should be, not Marx’s occasional “political” writings, but rather his full theoretical treatment of the alienated forms of social relations characteristic of capitalism That is, it is not from writings like The 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte that we should begin, but from Capital and Grundrisse.
In this perspective the character of the state and its relation to the processes of capital accumulation becomes a matter of great significance for the critique of political economy. We have to tease out the forms in which the state itself is the expression of the same fundamental alienated social relations that are expressed in the notions of value and surplus-value, accumulation and competition, and examine the limits of the possibility of “state intervention” in overcoming the contradictions of capitalist social relations.
It is characteristic of reformist thought that it looks to the state to do just that, to overcome the contradictions of capital. For reformism, in its various guises, the state stands Over and outside capitalism as a source of power which is capable under favourable circumstances of being captured by socialist principles and employed to destroy capitalism. Nothing, of course, could be further from Marx’s whole analytical conception than this, but nonetheless he never concretely worked out the links between the fundamental forms of social relations he analysed in the three volumes of Capital, and the forms in which the capitalist state appears. This was to have been achieved in a projected volume continuing the analysis in Capital, which was never even drafted in outline.
It is this task, theoretically, which has been taken up by a number of recent Marxist theorists, especially in Germany, [6*] I cannot cover all the ground or all the ideas they develop, or offer an adequate critical assessment of their work here. What I will do is to take some ideas from their work, and show how they make – I think universally – a mistake whose significance increases with the aging of the capitalist system.
The starting point for the German theorists, analytically, is a question posed in the 1920s by the great Bolshevik legal theorist, Pashukanis. [5] Engels, Pashukanis suggests, had theorised the state as a necessary product of class society and class conflict. But in so doing he had failed to ask why the state takes on the specific form it does, and why it performs the specific functions it does, within capitalist society.
Behind all these controversies one fundamental problem lies concealed: why does the dominance of a class not Continue to be that which it is-that is to say, the subordination in fact of one part of the population to another part? Why does it take on the form of official state domination? Or, which is the same thing, why is not the mechanism of state constraint created as the private mechanism of the dominant class? Why is it dissociated from the dominant class-taking the form of an impersonal mechanism of public authority isolated from society? [7*]
To this question, several kinds of answers have been given, which we can quickly outline, not in opposition to each other, but rather as if they were all additions to a rounded account. First, the fact that capital can exist only as many capitals in competition with each other means that the reproduction of the whole society is a problem. In a society constituted as a market, in which production is carried out in isolated units related to each other antagonistically through exchange, some institution outside the production units must enforce order on them, guarantee the rights which each must recognise if social production as a whole is to continue. The maintenance of contractual relations requires the development of law, and of an institution of coercion to enforce contracts and rights. Put another way, since the interests of each isolated individual in commodity production include no conception of a general interest of society, the state is required to enforce a common interest on all participants. (The state, in this perspective, is required as Thomas Hobbes’ Leviathan was required, to save humanity from the consequences of its own nature “red in tooth and claw”!)
The fierce competition between capitals means that capitalist society cannot ensure its own continuance, its own necessities, without some other institution outside capital to enforce a common interest on capitalist society. In his analysis of the development of the Factory Acts, Marx showed that the intervention of the state became necessary to prevent 19th century British capitalists from so extending the working day that they risked destroying the very foundation of their capital accumulation, the living labour-power of the working class. [8*]
The paradoxical result of the workers’ struggle to limit the working day was that, through the state, they enforced on capital its own interest in further development. The point is taken further in the current German discussion, in an argument (derived from a section of the Grundrisse) that capital accumulation involves the necessity of certain “general conditions of production” which capital itself – being constituted of many mutually antagonistic capitals – is incapable of providing. The state thus provides certain deficiencies of capital which it cannot itself provide. These include: the provision of certain parts of the economic infrastructure – e.g. roads, postal communications, nationalised industries, etc.; the provision of a legal system through which rights and contractual responsibilities are enforced; the regulation of the conflict between workers and capitalists, and where necessary the political coercion of the workers; safeguarding the expansion of national capitals on the world market (the imperialist function). Here the state is seen as providing certain necessary “general conditions of production” which private capitals themselves cannot directly provide. The existence of the state as a coercive institution separate from capitals, a product of the capital relation but not itself capital, is posited as a necessary aspect of the capitalist mode of production.
Capitalism, of course, is not merely, or even principally, competitive production of commodities; it is a mode of production based on the production and accumulation of surplus-value. It is not merely an anarchic system of production and distribution, it is a class system. The bean of capitalist social relations is constituted not simply by relations of antagonistic separation of producers, but by relations of domination. But the system of domination is hidden. On the surface of society, in the market relations between capitals and between capital and labour, it appears that everything is fair and equal; everyone gets, more or less, the value of his commodity, including the worker who sells his labour-power. In Capital I, Marx suggests that force is not a permanent necessity for capitalist exploitation to continue. Workers contintue to produce surplus-value for their employers, not because there is permanently a gun at their backs, but because if they don’t they will starve:
The advance of capitalist production develops a working class which by education, training and habit looks upon the requirement of that mode of production as self-evident natural laws. The organisation of the capitalist process of production, once it is fully developed, breaks down all resistance. The constant generation of a relative surplus population keeps the law of supply and demand of labour, and therefore wages, within narrow limits which correspond to capital’s valorisation requirements. The silent compulsion of economic relations sets the seal on the domination of the capitalist over the worker. Direct extra-economic force is still of course used, but only in exceptional cases. In the ordinary run of things, the worker can be left to the “natural laws of production”, i.e. it is possible to rely on his dependence on capital, which springs from the conditions of production themselves and is guaranteed in perpetuity by them. [9*]
 
V. And further difficulties
There is a good deal more to the contribution made by the German Marxist theorists to the understanding of the relation of capital to the state than appears above, and their work – with its many controversies and insights – deserves serious study. At the same time, in a few respects all the German theorists appear to agree on a particular approach to the question of the state which I wish to question.
They all tend to see the state in two unsatisfactory ways: firstly, they all treat the state as a necessarily unproductive sphere of activity, as being outside the concept of “capital” itself, as not-capital though necessary for capital; and secondly, they all tend to treat ”the state” in the singular. The two problems, I suggest, are related. The implication of their theorising of the state are such as to rule “state capital” out of court as a theoretical impossibility, a “non-thing” – a position which must tend, I suggest, to make it more and more difficult for them to apply the concepts they have developed to the analysis of contemporary capitalism, in both the East and the West (not to mention the South).
As to the first point, Muller and Neususs treat the state “as a particular social institution which confronts productive society” [10*]; Altvater writes:
... capital cannot itself produce through the actions of many individual capitals the inherent social nature of its existence; it requires at its base a special institution which is not subject to its limitations as capital, one whose transactions are not determined by the necessity of producing surplus value, one which is in this sense a special institution alongside and outside bourgeois society. [11*] [6]
And Hirsch writes that
The function of the bourgeois state can never be more than the creation of the “external” conditions for the social reproduction process which regulates itself on the basis of the law of value. The social process of production and reproduction cannot be the direct object of state activity ... [13*]
And before them all, the Bolshevik theorist of law Pashukanis had declared,
The principal of competition – which is “dominant in the bourgeois-capitalist world as we have already noted supra – provides no possibility of associating political authority with an individual enterprise – after the analogy of the association of such authority with great holding of land under feudalism. [14*]
Thus a rigid conceptual distinction is maintained between “state” and “capital”. The “external” concerns of states tend to be tagged on as an afterthought [7], not taken into the general analysis of the form and functions of the capitalist state. [8]
Contrary to the position implicitly or explicitly assumed in much of the contemporary discussion, I suggest that the state can itself “be a capitalist”, in the sense that the state institutions can directly become the “conscious bearer” of the capital-relation, that the state can have as its direct object of activity the social process of capital production and reproduction within a national sphere, that “political authority” can be associated with “an individual enterprise” even while the total activity of the state cannot be thus defined as directly “capitalist”. In particular, it seems to me to fly in the face of current actual developments in the world economy to deny that the state can be a productive capitalist, that is, a capitalist under whose direct dominion surplus-value is produced. In other words, the state can be funded not only through its taxation of revenue from productive capitals falling within its “political sphere” but can itself also directly exploit productive labour.
In part this position assumes that what Marx termed the “general conditions of production”, and which Marx discussed very briefly in the Grundrisse, are not produced by this or that nation-state for “capital in general”, as much of the discussion tends to assume. Rather, they are produced by this or that nation-state for “its” capital, or capitals, not to facilitate capitalist production in general, but to facilitate national capitalist production conducted in competition with capitalist production under the aegis of rival nation-states. This also therefore assumes that the production by states of the “general conditions of production” includes state activities which are both “productive” and “unproductive”, in capitalist terms. [9] (I also assume, though this point is not much further developed here, that the production of the “general conditions of production” is not an activity necessarily restricted to states, but is also performed by other capitals and by such forms as the family, under conditions which require to be analysed in their own right. [10])
 
VI. The state and unproductive labour
There appear, in the light of what has already been said, to be two principal forms of unproductive wage labour within modern capitalism, one of the two forms having important inter-relations with the dominant form of unwaged unproductive labour, “housework”. [11]
The first of these forms is unproductive labour employed in the sphere of the circulation of value, where labour is employed to realise value for a particular capital or state or to protect it for one capital or state against the depradations of alternative consumers. Here we include workers in finance, insurance, credit, sales [12], taxes, army, police, security-guards, judges, lawyers, prison officers etc.
The-second kind of unproductive labour is labour employed to reproduce labour-power, a commodity whose actual reproduction does not involve the production of surplus value. Here must be included the activity of productive workers when they are not actually at work for capital (for their own consumption activities are, as Marx noted, also a production process through which they reproduce themselves), the work of housewives, doctors, nurses, hospital porters, teachers, social workers, etc. The labour of these workers does not occur in the sphere of the circulation of surplus-value, but rather in the distinct sphere of the circuit of simple commodity production, the sphere of the reproduction of labour-power.
In Capital Vol. III, Marx showed that the relation between the individual productive worker and his individual employer is in reality a relation between the worker and the entire capitalist class. The worker who produces surplus-value under the direction of his immediate employer turns out in reality to be producing surplus- value which enters into the collective property of the whole class of capitalists,, and which is shared out amongst the capitalists by a process of internal competitive struggle through which (a) values are transformed into prices. (b) a general rate of profit is formed, (c) the claims of finance and landed capitals are met, and (d) – a matter not much discussed by Marx – the tax claims of the nation-state are met. What appears to be the relation between the individual worker and his individual boss turns out to be a relation between the working class and capital as a whole.
Similarly, to the extent that the state enforces taxation and uses the money thus collected to provide all manner of social services, the whole working class is forced to contribute to the costs of its own total reproduction, to the costs of maintaining and reproducing the reserve army of labour, the children, the old, the sick, etc., and to the cost of reproduction of the unproductive labour power which contributes to the maintenance and reproduction of labour-power future, present (actual and potential) and past. On examination, the seeming individualised relation between the individual worker and the individual employer, between the individual worker “citizen” and the state, turns out to be part of a collective, class relation.
There; are limits set to the possibilities of the complete statification of the reproduction of labour-power. The “welfare state”, whose development has on the one hand undoubtedly been the product of workers’ struggles over a number of generations, cannot be viewed simply as a set of “concessions” wrung out of capital and its state by the labour movement, cannot be seen simply as a “positive gain”. Not only because, as the cuts in welfare in the present crisis reveal, the ruling class are not willing to maintain the same level of “concessions”, but also because the forms of the welfare state are impregnated with the principles of the capitalist state, are shaped by the very process of class struggle through which they have been expanded.
Workers, not surprisingly, do not view the welfare state as “theirs”. Rather, the relation of workers with the agencies of the “welfare state” is one dominated by the bureaucratic relation of the state to its subjects, by the removal of control of welfare state institutions from popular control, by the scrupulous suspiciousness that pervades the dealings of welfare agencies with their “clients” (whether in schools, hospitals, claims for benefits, etc.). The welfare state is a highly alien sphere, whose very architecture declares its drab, alienated character, its miserable and limited pursuit of the “common interest”. Marxist historians are just beginning to write accounts of the welfare state’s various branches which take proper account of the tendencies to bureaucratic centralisation which have marked their development and extension. Certainly, from well before the New Poor Law, workers feared dependence on the state for the reproduction of their labour-power, and for all too comprehensible reasons. A part of workers’ struggle under capitalism has thus always been a defence of the family form of reproduction – as Marxist feminists have just begun to demonstrate. [13]
All forms of expansion of unproductive labour represent deductions from potential total surplus-value available for recapitalisation in the “productive” sector. On the other hand, the very existence of modern capitalism’s unproductive sector also depends. on the production of sufficient surplus-value to maintain it, and its growth – if growth there has been – has depended on the expansion of the mass of the total surplus value produced.
 
VII. State as capital: productive labour in the state sector
It would be a mistake to treat all forms of state production as unproductive labour, merely because of the fact of state ownership of the relevant means of production. The state can be a capitalist, and a productive capitalist. The obvious case is the nationalised industry Sector in western capitalism, within which wage-labour is combined with state-owned means of production to produce use-values embodying both necessary and surplus labour, embodying surplus-value. At the same time, the state is a capitalist of a particular sort, whose character as capitalist is disguised by the state form.
It is sometimes objected, that the state cannot be a capitalist, and in particular that the nationalised industries cannot be capitalist enterprises, because of the low or even negative rates of profit which they earn. This objection. however, confuses the surface appearance with the underlying real relations. In order to comprehend the place of the nationalised industries in the total process of reproduction of national capital, it is necessary to remind ourselves of the outline of Marx’s argument concerning value and prices, and concerning the formation of an average rate of profit.
In Marx’s account, the individual values of commodities cannot coincide with their average prices. Surplus value is created only by living labour power, and thus capital would never flow into the less profitable and more “capital-intensive” branches of industry, and capitalism would be marked by permanent technical stagnation. Such a theoretical conclusion does not, obviously, match the actual history of the capitalist mode of production, whose chief historical merit in Marx’s eyes was precisely its massive development of the productive forces.
A systematic deviation between values and prices is thus a necessity for capitalist production as a whole. Marx’s argument, crudely, is that all the surplus-value produced in all the various branches of production enters a common fund which is the collective property of the whole capitalist class. This fact of common property in surplus-value is what gives the capitalist class as a whole a collective interest in the rate of exploitation of the working class in the whole productive sector of capitalism. The distribution of that collective fund of value amongst the various capitalists is determined by competition between the capitalists. And, broadly speaking, the outcome of that competitive struggle amongst the capitalists is that each capital gets back a proportion of total surplus-value in the form of profit, its proportionate share being determined not by its contribution to the collective fund, but by the total size of its capital outlay. Thus the more “labour-intensive” industry produces surplus-value a part of which is transferred through the competitive process within the sphere of circulation to the more “capital-intensive” branch of industry; thus the worker in an industry with a low average organic composition of capital actually labours to produce profits for capitalists in industries with high organic compositions of capital. Through this competitive process, an average rate of profit is formed across the whole of the capitalist production process.
Nor is this the end of the story, for total surplus-value is distributed not only among the capitalists whose production processes contribute surplus-value to the collective fund, but also among other capitalists whose claim to a share rests on the possession of capital in other forms: finance capital, landed capital. Thus surplus-value is divided, not simply into various shares of profit, but also into interest and rent, which represent the claims of “non-productive” capitals. Though Marx has much less to say about this, it is also clear that it is at this point, when the collective fund is being distributed, that the state also steps in with its particular claims which its takes out in the form of taxes. Just as the landlord can press his claim to a share of total surplus-value on the grounds of his monopolisation of land, so the state’s monopoly of force permits its claims to be met as well. The various costs of the state are thus met out of this collective fund of surplus-value.
However, to the extent that the state owns productive capital, as with nationalised industries, it contributes to the collective value- fund as well as deducting from it. At the same time, its monopolistic position – founded finally in its ability to use force, to collect taxes – permits the state to organise the pricing of its products in such a way that it appears that they are simply unproductive, simply “loss-makers”. The state’s ability to tax gives it the power to obtain constant and variable capital by other means than through the price-mechanism.
The implication of the price-mechanism is, of course, that those who actually use (consume) a particular commodity provide the capital producing that commodity with the money that can be reconverted into further constant and variable capital in production. Non-users make no contribution.
The state, on the other hand, is able to enforce payments for its outputs on non-users, or – merely a variation on the same theme – to enforce payments for its output which are disproportionate to their use. And commonly we find nation-states, relying ultimately on their monopoly of force, altering the domestic price-structure, and altering the flows of surplus-value. Thus, state railways commonly make “losses”, in that their monetary revenues from passenger and freight services do not match their monetary outlays, but this does not imply that they therefore cease to operate. (Though, in the hands of private capital, which generally lacks the ability to tax, they would cease to operate, as they would fail to attract further capital). What happens, of course, is that the capital required for the maintenance of the railways, and for their “modernisation”, is provided by the state, through its peculiar powers. The implication is that those who directly use the railways are not the only providers of their money-capital requirements.
In Britain, certainly, it is notable that – with the possible exception of the Inland Waterways Board – the nationalised industries have invested massively in the development of the productive forces under their command, and despite their “low profitability”. Clearly, the financial resources to enable all the modernisation investment that has been undertaken in the electricity supply industry, in gas, in the railways, the coal-mines, etc., has not been secured by the price-mechanism alone. In addition to the revenues raised by these industries through direct sales of their products, they have also depended on the state’s ability to provide them with investment capital in other ways: through the writing off of losses, through loan-capital, through tax-raised money, through various kinds of financial subsidy, etc., All this money raised by the state, by whatever means, and used for these investment purposes must surely be viewed as a portion of total surplus value extracted from capital’s collective fund and redistributed through the state’s coercive ability to define, and enforce, a “common interest” for “national capital”.
On the whole, within western capitalist countries, the nationalised industry form is used by nation-states in situations where, for whatever reasons, (a) the rate of return obtainable by a particular branch of production or capital is insufficient to guarantee the continued investment of private capital (whose only means of “making a profit” is via the price-mechanism) and (b) where, for whatever reasons, the state judges that the continued provision of the use-values produced in that branch of production or capital is in the “national interest”. The state, with its particular powers, takes over the financing of capital in that sector, and to a greater or lesser extent shifts the locus of realisation of value away from immediate purchasers of the use-values produced onto the whole national capital or some other parts of it.
Nationalisation of this or that capital cannot be said to be “in the interests” nor “against the interests” of capital – either of “capital- in-general” or of whatever is defined as “national capital”. Some individual capitals benefit from nationalisations, others lose out. Some receive new money-capital in the form of compensation (if this is paid), some do not; some benefit, in that the state effectively forces other capitals to meet part of the costs of their material inputs, some subsidise more than they are subsidised; some benefit from the maintenance in the nationalised industry of a market for their own output, others do not; some meet the maintained nationalised sector as a competitor, some meet is as an alternative vendor seeking their custom.
It should also be cleat that formal, legal “nationalisation” is by no means the only process to which this kind of analysis is appropriate. To the degree that a nation-state subsidises any capital. it also interferes in the price-formation process, and thus interferes in the movement whereby value is distributed between alternative competing realisation possibilities. What seems to have been a marked tendency towards greater “state intervention” in investment, pricing, etc., means that the various nation-states have become increasingly prominent actors in the determination of the flows of value within national capitalist markets.
In the case of a national economy like the Russian one, the internal market plays only a very small part in the determination of prices. In such a case, the formation of prices is removed a good distance from the processes discussed by Marx in his account of the transformation of values into prices, and the need for a developed account of the tax-form becomes especially apparent. If Russia, where effectively all means of production are in the hands of the state [14], represents the extreme point of development within a national economy, there are clearly significant shifts in this direction also manifest within western capitalist countries.
In western capitalism, the nationalised industries, together with the “semi-nationalised” sector of state-subsidised industries, are to be regarded as a sector of productive labour. In this they are to be distinguished from the rest of the state sector, which is a sphere of unproductive labour. That is, the nationalised industries not only consume value produced elsewhere, but also add to the collective fund of capital their own contribution of surplus-value. But they represent, generally, a sector of capitalist production which – for a variety of historical reasons – has proved incapable of realising sufficient surplus-value to engage in the investment/modernisation deemed necessary by the state in the “national interest”.
The prospective rate of profit earnable on their assets has not been sufficient to induce their private (or municipal) capitalist owners to invest in their future to the degree deemed necessary by national government. It is not possible to treat these industries as “infrastructural” or simply a part of the “general conditions of production”, for they are too diverse to be thus neatly categorised. Even if we can slot industries like gas, coal, electricity, rail, the Post Office, steel into this kind of neat categorisation, examples like Rolls Royce aero-engines, or British Leyland (or indeed Volkswagen or Renault) just do not fit easily into such an over-tidy framework.
Two important general observations of course, need to be made. They are inter-related. The first is that however much state intervention may affect the pattern of domestic national prices, and however much it may affect the distribution of value between competing realisation possibilities the law of value still operates overall. A change in the distribution of value from one possible destination to another does not, in itself, add one iota of additional value to total capital. The general level of the rate of profit is not altered by its redistribution. Any inherent tendencies within capital in general, such as the tendency for the rate of profit to fall, are in no way overcome. [15] The fact that this or that nation-state becomes directly or indirectly involved in the actual process of surplus-value production, or alters the distribution of value within its sphere, does not in the least alter the general laws of motion of capital, which continue to operate “behind the backs” of the producers, including state producers.
State interventions in the distribution of surplus-value, of the kind involved in nationalisation and subsidisation, does represent a form of capitalist “socialisation” of production. As “socialisation”, of course, it is inherently limited by its capitalist form, and by its national character. Such “socialisation” is carried out, not in the interests of “production” in general, nor even in the interests of “capital in general”, but rather with a view to benefiting those parts of total capital which operate within the national orbit of the state. The costs of running these industries, insofar as they are not covered by receipts from direct sales, are borne by the rest of the national capitalist class, and appear as deductions from their (potential) revenue.
Secondly, we need to remind ourselves of the merely national character of the state. There is an apparent tendency in Marxist theorising about the state, and about phenomena like capitalist imperialism, to treat the external relations of states as factors to be added on to analysis as a mere after-thought. Put another way, there is a tendency to treat the world market as a sum of a set of national economies, rather than treating the world market as the analytical starting point for a discussion of the nation-state. [16] The world market, intended to be the subject of Marx’s last planned volume of Capital, is not something as it were extrinsic to capital, but is rather implied in the very concept of capital itself.
... just as capital has the tendency on the one side to create ever more surplus labour, so it has the complementary tendency to create more “points of exchange”, i.e., here, seen from the standpoint of absolute surplus value or surplus labour, to summon up more surplus labour as complement to itself; i.e. at bottom, to propogate productioii based on capital, or the mode of production corresponding to it. The tendency to create the world market is directly given in the concept of capital itself. Every limit appears as a barrier to be overcome. [16*]
The formation of capital from the beginning, as the basis of the capitalist mode of production, implied and was contained in a developing world market, within which nation states were formed and differentiated. The formation of a world market (whose geographical reach need not – as Wallerstein recently pointed out [17*] – initially be genuinely global in scope) implies that the processes discussed above, through which values are transformed into prices through the competitive interaction of capitals, occurs not merely on a national but on a world market level. Not only that, but it is through the world market that “socially necessary labour time” is determined for any particular commodity: i.e., it is through the world market, and the competition of capitals therein, that the production process of this or that capital is declared or not declared “necessary”. It is simply astonishing how easily this elementary and important idea is forgotten or not grasped, both by bourgeois and Marxist theorists [17]
Through the movement of value within the whole world economy, limits are set to the possibilities of nation-state interventions in capitalist production and realisation. This elementary notion is forgotten by those, including most in the Keynesian tradition, for whom “full employment” or any other desirable condition of the national economy can be simply provided if the state pursues the “correct” policies. In practice, no nation-state can have the degree of leverage required to produce the desired result in its own “segment”. Properly, analysis of the world economy should be the starting point for the analysis of the nation-state. [18]
 
VIII. “National capital”
State interventions in national production, whether in the form of the direct nationalisation of the means of production, or various indirect “semi-nationalisations” such as state-subsidisation, tariff protection for certain commodities, legally instituted limits on rights to transfer capital, etc., imply the formation of “national capital”. How far can we take this notion of “national capital”?
Consider the meaning of a nation-state’s decision to nationalise or otherwise “aid” a segment of industry. What we may say happens in such a situation is that a nation-state places itself in the position of the “directors” of a “national capital”, and tries to decide what policies will best serve the “interests” of that “national capital”. I place “national capital” in quotation marks, since part of the process of decision making actually involves deciding what the practical limits of “national capital” actually are. A nation-state is defined, in part, by its possession of a monopoly of force over a particular segment of geographical territory, for it is as tied to land as was any feudal serf or lord. The various means of production which exist within and outside the territorial limits of the nation-state can, under various circumstances, and depending on government perceptions, be counted as part of “national capital” or counted out of such a conception. Thus, for example, the plant and other facilities which legally belong to companies with their headquarters in other countries may, for certain purposes, be counted as “national capital” and for other purposes they may be counted as “foreign”, “alien”. [19] Similarly, the overseas holdings of the state’s own legal subjects may or may not be counted as part of “national capital”.
In whatever way the nation-state perceives the shape of its “national capital” for the immediate purpose, it must form its conception of “national capital” in opposition to or in separation from the rest of capital, as against other “national capitals”. In a sense, what the nation-state asks is, does “British industry” require a massive injection of new money-capital into its steel/coal/railway/nylon stockings production? [20] Will those who currently direct that production themselves provide or raise the necessary investment capital? What are the consequences for “British industry” of a major injection of new investment by the state into that sector – or, on the other hand, of allowing that sector of “national” production to run down? Should tariffs be erected to protect this or that branch of “national” production from overseas competition, and with what results for the rest of “national capital”?
It is clear; from the history of the relations between the state and capital both in Britain and elsewhere since at least the First World War that, with important forward and reverse movements, states have become increasingly “interventionist” vis-a-vis their “national capitals”. “National capitals” have become less and less “notional”, in the sense that large agglomerations of capital are being and have been formed around the nation-states of western capitalism, these “state capitals” consisting above all of the formally nationalised industries whose continued existence depends on a sizeable degree of state subsidisation. The states have carried out forms of “vertical integration” of a variety of sectors of production, collecting them together into statified “conglomerates” with more or less integrated internal structures.
But faced with a crisis in profitability in this or that sector of “national” production, nationalisation or state-subsidisation is only one possible response. For coherence of policy formation is not by any means to be expected in these circumstances; rather, ad hoc adjustments and decisions, reflecting capital’s essential anarchic planlessness, are all too apparent. [21] Mike Kidron put the point well:
It is difficult not to conclude that the state’s growth in size and economic effect has not been a direct result of pressure from either business or labour. While organised labour has, on balance, favoured state involvement and capital opposed it, nothing suggests that either attitude has had much effect on the actual course of events since the war. On the contrary, the state’s growth has been in a series of disjointed steps that bear every sign of not representing a coherent attitude working itself out in institutional form, but rather a series of ad hoc responses to short-term problems which could not be dealt with in any other way. Since the problems were shared by more or less all western capitalist countries and their institutional arrangements were similar at the outset, it is not surprising that they adopted similar approaches and went through a similar course. [18*]
Though even this is capable of being read too “economistically” in two senses: first, in that it underplays the degree of “uneven development” as between nation-states – witness the lower level of formal nationalisation etc. in the US economy, especially in the 1950s and 1960s; second, in that it leaves unexamined the Ways in which “ad hoc responses to short-term problems” could be dealt with in other ways – i.e., it leaves out the class struggle.
How should “national capital” be organised? There is a permanent debate and struggle among capital’s ideologists as to the appropriateness of “market forces” and “planning”, over the desirable level of statification for “national capital”, etc. [19*] That debate is paralleled within “management theory” in a general controversy over the desirability of centralised control and decision-making as against local managerial initiative and departmentalism within the individual capitalist enterprise. It is also mirrored in the post-Stalin debates in Eastern Europe over the degree to which “market forces” should be permitted freedom of movement and development, given the effects of bureaucratically centralised “planning” on waste, stagnation, etc. [22] The issue in the debates is, which form of internal organisation of capital will prove most effective in terms of capital’s external necessity of responding to competitive anarchy in the world system. Certainly the debate is not about capitalism v. socialism, but about forms of capitalist organisation and strategy, in which the various schools of thought emphasise particular aspects of the contradictory character of capital, without perceiving the totality. The actual effect of the ideologists on state policy-making is obscure; probably, they appear effective to the degree that their propositions represent actual class forces at particular conjunctures.
The problems of analysis arising from the growth of the state sector in 20th century capitalism are considerable. If, on the one hand, we reject that argument which suggests that the whole of the state sector is a sphere of “unproductive” labour in the sense that it is a sphere of activity financed purely from revenue and which contributes nothing to surplus-value directly, we also have to beware of the opposite trap of treating modern capitalism as a more or less fully formed system of state capitals. In such a view, as presented in an essay by Kidron [20*] for example, the world economy is seen as fundamentally a system made up of an aggregation of “Russias”, with only the added complication that the boundaries of the integrated state capitals do not coincide with the territorial boundaries of states. For Kidron, if such a system is not yet fully formed, this is the tendency of development.
Such an approach, I suggest, involves treating the capitalist nation-state as a rather less contradictory phenomenon than in fact it is. In a senses Kidron makes the same mistake that von Braunmuhl (cited above, section VII) identifies as the mistake underlying a variety of accounts of imperialism: they treat the world market as a sum of national markets, a sum of nation-states, rather than beginning with the totality and treating each national segment and each nation-state within it as a particular field within the whole seen in this light, each national economy appears as a particular combination, a complex unity of capitals with different structures, different markets, different sources for its material inputs, etc. And within world capitalism, at least two general tendencies are identifiable: not merely the one suggested by Kidron.
These are exactly the tendencies that Bukharin identified in general terms in his much neglected work, Imperialism and World Economy (1915): on the one hand tendencies to the nationalisation of production and exchange, on the other hand tendencies to their internationalisation. Both tendencies are very apparent within contemporary capitalism, and in important ways they contradict and reinforce each other. One field in which the contradictory character of these tendencies manifests itself very sharply is within each nation-state: hence precisely the importance, in using terms like “national capital” and “national interest”, of maintaining permanent quotation marks.
“National capital” comprises a very contradictory bundle of capitals. It includes domestically based capitals which are chiefly concerned with the domestic markets for both “capital” and “consumer” goods. They may be private or nationalised. It also includes capitals based and run from overseas, which are oriented towards the domestic market and towards overseas markets. It also includes domestically based capitals which are oriented towards export markets: again, both “private” and “state” capitals are involved – British Steel, British Shipbuilders, Rolls Royce, British Leyland. Among these, some capitals are concerned chiefly with the export of commodities, others with the export of capital, both “productive” capital and various kinds of “rentier” and “finance” capital. Nor are the sources of capital borrowing limited to the domestic market, but include massive foreign borrowings, including borrowings from the growing “euromoney markets”. In the nature of the situation, the process of nation-state policy formation and strategy must be a response to a whole variety of demands and pressures from capitals, many of them necessarily in contradiction with each other. [23]
The state’s relation to the contradictory demands and movements of capital in the world market, and in its domestic economy as it relates to the world market as a part, is mediated most directly through the more or less accidental aggregate manner in which the inter-relations between capital “within” and “outside” its territorial boundaries are experienced: through the national balance of payments, and through the varying relations between the state-guaranteed national currency and world money, i.e. between the exchange-value of its national money and other national currencies and gold.
So the capitalist nation-state is – even without our taking account of the struggle of capital with the working class over the accumulation and exploitation process – anything but a permanently structured bloc of interests. Rather, the state is a field of intracapitalist conflict, through which at best only temporary and shifting determinations and enforcements of the “national interest” are achieved. Understanding the role of the state as capital is therefore only the starting point – although an essential starting point – for understanding its relationship with the rest of capitalist society.

Notes
1. It is odd how little theoretical reflection there is on this question in the Marxist literature. Yet a moments thought suggests it is vital for the comprehension of capitalist imperialism, for the long debate over the “national question”, etc.
2. Ralph Miliband, The State in Capitalist Society, 1969, is probably the best-known of all the proponents of this thesis, according to which the modern state is the “instrument” of the capitalist class. With the possible exception of Claus Offe [3*] none of Miliband’s critics have really attacked him directly on this question.
3. Very often – and Miliband is an exemplar here – the capitalist class is not really the object of attention at all, but rather “the rich” become the chief focus of interest. Thus attention is diverted from the relations of production to the sphere of distribution, and the specific character of the capitalist class is forgotten. The difficulty with Miliband’s propositions is that they could equally well be applied to feudal England or slave-owning Rome, with only marginal adjustments here and there. Miliband’s whole analysis really does not belong to the Marxist tradition of analysis at all: it lacks historical specificity, and lapses into a mixture of sociological elite theory and sociological functionalism. I have an overlong unfinished typescript on the problems posed by Miliband’s kind of analysis, if anyone’s interested.
4. One of the most amazing aspects of the work of writers like Miliband is the practical absence of the class struggle from the centre of their analysis. They provide an account, not of a society riven by class contradiction and struggle, but of a society organised by and dominated by the rich and powerful. (The most effective critique of Miliband along these lines is that provided by Isaac Balbus. [4*])
5. E. B. Pashukanis, The General Theory of Law and Marxism, 1923. This is a regrettably little-known work, which is currently available in English in a classically appalling translation by John Hazard in a volume entitled Soviet Legal Philosophy (Harvard 1951). Hazard’s text can only be understood if the reader can re-translate as he or she goes, for “labour-power” appears as “worker-strength”, “commodities” as “goods”, “exchange” as “barter”, etc. A new translation has been announced for later in 1978 by Inklinks Books. There are useful introductions to Pashukanis in Chris Arthur, Toward a materialist theory of law, Critique 7 (to which a forthcoming critical note in the same journal by Steve Redhead should be noted) and in Eugene and Alice Kamenka, The Life and Afterlife of a Bolshevik Jurist, Problems of Communism, 1970.
6. Altvater is the most explicit in his insistence on this point, and in a way the most revealing. He writes:
... the state is never an actual, material, total capitalist, but rather always simply an idealised or fictitious total capitalist. [12*]
The State, he suggests, is able to play its particular role, of supplying the deficiencies in capitalist reproduction as a whole
... precisely because the sate, as a special institution, outside and above bourgeois society, is not subservient to the necessities of surplus production, as are capital units, no matter how big. The appropriate form of the state under capitalism is therefore its special existence counterposed to capital units ...
Altvater is here making explicit what is implicit in other writers. The state is necessarily “outside and above” bourgeois society; is not subservient to the necessities of surplus (value) production as are “capital units”; is counterposed to “capital units”; etc. Altvater’s whole argument is construed on a reading of Engels’ Anti-Duhring, in which Engels discusses the situation where the centralisation of capital reaches the level of the state, and the state itself becomes a capitalist. Engels writes:
The modern state, no matter what its form, is essentially a capitalist machine, the state of the capitalists, the ideal personification of the total national capital. The more it proceeds to the taking over of the productive forces, the more does it actually become the national capitalist, the more citizens does it exploit. (my emphasis, CB).
Altvater disagrees with Engels’ formulation, but in so doing revealingly misquotes what Engels said. Where Engels refers to the state as the personification of total national capital, as national capitalist, Altvater leaves out the word “national” and reads Engels as saying that the state becomes the “total capitalist”.
Had Engels said that, he’d have been uttering a Marxist nonsense. A total capitalist would imply a single capitalist controlling the entire capital within the system – i.e., precisely the abolition of capitalism. Capital, pace Marx’s Grundrisse, can only exist as many capitals. The total unification of all capital into one set of hands would imply the direction of production from one centre, whether with or without proletarian revolution. The law of value would be abolished; competitive accumulation could no longer provide the motive of production. (Cf. the discussion of the abstract possibility in L. Trotsky, In Defence of Marxism). To repeat, had Engels said that, he’d have uttered a nonsense. But he didn’t say it. He referred only to the “total national capital”, which is a very different thing. Nor, it’s clear, did Engels regard the state takeover of production as the abolition of the capital relation:
The workers remain wage-workers – proletarians. The capitalist relation is not done away with. It is rather brought to a head. But, brought to a head, it topples over. State ownership of the productive forces is not the solution of the conflict, but concealed within it are the technical elements that form elements of that solution.
In the 20th century we might find Engels a bit optimistic here. But, though he doesn’t theorise the question any further (presumably he assumed his readers would understand him), his meaning seems clear enough. It is of course only comprehensible if we remember a crucial element in the capitalist system which Altvater has forgotten, namely, that capitalist society is a world society consisting of many nation states. A nation-state takeover of the means of production in one country is not, by any means, the centralisation of all capital into one set of hands, thus not the formation of an impossible “total capitalist”.
7. This is very clear in the article cited above by Altvater, who lists four general functions of the state, the fourth of which is “safeguarding the existence and expansion of total national capital on the capitalist world market”. This fourth function is the only one to which he devotes no further analysis.
8. This is a counsel of excellence, which I’m currently unable to fulfil. At least implicitly, some pointers in this direction are suggested below – though I hasten to add that they’re not theoretically integrated.
9. It would be improper of me not to draw attention to the fact that my use of the term “general conditions of production” goes beyond Marx here. For Marx – in a rather abbreviated discussion – defined these “general conditions” as definitely unproductive forms of labour. These conditions of production, he wrote,
... so long as their production cannot yet be accomplished by capital as such and under its conditions – are therefore paid out of part of the country’s revenue – out of the government’s treasury – and the workers do not appear as productive workers, even though they increase the productive force of capital. [15*]
10. On the production in the family of capital’s “general conditions of production”, cf. Ann Foreman, Femininity as alienation, 1977; also relevant to her argument is Jane Humphries, Class struggle and the persistence of the working class family, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1.3, 1977, and Eli Zaretsky, Capitalism, the family and personal life, 1976.
11. Those who are the “conscious bearers” of capital, the capitalist class and their functionaries, are of course also unproductive.
12. Insofar as sales workers put goods on the shelves for consumers, i.e. physically transport commodities to users, they are productive transport, workers of course. Labour-force statistics, which lump together both productive and unproductive labour in the activity of “distribution” are – like most official statistics – of no use in Marxist analysis.
13. See, e.g. the work of Ann Foreman, Jane Humphries, Eli Zaretsky, cited in note 10. This kind of argument, which takes note of working-class reasons for the defence of the family form, and which is essentially a historically based argument (conducted within the framework of an understanding of the “form determinations” of capitalist reproduction), is probably more important and significant than the kind of “form analysis” of the impossibility of the abolition of the family provided by e.g. Sue Himmelweit and Simon Mohun, Domestic labour and capital, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1.4, 1977. Apart from anything else, at various periods in various places within the capitalist system, familial reproduction of labour-power has not existed. Cf. the Stalinist labour-camps, the situation of guest workers in West Germany, the condition of many of the slaves in the capitalist slavery system of the USA, etc. Let alone orphanages, state-broken “problem” families etc.
14. Outside that is, the still significant petty-commodity production sector of private agriculture, and the not yet very significant “joint enterprises” like Togliattigrad. The importance of graft also needs to be considered here.
15. Indeed, most commonly they are pushed forward by state interventions, for these interventions tend, generally, towards the encouragement of investment in production processes with a high organic composition of capital, in which the branch rate of surplus value is lower than average.
16. On the general point, cf. Claudia von Braunmuhl, On the analysis of the bourgeois nation state within the world market context in J. Holloway and S. Picciotto, (eds.), State and capital: a marxist debate, Edward Arnold, 1978.
17. For an example of a bourgeois theorist who “forgets” the world economy, this amnesia enabling an account of the US economy as “planned”, cf. J. K. Galbraith, The New Industrial State, 1967. In Marxism, the amnesiac tendency appears in the form of amazingly reactionary and absurd accounts of Russia, China, Cuba and other amnesiac heavens-on-earth.
18. Since writing these notes, I have read the discussion of state industries provided by Rosemary Crompton and Jon Gubbay in their Economy and Class Structure (Macmillan 1977), a book produced broadly within our own traditions of analysis. Crompton and Gubbay distinguish between “capitals” and “quasi-capitals”, with nationalised industries tending to fall into the latter category. A “quasi-capital” is an enterprise that “does not appropriate surplus-value but seeks surplus product as if it were surplus value” (ibid., p. 102).
While there is much of value in their book, I do not find this way of distinguishing between kinds of capital very fruitful. It seems to rest on a confusion, between “value” and “price”. They write:
... insofar as state enterprises are subsidised, cartelised and coordinated, their prices are determined to that extent by central authority rather than by the market; since each enterprises’s products are not pure commodities, surplus labour is not appropriated entirely as surplus value. (Ibid., pp. 109–10).
It seems appropriate to suggest that the final part of this sentence could be restated, in much clearer terms, as follows: “surplus labour is not appropriated entirely through the normal workings of the price system.” No capitalist appropriates surplus value entirely as “surplus value”, outside the immediate process of production; the money which capitalists appropriate as profits is a mediated form of surplus-value, gained after and through the competitive process of realisation of value. The production and the realisation of surplus-value, as Marx remarked, are processes separated, both logically and spatially, and they need to be kept separate if we are to comprehend the particular place occupied by state-subsidised industries.
That doubt raised about Crompton and Gubbay’s book, it is also clear from a first reading that it is an important and path-breaking work in that it seeks to demonstrate the relevance of Marxist categories of analysis in a field where bourgeois analytical frameworks (especially those derived from Max Weber) have long held sway. It deserves careful and critical reading, as a very good basis for further theoretical development.
19. In rhetoric at least, Gaullism in France treated American multi-nationals’ investments in France as “alien” capital. Neither Tory nor Labour administrations in Britain have tended to do this so far: cf. Michael Hodges, Multinational corporations and national government, Saxon House, 1974.
20. Let is not be thought that stockings are a frivolous example. Bear Brand Stockings of Liverpool were held up for a period in the 1970s by state elastic, and only after a review in the DTI were they allowed to slide down when the subsidies were not renewed.
21. The last Tory government, under Heath, is but a case in point. Initially committed to cutting state aid to industry and to de-nationalisation, the Tories did a complete turn-about while in office, nationalising Rolls-Royce and rescuing UCS. They ended up spending 50 per cent more per year in "aid" to industry than Labour had done before them. Cf. e.g. J. Bruce-Gardyne, Whatever happened to the quiet revolution?, 1975.
22. Cf. Chris Harman’s interesting remarks on the tendency towards break-up within Eastern European planning in IS 100, p. 10.
23. These two tendencies, the cheapening of the value of labour-power and the cheapening of the elements of constant capital, are theoretically among the most important “counteracting tendencies” on the famous tendency of the rate of profit to fall. They are – especially the latter – the ones which have proved most troublesome to Marxists seeking to defend this “most important law” against its critics.
 
Top of the page
 
References
1*. Roman Rosdolsky, The Making of Marx’s Capital, 1977, chap.2.
2*. Karl Marx, The revolutions of 1848, 1973. p. 69, (my emphasis – CB).
3*. Cf. Claus Offe, Structural problems of the capitalist state, German Political Studies, 1974.
4*. Isaac Balbus, Modern capitalism and the state, Monthly Review, May 1971.
5*. Cf. John Hollway and Sol Picciotto (eds.), State and capital: a marxist debate, 1978, Introduction.
6*. Cf. ibid.
7*. E.B. Pashukanis, The general theory of law and marxism, in J. Hazard (ed.), Soviet Legal Philosophy, 1951, p. 185.
8*. Cf. W. Muller and C. Neususs, The illusion of state socialism, Telos 25, 1975.
9*. Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Penguin 1976 p. 899.
10*. Hollway and Picciotto (eds.), op. cit., p. 38.
11*. Ibid., p. 41 (my emphasis, CB).
12*. Elmar Altvater, Notes on state interventionism, Kapitalistate, 1, p. ??)
13*. Hollway and Picciotto (eds.), op. cit., p. 64 (my emphasis, CB).
14*. Pashukanis, op.cit., p.186)
15*. Eugene and Laice Kamenka, The life and after-life of a Bolshevik jurist, Problems of Communism, 1970, p. 532.
16*. Karl Marx, The Grundrisse, 1973, pp. 407–8.
17*. Cf. Immanuel Wallerstein, The modern world system, 1974.
18*. Michael Kidron, Western capitalism since the war, 1970.
19*. Nigel Harris, Competition and the corporate society, 1973.
20*. Cf. Michael Kidron, Two insights don’t make a theory, IS 100, July 1977.>

Bibliography
Elmar Altvater, Notes on state interventionism, Kapitalistate, 1 & 2, 1973.
Chris Arthur, Toward a materialist theory of law, Critique 7, 1977.
Isaac Balbus, Modern capitalism and the state, Monthly Review, May 1971.
Paul Baran, The Political Economy of Growth, Penguin 197?.
Colin Barker, A note on the theory of capitalist states, Capital and Class 4, 1978.
Harry Braverman, Labor and monopoly capital, Monthly Review Pres, 1974.
N. Bukharin, Imperialism and world economy, Merlin 1972.
P. Bullock, Categories of labour power for capital, Bulletin of CSE, Autumn 1973.
P. Bullock, Defining productive labour for capital, Bulletin of CSE, Autumn 1974.
P. Bullock and D. Yaffe, Inflation, the crisis and the post war boom, Revolutionary Communist 3/4, Nov. 1975.
Tony Cliff, Russia, a Marxist analysis, IS 1970.
Rosemary Crompton and Jon Gubbay, Economy and class structure, Macmillan, 1977.
F. Engels, Anti-Duhring, Moscow, 1969.
F. Engels, The Origins of the family, private property and the state, Moscow.
Ann Foreman, Femininity as alienation, Pluto 1977.
J.K. Galbraith, The new industrial state, Penguin 1968.
J. Bruce-Gardyne, Whatever happened to the quiet revolution?, Charles Knight 1975.
Chris Harman, Bureaucracy and revolution in Eastern Europe, Pluto 1974.
Chris Harman, Marxist economics and the world today, IS 76, March 1975.
Chris Harman, Better a valid insight than a wrong theory, IS 100, July 1977.
Nigel Harris, Competition and the corporate society, UP 1973.
Nigel Harris, World crisis and the system, IS 100, July 1977.
Sue Himmelweit and Simon Mohun, Domestic labour and capital, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1.4, 1977.
John Hollway and Sol Picciotto (eds.), State and capital: a marxist debate, Edward Arnold 1978.
Jane Humphries, Class struggle and the persistence of the working class family, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1.3, 1977.
Athar Hussein, Hilferding’s Finance Capital, Bulletin of CSE, March 1976.
Eugene and Laice Kamenka, The life and after-life of a Bolshevik jurist, Problems of Communism, 1970.
Michael Kidron, Western capitalism since the war, Penguin 1970.
Michael Kidron, Capitalism and theory, Pluto, 1975:
Michael Kidron, Two insights don’t make a theory, IS 100, July 1977.
J.C. Kincaid, Poverty and equality in Britain, Penguin.
David Lockwood, The Blackcoated worker, Allen and Unwin 1958.
Frank McFadzean, Galbriath and the planners, Strathclyde University 1968.
Ernest Mandel, The formation of the economic thought of Karl Marx, NLB 1971.
Ernest Mandel, Late capitalism, NLB 1975.
Karl Marx, The revolutions of 1848, Penguin 1973.
Karl Marx, The Grundrisse, Penguin 1973.
Karl Marx, Early Writings, Penguin 1973.
Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Penguin 1976; Vol. III, Moscow 1963.
Karl Marx, Theories of Surplus Value, Vol. III, L&W 197?.
Ralph Miliband, The state in capitalist society, Weidenfeld & Nicolson 1969.
W. Muller and C. Neususs, The illusion of state socialism, Telos 25, 1975.
Claus Offe, Structural problems of the capitalist state, German Political Studies, 1974.
E.B. Pashukanis, The general theory of law and marxism, in J. Hazard (ed.), Soviet Legal Philosophy, Harvard 1951.
Nicos Poulantzas, Political power and social classes, NLB 197?.
Nicos Poulantzas, Classes in contemporary capitalism, NLB 197?.
Nicos Poulantzas, The problem of the capitalist state, NLR 58, 1969.
Roman Rosdolsky, The Making of Marx’s Capital, Pluto 1977.
Martin Shaw, The theory of the state and politics: a central paradox of Marxism, Economy and Society, 3.4, 1974.
Leon Trotsky, In Defence of Marxism.
Immanuel Wallerstein, The modern world system, Academic Press, 1974.
David Yaffe, Value and Price in Marx’s Capital, Revolutionary Communist 1, 1975.
Eli Zaretsky, Capitalism, the family and personal life, Pluto 1976.



Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, Volume One, State and Revolution, two parts
by Hal Draper
Monthly Review Press, £17.50 the set
Hal Draper is setting out to provide a completely comprehensive account of the political thought of Marx and Engels. This first two-part volume will be followed by two more – each, no doubt, equally expensive. Monthly Review Press have taken on a major publishing venture, whose costs are obviously terrifying. I can only hope that the hard-back venture recovers its capital outlay rapidly, so that a cheaper paperback edition can follow. Readers of this journal should try hard to get Hal Draper into every library.
For Draper’s first volume indicates that this is going to be a stupendous work of Marxology. As a work of reference, clearly written and admirably organised, Draper is going to be indispensable to anyone who wants to know exactly what Marx and Engels really thought. Those who have appreciated the work of scholarship Draper has already put into various articles that have already appeared in different journals over the past decade (including this one) will know how significant this massive enterprise is going to be. Draper is a committed revolutionary socialist, of enormous scholarship, every page of whose work is a vindication of the democratic emancipatory vision he shares with the theoretical founders of our movement.
A brief review of this kind can do no more, firstly, than celebrate the publication of Draper’s first volume, and hope for the opportunity to review the whole work, when it finally appears, at greater length. That said, reading the first volume raises some doubts, concerning potential weaknesses in the work. (The remaining two volumes may prove me wrong, I admit with anticipation.)
First, Draper seems to underplay the ‘philosophical’ elements in Marx’s critique of the state and of bureaucracy, in particular in connection with Marx’s theory of alienation and freedom. Second, and perhaps more seriously, I fear that Draper may turn out not to develop further those aspects of Marx’s work which he himself left very incomplete. We know that Marx planned to continue, after the three volumes of Capital, with a major work on the state, and another on the world market. To my knowledge, not even outline sketches of these works survive. As a result, Marxist theorising on the ‘political economy’ of the capitalist state remains seriously underdeveloped. In the 20th century, the gaps in our theory have become increasingly significant: We have little in the way of developed theory concerning the nation-state, the growth of state ‘welfare’, nationalisation of industry, state economic ‘planning’, and the like.
Third, where Draper engages with Marxist debate since Marx, his focus is narrow. He is brilliant at refuting those who have drawn wildly mistaken inferences from Marx’s text (see for instance his superb demolition job on Karl Wittfogel), but he does not engage at all with the mass of writing that has appeared in the past few years. A whole new generation of Marxist theorists has sprung up in the world, especially in the 1970s, trying – often crudely, sometimes very excitingly – to grapple with the problems of developing Marxist ideas to make them relevant to the world of today. Judging by the first volume, Draper has ignored them all, good and bad alike. Sometimes, Draper hints at the relevance of Marx’s ideas to the contemporary world (e.g. in passing remarks on Stalinist Russia), but infuriatingly he leaves the matter at the level of hints.
My fear, I suppose, is that this extraordinary enterprise will – through some regrettable self-denying ordinance on Draper’s part – stay stuck at the level of ‘Marxology’, at the level of brilliant and authoritative explication of what Marx said, but with only a tangential relevance to contemporary political and theoretical struggles. It will, in that case, be for others to use Draper’s book as Marxists, uniting theory and practice more directly and less academically. That said, the socialist movement has been rendered a great service by Hal Draper, and we should wish it very well.
 



In Capital and Class 2, John Holloway and Sol Picciotto (hereafter H&P) published an important contribution to the ongoing debate on the Marxist theory of the state. The Note that follows criticises their article on a couple of points, so I should remark that their argument, taken as a whole, has very significant merits. In particular, its insistence that the capitalist state-form cannot be considered separately from the capital relation is exceptionally valuable.
To summarise my argument: I suggest that there is a very significant weakness in H&P’s article, a weakness which is however anything but peculiar to them. Their treatment of the state remains at an inappropriate level of abstraction, in particular in that it treats the state as if it existed only in the singular. Capitalism, however, is a world system of states, and the form that the capitalist state takes is the nation-state form. Any discussion, therefore, of the capitalist state form must take account of the state both as an apparatus of class domination and as an apparatus of competition between segments of the bourgeoisie. The failure of H&P, together with most other Marxist writing on the state, to integrate this perception into their account of the state is connected with a second problem in their article: their insistence on a conceptual separation between “state” and “capital”, such that state economic intervention seems to be utterly problematic for the capitalist state. Indeed, their account rules out as theoretically impossible (or at least very difficult) what has actually been happening historically – namely, the tendency within 20th century capitalism for capital to be organised directly by nation-states, thus taking the form of state capital.
Throughout their article, H&P refer to “the state” and “the capitalist state” in the singular. One might get the impression, from H&P as from a mass of other Marxist writing on the state, that capitalism has but one state. Where it is acknowledged that the beast is numerous, the implications of that very concrete fact are not developed at All. In fact, however, the very multiplicity of capitalist states is of great importance to the theory of the capitalist state form.
H&P quote Marx’s Capital Vol. III:
The specific economic form, in which unpaid surplus-labour is pumped out of the direct producers, determines the relationship of rulers and ruled ... Upon this, however, is founded the entire formation of the economic community which grows up out of the production relations themselves, thereby simultaneously its specific political form.
Now the central thrust of their argument (with which I agree) is that an adequate theory of the state depends on comprehending the form of the fundamental social relations of production. But, if we take Marx seriously, what is the “economic community that grows up out of the production relations themselves”? Taken as a whole, it is the world market, international capitalism, the global system of social relations that has grown up – for the first time in human history – on the foundation of the capital relation. And if we ask too, what is the “specific political form” that this economic community takes, we must answer that it is the set of nation-states that make up the “international political community” of world capitalism. The nation-state system is a product of capitalist development, and is global in scope in just the way that capital as a social relation is.
In this light, we should conclude that some of Marx’s summary accounts of the relation between capital and the state are, at best, misleading. Thus the Communist Manifesto:
The modern state is merely the executive committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.
Take the last phrase: “the whole bourgeoisie”. The whole bourgeoisie is an international class, like the proletariat: both are formed as elements of a system of production relations that, from their commencement, were international in scope. The “common affairs” of the whole bourgeoisie cannot be managed by any single nation-state, yet this is the form that the capitalist state takes. [2] (Were this not so, the whole Marxist discussion of imperialism and nationalism would rest on thin air.)
H&P suggest correctly that the problem in the Marxist theory of the state is to locate the state in terms of the basic social relations of capitalist production, in the capital relation: “The starting point for the analysis of the capitalist state is thus capitalist society, not the state in general.” Capitalist society, we’ve suggested, is not coterminous with the geographical space occupied by any one nation- state, but is rather the world. The problem is, how do we relate the form of the capitalist state to the society of which it is part and expression? To answer this, we need to understand the capital relation properly. There is a tendency within Marxism to treat the “social relations of production” as being only the relations formed at the moment and point of production itself: in other words, to identify a mode of production with the immediate relations of exploitation in the productive process itself. [3] This, even if we restrict our discussion to capitalism alone, will not suffice. Marx’s critique of bourgeois podlitical economy rested on an analysis of the forms of alienation developed within capitalism, one crucial aspect being the characteristic division of labour within commodity production, in which social production is out of the control of the associated producers. Social relations within commodity production are governed by mutual competition and antagonism among the producers. The materialist critique is aimed at capitalist relations, not simply as alienated exploitative relations, but also and simultaneously as alienated competitive relations. The capital relation is a summary expression for the whole nexus of social relations, founded in the production of surplus-value, but embodied in the whole circuit of capital. That is, the capital relation is more than the moment of capitalist production: it is also the other moments of the capital circuit (exchange, realisation, price-formation, etc.).
Capital, according to Marx, can only exist as many capitals; through the interaction between the many capitals the principles of capital-in-general are realised. A single universal capital is a contradiction in terms.[4] It is thus characteristic of capitalism that it develops through competition, which competition is the source and expression of the anarchy of capitalist production. Hence, Marx argued, the social relations of capital have a dual form: anarchy and despotism. Between the many capitals there is anarchy; within each capital, despotism. Each relation, anarchy and despotism, is the condition of the other. [5]
Now if the capital relation has this form, and if the state is an aspect of the capital relation, we might expect to find in the state form elements of this dual determination. As we do. The nation-state, capitalism’s state form, is itself both a structure of despotism vis-à-vis its “subjects” and a structure of competition vis-à-vis its rivals. Its very form expresses the fact that the capitalist state is not something above and separate from the relations of capitalist production, but is itself directly part of those relations. Being anything but a state of the “whole bourgeoisie”, each nation-state is never more than a state of some capital(s), of a segment of the whole bourgeoisie. Moreover, to insist on the partial, national character of the capitalist state-form is not merely a matter of adding on another “factor” to the discussion of the state. The dual determination of the state is a permanent presence in all aspects of state policy and activity. In a capitalist world, it becomes ever more the case that “forgetting” the international dimension of the capitalist state system puts the theorist in the position of a one-handed violinist.
This is not the place to consider how the various nation-states were formed. All we need to note is that each separate nation-state represents an achieved fusion, or mobilisation, of a particular segment of the whole bourgeoisie and other classes into a nation, and a nation formed moreover in opposition to other nations. It may well be that the nation-state is a committee for managing the common affairs of its bourgeoisie – however we define “its bourgeoisie” and “its common affairs”. But it is a structure that is shaped, inter alia, by that bourgeoisie’s competitive struggles with other bourgeoisies, other nations, other capitals. More than an instrument of inter-class domination, the modern state is also an instrument of intra-c lass competition. That competition takes many forms, including trade, trans-national investment, imperialist domination, war, diplomacy, etc. And each nation’s ability to compete depends on the relative size of the capital(s) that fall(s) within its orbit, however we define that orbit.
In H&P’s account, however, the state appears one-sidedly as a relation of force directed principally at the working class:
This abstraction of relations of force from the immediate process of production and their necessary location (since class domination must ultimately rest on force) in an instance separate from individual capitals constitutes (historically and logically) the economic and the political as distinct, particularised forms of capitalist domination. (p. 79)
The state must appear in this one-sided form, since their whole article is concerned with an abstraction called “the state” whose connection with the actual states of the capitalist system is not adequately developed. It is as if we were to try to account for capital and its laws of motion without reference to its existence as many capitals.
The above quotation illustrates a further problem in H&P’s article. Their argument centres on the idea of the “separation” of the economic and the political as instances and forms. This “separation” is a point of principle with them: the concept of “state”, though they argue it is founded in the capital relation, is so separated in their analysis from “capital” that “state” and “capital” are two opposed notions. In their treatment, the state always stands outside the immediate valorisation process, and must stand outside:
... the state must remain essentially external to the process of accumulation. While the purpose of state action must be to promote the accumulation of capital, it must, by reason of its form, remain external to that process. (p. 96, my emphasis – CB)
That permanent externality of the state seems to me exceptionally dubious. Given the national form of the capitalist state, there is no “reason of its form” why it must be thus external to capitalist production and accumulation. H&P actually come close, in the last part of their article, to belying their own assumption about the separation of the “political” and the “economic”, the “state” and “capital”. For in their own account, it seems that “the autonomy of state action from the immediate demands of the valorisation process” is itself threatened by the development of capital, even though that autonomy of the state is crucial to their account and is “implicit in the particularisation of the state as a distinct form of capitalist domination”. As they note, the British state “intervenes directly in the production process, taking over particular industries and reorganising the actual process of value creation and exploitation”. For H&P this kind of development (in no way peculiar to Britain) is a fundamental contradiction in the state’s situation, for it threatens the “generality implicit in its form”. It is exactly this idea, that there is “generality implicit” in the capitalist state form, that I suggest is inadequate. In the sense in which H&P use the term, capitalism has no organised institution with generality implicit in its form. No state can have this implicit generality, for each state is merely a national state. Within capitalism, the only source of “generality” consists in its blind laws of motion, produced by the movements and interactions of the world’s constituent capitals and constituent nation- states. Capitalism in this sense is ungoverned, anarchic. No central institution governs it, only the movement of its parts. Its “generalities” are only outcomes of anarchic relations between competing capitals.
H&P are not, of course, alone in the view that “the state is not capital”, which is repeated by numbers of writers, including Altvater, Offe and Habermas. In all cases, the strict demarcation line drawn between “state” and “capital” rests on an account of the state form in which the state is treated in the singular. [6] In all cases, for the purpose of analysing the capitalist state, the bounds of capitalism are treated as coterminous with the national frontiers. That is, rather than seeing capitalist society as a global “social formation , as a real totality, the world is seen as a set of capitalist societies, a mere agglomeration and not a unity.
If we hold firmly to the merely national character of the capitalist state, and reject the (residual Hegelian?) idea that the state has some principle of generality implicit in its very form, then we can abandon the highly restrictive assumption that “state” and “capital” are mutually exclusive terms. In which case, the discovery that some particular state is becoming more and more directly involved in the valorisation process is not in itself an implicit threat to its own logic or anything of the sort. And the kind of developments to which H&P refer can be accounted for in simpler and altogether more straightforward terms.
Consider for example the limitations on state action to which H&P very properly draw attention. These limitations they derive simply from “the state’s structural relation to, and separation from the immediate process of exploitation”. Yet these limitations also derive, surely, more simply from the inability of any single nation-state to manage the world economy. In this respect it is notable that David Yaffe’s account (cited by H&P) of the growth of the state apparatus in terms of “the state’s postwar commitment to full employment” is subject to just the same limitations as Keynesianism, in that it fails to explain how the British (or any other) state goes about encashing its “commitment to full employment”. Roosevelt in the 1930s seems to have been as subjectively committed to full employment as were Attlee and Churchill after the war, but he failed. What brought “full employment” to western capitalism was not simply the separate “commitments” of the various national governments, but also – and crucially – the global situations which, while it was the outcome of their various national decisions, was yet more than the sum of the parts. War, we should perhaps remember, restored full employment ...
In their last section, H&P do make reference to the phenomenon of the system of capitalist states, but without recognising the problem it poses for Marxist theory. Their only theorisation of the question refers to processes of “convergence” affecting capitalist states, through processes of combined and uneven development and inter-state imitation. As presented, their “convergence thesis” is rather dubious. There may well have been elements of “imitation” in, say, German or Japanese capitalist development in the 19th century, but that imitation occurred not in contemplative isolation but as a response to pressures exerted on them by the more highly developed capitals of Britain and the USA. The term “imitation” suggests mere repetition, sameness, and is inappropriate: the German and Japanese “imitations” were competitive responses, whose character dictated to their states more centralised and less “liberal” political frameworks than existed in the states they were supposedly “imitating”. In any particular branch of capitalist production, some capitals are “ahead” and others “behind”; the “backward” experience the law of value as a coercive force dictating different methods of “catching up” from those adopted by the already “advanced” capitals. So too with the relations between nation-states. Latecomers and laggards, to succeed, seem to require a greater degree of centralisation than their more advanced rivals.
If we asked, what forces move the states of Western Europe towards “planning” and “nationalisation” in the present period, our answer would have to include the massive weight of US capital in the world economy. The shift towards national “planning”, a marked feature of West European states since the late 1950s, is not an imitative response to the USA, where such processes have gone least far. It is a competitive response, an attempt to mobilise capital resources for competition in the world market.
In H&P’s article, though, the world market appears only as an occasional afterthought (as p. 93). It is not central to their analysis of the state and its relation to capital, but is just one of the “myriad extraneous circumstances which affect the way the crisis presents itself, and may provide escape routes for particular national capitals”. But, what is an “escape route” for one capital is thereby a source of major disruptive pressure for another. Overseas investment by US multinationals like IBM may be, for them, an “escape route”: it’s hardly been that for the British domestic computers industry.
When H&P very properly suggest that state intervention does not do away with the anarchy of capitalism, they propose only that the inherent antagonisms of the market, where capitals meet as “hostile brothers”, reproduce themselves within the state. They certainly do. But they also reproduce themselves between states, who also meet as “hostile brothers” whether in the IMF vaults or in the United Nations soup queue. The internal forms assumed by nation-states are shaped, not only by domestic class struggle, but also by the movement of capital on the world stage, a movement that includes themselves.
The clear implication of my argument is that there is no abstract, theoretical reason why history should not have happened as it has: no reason, that is, why particular nation-states should not have become “capital personified”. “State” and “capital” can become a unity. Indeed, there are structural aspects to the state’s form which suit it to this purpose: it has aspects of a homology of form with every individual capital, being doubly determined by the capital relation as anarchy-plus-despotism. In most Marxist writing on the state, it is the second determination – the repressive aspect of the state – which is stressed. To that extent, Marxist understanding of the state has tended to continual one-sidedness.
When Marx wrote Capital, any tendency to the assimilation of “state” and “capital” was still in its infancy. Yet in Anti-Dühring (1878) Engels was already discussing such developments. In any case, Capital itself stands incomplete in two respects vital to the present discussion: the planned volumes on the state and the world market seem never to have been even sketched out. What Marx did give us, however, was a clear account of the real historical tendency to concentration and centralisation of capital into the joint-stock company form and – by mere extension – into the form of “state capital”. [7]
The development of state capital is a predominantly 20th century phenomenon, its emergence within world capitalism being characteristically uneven. At one extreme are those states where the means of production are more or less totally centralised into one national-state capital, whose development is only comprehensible in terms of their competitive interactions with the rest of world capital, and not simply in terms of their domestic class relations considered in isolation. [8] At another pole stand the nation-states of western capitalism, around which are formed more or less articulated and enlarged blocks of capital, which are either the direct legal property of the states (nationalised industries, etc.) or are increasingly effectively state property (given their dependence on the state for investment capital, orders, etc.). Capitalism in the last quarter of the 20th century can no longer be described as if “capitalism” were synonymous with personal private property. The erosion of the apparent neutrality of the state, to which H&P refer, is a real erosion: crucial to it are all those processes, including capital concentration, which press in the direction of a fusion of state and capital.
Any such fusion of state and capital, achieved either partially or totally, in no sense abolishes the conditions of capitalist production, nor resolves its contradictions. There are of course ideologues of late capitalist development who conceive that socialism is precisely national, single-state capital unified and concentrated into one block, a view of socialism shared of course by the bourgeoisie. The view of socialism as equivalent to single-state nationalisation, the equation of capitalist nationalisation with the Marxist idea of the socialisation of production, is widespread still within the workers’ movement. That such a conception of socialism should continue with such strength, despite all the experiences of the working class in this century, is witness to the under-theorised condition of Marxist state theory. It is, seemingly, a characteristic of the 57 varieties of reformism that their conception of socialism stops at the local frontier posts. If the critique of political economy is to advance its attack on the capitalist state form, we must critically discuss the conceptions of “state” and “capital” that we’ve received, half unconsciously, from previous generations. I’m aware that this Note raises more problems than it solves. Nonetheless, today more than ever we should remember that the working class has a world to win.

Notes
Colin Barker lectures in sociology at the Department of Social Science, Manchester Polytechnic, Aytoun Street, Manchester 1.
1. My thanks to the following for very helpful comments on an earlier draft: Claudia von Braunmühl, Simon Clarke, Ian Cough, Peter Green, John Harrison, Bob Jessop, Doreen Massey, John Ure. They will agree that my responsibility is total.
2. It is very odd what an “absence” there is in Marxist theorising on the state in this respect. To my knowledge, the only Marxist who has explicitly called attention to the matter is von Braunmühl (1974, 1976, 1977). Even Marxists whose other theoretical positions ought to have sensitised them to this aspect of the capitalist state seem not to remark on it. For example, Martin Shaw (1974) produced a very useful critical review of some problems in the development of the Marxist theory of the state without even mentioning the state’s national form: yet his view, that Russia and Eastern European countries are state capitalist formations, depends theoretically on exactly this conception.
3. There is a very useful discussion of this in Banaji, 1977.
4. E.g. Marx, 1973, p. 421: “Since value forms the foundation of capital, and since it therefore necessarily exists only through exchange for counter-value, it thus necessarily repels itself from itself. A universal capital, one without alien capitals confronting it, with which it exchanges – and, from the present standpoint, nothing confronts it but wage-labourers or itself – is therefore a non-thing. The reciprocal compulsion between capitals is already contained in capital as realised exchange-value.”
5. E.g. Marx, 1976, p. 477: “... in the society where the capitalist mode of production prevails, anarchy in the social division of labour and despotism in the manufacturing division of labour mutually condition each other ...”
6. In the case of Elmar Altvater, who is extremely explicit in theorising a conceptual gap between “capital” and “state”, the problem is rooted in a misreading and misinterpretation of Engels’ Anti-Dühring. Engels, who admittedly did not theorise his point fully, wrote of the possibility of the centralisation and concentration of capital reaching the state itself, and gave a clear affirmative answer to the question, would such a national state capital still be capital? (Engels, 1959, p. 384). The modern state, he explained, is “essentially ... the ideal personification of the total national capital”. Altvater does not notice that Engels is talking of a total national capital, and reads him as referring to the absurd notion of a completely centralised “capital in general”. Had Engels meant any such thing, he would – as Altvater suggests – have been uttering a nonsense. But he wasn’t: Altvater was misreading him, seemingly because he himself forgot that national limits do not coincide with capitalist limits. See Altvater, 1973, esp. p. 99; Barker, 1977.
7. It is sometimes argued, against the validity of the very concept of state capital itself, that capitalist production rests on a particular form of private property relations. Far from disputing the point, I would only point out that “private property” is not necessarily limited to “personal property”. The private conduct of surplus-value production is in no sense logically opposed to nation-state capitalist production. “Private” means simply “not-social”, that is, not under the collective will and control of the associated producers. Whether capitalist production is carried out under the aegis of personal owners, churches, joint-stock companies, trusts or baboon colonies, or nation-states within a world market, is an important but secondary question. To treat it as the primary question is to reduce the concept of the social relations of production to the vulgar bourgeois sphere of concern with relations of distribution, and to add another “Marxist” head to the Hydra of reformism.
8. The conception of Russian society as a “state capitalist” formation, which cannot be defended here for reasons of space, rests essentially on the view that – from the inception of the First Five Year Plan and the forced collectivisation of agriculture – the Russian revolution must be regarded as decisively “lost”. Thus, far from being viewed with Trotsky as a “degenerated workers’ state”, or with others as a “transitional formation”, or a “bureaucratic collectivism”, or a “statist socialism”, Russia is seen as a single state capital, whose form of economic and social development under Stalin and his successors was conditioned above all by the accumulation needs of competition with the rest of world capitalism. If the theory – extended also to Eastern Europe and other “socialist” countries – has been left in a rather undeveloped state, I find it still the most promising approach to the notorious “Russian question”. The most easily available accounts are to be found in Cliff, 1970 and Harman, 1974.

Bibliography
Altvater, Elmar, 1973, Notes on some problems of state interventionism, Kapitalistate, 1.
Banaji, Jairus, 1977, Modes of production in a materialist conception of history, Capital and Class, 3.
Barker, Colin, 1977, On Altvater, mimeo, CSE Manchester.
von Braunmühl, Claudia, 1974, Kapitalakkumulation im Weltzusammenhang. Zum methodischen Ansatz einer Analyse des bürgerhichen Nationalstaates, Gesellschaft, 1, Frankfurt.
von Braunmühl, Claudia, 1976, Die nationalstaatliche Organisiertheit der bürgerlichen Gesellschaft: Ansatz zu einer historischen und systematischen Untersuchung, Gesellschaft, 8/9, Frankfurt.
von Braunmühl, Claudia, 1977, The nation state and the world market: on the national organisation of bourgeois society in John Holloway and Sol Picciotto, eds., The State and Capital: a Marxist Debate, Edward Arnold, forthcoming.
Cliff, Tony, 1970, State Capitalism in Russia, Pluto.
Engels, Frederick, 1959, Anti-Dühring, Moscow.
Harman, Chris, 1974, Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe, Pluto.
Holloway, John and Picciotto, Sol, 1977, Capital, Crisis and the State, Capital and Class, 2.
Marx, Karl, 1973, Grundrisse, Penguin.
Marx, Karl, 1976, Capital, Vol. I, Penguin.
Shaw, Martin, 1974, The theory of the state and politics: a central paradox of Marxism, Economy and Society, 3.4.
 



Capital and Class, Vol. 1, No. 1, Spring 1977
Conference of Socialist Economists, £1
IN the last few years, there has been a rush of new socialist theoretical journals and issue-organisations. To name but a few: Radical Philosophy, History Workshop, Critique, Radical Science Journal, Kapitalistate, Insurgent Sociologist, Telos, Radical Criminology, Critique of Anthropology. The growth of these journals has both reflected and contributed to the revival of Marxism in academic circles. To illustrate: a large proportion of the professional papers offered at the 1977 conference of the British Sociological Association are either directly concerned with, or are informed more or less by, the language and problems of Marxism.
There is an element of ‘band-wagoning’ in this, of course. As Marxist discourse has become ‘respectable’, by comparison with the period of the 1950s, all manner of people have – to maintain some level of contact with their students, perhaps – started writing and talking in the most general terms about ‘capitalism’, ‘mode of production’, ‘class struggle’, and the like. Some of these, we have good reason to suspect, will be found wanting in any general crisis.
At the same time, the growth of interest in the problems of analysis of capitalism, in the rediscovery of the complexity of Marxist ideas – after the theoretical winter induced by Stalinism, with its mechanical ordering of concepts, its subordination of all scientific questions to the pressing needs of capital accumulation and state terror – is a very welcome phenomenon. In Britain, as well as the USA and Western and Eastern Europe, the sprouting of socialist theory is a very yeasty sediment left by the international student revolt of the late 1960s.
On the whole, the characteristic stance of these new journals and issue-organisations is non-sectarian. They do not present a homogeneous political line, indeed they generally distance themselves from immediate tactical questions in the socialist and working-class movements.
In this context, a welcome should be accorded by the readers of IS to Capital and Class. The Conference of Socialist Economists was founded in 1970, initially as a discussion forum for socialist economists wishing to confront bourgeois economics more adequately. Until now, its publications – beyond a couple of useful pamphlets (still available from Stage 1, or from Bookmarks) – have consisted of a duplicated internal discussion bulletin. Capital and Class is a new venture, a public journal. It is due to appear three times a year, and is available to subscribers – who thereby gain membership of the CSE, and newsletters about activities, discussion groups, conferences, etc. – for £2.50 a year (students and unemployed £2.00).
The early issues of the old Bulletin of the CSE were, by and large, more devoted to theoretical-technical issues in Marxist economic theory. While this element continues – in particular, a running engagement between ‘orthodox’ Marxist economics and ‘Sraffian’ conceptions of Marxism – the CSE, and its new journal, have widened their focus to ‘the beginnings of the materialist analysis of capitalism as a whole’ (Editorial). Comrades less versed in the intricacies of debate on productive and unproductive labour, the transformation problem, the question of the rate of profit, complex and simple labour, and the like, will now find more in the journal that will engage their attention. Similarly, the many discussion groups that have sprouted unevenly around the country are now concerned with a much broader set of theoretical questions than the CSE title might suggest.
The first issue of the journal is, naturally, uneven in its composition. Probably the most immediately accessible article is a fascinating account, by Penny Summerfield, of Women Workers in Wartime Britain. The debate on the labour process in capitalism, whose rediscovery as an issue must above all be credited to the work of the late Harry Braverman (Labor and Monopoly Capital, now available from Monthly Review Press in paperback) is carried forward in two articles, one from a group project in Brighton, and the other from Andy Friedman. An old piece by Anton Pannekoek, arguing against simple capitalist breakdown theories, is reprinted. There is a rather unsatisfactory, though interesting, attempt to characterise Russian and East European societies by Mark Rakovski. And – I confess to my incomprehension – there is a discussion of the reduction of complex to simple labour by R. Tortajada. No, this journal will not set the world on fire, but it is useful, and all readers will gain from acquaintance with it.
A final publicity note. The old CSE Bulletin cost £6.00 a year, the new journal at £2.50 (and £2.00 for those on low incomes) is a bargain. How appropriate for a contribution to socialist economics! Subscriptions should be addressed to CSE c/o Economics Dept, Birkbeck College, 7–15 Gresse Street, London W1P 1PA.
 



Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape
Susan Brownmiller
Penguin 95p
A MOST impressive, important and frightening book, this. Susan Brownmiller has written a most readable and terrifying account of the least-researched, least understood crime.
Rape, she insists, is a political crime, a crime committed by men against women, and a product of a society in which men and women’s roles and relationships are grossly perverted. Rape, she argues, is not primarily a sexual act, in the sense that the term is normally used. It is an act of aggression against the person of a woman, and an act that reveals—in its long history and its contemporary prevalence—the real character of the relationships between men and women that predominate in our society. A whole number of feminist writers have pointed to the way that men are taught to regard women not as persons but as things. Brown-miller adds—as hated things. Rape is an expression, not of sexual desire, but of hatred. It is, predominantly, an act of humiliation, a violent expression of antagonism.
Brownmiller’s book is a major contribution to the discussion of the situation of women and men in society. As a man, I found it agonising reading. I expect that women readers will find it even more agonising. It is difficult, in practice, for men to imagine the reality of a rapist’s assault on their bodies, to comprehend fully the experience of being ‘gang-banged’. Perhaps men should begin with Brownmiller’s account, in Chapter 8, of homosexual rape in American prisons.
The book is in no way sensationalist. Anyone looking for sexual fantasy material in this book will not (I hope!) find it. The book is horribly detailed, precise, cool. It deserves the widest possible readership.



Marxism and Politics,
Ralph Miliband
Oxford £3.50 hardback, £1.75 paperback
In 1969, Ralph Miliband published The State in Capitalist Society. Reviewing it in this journal, John Lea noted then that Miliband had left open the crucial political question: how may the capitalist state be changed? The book lacked explicit conclusions.
In the past few years, in various articles in the Socialist Register, and now in the present book, Miliband has elaborated a position on the problem of the transition to socialism. It is this aspect of his book on which I shall focus this review, for space is limited.
The early chapters of the book do not, in any case, add much that has not already been said in the earlier book. Except, perhaps, that the new book is an improvement, having more sense of the way class struggle shapes the state, shapes idology, etc. On the other hand, he holds fast to his distributional theory of class, as if class were a matter of private wealth rather than of social relationships, and he cleaves fast therefore to the standard soggy left view of Stalinist Rusia, that it has elements of socialism about it but lacks democracy, (the view shared, with different emphases, by contemporary communists and adherents of the various fourth internationals).
The last two chapters do, however, represent an attempt to deal systematically with the major strategic problems of socialism, with the relation of party to class, with reform and revolution. Miliband provides a clear statement of a basically unsatisfactory position.
The bones of that position are a rejection of the Leninist, or ‘insurrectionary’ road to socialism, and preference for a muscular, determined reformism. Miliband, after the experience of the Russian Revolution’s degeneration, is persuaded that insurrection to smash the state cannot produce the dictatorship of the proletariat, understood as the most widespread popular working-class democracy. What he does is to take a real possibility, and make a historic necessity out of it.
Emergency situations like war and civil war tend to demand rapid centralised decision making and communication, which is not the most favourable environment for the growth of democracy based on workers’ councils. Miliband’s argument is, in effect, that the degeneration of the revolution must happen. It is inscribed into the revolutionary process. The revolution will be strangled by the revolutionaries, who will of necessity develop a more or less bureaucratic dictatorship.
Miliband makes an assumption in all this, which is that the dictatorship of the proletariat is incompatible with a ‘strong state’ (which he sees as necessary in an immediate post-revolutionary situation), and that popular democracy cannot handle humdrum necessities. In which case, of course, socialism is a Utopian project full stop. He also seems to assume that the problems of centralisation and bureaucracy are peculiar to the revolutionary road to socialism, without any argument at all.
It is his alternative scenario, his reformism with teeth, which is of most interest, however. Miliband suggests we consider the likely outcome of a situation in which a left coalition government, including communists, has been elected. What happens next? Two possibilities exist, of which the first is the more familiar. For the first option is that nothing much happens at all. Perhaps the left government carries through a few reforms, but it does nothing serious, and gets itself thrown out at the next election. It has been incorporated – a more than familiar scenario.
The second possibility is the one that interests Milband, and is his gamble on the future. What happens if a left government proves determined to carry through a whole series of major transformations: nationalising large slices of industry, redistributing wealth, improving labour legislation, building up welfare, taxing the rich hard? What then? Such a government will represent a real threat to the ruling class, and they will organise against it. They will, from the beginning, seek to overthrow it, by force if necessary. Chile is very much at the centre of Miliband’s attention.
Such a left government is threatened with going down in glory, and disaster: it does enough to drive the Right to counter-revolution, but not enough to secure its own position.
Miliband has learned from Chile, that the problem with Allende was that he did not go far enough. To secure a transition to socialism, to defeat the threat of a right-wing coup, fire must be met with fire. Above all, the assumed left government must create organs of popular self-government all across the country, bases of popular mobilisation which will prove too strong for the Right. Thus, by relatively peaceful and gradual means, the dictatorship of the proletariat will be achieved, only without any smashing of the ‘good’ side of bourgeois democracy. Civil liberties and the democratic framework will be preserved this way. The population will be mobilised to defend their own liberties and their own institutions, the government will not be alienated from the people, and the seeming impossible will be achieved – a peaceful transition to socialism.
Where is the flaw in this happy vision? Not, certainly, in his argument as to what such a government ought to do. What else did revolutionary socialists urge in relation to the Allende government than the essentials of what Miliband suggests? The scenario, accbrding to which a part of the state machine is captured by a leftward moving force before the working class is mobilised fully is not impossible: consider Portugal. Miliband and the SWP might well be saying the same things, urging the same programme, in such a situation. Except for one thing: we’d be saying it to different audiences.
Miliband would be speaking to the government, we would be speaking against it. Not out of perversity, but for the reason that Miliband has forgotten something about probabilities. The problem is this: how likely is it that such a left government, made up perhaps of left social-democrats and communists, would do what is necessary to defend and secure their position against the right, by advancing to the left? How likely is it that they would be ready to mobilise the population to take over the running of their factories, farms, estates, towns, etc? Especially, how likely is it that they would encourage and support autonomous movements in this direction that occured before the government decided they should happen? Miliband is correct, of course, in saying that this is the only way that such a government could survive. But would it?
Miliband forgets that such a government would be a government of parties who never intended any such thing, government of parties that have no tradition of mobilising mass movements, encouraging autonomous working-class activity, a government whose instincts and habits are opposed to any such developments, a government opposed to necessary violence against the right. The likely outcome is, rather, that of Allende’s government, that sought to repress popular movements, and to avoid fighting the right.
It is the experience of the French CP in 1968, of the Portuguese CP, of the Cuban CP, of the British CP, etc. etc. ... and of social democracy everywhere at its best. The government of which Miliband dreams would be a government of reformist parties, in whom reformism was a hard-won, deeply ingrained experience and habit.
Reformism is not only a politics of the future, it is the politics of here and now. And, as a politics of here and now, it is the politics of controlling rather than leading rank-and-file movements, of accomodations with the right, of the union office more than the shop floor and so on.
As a politics of here and now, reformism shapes those who pursue it, it shapes their organisations, and shapes their relations with the working class. It is not a politics that that will encourage the rapid collective learning process required to convince such parties that they must drive fast to the left to survive.
For us, the lesson of Chile is not so much that Allende was wrong, which he was, as that the strength of revolutionary ideas amongst the working masses of Chile, and the organisations to articulate those ideas, were not sufficiently strong to prevent Allende being wrong, or throw him aside when he was. The needed ideas and organisations do not appear out of the blue, at the moment of historical necessity. They have to be built, fought for, won, beginning here and now. The expectation must be that the communist parties will learn no lessons at the school of Miliband, will not acknowledge the bankruptcy of their own history for half a century, and must therefore be pushed aside, have their influence undermined – beginning now.
There is no word in Ralph Miliband’s book about the probability of his dream being realised. Understandably not. But the result is that he ends up a Utopian, a socialist who wants a revolution without a revolution, whose position is such that he must be politically irrelevant or move to the right. The theoreticians of ‘Eurocommunism’, of the rightward moving communist parties, will be glad to embrace him. It is rather sad.

 Barker: The rise of Solidarnosc (Autumn 2005)



Colin Barker Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Colin Barker
The rise of Solidarnosc
(Autumn 2005)

From International Socialism 2 : 108, Autumn 2005.
Based on extracts from C. Barker, Poland, 1980–81: The Self-Limited Revolution, in Colin Barker (ed.), Revolutionary Rehearsals (Bookmarks 1987).
Copyright © International Socialism.
Copied with thanks from the International Socialism Website.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

At the end of the 1970s ‘People’s Poland’ was racked by
crisis as it experienced the largest collapse of production yet seen
in any postwar industrial country: GNP fell in 1979 by 2 percent, in
1980 by 8 percent and in 1981 by 15–20 percent. Public corruption
had become endemic. Popular belief in the regime was at an all-time
low. The housing shortage remained acute; food supplies were a
permanent source of difficulty; Poland was the most polluted country
in Europe; the women of the textile city of Lodz suffered the
continent’s highest still-birth rate.
On 1 July 1980 a government spokesman announced that better cuts
of meat would in future be available only in the ‘free price’
shops. The announcement was the signal for a wave of strikes that
rolled across most of Polish industry for the next six weeks, to
reach its climax in the coastal cities of Gdansk, Gdynia and Szczecin
in mid-August.
Although the strike movement had no coordinating centre, the
workers had developed an information network by which they spread
news of their struggles. A group of ‘dissidents’, the Committee
for the Defence of Workers (KOR), set up originally in 1976 to
organise aid for victimised workers, drew around them small circles
of working class militants in major industrial centres who produced
and distributed cyclostyled bulletins entitled Worker, Coastal
Worker and the like.
In August 1980 one of the Coastal Worker group in Gdansk, a
50 year old woman crane driver called Anna Walentynowicz, was
victimised by the management at the giant Lenin shipyards. The group
smuggled handwritten leaflets and posters into the shipyard and a few
other workplaces. Their sections stopped work and marched around the
shipyard calling out the rest of the workforce. By the end of the
morning of 14 August a mass meeting was arguing with the shipyard
manager. A member of the group, Lech Walesa, himself sacked from the
shipyard, climbed over the wall, announced himself to the crowd and
declared the start of an occupation strike.
The strike spread rapidly to other local workplaces. Delegates
from these workplaces, including the Paris Commune shipyard in
neighbouring Gdynia and the city’s tram drivers, gathered in the
Lenin yard. A new body was formed – the Inter-Enterprise Strike
Committee (MKS), comprising delegates from all striking workplaces in
the region. It formulated a set of demands, the 21 Points. No
longer concerned simply with immediate local issues, the list began
with the demand for new, independent trade unions. It went on to call
for relaxation of censorship, new rights for the church, the freeing
of political prisoners and improvements in the health service.
By the Tuesday there were more than 250 enterprises represented on
the Gdansk committee. A news-sheet, Solidarnosc, produced on
the shipyard’s printing press with the assistance of KOR members,
reached a print run of 30,000 copies daily. The authorities cut off
Gdansk from all phone contact with the rest of Poland. News of
Gdansk’s new organisation and new demands spread rapidly. A further
MKS was established in Elblag, and then in Szczecin, scene of the
mass shipyard occupation of 1971. The regime was forced to agree to
open talks directly with the Gdansk and Szczecin MKS inside the
shipyards. On 31 August in Gdansk, government ministers signed
documents accepting the 21 Points.
The movement was based on a huge wave of workplace occupations.
Each striking enterprise sent a delegate to its local MKS. The
delegates elected an inner executive committee, under their immediate
control. The major negotiations with the state were conducted in
front of microphones which were linked into the shipyard tannoy
system so that thousands of workers could follow the proceedings and
assess the progress being made.
Though they did not know it, the Polish workers had reinvented,
out of the logic of their own experience, the organisational form
first adopted by Russian workers in 1905 – the workers’ council.
Such class organisations have the potential to develop into organs
of revolutionary popular power and become the foundations of a new
social order. However, that potential is not automatically realised –
for the MKS to in this direction, its members would need to be able
to see the potential. In Poland in 1980 no significant body existed
to propose any such notion. Rather, from the beginning, the MKS
consciously limited its aspirations.
Numbers of intellectual ‘advisers’ were incorporated into the
circle around the MKS leadership. Their role was predominantly to act
as the advocates of compromise. The church hierarchy too preached
moderation. At the height of the strikes Cardinal Wyszynski delivered
a widely broadcast sermon effectively calling for an end to the occupations.
Three weeks after the Gdansk agreements delegates from the various
MKSs held their first national meeting. They called their new union
NSZZ ‘Solidarnosc’ (Independent Self-Governing Union Solidarity).
By late autumn something like 10 million members were registered.
This was some 80 percent of the total Polish workforce.
Solidarity changed its members. The very act of participating in a
founding meeting, often in defiance of local bosses, involved a
breach with old habits of deference and submission. New bonds of
solidarity and a new sense of strength were forged. All over the
country, this process involved strikes and other conflicts. Far from
the Gdansk agreements having ended battles between workers and the
regime, they merely opened the door to a swelling flood of popular
demands and sharp regional and national conflicts. For seven months
after August the Solidarity tide continued to rise.
There was in reality an incipient ‘dual power’ situation. On
one side stood the regime, still holding the major levers of official
economic and political power and still firmly in control of the
forces of repression (the security police and the army in
particular). But the normal mechanisms of control over the mass of
the population were rapidly breaking down. The regime was isolated,
regarded with openly articulated scorn and contempt. Against it stood
Solidarity – a flooding torrent of popular power and aspirations,
growing in confidence, and centred on the huge regionally-based
delegate bodies that comprised the workers’ union.
Everyone looked to Solidarity for a lead. This was a dilemma for a
movement that did not aspire to power. The union leaders’ response
was to seek to stem the onward march of their own side.
In March a massive crisis erupted in the city of Bydgoszcz.
Solidarity members occupying an office went to the local prefecture
to negotiate with party representatives. A couple of hundred police
invaded the room and systematically beat up the Solidarity men, among
them a national leader of the union, Jan Rulewski. This was the first
time open force had been used against the union. Half a million
workers across the whole Bydgoszcz area erupted into strike. By the
time a national delegate meeting, 300-strong, was held on 23 March,
the pressure coming from the grassroots for national action was
overwhelming. A highly successful national four-hour strike was
accompanied by preparations for an unlimited general strike which
would begin on 31 March if the union’s demands were not met.
The atmosphere in Poland was electric, as both sides prepared for
a decisive confrontation. Strike headquarters were designated in the
largest factories in each region, fortified with barricade materials.
The premier, Jaruzelski, turned to the church for support. Direct
pressure was applied to Lech Walesa through an hour’s private
meeting with the cardinal, and at the last moment Walesa appeared on
TV to announce the strike was called off.
The general strike’s sudden cancellation was a serious setback,
throwing the union back on itself. The aftermath saw a partial
demobilisation of the membership. For more than three months there
were no strikes. Attendance at union gatherings declined.
The economic crisis deepened in the spring and summer of 1981. The
supply of everyday goods was steadily worsening. Meat rations were
cut, and soap, detergent, toilet paper were all in short supply. The
crisis provoked a new eruption of working class protest. The response
of the leadership was cool and sometimes hostile. When the regime
alleged that Solidarity was sabotaging the economy, the leadership
called for a two-month moratorium on strikes. At one point in late
September two thirds of Poland’s provinces were affected by
strikes. These upsurges from below remained fragmented and
incoherent, isolated from each other. No section of the leadership
attempted to link them together, showing how they might be combined
in a new assault on the regime. Eventually, from mid-November, the
strike wave died down – the membership was increasingly exhausted,
turning away in disappointment from the union.
The regime began taking open offensives against Solidarity
activists, testing the union’s readiness to fight back. Small army
squads were sent out into the countryside and the smaller towns.
Similar units were sent out to the factories ‘to check on civil
defence preparations’. Then, on 2 December, hundreds of ZOMOs (riot
police) smashed their way into the Warsaw Firefighting School, which
was occupied by students demanding the right to join the union. The
regime had deployed open force against Solidarity.
On 12 December the union’s national commission met in Gdansk, in
the most radical mood since before Bydgoszcz. The delegates voted
that they would oppose emergency powers legislation with strikes,
including a general strike. As the national commission members slept
in their hotel that night the regime struck. The hotel was surrounded
and invaded by riot police, the delegates arrested and interned. Up
and down the country thousands of Solidarity activists were seized in
their beds and dragged away. At six o’clock on Sunday morning
Jaruzelski announced his military coup, the suspension of Solidarity
and martial law. Cardinal Glemp broadcast an appeal for people not to
fight back. The workers’ response to the coup was patchy. There
were a couple of hundred strikes and occupations, chiefly in the
largest plants and in several of the Silesian coalmines. After a few
days, they were broken by brutal police and army interventions. Nine
workers were killed at the Wujek mine.
 



Pluto Press have an important book out in July, a translation of a text by a Chilean revolutionary, Juan Prieto, on the latter days of the Allende government. It is a detailed and scathing attack on the politics of reformism, the suicidal logic by which the Communist Parties of the world in particular have – against all experience – urged the continuance of the ‘parliamentary road to socialism’. Provisionally titled The Gorillas are among us, Prieto’s book is. essential reading. Pluto are rushing to get it out, readers should rush to get it in.
Already out from Pluto is Martin. Shaw’s Marxism versus Sociology (90p). Sociology students will find this bibliography of Marxist writings useful, though the wisdom of printing rather than duplicating the text seems doubtful. More interesting, in the long run, will be Martin’s promised book on the subject.
New Park Publications have published Zinoviev’s History of the Bolshevik Party (£1.50) and Preobrazhensky’s From NEP to Socialism (£1.25), both of them important texts dating from 1923. (From IS Books, 265 Seven Sisters Road, London N4 or direct from 186a Clapham High Street, London SW4 7UG).
There is now a steady and welcome trickle of ‘Handbooks’ for those seeking social security benefits. The latest, .and most up-to-date, is the Child Poverty Action Group’s Rights Guide for Unemployed Workers and Strikers, available from CPAG, 1 Macklin Street, London WC2 (30p, 15p to claimants). This one has the new (June 1974) benefit levels.
A couple of paperbacks interested readers may have missed: Joyce Mallow’s The Tolpuddle Martyrs (Panther, 75p) and Solzhenitsyn’s Letter to Soviet Readers (Fontana, 35p).
International Defence and Aid Fund (104 Newgate Street, London EC1) have published Sun Will Rise: Statements from the Dock by South African Political Prisoners (20p) and Alexander Hepple’s Press Under Apartheid (25p).



The Death and Life of Malcolm X
Peter Goldman
Gollancz, £4.20.
IN all too many ways, the fate of the world hangs on the fate of the United States. And in all too many ways, the future of the US hangs on that of the Negro American movement.
Of all the people that the American black movement has produced Malcolm X was one of the most fascinating and significant. His career and his character personify many of the contradictory developments and elements in that black movement.
A teenager whose ambitions at school were rudely shattered by the stark presentation of the reality facing him as a black, Malcolm turned to petty crime, His career as a small-time fixer and hoodlum ended, inevitably, in prison. Here he was converted to the Black Muslim faith, and fell under the spell of Elijah Muhammed, Allah’s prophet in Chicago. The Muslims, whatever their protestations to the contrary, are an all-American phenomenon, a product of the rage of black people in racist America. Their doctrine, which holds that all white people are devils, on whom Allah will one day bring his vengeance everywhere to bear, has elements in common with many other religious movements that have emerged amongst the oppressed of the world – from the followers of Joanna Southcott amongst the early 19th century working class in Britain, to the devotees of the Pacific cargo cults.
What matters about the Muslims is that they spoke – if in allegory and myth – truthfully about the situation of the black people of the United States. Malcolm X, in the years that he was a minister in the Muslim church, spoke to black Americans of the society they experienced daily: a society in which whites were ‘devils’, who kept them out of jobs and decent housing, who had held their entire people in slavery, who had denied their very humanity, who exploited and demeaned them, who let them and their children suffer and starve, and who justified their racist oppression with the language of the Christian Bible and of democracy.
The Muslims – and Malcolm X, minister of their church in New York’s Harlem ghetto above all – spoke to that condition, declared aloud what no black person could deny feeling. And, crucially important, they declared the truth about American society in a way that promoted the dignity and pride of black Americans. Malcolm X was the prophet of black power and black pride before those terms ever gained prominence in US politics, before Stokeley Carmichael and SNCC, before the Black Panthers.
However, the Muslims were more than the prophets of black America. They were also a movement that exalted moral behaviour of an individual character, and that eschewed political activity. Crudely, those who wait on the vengeance of Allah have no need to enter directly into the disputes and struggles of the Civil Rights Movement, of the black movement generally.
In ways that other American negro writers have suggested, the Muslims – however unwittingly – were in some senses a prop to racism in America. Their very emphasis on the separateness of black America, their refusal to confront the problems arising in the possibilities of dividing white America against itself over the black question, and the prosperity that came (as so often) from high-toned moral behaviour, established them as a new (and admittedly more radical) version of the ‘Black Bourgeoisie’.
Malcolm X was a man who won through beyond the Muslim position. The leading minister of the Muslim church, he came finally to a parting of the ways with them. Where he might have ended we cannot know. Many sects (including the Socialist Workers’ Party) have more or less claimed him as their own, but all the claims seem dubious. It is difficult to see a man who had still enormous illusions in the governments of black Africa, and who pinned many of his political hopes on a motion in the United Nations critical of the USA’s treatment of its black population, as anything near a revolutionary socialist. Of Malcolm X more than many other men, it must be said that he was a man evolving.
His evolution was cut tragically short by three black gunmen who murdered him at one of his Harlem meetings. Despite rumours of CIA and FBI plots, the evidence points to the Muslims as the murderers. Whoever organised it, they took away from the black movement one of its most powerful and important spokesmen. Since Malcolm X, no man or woman seems to have emerged with an equal ability to express the potential challenge to American imperialism that black America continues to offer. And it is, he remains as a symbol to that black revolutionary movement of magnificent resistance to oppression.
This biographical study by Peter Goldman, a white journalist, is a moving and an honest job of work. Its chief fault is an over-long discussion of the ‘whodunit’ aspect of Malcolm’s murder. A paperback edition, putting it within the reach of more socialist pockets, would be very welcome. In the meantime, there are public libraries – and the paperback edition of Malcolm’s ‘autobiography’.
 



LAWRENCE and Wishart are shortly to begin publishing the Collected Works of Marx and Engels. As this will be first-ever complete English edition of the writings of the founders of the Marxist movement, the occasion must be one for considerable pleasure. The publishers’ intention is to hold each volume, of between 700 and 1,000 pages, down to £3.00, which in these inflationary times is actually cheap for hardbacks. In total there will be 50 volumes, appearing over the next few years. Volume 1 will contain Marx’s earlier works, his doctoral dissertation, notebooks on Greek philosophy and other items; and Volume 2 will be devoted to Engels’ writings from 1838-42. According to the publishers, this volume of Engels is much enlivened by a set of his drawings.
A new socialist publisher will shortly be hitting the bookshops. Journeyman Press (97 Ferme Park Road, Crouch End, London N8 9SA) aims to make available once again classics of the socialist movement which have been difficult or impossible to obtain for many years. The first title, due out in November, will be Jack London’s prophetic classic, The Iron Heel (75p, with a hardback at £2.50). This will be followed by Six Red Months in Russia £1.25 by Louise Bryant, the wife of John Reed, whose Ten Days That Shook The World is already justly famous. Other titles planned for the near future include Socialism: Its Growth and Outcome by William Morris and E. Belfort Bax, and Shelley’s Socialism by Edward Aveling and Eleanor Marx Aveling. Socialist bookshops and bookshop managers are asked to contact Journeyman Press for more details.
Many readers will have seen the BBC TV production of Athol Fugard’s brilliant play Sizwe Bansi Is Dead, earlier this year. Athol Fugard’s three plays, which were performed in London during 1974, are now published by Oxford at 95p (paperback), under the title Statements. They make a starker statement about South African society than many more propagandists publications.
Admiers of the work of Lenny Bruce will be interested in an assessment of his work by Frank Kofsky, Lenny Bruce, The Comedian as Social Critic, Pathfinder Press 80p. Finally, a couple of pamphlets published by IS which should not be missed: Chris Harman’s The Struggle in Ireland (15p) and Laurie Flynn’s Asbestos: the dust that kills in the name of profit (10p)
P.S.
Just out is Counter-Information Services’ latest ‘anti-report’, entitled Courtaulds Inside Out Courtaulds is one of Britain’s top ten monopolies, and the CIS dobument should do well among its 124,000 employees. 30p from CIS, 52 Shaftesbury Ave, London W1, or from IS Books.
 



Spokesman Pamphlets have recently published Profit Trends and Price Controls by John Hughes. Readers who looked at Glyn and Sutcliffe’s British Capitalism, Workers and the Profits Squeeze (Penguin, 1972) will find this a most useful corrective to the analysis offered there. Hughes argues – successfully, it seems to me – that the evidence for falling profits in British business is at best tenuous. He shows how the official figures obscure the reality of the situation. At 24p it’s worth a look.
Spokesman, whose publications we have had cause to criticise sharply in the past, have announced a most interesting series, to appear during 1974. Under the general title European Socialist Thought, they will be publishing three books by Serge Mallet and one by Lucien Goldmana The first title in the series will be Mihailo Markovic’s The Contemporary Marx. Markovic is a Yugoslav Marxist, a colleague of Stojanovic, whose Between Ideals and Reality was reviewed in last month’s International Socialism. Hopefully paperback editions of these books will be available.



MANY OF THE BEST ideas are also the simplest. Pluto Press’ latest publication, Rates for the Job 1974 (20p) is a fine illustration. The idea is so simple you wonder why no one ever did it before: the booklet is just a series of maps of Britain, showing the rates for various jobs, such as crane driver, computer operator, welder, in different firms in various parts of the country. It shows the wide variations in the pay for identical work and should prove dynamite in the hands of shop stewards and union militants who can use it.
Pluto also announce three titles for the spring which will interest IS readers (paperback prices quoted). Ian Birchall’s Workers against the Monolith (£1.50) is a history of the international official Communist movement since 1943, when Stalin dissolved the Comintern. Reg Groves’ The Balham Group, How British Trotskyism Began (75p) is an amended version of the series Reg wrote for this journal last year, and Martin Shaw’s Marxism versus Sociology: A Guide to Reading (90p), should delight our student comrades especially.
Counter Information Services have already established a reputation among militants and socialists for their ‘Anti-Reports’, beginning with their well-documented attack on Rio Tinto Zinc (now out of print) to their latest, Your Money and Your Life: Insurance Companies and Pension Funds. Every Anti-Report has been well documented and researched, and provides excellent ammunition for the struggle.
Occasionally, as in the insurance and pensions ‘Anti-Report’, a little of the force of the attack is lost through trying to hit too many targets at once, but the information presented is rich and plentiful. (Teachers, for instance, will find a crisp and well-informed analysis of their pension scheme that makes one wonder why the rank-and-file groups haven’t taken up this issue
CIS are now publishing six Anti-Reports a year, at £2 a year to subscribers. The reports can also be purchased separately. Especially recommended for the general reader are The Recurrent Crisis of London (just reprinted, at 90p) and Three Phase Tricks: a handbook on inflation and Phase Three (still relevant despite the Election, 30p). Coming soon is ‘a bumper edition on the Energy Crisis’ which sounds promising. Not many booksellers handle CIS material, but they can be purchased through IS Books or direct from CIS at 52 Shaftesbury Avenue, London W1.
Reminder: any reader who hasn’t yet bought, read and sold Pat Kinnersly’s The Hazards of Work (Pluto, 90p) should examine his head: destitution is the only excuse.



The Fine Tubes Strike
Tony Beck
Stage 1, £1.80 (hardcover), 45p (paperback).
THE STRIKE at Fine Tubes of Plymouth lasted for three years, from June 1970 to June 1973. It was ultimately defeated, despite having for the entire period the official backing of the AUEW and the TGWU. The strike was not only ‘official’, but in terms of the engineering industry’s own procedure agreement, it was even ‘constitutional’. And it was a strike directly involving fundamental trade-union principle.
By any measure, the Fine Tubes strike was a test case for the trade union movement And, equally, the trade union movement failed that test. As Tony Beck says in this history of the strike: ‘The failure of the Fine Tubes strike was, at bottom, the failure of the two biggest battalions of the working class – the Transport and General Workers’ Union and the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers – to hold their own against one small American firm.’ If ever there was a strike that need not have been lost, it was Fine Tubes.
Tony Beck’s account of the strike is essential reading for trade unionists. It is clearly and simply written, and accurate. The villains of the piece, from Tom Barclay, Fine Tubes’ arrogant anti-union boss (‘tough Tom’ as the EEF officials called him), through Vic Feather (who gave tough Tom an autographed copy of the TUC’s centenary volume when he met him, but treated the strikers’ delegations with contempt) to Bro. Crispin of the TGWU (who threatened the remaining strikers with loss of financial benefits if they dared to tell the truth about the strike at the end) – these are all here. The let-down by senior stewards at Rolls-Royce Derby, BAG Preston, Henry Wiggins Hereford and the UKAEA, the lack of elemental union solidarity from the officials of BISAKTA in Yorkshire, are properly recorded. It is a blow by blow account, and every blow hurts.
If the book has a weakness, I think it is in its brevity. In the course of the three-year strike, the Fine Tubes strikers, and especially their non-stop travelling delegates, gained a knowledge of the British trade union movement that is rare indeed. They went everywhere, they saw everyone. There are literally thousands of trade unionists, in hundreds of factories up and down the country, who came to know them. The book tells too little of their experiences, of the tricks and stratagems by which they overcome opposition from all kinds of quarters. If nothing else, the Fine Tubes delegates became the most expert practitioners of the art of getting through closed doors. In some cases, their appearance at a factory itself provoked disputes. At Rolls-Royce, Coventry, I was told, management hid with a tape-recorder during a meeting with TASS members. When the convenor at Austin Longbridge wouldn’t speak to them at the gate, not liking the socialist company they kept, they walked in next morning along with the workforce and dug him out of his hole.
So the book lacks some of the drama of the strike, the humour and the ingenuity. It underestimates, as a result, the magnificence of the work done by the strikers, particularly the delegations.
But this is not to belittle Tony Beck’s work. His judgments are accurate and to the point The key question posed by the Fine Tubes strike remains before the labour movement: how are the unions to be made to fight for rather than talk on behalf of their members? A rank and file movement without the resources of the official union machinery is not sufficiently strong. In any case, the unions are not the property of the full-time officers, but of the membership. The crucial issue, pinpointed by the struggle at Fine Tubes, remains the regaining of the unions for the members. That is the problem Tony Beck’s story properly focuses on. His book should be bought and read, as an urgent reminder of the job we have to do.






The task for revolutionary socialists in the West is difficult, in the Stalinist bloc the task is enormous. Svetozar Stojanovic and his comrades are at present under heavy attack from the Yugoslav authorities. Stofanovic’s book Between Ideals and Reality: A Critique of Socialism and its future (translated by Gerson Sher, Oxford, £3.60 hardback, £1.40 paperback) has recently been published in this country.





SO FAR only a small trickle of revolutionary Marxist literature written in Eastern Europe has filtered through into English. That makes the appearance of this translation of a book by the Yugoslav philosopher Stojanovic particularly welcome.
The author is a member of the faculty of philosophy at Belgrade University, which has been producing a journal of Marxist philosophy, Praxis, since the mid-1960s. The journal, which has an international edition in English, French and German, has attempted to develop a critique of Stalinism, of Marxist theory and of the development of Yugoslav society. It is well worth looking out for in the few libraries in this country which take it.
The philosophy of the Marxists around Praxis has always had practical implications. The philosophy faculty was one of the storm centres of the student movement in Belgrade in 1968, and according to press reports, the jobs of the philosophy teachers are currently being threatened by the regime. Stojanovic and his colleagues have clearly been a thorn in the flesh of the party and the state for a decade, continually criticising the fundamentals of the regime, continually seeking to elaborate the revolutionary meaning of Marxist ideas, continually arguing for socialist change in Yugoslavia.
The chief concern of both Praxis and this book has been with political philosophy. When it comes to economic analysis, however, Stojanovic and his colleagues have little to say. The result is that their arguments often have an abstract character which deprives them of much of their force. There is little in the way of systematic discussion of the economic and social development of Yugoslavia, which means that the criticisms made by the Yugoslav philosophers are much less pointed than those made, for example, by Kuron and Modzelewski in Poland. Where Kuron and Modzelewski’s pamphlet, An Open Letter to the Party (available in English as A Revolutionary Socialist Manifesto) would be dynamite in the hands of the Polish working class, the highly abstract philosophical character of the Yugoslav professors’ output makes it much less explosive.
That is by no means to belittle their achievement. Over a period of ten years they have sustained, often under difficult political circumstances, a consistently high level of critical discussion of Marxism, in theory and practice, which is likely, by the nature of things, to have found its echo in the factories of Yugoslavia – and probably elsewhere in Eastern Europe.
 
STOJANOVIC BEGINS with a critique of Stalinism and its perversion of the Marxist tradition:
‘The transformation of Marxism from revolutionary critique to the conservative-apologetic ideology of the new ruling class proceeded parallel with the oligarchic-statist degeneration of the communist party and the revolution.’ (p.8)
Stalinism, Stojanovic argues, converted Marx’s thought into ‘the ideology of a new stage of pre-history’. However much the Stalinists sought to ‘protect’ Marxism from bourgeois deformations, they themselves represented a negation of Marxism.
Stalinism sees the essential changes resulting from the socialist revolution as being in the spheres of ‘material and cultural construction’ rather than in social relationships themselves. There are no structural or other contradictions in the new society for them. If there are ‘problems’, these derive from ‘hangovers’ from the pre-revolutionary period. ‘The humanness of productive and other relations among people was the criterion of social progress for Marx,’ but for the Stalinists the basic measure of socialism becomes the development of the forces of production, understood statistically, in terms of increased rates and quantities of output of goods.
The concept of ‘alienation’ provides Stojanovic and his colleagues with a key entry point for their critique of Stalinism. It is important for the drawing of the ‘theoretical boundary’ that separates the socialist and the Stalinist state. For alienation, which in Marx is linked to the institution of private property, is a characteristic of societies like Stalinist Russia where, in formal legal terms, private property has been largely abolished:
‘It has turned out that the place of private property can be taken not only by social property, but also by a new form of class property – statist property, and along with it a new mode of economic-political alienation no longer in socialism, but rather in statism.’
The job of Marxists is to extend Marx’s critique of alienation in ‘the society of private property and commodity production’ to an examination of alienation in ‘statist society.’
The main problem, therefore, is that of determining the character of the Stalinist regimes and their relationship to socialism. On this question, Stojanovic is unambiguous:
‘The most prominent ... ideological-political myth of our age ... is the statist myth of socialism ... With the degeneration of the October Revolution a new exploitative class system was created, a system which stubbornly tries to pass itself off as socialism.’ (p.37)
Stojanovic’s account of the victory of what he terms ‘the statist tendency’ in the communist movement, the identification of socialism with state property, is cast in rather idealistic terms. To be fair to Stojanovic, his discussion of the causes of the victory of Stalinism in Russia after the revolution is exceptionally brief: in half a page, he lists as casual factors the small size of the industrial proletariat, its decimation in the Civil War, the political legacy of Tsarist absolutism, the threat of counter-revolution and foreign intervention, and the absence of effective support from abroad for the October Revolution. All those factors, he suggests, strengthened – as they did – tendencies to ‘statism’.
But the factor to which he attributes the greatest weight is that of ideas: the post-revolutionary government faced a clear choice, between reliance on the state-party apparatus, and development of the ‘social self-government of the Soviets.’ The latter choice, ‘social self-government’, was only vaguely sketched, by Marx in his writings on the Paris Commune and by Lenin in The State and Revolution. Vagueness on the part of the Russian Marxists as to what a socialist economy should be like, Stojanovic suggests, played a part in the victory of the statist tendency.
The trouble with this argument is that social self-government, workers’ control of production and so forth, rest fundamentally on the existence of workers and of production. The tragedy of the post-revolutionary situation in Russia was precisely that due to the incredible pressure of external, material pressures, far from the state beginning to wither away, it was the working class itself that withered. Cities and factories, the geographical and productive basis for the very existence of the working class, were depopulated in the period 1918-1920. Whatever ideas the Bolsheviks had had about the proper meaning of socialism, that fact was inescapable. The victory of Stalinism in Russia cannot be explained chiefly in terms of the ideas held by the revolutionaries, either the party leaders or the insurgent masses.
 
Masters of society
ON THE OUTCOME of October, Stojanovic is very clear. Stalinism is not to be identified with any transitional form of society, which might be termed ‘state socialism’, where the state and nationalised property represent an initial and indirect form of social ownership, where state property is held through the representatives and in the interests of the working class and the labouring masses as a whole. The Stalinist system is a system where a bureaucratic state is master of society, disposing of ownership in its own interests. Stalinist state ownership is collective ownership on the part of the bureaucratic state apparatus. It is a new form of class society, for which Stojanovic proposes the term ‘statism’.
Stojanovic provides some very fine descriptive material on the politics that characterise the Stalinist regimes: the careerism of the members of the apparatus, the separation of decision-making from the working class, the fawning to leaders, the dogmatism of ‘Marxist’ pronouncements, and so forth.
The state apparatus in statist society, he says, employs and exploits the labour force. The position of the members of the state/party hierarchy determines their share in surplus value, and determines the extent of their participation in decisions concerning production and the distribution of surplus value. The ruling class in statist society controls production and disposes of surplus value ‘primarily in its own interest’.
Every element of Stojanovic’s description of Stalinist society is, of course, quite accurate. His rejection of the notion that the state apparatus represents a ‘caste’ (as Trotsky suggested) or a ‘stratum’ is well argued. He criticises Isaac Deutscher’s apologetic account of Stalinism as historically ‘necessary’ in some sense. Only by comparison with Tsarism, he insists, can one call Stalinism ‘progressive’, but that is not a justification of Stalinism’s crimes, for Stalinism did not represent the highest degree of progress possible in Russia. All of this is very fine, and we can recognise in Stojanovic a revolutionary socialist critic of Stalinism. His attitude to the future political prospect is exemplary:
‘With respect to the statist class, as well, we must speak in the Marxist manner of the prospects for expropriating the expropriators and for socialising the means of production.’ (p.46)
At the same time, however, as a total explanation of the phenomenon of Stalinism, and of the form of society existing in Russia and Eastern Europe, Stojanovic’s account is unsatisfactory. For it leaves certain crucial questions unanswered. What are the ‘interests’ of the statist class, which Stojanovic suggests they pursue? What determines how the ruling class disposes of the ‘surplus value’? Why is it that investment resources in Stalinist societies have been directed, disproportionately, towards the building up of heavy industry at the expense of the standard of living of the masses? What, in short, are the ‘relations of production’ in statist society?
Stojanovic’s emphases on the role of ideas, on the political process, and the absence of discussion in his book of the actual pattern of distribution of surplus value in Stalinist society, leaves his account suspended in a void. He does not, therefore, discuss the ways in which the pressures of international competition, in the epoch of imperialism, force the ‘statist’ ruling classes to seek to deepen exploitation, to hold back the consumption of the masses, etc. No material constraints appear to exist on Stojanovic’s ‘ruling class’. To that extent, his account is flawed, and unequal in theoretical scope, or explanatory power, to the theory of bureaucratic state capitalism developed in this journal and elsewhere – a theory, incidentally, of which he appears not to be aware, since he does not discuss it, though he devotes some attention to other alternative theories.
Stojanovic does not only concern himself with the question of the nature of Stalinism, but also discusses the reformism of the international communist movement, and several of the perversions of Marxist revolutionary socialism that have appeared in the wake of the capitulation of the world communist movement to reformism and ‘peaceful coexistence’. He stresses, in his discussion of the 1968 French events, the crucial creative role of the ‘classical revolutionary subject, the working class’. His comments on what revolutionaries in the West should do in the current situation are not especially helpful – rather than create independent revolutionary organisations, he argues for entrism into the ‘leftist parties’ with a view to attempting to revolutionise them – but we need not demand of a revolutionary in Yugoslavia an accurate appreciation of tactical problems in Western Europe, and any criticism on this score must be minor.
 
Yugoslav experience
WHILE STOJANOVIC IS exceptionally clear in his account of the reality of Stalinist society in general, and of the form of politics appropriate for revolutionary Marxists in it, he is very cautious in his statements about Yugoslav society. He presents his account of Yugoslavia in terms of the struggle between ‘principles’, whose social basis he hardly discusses.
There is a tendency towards ‘statism’ which he opposes. There is a second current, which identifies the existing workers’ councils in Yugoslav factories as the practical realisation of Marxism, which he also opposes, identifying it as ‘anarcho-liberalism’. Stojanovic, and the Praxis group, are very explicit that self-management is the primary political means through which the working class can become the predominant social class – in short, the means through which the dictatorship of the proletariat can be realised. The principle of workers’ self-management has to be extended to every sphere of politics and of the economy, for the alternative – workers’ control in each separate factory, but a separate state planning the economy as a whole and deciding large political issues – can only be defended in terms remarkably akin to those employed in defence of liberal capitalism. Anarcho-liberalism in practice, despite its formal ‘anti-state’ position, demands a strong state. The ‘anarcho-liberal’ trend in Yugoslavia, far from being the enemy of the ‘statist’ trend, actually lends it strength. It is no part of the road to socialism.
Despite the abstract character of the treatment, Stojanovic’s account of the principles behind the Yugoslav system of workers’ councils is exceptionally penetrating. It is this aspect of his and his colleagues’ ideas that most threatens the Yugoslav regime – for it is this aspect on which the student movement in 1968, for example, seized in their demands. (See the account by D. Plamenic in New Left Review, No.54, March-April 1969). Here Stojanovic comes closest to a specific materialist, class critique of the Yugoslav system:
‘Mired in the framework of self-governing groups, the working class cannot make its way on to the political stage to pose questions concerning the total distribution of surplus value. So long as this is the case, the burden of economic reform will fall most heavily by far on the shoulders of the working class.’ (p.119)
This review has stressed some of the points of difficulty and disagreement with this book. It should be emphasised, however, that Stojanovic’s book is exceptionally important. Whatever our specific points of disagreement, it is the work of a socialist revolutionary struggling under conditions very much more difficult than our own to come to grips with the key questions of our epoch. Marxists in the West should protest vigorously to the Yugoslav authorities at their current attempts to isolate and sack Stojanovic and his comrades, and hope that the conditions may be created for open theoretical exchanges between Belgrade Marxism and the revolutionary socialist movement in the rest of the world. In the meantime, the very existence of this book is a further sign of the developing struggle for the principles of international socialism and for working-class theory in Eastern Europe. As such, it must be strongly welcomed.



CHRISTOPHER FARMAN’s The General Strike is now out in paperback, at £1.00, from Panther Books. This journal should have reviewed it when it came out in hardback, except that the reviewer absconded with the book. According to all accounts, including that in Socialist Worker, it is a useful book to have around.
Pluto Press has an interesting autumn and winter programme. Due out any time now is Michael Kidron’s collection of essays, Capitalism and Theory (£1.50 paperback). Many of the essays appeared in old issues of this journal, are now out of print, and still worth reading. There are two new essays, on Waste, and on modern imperialism, which are a must, although far from easy reading.
October promises well, with a reissue of Tony Cliff’s most original and enduring contribution to Marxist theory, State Capitalism in Russia (£1.00 paperback); Chris Harman’s Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe, a mighty labour (£1.50 paperback); and the Minutes of the Bolshevik Central Committee in the actual process of the revolution (£2.70 paperback). Also due are three plays by Steve Gooch, 1975’s Big Red Diary (on the theme of 1945, the year that saw our very unbright new world stagger out of Hot War), and a cheap edition of Sheila Rowbotham!s Hidden from History (75p). Sheila’s Women, Resistance and Revolution, incidentally, has just been paperbacked by Penguin Books this month, at 60p, as has the full edition of that masterpiece of satire, The Good Soldier Sveyk (£1.25).
Back to Pluto. In January comes the second of their Workers’ Handbooks. Pat Kinnersly’s Hazards of Work has, by any standards, been a best seller. It will be joined, hopefully with equal success, by Christopher Hird’s Your Employer’s Profits: a Workers’ Guide to Company Accounts. Like Hazards, this will cost 90p in bookshops, and less in bulk orders. Also out in January, the first volume of Tony Cliff-s long-awaited, everlastingly announced Lenin. Volume One is entitled Building the Party. Two more volumes will follow, the second on the October Revolution, and the third on the revolution’s isolation and defeat.



‘The forms of the struggle may and do constantly change in accordance with varying, relatively particular and temporary causes, but the substance of the struggle, its class content, positively cannot change while classes exist’ – Lenin, Imperialism.
Relatively full employment in postwar Britain and the rest of Western Europe, as well as in the United States, increased the bargaining power of labour considerably. In many industries management found itself, without the disciplining sanction of redundancy, in a weaker position vis-à-vis organised labour than ever before. For a time, up to the late fifties, the most common reaction on the part of the bosses was to make the best of this situation, to give way to labour’s demands wherever the only alternative was a stop in production, and to pass on higher costs in the shape of higher prices. The boom was on, and such a boom as never before.
Inflation was something to be deplored, publicly, but as long as profit margins could be maintained it was not felt as a real problem. However, competition in world markets increased yearly, and with a semi-stagnant economy the bargaining power of labour became more and more of a problem; the never-forgotten dream of a totally malleable and disciplined working class returned, and Chancellors, industrialists and bourgeois economists sought with increasing energy to find ways of achieving the ultimate aim of any ruling class: a working class that knows its place and keeps it, that demands no more than the ruling class is willing to offer, and that is prepared to pay the costs of its rulers’ blunders. This article will attempt to examine some of the strategies adopted by the ruling class and to show the implications for the working class movement in the sixties. The double burden, firstly of Conservative economics, which involved stop-go monetary policies aimed at successively releasing and shutting off demand in response to the vagaries of the political trade cycle, and secondly of an enormous expenditure on armaments that devoured approximately half of the annual investible surplus, produced an economy that was on the surface stable, but that grew at a rate lower than that of any other developed economy. From 1950 to 1955 the real national product per man-year in Britain rose by 1.8 per cent, and from 1955 to 1961 by 1.6 per cent. (The comparable figures for the two periods in other countries are respectively: West Germany, 6.0 and 3.5 per cent; France, 4.3 and 3.5 per cent; Italy, 5.4 and 4.1 per cent; Netherlands, 4.4 and 2.6 per cent; United States, 2.8 and 1.4 per cent.) [1] From 1954 to 1962 Britain’s share of exports in world trade fell from 20.1 to 15.2 per cent. [2] The balance of payments has been continually precarious; their relatively healthy situation recently reflects not an increasing success on the part of British exporters but an advantageous change in the terms of trade, to the detriment of the primary-producing countries. [3] More equable terms of trade for the primary producers would make the British balance of payments problem more acute; there are signs that recent trading agreements in some commodities will act to raise the prices of raw materials. [4]
Partly because of the benefits of the 1949 devaluation of the pound, the effects of stagnation were not at first felt, for export prices rose more slowly than did home prices without unduly reducing profit margins; and with a boom on abroad, prices there rose fairly quickly, even if not as fast as in Britain. However in the late fifties and early sixties a series of chronic balance of payments problems showed up the structural weaknesses of British capitalism in bold relief.
The ‘liberal’ Tory policy of deflation to create unemployment, so as to cut down wage increases and price increases, was shown to be bankrupt; a large volume of output was lost, and there was no improvement in British capital’s competitive position. To bring unemployment to levels where it would have been effective as a price-cutting mechanism was politically too dangerous, even for a cynical Treasury. It became clear that other policies would have to be found, and from the late fifties we have seen successive attempts by Tory Chancellors to find a viable way of increasing the rate of growth of the economy – the costs of the new policies of course to be passed on to the working class the best way possible.
Three main policies have been proposed, each in effect amounting to a different tactic in one overall strategy, an attempt to reduce the power to bargain of the working class and its representatives. The first is the method whereby capital and the state unite – as in the National Economic Development Council – in an attempt to involve the upper echelons of the representatives of the working class in responsibility for some aspects of decision-making, and so to neutralise them as opposition forces. The second is less subtle, and has the longest heritage. It is the tactic of open conflict, whereby the employers, with or without the assistance of the state, are prepared to take a strike or other forms of industrial action (after assessing the likely outcome) as a calculated attempt to weaken the labour force. The third is relatively new to Britain, and has been most highly developed in the US, where unions are persuaded to sign long-term contracts which guarantee an annual rise in wages (and sometimes other benefits) for all workers, in return for the abandonment, for anything from two to five years, of the right to make any further claim on the employers. These tactics, with all kinds of variation, can be found alone or in combination in the history of all the countries of the Western bloc since the war, and their frequency of use is likely to become greater as competition increases.
 
2. A National Incomes Policy?
The current attempt by the government and the employers (and by some trade union leaders) to persuade the working class to accept some sort of incomes policy falls into the first category. With it goes parallel effort to persuade the working class that ‘we are all in it together,’ that the interests of each individual and class are those of the whole ‘nation,’ to obscure the realities of class society in a fog of slogans of co-operation. The legitimate interests of the working class become the sectional interests of a selfish minority. This idea of society as a harmonious whole has a long heritage, but the forms it takes today are clearly related to the rise of large-scale monopoly capitalism. [5]
This ideology has appealed particularly to the right of the Labour Party, whose theoreticians long ago lost sight of any adequate notion of class; Crosland is the chief exemplar, but official Labour Party policy hurries along in his footsteps. With the right of the Labour Party go the TUC and the majority of the union leaders, anxious for respectability, for knighthoods and the plaudits of The Daily Mail. Of course this is no new development; caution and moderation have been the stock-in-trade of the big union leaders since long before the General Strike. The colour of the Government has made no difference. [6]
Now the process is being taken further, with the National Economic Development Council, where a fairly willing TUC is quietly coming to accept its part in the planning of capitalism. Under a Labour Government this process is likely to be taken still further, and its implications for the official trade union movement are very clear. A national incomes policy of the sort proposed by the Labour right (and enthusiastically supported by some of Harold Wilson’s strange new friends) would be likely to involve much more centralisation of power in the hands of the TUC, which would have to be able ‘to speak for all and to enforce its word.’
‘It will certainly mean the relegation of the present collective bargaining machinery to a secondary place in the structure since the crucial decision, of the size of the general increase for any one year, will be taken elsewhere ... It also means that the central skill of many union leaders, that of negotiator, will be less important, with consequent effects on their general status.’ [7]
In return for this loss of function, however, they will perhaps be offered compensations:
‘It would probably require a number of the most influential and respected union leaders to take a step up from their position of union secretary to some higher position, perhaps in the government.’ [8]
The TUC is not likely to be averse to developments of this sort, hoping that its voice may become more influential in the shaping of national policies. And, given the opportunity, there can be no doubt that that voice will speak in very moderate and reasonable tones.
Of late, much to its sorrow, the sweet and reasonable voice of the TUC has not been heard very loudly in the corridors of Whitehall, despite its strenuous efforts to gain the ear of many a civil servant and Cabinet Minister:
‘The growing frustration experienced by the Council can be seen from a study of the reports which its specialists committees make to Congress. Here one can read of the failure of the Economic Committee to influence budgetary policy; the Production Committee records its criticisms of Government plans for high-unemployment areas; and the Education Committee reports its unsuccessful attempts to secure the implementation of the Crowther Report. But the decline in influence can be seen at its most tragic in the field of Social Insurance and Industrial Welfare; topics of great concern to the unions, where the General Council’s past achievements have been considerable ...’ [9]
The TUC has failed to get the number of Factory Inspectors increased to a satisfactory level, to get concessions for the industrially injured, to get compensation benefits standardised for those injured before 1948, etc.
‘Labour’s National Health Act gave the Minister power to provide appliances for the disabled. Consequently motor-tricycles were provided for those whose disability involved a loss of both legs. During the last few years specially adapted small cars have been designed for the use of the disabled, and they have been supplied, under the National Health Service, to the war-disabled. Yet successive Tory Ministers have refused to extend this provision to the industrially disabled. The TUC has pointed out that tricycles are less reliable than cars, and in cases of breakdown disabled men have been stranded for long periods ... Despite the injustice and hardship caused ... and the trifling cost involved, the representations of the TUC have had no effect.’ [10]
This seems to be apt comment on George Woodcock’s claim at the 1963 Congress that the TUC has moved from Trafalgar Square into the committee rooms. Organised force would have won this in five minutes; there can be no doubt of the generous and sympathetic reaction that a call for industrial support for this claim would have produced from many groups of workers. But the TUC has long been cut off from the working class, and such a call is almost unthinkable.
Apart from the question of the institutional changes necessary for a ‘national incomes policy’, there is the further question, is an incomes policy possible at all under capitalism, at least in the terms in which those on the ‘left’ who support the idea of such a policy speak? Some of the slightly more militant union leaders have declared that they will lend their support to wage-planning only if all other incomes can be planned. So, for instance, Frank Cousins, in his union journal for September 1963:
‘A real examination of total incomes, full employment and redistribution of wealth would necessitate profits, interest, rent, investment and a fairer taxation policy being brought within the scope of the Government’s approach. Under those circumstances we would not only have to accept that real wages should be considered, we would welcome this.’ [11]
Unfortunately, as Frank Cousins ought to realise, this is not possible, under capitalism. Other observers are far more realistic:
’The notion that company profits can be limited to, say, a four per cent annual increase in line with the projected annual increase in national productivity is ludicrous. In any particular year the profits of any one industry, which may be recovering from a slump, will be advancing by, say, 50 per cent, while the profits of another, which may be turning down from a boom, will be declining by, say, 10 per cent. To put an extra tax on profits which have risen through the greater skill of the management would be to tax and discourage efficiency. The Labour Party must accustom itself to the idea that the efficient profit-makers in a mixed economy are the pillars of the trading state. It is private enterprise which runs the export trade, which enables the nation to pay its way in the world and secure a surplus on its balance of payments. Sometimes it is the flamboyant business tycoon, drawing on an immense expense account, who is responsible for the most spectacular success in foreign markets. Wilson has got to make those businessmen feel that they can work with profit under a Labour Government. And by “with profit” I do not mean a meagre profit.’ [12]
Nor is a long-run limitation of profits over a number of years possible. If any attempt were made to ‘control’ profits, capital would simply move to sunnier climes. Capitalism needs its profits to reinvest and retool. Any serious suggestion at control would lead to a complete shutting up of investment. Dividends could be limited, at least, it is proposed, but the same strictures apply. In the District Bank Review for September 1963 it was suggested that dividends might be limited (profits could not, for any limitation would only lead to higher prices); however, the authors made it clear that an average annual rate of return of eight per cent would be needed!
If profits and dividends cannot be limited, what does a national incomes policy amount to? Can it really be said to be anything more than wage restraint?
What happens when the trade unions completely abdicate their bargaining role in the ‘national’ interest of increased growth was amply illustrated after the war in the Netherlands. In 1954 real wages were still at the same level as in 1947, while the Dutch national income had risen over the same period by some 60 per cent, and industrial production had risen by 75 per cent. [13] Since 1954 Dutch wages have been ‘liberalised’ to some extent, but this has not been sufficient to prevent the workers’ share of the national income from falling further:
‘When the “means of production are fully employed, every rise in wages cannot but have an inflationary effect. But in fact, even if the wages earners can be persuaded to “moderate” their claims during a period of full employment, no government in a capitalist regime has a chance of moderating” the bosses, or prices and profits. The paradoxical result is that it is precisely in a period of full employment that the relative share of wages in the national income is in danger of falling, if the unions let themselves be gulled by the “menace of inflation” and the “vicious circle.” And this is exactly what has happened in the Netherlands, where the wage earner’s income has fallen from 92.3 per cent of the average income for an active person in 1952 to 87.5 per cent in 1957 and to 85.8 per cent in 1960, while the same wage earner’s income has fallen from 74.8 per cent of the entrepreneur’s in 1952 to 60 per cent in 1957 and to 55.2 per cent in 1960.’ [14]
From being the highest paid worker in Western Europe before the war, with wages at least 35 per cent above those received by the Belgian worker, the average Dutch worker now receives wages 20 per cent lower than those in Belgium and England and 30 per cent below those in German. (It should be remarked that the Government which instituted the Dutch’s ‘national incomes policy’ was a Social Democratic one.) While it is exceptional under capitalism for the share of wages in the national income to rise, it is always possible for it to fall. Indeed, there is an inherent tendency under capitalism for them to do so, which can only be prevented by vigorous action on the part of the working class. In the long run higher wages (outside very close limits, defined by the needs of capital) will always be passed on in the form of higher prices, to protect the rate of profit, but there is no ‘countervailing tendency’ inherent in capitalism which pushes wages up together with higher profits or prices:
‘A gain in their (the workers’) real standard of living of nearly 44 per cent in 11 years – 3½ per cent per annum compound – does not stand up against a rise of 200 per cent (in real terms) in the value of equity shares which the owners of equity shares enjoyed, which was at the rate of 10½ per cent per annum compound. And the workers never managed to win a larger share of the national income. Their share remained at a little over 42 per cent throughout the Conservative regime.’ [15]
And this during a period when there was no ‘incomes policy’ to inhibit workers’ demands.
It is true, of course, that workers who are prepared to accept second place in a vigorous and technically progressive capitalist economy that is expanding fast can do well for a time, in terms both of their standard of living and of their level of employment. So Germany, where real wages in 1950 were 30 per cent lower than those in Britain, are now definitely higher, and are increasing at two or three times the British rate. [16] But this cannot be a solution for all capitalist countries together, in conditions of world competition. Nor in the long run can it be a solution for the German working class. German economic growth is already slowing down and workers are rinding it difficult to maintain the advance of recent years. We may perhaps suggest that a ‘national incomes policy’ in Britain will fail, not because the union leaders will abandon the idea as much as because on the shop-floor level it will be meaningless. The real struggle for wages – in many industries, though not all – takes place at the level of the workshop, the level of the steward or convenor bargaining on the rate for the particular job, and bargaining with the threat of action behind him. This, not the current caperings of the union leaders, is the true measure of working-class strength in Britain. Between 1945 and 1960 average weekly wage rates rose by 90 per cent, while average earnings rose by 130 per cent (in the motor industry the average rise was 144 per cent). [17] Within an industry there are wide variations from region to region and from factory to factory, which reflect not ‘market forces’ but variations in the organised strength and combativeness of workers. These variations are in some cases considerably levelled out through the activity of shop stewards’ combine committees, which help to prevent large disparities arising between levels of earnings in different factories and areas. [18] Of course this type of bargaining structure is not entirely a matter for rejoicing among socialists, for sectional consciousness can predominate over class consciousness, but the possibilities that arise from this situation are very encouraging.
And at the same time the employers are not completely unified on every issue. While the interests of some lie firstly in keeping down costs (and hence in support of the ‘guiding light’) others are more concerned about keeping production flowing smoothly and will make concessions to organised workers which are well above what the employing class as a whole has determined as the ‘national interest.’ So Ford and Vauxhall last year, in spite of the fact that by granting five per cent increases they greatly weakened the solid front of the employers as a whole. The National Incomes Commission chided the Scottish builders for giving bonuses, and called on them to offer greater resistance to demands for increase:
‘... the entirely haphazard practice on the part of individual employers of making these additional payments is bound to undermine an incomes policy.’ [19]
One of the principal functions of the National Incomes Commission may well turn out to be that of calling for greater class solidarity by the employers. Its rejection by the unions leaves it with little else to do. Nevertheless, it is likely that under a Labour Government the union leaders may well decide to support a national wages policy, for a shorter or longer term. Certainly without their support the venture will be entirely meaningless. Whether it will be effective (in the situation where the union leaders do decide to lend it their support) will depend on the strength of the workshop organisations, which certainly have nothing to gain and very likely a great deal to lose from it. In any case, the very attempt to institute such a wages policy will tend further to increase the alienation of the workers at shop-floor level from their official leaders.
 
3. Employer Offensives
If a national incomes policy which is accepted by the union leaders is not possible (and this is by no means certain yet), other developments certainly are. To some extent it is true that in any year the size of national settlements at least – and these still largely determine the standard of living and conditions of work of a large section of the working class – is conditioned by the success or failure of certain key claims, in particular those that come from the strongest unions. There is a strong case to be made for the proposition that certain settlements in any one year determine (within limits) other settlements; once a trend has been set the employers in other industries tend to follow suit, since workers deprived of the rises that other workers are receiving tend to become more militant. Sometimes this can be to the advantage of the unions; sometimes it is not:
‘The small average size of subsequent wage increases in 1958 and much of 1959 seems to have been in large measure due to the psychological climate created by the failure of the bus strike. It is true that unemployment was rising throughout 1958, and this might have been expected to moderate wage increases anyway; on the other hand, retail prices rose rapidly during 1957 and the first half of 1958, and this might have been expected to make the unions quite militant in their attempts to restore the real value of wages.
‘It seems legitimate to infer from this that it may be possible to influence the size of keynote settlements, and hence of the succeeding wage round. Obviously a Labour Government would not want this influence to be exercised by the failure of a strike. The only way it could be exercised is by agreement on the part of union executive committees that a reasonable annual wage increase is three or four per cent rather than anything higher.’ [20]
This sort of policy could be a great deal more damaging to the working class than the euphoric glow of the NEDC, for it is a policy that strikes at the strongest workers in an attempt to bring all to heel. The outcome of any particular attempt of this sort to weaken the unions would depend on the solidarity of the government and the employers, and on the solidarity shown between different groups of workers, regardless of their union leaders. The 1958 bus strike was defeated primarily because the underground men failed to support it. Lack of solidarity between workers could in some cases allow the sort of policy put forward by The Economist recently (in its most class-conscious mood) to become effective:
‘... the first rule for any government that intends to run its future incomes policy “in co-operation with the TUC.” If some specific test case blows up for incomes policy, with a strike threat impending and an inflationary wage claim on the table, it would be quite fatal to ask Mr Woodcock or any other trade unionist of his group to use his good offices as a peacemaker ... The proper course for a government which intends to stick by an incomes policy in such circumstances, is to stand firm and to take the onus of resisting the strike upon itself. Instead of putting the TUC and its general secretary into an impossible situation by asking them to mediate, it should be ready to allow some militant union leader to embroil himself in an impossible strike situation if he must and then feel glad if the TUC extracts him from that impossible situation if it can; this is what happened in 1958 when Mr Cousins was entangled in a London bus strike and when the TUC then refused to support him.’ [21]
And given Government support, there is no doubt that some employers would be glad to fight it out with the unions, and to risk several weeks’ production in the hope of weakening the union significantly. This was the case in the 1957 engineering and shipbuilding strike, when the employers were under the impression that the Government would support their attempt to resist the union pay-claim. In the event the Tories did not give them the support they had expected, and the engineering and shipbuilding workers were given five per cent by an arbitration tribunal. (The same happened the following year in the case of docks, when the Government was faced with the threat of a national dock strike.) After the engineering strike the employers issued a statement deploring the Government’s interference:
‘Twice in four years the Federation have been prepared to “fight it out” with the unions. Clearly the unions’ capacity to pay strike benefit was limited. Such a course, involving, as it would have done, the virtual closing down of the industry, might have been a worthwhile calculated risk. It was no occasion for the kind of compromise which would inevitably emerge from a Court of Enquiry.
‘The Federation can hardly be blamed for heeding Government warnings calling attention to the economic dangers of further wage increases. Like the Czechs in 1938, their complaint was that they were not allowed to resist in 1954 and 1957 after they had received every encouragement to have a firm purpose and to make it known to the unions.’ [22]
Whether or not such a head-on clash between employers and unions is likely to occur again on such a scale is anyone’s guess, although as increasing competition threatens profit margins the pressures on the employers to try this may become very great. Nor is it clear that a single union or group of unions can by themselves win a protracted strike. The engineering employers’ assessment of the ability of the unions to pay strike benefit in 1957 was very accurate, and had the struggle been fought out over a longer period, as the employers wished, the outcome for the unions concerned would have depended on the degree of support that they could muster from other sections of the labour movement who were not directly involved in the dispute. In such a situation, the role that the state plays is clearly crucial; and, as noted above by Stewart and Winsbury, a Labour Government is more likely to wish to avoid a major defeat for the unions than is a Tory one.
The role that a Labour Government is likely to play in the event of large-scale unofficial disputes is, however, less likely to be to the advantage of the workers concerned; and there is every reason to expect further strong and continuous attacks on shop steward organisations by the employers, such as were mounted at British Light Steel Pressings in 1961 and at Fords of Dagen-ham in 1962, where in both cases the shop stewards were defeated, with the connivance of the union leaders. [23] In the case of conflicts with shop stewards, in particular, the employers are in certain circumstances likely to risk the costs of a strike (even deliberately to create the circumstances in which a strike is inevitable), especially where they can rely on the support of the union leadership.
Nonetheless, on the whole it is true that long drawn-out strikes are less likely to appeal to the employers, as the capital-labour ratio continues to rise with improved technology. This is particularly true in manufacturing. With a high ratio of capital to labour it becomes increasingly important to maintain full-time production, to get as much use as possible out of expensive equipment. Furthermore, since the various parts of the production process are inseparably linked, it becomes possible for workers to exert pressure on an employer very effectively by removing a relatively small number of key workers from the production process, thus very swiftly bringing all production to a standstill. Against this stands the fact that increasingly the possibility of supervisory personnel continuing production at a lower level during a dispute becomes a reality. This has been the case particularly in the United States (see below). Furthermore, and particularly where an industry runs below capacity, certain employers are able to stock-pile finished goods or use similar means to help them withstand a strike; this happened before the BLSP dispute and before the dispute at Thrupp and Maberley’s in 1960. On the other hand, that a strike can hurt an employer very quickly was shown last winter at the Steel Company of Wales, some of whose customers were reported within a week of the beginning of the strike to be seeking supplies elsewhere.
 
4. Long-Term Contracts – The USA
On the whole, most managements are especially concerned to avoid disputes, and an increasingly popular means for doing this is the long-term contract. The first important contract of this type was signed between the United Automobile Workers and General Motors in 1948; and the American unions’ experience with long-term contracts is worth recounting, for it throws some light on the implications of these agreements (which already in January 1964 cover over three million workers) for the working class in Britain.
In 1948 hardly any American workers were covered by long-term contracts, but by the end of the 1950’s ‘80 to 90 per cent of the contracts covering more than 5,000 workers had a duration of two years or more. Although the equivalent figure for contracts covering fewer than 5,000 workers is not available, it is justifiable to conclude that a substantial majority of American workers under collective bargaining agreements are currently covered by long-term agreements and have been for some years.’ [24] About 70 per cent of all major agreements in 1958 scheduled future wage increases.
The period immediately after the war was marked by a large number of major strikes. 200,000 workers at General Motors struck for 111 days in 1945-46, 450,000 in basic steel struck for 24 days, and 174,000 in electrical engineering struck for up to several months. Management was forced to accept that the prewar militancy of the unions (particularly those affiliated to the CIO) had not decreased. The unions were strong and determined, and management was forced, after offering considerable resistance, to make large concessions. In the postwar situation employers were principally concerned to keep production going; prices could always be raised in a generally inflationary economy to cover the costs of higher wages.
One of the strongest unions was the United Automobile Workers, one of whose Vice-Presidents was Walter Reuther. Reuther had annoyed the management of General Motors considerably by demanding a say in their pricing policy in the wage negotiations of 1945-46, going so far as to propose that UAW members would accept a lower rise if the Corporation would agree not to raise prices. A Mr Coen of General Motors replied to Reuther’s suggestion, which received wide and sympathetic publicity:
‘Why don’t you get down to your size and get down to the kind of job you are supposed to be doing as a trade union leader, and talk about the money you would like to have for your people and let the labour statesmanship go for a while?’ [25]
Management had no intention of handing over one of its most sacred prerogatives to any union leader. The General Motors president told Reuther on a similar occasion in 1940, ‘If you are interested in production I’ll give you a job.’ [26]
The government, to the annoyance of the employers, had intervened in the 1945-46 dispute, and the President’s ‘fact-finding board’ had supported Reuther’s demand for General Motors’ books to be opened for inspection. Faced with the possibility of further government intervention and a generally aggressive union attitude, the General Motors’ President, C.E. Wilson, proposed to Reuther that the UAW should sign a long-term contract. After a little hesitation Reuther agreed. This contract, the first significant long-term contract in the US, ran for two years. It provided for adjustments to wages to be made as the cost-of-living index rose and fell, and for an immediate increase of eleven cents an hour, to be followed in 1949 by a further three cents, the so-called ‘annual improvement factor’ which was equal to the estimated rise in national productivity of two per cent. General Motors only accepted the two per cent figure after making sure that ‘we could do better than two per cent annually.’ [27]
The General Motors contract aroused a good deal of interest at the time, but no major company decided to follow suit. Allowing for the cost-of-living adjustments that were made over the period 1948-50, the General Motors contract gave the workers the equivalent of an increase of 13 cents in 1948. It is interesting to note that the two other large automobile manufacturers both granted increases of 13 cents an hour in 1948. At the end of 1949 Ford and the UAW negotiated a pension-insurance fringe scheme that was worth about 10 cents an hour. Chrysler, after the management had protracted the negotiations, and the union had struck all the Chrysler plants for 100 days, conceded a similar package. In 1950 General Motors and the UAW signed a five-year contract, still with a two per cent ‘improvement factor’, but with a more generous fringe package than had been won from Ford or Chrysler. The General Motors’ President’s argument, that ‘such contracts were simply methods of doing on purpose what would otherwise be done by accident,’ [28] began to seem very plausible to management. Nevertheless, most companies remained unimpressed, and preferred the risk of annual bargaining, still hoping that a change in the economic situation might significantly weaken the unions. A survey at the time found that 85 per cent of the companies replying to a questionnaire did not plan to use the formula, and 50 per cent expected it to have unfavourable effects on the competitive position of General Motors. [29]
The impact of the Korean War on prices soon altered this. The rest of the automobile industry hurried to sign contracts giving the same terms as the GM-UAW contract of 1950, and other industries adopted similar versions, for periods of up to five years. Some of these agreements allowed only for adjustments in line with changes in the Consumer Price Index, and others only for annual ‘improvement factors.’ Once the inflationary period had passed, many of these contracts were abandoned. The next major wave of long-term contracts came in the 1955-56 period, when contracts were signed in electrical equipment, steel, construction, railroads and trucking, as well as in automobiles. The contracts signed by the UAW provided for annual increases of 2½ per cent (still in line with estimates for national productivity) but those in other industries gave workers increases above this level. It is clear that it was not the threat of further inflation that induced the signing of these contracts (except in the case of the railroads); ten years after the war the unions still seemed as strong as ever, and two minor recessions had been weathered without any great loss. Management’s decision to try long-term contracts on a much wider scale reflects the growing conviction that major depressions could be avoided in the future and the acceptance of relatively aggressive unions in the major organised sectors of the economy:
‘By 1955 it was evident that the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 had not significantly weakened established unions and that the contemporary Republican administration was not likely to alter substantially the relative positions of the parties to collective bargaining ... If the annual wage re-openings that the then-existing collective bargaining contracts called for were to result in a monotonous succession of yearly wage increases, it made sense to consider scheduling raises in advance to avoid repeated negotiations and potential strikes.’ [30]
In the late fifties, however, the economic environment in America changed, and the change was signalled among other things by a more aggressive stance on the part of management, a stance that has not been without its successes for the employers:
‘Between 1957 and 1961 the economy experienced a recession, an incomplete and unsatisfactory recovery, followed by another recession. Concern over a persistent inflationary trend and increasing competition in both foreign and domestic markets focussed attention on both price and cost behaviour. Poor economic conditions provided an incentive for management to adopt a more vigorous stance in bargaining as well as an opportunity to make this policy effective in at least some instances where the union bargaining position was weakened.’ [31]
Competition has increased, not only in world markets, but also in the internal US market. Between 1955 and 1959, for instance imports of steel quadrupled, those of motor vehicles rose by eight times, and those of electrical machinery by more than five times. [32]
Investment expenditure, encouraged by the state through tax concessions, has been concentrated in those areas where labour and hence wage costs can be reduced, a development that has led to the growth of unemployment in the major industrial centres. This development has again had the effect of weakening the power of the unions very markedly, for much American industry is now running considerably below capacity, with the result that techniques such as stock-piling during the period before a new contract is negotiated become possible. This happened during the 1956 steel strike, when the unions were, however, still strong enough to defeat the employers, and win substantial concessions:
‘When the 1956 steel strike began, some authorities estimated that inventories were at an all-time high. In a letter to wives of strikers, the president of the union said, “Warehouses are bulging ... This shutdown means that your husband is out of work now instead of working short weeks or being unemployed altogether later.” The first 100 days of the strike created very little economic pressure; and once the stoppage had ended, industry resumed production with surprising speed.’ [33]
By 1961 the steel industry was running at only 50-55 per cent of capacity [34], and in 1959 the steelworkers were badly defeated in a long strike that was provoked by the employers, who insisted on an eight-point speed-up programme that they knew the unions would not accept. The steelworkers in 1956 had won a higher wage increase than the employers considered they could afford: in particular the employers wished to scrap the cost-of-living clause in the agreement, which had proved more costly than they had expected (the seeming stability of the price index in 1955 and 1956 being due to the deflation of farm prices from their all-time high during the Korean period). The 1960 agreement put a limit on the amount of cost-of-living bonus that the steel-owners were prepared to pay. Other employers had prepared themselves in advance for a long strike by putting in large orders for steel in the spring of 1959. [35] Significantly, now that the steel unions have been weakened, the employers are ceasing to bother with long-term contracts: the 1962 and 1963 agreements did not provide for deferred increases. Heavy investment, as well as allowing for the possibility of stock-piling (a danger that affected the coalminers in the US as long ago as 1948-9 [36]), also decreases the power of a union that does strike to stop production:
‘In 1960 the United Automobile Workers and the International Union of Machinists struck five New England plants of the United Aircraft Corporation. The company kept its plants open and operating. When the unions caved in after two months, they had won so little that the workers in the Sikosky division voted to decertify the UAW which had represented them for 15 years.’ [37]
This development is particularly a danger for unions whose members work in semi-automated plants:
‘Once production has become highly automatic, a small number of supervisors or non-strikers may be able to maintain operations without strike-breakers. Perhaps the co-operation of the Teamsters would save the situation for a striking union, but unless deliveries could be interrupted an employer might be able to hold out almost indefinitely. Oil refining is a case in point. The Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers recently struck for 191 days against the American Oil Company’s refinery at Texas City ... On the same day the company announced its intention to continue operating. Within ten months the rate of production had been raised to about seventy-five per cent of normal, with 300 supervisors working six and seven days a week.’ [38]
And there are plenty of other examples. As technological advance has strengthened the hand of the employers in the US, they have been quick to take the initiative by uniting in a common bargaining policy towards the unions. This was the case in autos in 1958 and in steel in 1959. Strike-insurance plans exist between employers in a number of industries, often on a scale that puts American union funds completely in the shade; in the airlines, for instance, strike benefit paid to employers between October 1958 and April 1961 came to about 15 million dollars. [39] Other highly successful policies have put the US employers definitely on top for the time being, especially since the unions have been slow to find new methods of struggle which fit modern conditions. Under the Kennedy administration, the employers have received further help, on a scale not paralleled before, from the state – ‘in the national interest.’ The US government recently has interfered in bargaining even before negotiations have properly begun, has attacked demands for shorter hours in spite of the growing level of unemployment, [40] and on one occasion paid the strike costs of United Aircraft, a piece of ‘unabashed strike-breaking.’ [41]
The present group of American leaders have proved on the whole incapable of responding to this new situation by developing new forms of struggle. The future of the American working class depends on the future of their rank-and-file, shop-floor organisations, whose activities necessarily reflect the real problems that face the workers today. That the stewards have been an effective thorn in the side of the employers is beyond doubt; one management adviser comments:
‘Management has discovered that in some departments the union steward plays a more active role in determining work assignments than does the foreman. An aggressive steward or committeeman may browbeat an ineffective supervisor by threatening to file a grievance if he makes an assignment to certain job incumbents. To avoid this risk and believing it better to have union concurrence, the foreman may yield to the wishes of the union representative. Without top management knowing it, supervision may be turning over to the union a basic management responsibility.’ [42]
Other ‘basic management responsibilities’ have come under the effective control of the stewards and committeemen, including the determination of overtime, the right to hire and fire, and so on. Nor has management been slow to react, especially in the last few years. The following is typical:
‘Management in one plant made a list of “left wing” leaders and over the years kept an extremely close watch over these men – observing every case of absenteeism, poor workmanship, or violation of company rules. Some quit rather than withstand such pressure, and enough evidence was collected against most of the rest so that they could be fired.’ [43]
Conscious attempts to limit the support for the union were made in a number of plants by making it more difficult for stewards to process grievances, and so on. In some cases, stewards are now being paid by management – an effective means of making them ineffective.
One particularly class-conscious management, that of General Electric, led by its Vice-President, Lemuel L. Boulware, has developed a whole intricate strategy (named after its founder) designed to weaken union support and to make it more difficult for the union to conduct any form of effective industrial action:
‘In brief, Boulwareism involves a continuing programme of direct company communication with employees on a wide variety of topics, including current and prospective issues in collective bargaining. In collective bargaining, the more spectacular aspect of the technique, the company meets with the union to discuss union demands and then at an appropriate time advances what it believes to be a fair proposal. From the union point of view the element of low cunning in the procedure is that the offer actually may be very close to the anticipated final settlement. Having made what it declares to be its final offer, the company announces a date at which it will be put into effect for all unorganised workers and for any union that accepts it, and asserts that any settlement reached after that date will not be retroactive. The company’s proposal is widely publicised to its employees, and an effort is made to build up grassroots pressure on the union leadership for its acceptance. In essence, the strategy is designed to minimise the role of the union in bargaining and particularly to undercut the image of the union as the indispensable champion of employee interests against a grasping employer.’ [44]
In the case of General Electric, this strategy, which has been very successful and has been imitated by other companies, is particularly successful because of the conscious diversification of plant and operations over a long period (‘Boulwareism’ began in 1947):
‘From the labour relations point of view, this diversification is highly significant. It is clearly impossible to shut down this company by striking a key plant, as the auto workers shut down Ford by striking a forge shop in 1953. Moreover, in planning its general programme of expansion during the last decade, GE has kept in view the employee-relations aspect of plant operations and has built second or satellite plants in many cases where operations of a group of plants might be jeopardised by a strike in a sole supplying plant.’ [45]
Using this sort of technique, General Electric in 1960 forced the unions to accept a new long-term contract with a significant innovation: wage increases in future were to come every eighteen months instead of every year.
 
5. Long-Term Contracts – Britain
In the American experience, it is clear, a large part of investment has been directed into technological innovation aimed at cutting labour costs, in a fairly planned and systematic way. This planning of investment, which in the social conditions of American capitalism is against the interests of the American working class (since it creates rising unemployment and decreases organised labour’s bargaining power), has been facilitated by long-term contracts, which make future costs and continued production more predictable. If for no other reason, we must, before we accept Harold Wilson’s vision of a ‘new scientific age,’ ask under what social conditions this new scientific age is to dawn. And to date Wilson has given the British working class little reason to suppose that changes in its fundamental social conditions – in particular, in its relations to power – form part of the programme. For full workers’ control – the only solution for the working class – the new ‘bright young men in the boardrooms’ are more likely to read, at best, the sham idiocies of joint works councils. We may expect more of the following:
‘In the factories workers must be consulted more by the management and treated as partners in the enterprise. Of course, managements must retain control over policy, but in the day-to-day administration of the factory the management and its labour force must co-operate through joint committees and these joint committees must include the shop stewards .The problem of industrial relations is largely psychological and the labour officers of big managements need some training in psychiatry.’ [46]
The development of long-term contracts in Britain has been too recent for any very definite conclusions to be drawn yet. British industry has not yet reached the level of automation (or of unemployment) that has been reached in the US, but it could easily do so within ten years or less, especially with government ‘encouragement’. That the result will be a weakening of union bargaining power similar to that in the US seems indubitable, especially if the present trend to long-term contracts continues. At the end of 1963 The Times estimated that about three million workers were covered by long-term contracts. [47] If we add those workers who are covered by agreements signed by individual companies (such as Ilford Limited) rather than at national level, the figure may be nearer three and a half millions, and in a number of other industries plans are under way for long-term agreements to be made during 1964. [48] Generally these contracts have been for two or three years (more often the latter) but the Ilford Limited agreement is to run for five.
The first thing to note about the British agreements is the relatively small size of increase that has been won, some of the agreements (notably the November 1963 three-year agreement in furniture manufacturing, which gave an annual increase of only 1.8 per cent) falling well below the limit proposed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. Whereas in the United States the strongest unions tended to be the first to sign the agreements, in Britain, with some exceptions, the majority of the recent wave of long-term agreements has been accepted by the weaker and less militant unions. In the case of the building industry, the low level of increase was not due to the lack of militancy of the ordinary building workers, but to that of their leaders: after a week-long strike in August 1963 which was very well supported throughout England and Wales the union leaders accepted an extra penny addition to the employers’ earlier offer, this penny to suffice for three years. (Fortunately for the builders, however, they are not – unlike many other groups of workers, especially those in direct government employment or in the nationalised industries – entirely dependent on national agreements, being able to force up rates on individual sites through their own militancy.)
One reason for the acceptance of the long-term agreement by the unions seems to be the desire to obtain the 40-hour week, without having to fight for it. Reluctance to use the strike weapon to win shorter hours has led unions to accept long-term agreements (that give them no more than they could have won through annual bargainings) in order to win this concession from the employers, and at the considerable risk of weakening themselves in the long run. The Confederation of Engineering and Shipbuilding Unions actually asked the employers to grant them a long-term contract – the employers rejected the demand, recognising rather more realistically than the unions that no national agreement in engineering or shipbuilding could be relied upon to stabilise their wage costs in the individual workshops and yards. It is very likely, however, that many engineering employers may attempt to obtain long-term factory or company agreements which might, if accepted by the unions, tend to reduce the effectiveness of the shop stewards’ organisations in the industry, at least in the area of wage-bargaining. (During the 1963 overtime ban in engineering, at least one company signed a local three-year agreement.) A national long-term agreement in engineering would not significantly affect the shop stewards at all, and for this reason alone is unlikely to occur, although a working party has been set up to study the question. Local agreements between one company and the union, however, could have the effect of weakening the shop steward organisations, for these contracts would be enforceable by law and could seriously limit the scope of the shop-floor bargaining process. A shop steward who fails to produce the goods (and the goods include more wages for his members) is immediately in a weaker position vis-à-vis the men he represents. Obviously this type of development would depend on all sorts of local conditions.
That in the long run the questions of redundancy and speed-up are likely to be linked to the emergence of long-term agreements, in Britain as in the US, was demonstrated in the cases of the London busmen, the printers and the electricity supply workers.
The London busmen in April 1963 rejected a proposed long-term agreement offered by London Transport, because it was linked with proposals for ‘increasing productivity,’ proposals which meant working under even worse conditions than at present for next to no wage-gain; for the busmen to have accepted these proposals would have amounted to an acceptance on their part of the responsibility that properly belongs to the London Transport Executive for the acute short-staffing of the buses, and a further worsening of their conditions. [49]
The printing workers in September 1962 signed an agreement that gave them a rise of only 2¼ per cent a year for three years, a figure considerably below the ‘minimum’ that the union leaders had said they would accept. Under pressure from the unions a clause was inserted in the agreement, couched in very general and – in practical terms – meaningless language, which was intended to protect the jobs of the workers affected by new processes and methods of production; there was no mention, however, of unemployment resulting from take-overs, the biggest problem by far for printing workers in recent years. In January 1963 the electricity supply workers were given a three-year contract that Charles Doyle (one of the shop stewards who led the unofficial work-to-rule in support of the union claim) described as ‘abject, complete and unnecessary capitulation.’ The agreement, which gave the workers much less than they had asked for, was accepted by the unions on the understanding that the forthcoming talks on ‘raising the status’ of the electricity workers would be to the benefit of the workers. What ‘staff status’ really meant became clear when the shop stewards committee published details of the Electricity Council’s secret proposals in their paper, Power Worker:
‘Proposals to enhance the status of National Joint Industrial Council staff by paying them an annual salary for 42 hours impose on the staff concerned certain obligations to act responsibly. One of these obligations is to accept the normal give-and-take of working arrangements, which is intended to ensure that work in hand is completed without too rigid adherence to finishing time.’ [50]
Spelled out in detail, this meant the virtual abandonment of overtime, acceptance of work study, labour mobility and other measures that amounted to a straightforward speed-up, dressed up in other terms. The ETU finally decided to withdraw from the talks, and to recommend the abandonment of the three-year contract, since the Electricity Council was not willing to extend to the manual workers the same fringe benefits that it gives to its white-collar workers. So much for ‘staff status!’ At present the unions, because of the long-term agreement, are unable to demand more pay, and are therefore limited to asking for extra benefits in the way of holidays, shorter hours and more long-service pay.
 
6. Conclusions
The advantages of the long-term contract for employers are very considerable, with regard both to the steady continuation of production and to the company’s relations with the unions:
‘Management has turned to long-term contracts primarily in the hope that such contracts will help to “stabilise” their labour relations ... Stability is used most often as a synonym for “labour peace,” ie, freedom from strikes or threats of strikes which are ever present in contract negotiations ... Coupled with the desire for stability is the desire, for predictability of labour costs and an opportunity to plan ahead on investment, production, expansion, and other areas dependent on reasonably stable union-management relations.’ [51]
What this ‘opportunity to plan ahead’ means should now be clear from the experience of the American unions. Far from ‘stabilising’ labour relations – at least in the sense of maintaining an equilibrium – the balance has swung to the employers, who are now in a more powerful position in the US than they have been at any time since the great wave of unionism in the thirties.
Certainly it has been the employers who have been eager to promote long-term contracts (apart from the aberrant British engineering union leaders); indeed they have been so eager that they have been prepared to make concessions to the unions in order to obtain them:
‘The company was sufficiently convinced of the usefulness of the wage-formula approach after two years of trial that it conceded a substantial monetary gain to the union to secure the five-year contract. Although General Motors President Charles E. Wilson previously had expressed strong opposition in principle to compulsory union membership, the 1950 contract provided for a modified union shop.’ [52]
This has been the union’s view too: ‘a long-term agreement is a very substantial union concession and must not be sold cheaply.’ [53]
That the companies have good reason for liking the long-term contract can be seen from the fact that since 1948 there has been not a single company-wide strike in the whole of the US automobile industry. A further advantage resides in the fact that employers do not even have to spend so much time and energy on bargaining:
‘As the opening of negotiations draw near, the company must begin to develop its own bargaining position and must try to anticipate demands from the union. In practice this may mean gathering information on the way the current contract is working out, soliciting proposals for changes, reviewing grievances and arbitration awards, and consulting specialists on a variety of social security issues, such as pensions and health plans ... As negotiations approach the deadline, the cumulative effect of the campaign frequently shows itself in reduced efficiency on the job and possible “spontaneous” short strikes or slowdowns. In a major negotiation the deadline date is often preceded by marathon sessions involving top-level management personnel, after which an agreement is reached, a temporary extension is negotiated, or a strike is called. The actual signing of the agreement does not end the process since the new provisions must be analysed, actions to implement them must be taken, and supervisory personnel must be trained to administer them ... If this process were repeated annually, during a substantial part of each year industrial relations problems would be occupying most of the time of a large part of an organisation, and instability would be chronic.’ [54]
Under the long-term agreement, a management that plans a major offensive against the unions is almost guaranteed three years in which to prepare for the struggle, as happened in the case of the US Steel companies in the period between 1956 and 1959, when there was intensive stock-piling of finished steel, and customers were prepared for the coming strike by warnings to get their orders in early.
Beside these considerable advantages for the employers, the unions have little or nothing to gain from these contracts, and in the long run may have much to lose, although this is generally not perceived by the union leaders who have been and are signing these contracts. The American union leaders have striven to obtain common termination dates for their agreements, in the hope that this will give them greater leverage during negotiations; but these efforts are matched by the unification of the employers that was noted above, and have been largely ineffectual.
Long-term agreements significantly lower the interest and participation of the average union member in his union’s affairs. The granting of the modified union shop to the UAW by General Motors in 1950 was an implicit recognition by the company that the union would not accept a five-year contract without this concession, for its bargaining role in the next five years must of necessity be a passive one. A union that appears to do nothing to further workers’ immediate interests for three or five years is not likely to find it easy to retain the same loyalty that is shown to a union that negotiates every year for increases which may have to be fought for.
‘There has always been a widespread belief that membership interest in union affairs and attendance at union meetings was tied closely to the frequency of contract negotiations. Experience with long-term contracts bears out this expectation.’ [55]
Nor has the advent of long-term agreements led to higher wage-rises, as both employers and unions in the US recognise. [56] And the expressed union reason for the acceptance of the long-term contract – that it would leave the unions ‘free to concentrate in their negotiations for a new agreement on the major objective of increasing their share in the total national product.’ [57] – has been proved, quite simply, to be complete nonsense. If anything, the unions have lost some of the ground they had previously gained.
Control of wages under capitalism, whatever the means employed, is not in the interests of the working class. Quite apart from the arguments put forward above, it must further be added that in essence any attempt under capitalism to control wages cannot be regarded as anything but an attempt to reduce the self-activity of the working class, which is still primarily expressed in terms of the struggle for wages and conditions. The self-activity of the working class is the essential means for the ending of all class society. The only policy for socialists is complete opposition to all forms of wage-control, either at the level of the individual industry or at the level of the state, without full workers’ control at all levels, both political and economic.
 



The Essence of Trade Unionism
Victor Feather
Bodley Head, 10s. 6d.
Mr Feather is Assistant General Secretary of the TUC, and his book reflects this fact. The short history of British trade unionism in the first two chapters is a proud account of the growing ‘modernisation’ and ‘sense of responsibility’ of the unions, of their growing ‘prestige’ and acceptability to management. The Mond-Turner talks, which ‘laid the foundation of much modern trade union thought’ (p.26), are a high point in the history, and take as much space as the General Strike, where his brevity allows Mr Feather to skate over the role of the TUC. However, the best that Mr Feather can say for the role of the TUC during the thirties is that they ‘envisaged’ better social security provisions (p.27). His is a brief and bureaucratic history, in which administrative forms mean more than real social content.
The same approach typifies his presentation of the activities and purposes of the unions today. Unofficial stoppages are ‘helpful neither to workpeople – or employers – or the union’s responsible leadership’ (p.60). (Mr Feather really should go out and ask some of the workpeople who are not helped by unofficial stoppages where they get most of their wage-rises from.) He supports management ‘rights’ as laid down in union-management agreements against workers who are ‘unreasonable and obstructive’ (p.83). His vision of the ‘two sides’ in industry is of ‘the two sides working towards the same goal, recognising the merit of the other, understanding the rules and observing them.’ (p.86). Where there is a conflict in nationalised industries, the ‘proven national interest’ (that hoary old myth of class society) must come before the interests of the workers. There is no conception of different classes in society with fundamentally opposing purposes, all problems are administrative, all conflict is regrettable. Mr Feather seems to have no sense of the real problems that technological change creates, indeed he devotes no more space to this than he does to the problem of making an effective speech. Anyone who ever thought that the working class could ever get anything from the TUC need only read this book to be quickly disillusioned; it is bourgeois to the core, and boring to boot.



The Political Role of Labor in Developing Countries
Bruce H. Millen
Brookings Institution, Washington DC, (distributed by Faber), 25s.
In spite of the fact that this is very much a cold war treatise, Millen’s study is surprisingly good. As an employee of the US Department of State, his concern is, of course, not with the real interests of the workers of the developing countries, but with making sure that the US follows policies that will not turn the workers to the Communists. However, he has brought together a good deal of information and made quite reasonable sense out of it. The main part of the book is descriptive, and on the whole well done, the least satisfactory section being that in which he attempts to deal with the internal dynamics of the unions – a question that does not seem to interest Mr Millen very much anyway, for his emphasis is primarily upon the purposes of the union leaders and the politicians. This, however, merely reflects Mr Millen’s ideological preoccupations. The peoples are a mass, and the question is, who will capture them? Most of the trade unions in the developing countries differ markedly from those in the US and in Western Europe. If anything they tend to be closer often to the Russian model than to the American, concerned with production rather than consumption, and under governmental control. The typical pattern is one in which, before independence, the trade unions are an important part of a mass movement demanding political independence; with political independence, however, comes the necessity for a redefinition of the union role. The union leaders are often involved in the processes of administration, and the union bargaining role is restricted heavily by economic and institutional factors.
Furthermore, the unions often retain their earlier ‘movement’ quality, and in spite of irregular dues-paying, fluctuating memberships, and the embryonic stage of development of the working class, they are important loci of political activity. Their leadership is generally middle-class, sometimes dishonest or opportunistic, and as a rule cut off from the conditions of life and aspirations of their members. Often the core of union organisation in these countries is formed by the white-collar workers (and, in some cases, the railway workers), whose literacy and more complete urbanisation makes them the natural leaders of a still half-developed proletariat. How long these men will continue to lead the union movements is a question that Mr Millen does not ask himself. There is insufficient discussion of the economic pressures that have moulded the pattern of government-union relations in the new states, and made ‘state socialism’ such a characteristic form. Mr Millen presents a quite convincing picture of the trade unions as forces on the side of modernisation and development, and as a counterweight to those forces seeking to organise power around traditional religious, tribal and other groups; they seem also to act as social service agencies in some cases, easing the transition from the rural to the urban environment. Since the present-day unions in these countries may well contain the seeds of future oppositional movements, their history and future development is clearly of great concern to socialists. What we really need now is a collection of detailed analyses of individual unions and countries (Epstein’s Politics in an Urban African Community is an example), to which this book can well serve as a fairly useful introduction. At least facts and prejudices are kept separate, a rare enough asset in a book of this kind.



British Politics in Transition
Francis Boyd
Pall Mall, 27s. 6d.
This book is like a hundred others, no better and no worse. British politics take place only at the Top (and, a little, in the constituency parties); changes in the electorate, in terms of shifts of values, a changing class structure, etc, are not considered; there is no discussion of the relations between government and governed. Parliament is of course a splendid institution; the nagging question of the growth in executive power is mentioned, but not incorporated into such analysis as there is. Despite the title, the picture is static: changes can’t be ignored, but they are strings of unexplained events, rarely coherent processes. Class interests, class conflicts, these do not really exist; even the Tory policy of redistributing wealth to those who have leads Boyd to no stronger conclusion than that the parties sometimes disagree. He notices most of the central changes in the economic structure of Britain, but the relations between these and other changes are not discussed. Generally he gets his facts right – although his Hungarian revolution took place in November 1957 (pp.113 and 185) and so is unrelated to Suez; and he is simply misleading in stating that the Tories haven’t weakened the Health Service (p.152). His politicians are all men of moderation and good sense, his book an offering to failed gods. But it’s dull stuff. Don’t bother ...

