


To the Central Committee
Communist Party of the U.S.A
Earl Browder, Secretary
Dear Sir:
Last Sunday afternoon, October 22, I attended a meeting of the Left Opposition in their own headquarters, called under their own auspices, at which comrade Arne Swabeck was scheduled to speak on Germany. Before the meeting could start, a horde of some 250 “Communists” – members of Section 5, District 8 – invaded the hall under the leadership of their Section Organizer, Jack Spiegel, and of a member of the District Committee, David Poindexter. On their own admission, they had come fresh from mobilization caucuses for the express purpose of breaking up the meeting. They precipitated a riot in which literature and furniture were destroyed, workers were beaten up and trampled upon, and such a commotion developed that the police came into the hall from the street.
I have been in the revolutionary movement all my life and have participated in many demonstrations, some of them bloody and brutal, but I have never felt that I was facing so vicious and irresponsible and .anti-social a mob as the one which came last Sunday under the banner of the Communist party.
I wonder if you as a leader of the Communist Party realize all that such a thing means? A party which conducts itself in the manner of the most degraded section of the very lumpen-proletariat – plus from the decayed and degenerate body of a rotting social system – can neither win healthy elements to its ranks nor lead the revolution when the moment arrives; on the contrary, it must become a feeder of Fascist forces. A party which cannot raise the intellectual and moral level of the proletariat but on the contrary trains line elements down to the depth of gangsters has no right to use the name Communist.
Is it too much for you and your party to learn that a meeting of workers, come together to hear anyone at all, must not under any circumstances be physically attacked and broken up? Or is the answer that you can only hope to impress the American proletariat this way since you have so signally failed to impress them ideologically?
Several months ago, I severed my connection with the Communist party (after twelve years of membership) over occurrences in Germany. At that time I stated that the excuse offered by the C.I. that the German party was not rooted in the factories needed further explanation because a party can only be a really functioning Communist party when its composition is mainly of the working proletariat. Maybe last Sunday’s event throws some light on the question. If the leadership of the German party trained its members not to win other workers by ideological conviction but by destroying the meetings they organized and hoped to conduct, then a revolutionist knows why the Communist party of Germany was not “rooted in the masses.”



 


Sincerely,
Lydia Beidel



 




A recent highly interesting survey, based on the latest influx of volunteers for the army, has been reported in the pages of the Journal of the American Medical Association for October 12, 1940. by Dr. George E. Leone, captain of the U.S. Army medical corps and medical inspector for recruiting in the 2nd corps area, including New York City. During the months of June, July and August of this year 6,743 unmarried young men between the ages of 18 and 35, all part of an original enlistment into the Regular Army, were examined under his supervision. All of them were eighth grade graduates and many had completed high school and college courses; none had ever been convicted of a felony. These facts indicate that the social level represented by these men was by no means the lowest or poorest in America. Of this number, 2,195 or about one-third were rejected because of physical deficiencies which made them poor material to send onto the battlefield.
Of the men rejected, the largest number (516, or 23% of the total) were turned down because of the condition of their teeth. Among physicians, as among horse-traders, it is Commonly agreed that the condition of health of a subject’s teeth is a reliable criterion of his general health. The appalling condition of the teeth of these citizens of New York can be fathomed when one learns that the requirements for acceptance in the Army are ridiculously low. A man must have a minimum of three masticating teeth above and three below. This means twelve teeth to a head, even if the teeth have been filled. And it means also, if teeth are accepted as a gauge of health, that a man can be less than 50% par and still be good enough for the Army.  
Diseases of Poverty
Next in order of frequency came disqualifications because of bad eyes. Twenty-one percent of those rejected (479 men) were turned down, because they suffered from eye conditions which the report admits could have been avoided if attention had been paid them earlier in life. Most of the recruits did not wear glasses and had no suspicion that their eyes were not good.
A significant commentary on the widely publicized report that present recruits are on an average two inches taller than those of the last war is the fact that 15% (308 men) of the recruits examined were rejected because of stature deficiencies. Most of these were found to be underweight for their height, a condition which is especially alarming to military specialists, since it indicates a fundamental lack of resistance and marks such men as the first to break down physically when they come up against the rigors of military life. A large number of these men showed such signs of undernourishment that they were potential candidates for tuberculosis.
Complaint is made that much of the physical debility of American workers springs from their faulty diet, made up in too large part of potato and flour starches and sugar, which provide surface energy and an unhealthy fatness but give an inadequate supply of the minerals and vitamins necessary for real strength and resistance. If any of these military physicians cared to go further into statistics they might find that the incidence of starches and sugars in the diet of workers has a direct relation to the level of wages on the one hand and the price of various types of foods on the other.  
Bourgeois Press Alarmed
The bourgeois press, notably the New York Times, in commenting on the findings reported by Dr. Leone are properly alarmed at what the survey has disclosed. They are fearful of the possibility that the army now being created may be made up of men who are not physically equipped to stand up and take it as a good American should. They grasp at the traditional straw when they point out that these men are, after all, volunteers most probably largely from the unemployed ranks and therefore representative of a lower level of living than the normal cross-section of the American population. The direct opposite is however the probability.
Dr. Leone himself records that these young men had volunteered for Army service because they had “thought themselves physically fit to fight for the defense of their country.” They were surprised and annoyed at the rejections, having considered themselves, in comparison to other men of their acquaintance, good physical specimens. It is quite obvious that men suffering from pulmonary or venereal diseases or displaying noticeable skeletal defects simply do not normally volunteer for Army service.
Military circles express a vain hope when they anticipate a higher physical level among the mass of conscripts who will soon be called for training. Only then will the real ravages of malnutrition and bad social environment become noticeable. Then we shall begin to hear the real statistics on tuberculosis and pelagra, on syphilis, on bone deformities and rotten teeth. Then it will become clear even to the officer caste that the penalty for the last decade of intense depression has been paid for by a serious weakening of the physique of the potential American soldier.
Under a workers and farmers government, not only would an imperialist war have been avoided, but the present generation of young men in a land of such abundance as America would have enjoyed food and decent living conditions that would have given them the healthiest bodies in the world.
 




It is twenty-three years since the birth of the USSR, the first proletarian state. And it is twenty years since, the death of John Reed, author of one of the finest dramatic records of that birth, Ten Days That Shook the World.
The figure of John Reed – adventurer, reporter, dynamic American youth – plays a unique and highly symbolical role in the greatest of all historical crises, the Russian revolution. His rebel spirit, batting about in. a struggle against the restraint of tradition in the literary arts, gravitated unerringly toward Russia in 1917, the focal point of revolution against every aspect of the senility of capitalist society. The adventurer in him sensed that here he could be part of the grandest of all human adventures.  
He Grew with the Russian Revolution
But history, in its moments of’ creation, distils out of every man the finest in him for the future to cherish. John Reed, adventurer and romanticist though he may have been, could not fail to see that he as an American was not alien in Russia in November 1917. Hearing and seeing Lenin and Trotsky, he perceived that this upheaval of a decayed society was but the beginning of a universal phenomenon which must remain incomplete until it had run its course and embraced all of mankind. He saw more clearly than many a politician of his day that this was a class and not a national event.
He played his role in the Russian revolution and then, with the simple acceptance of an indisputable fact which characterized all the Russian Bolsheviks, hastened back to the United States in 1919 to carry the revolution beyond the place of its beginning by helping to form a communist party here.
John Reed came to the revolution not as a proletarian politician or theorist but simply as a sensitive, intelligent rebel. Yet he epitomizes some of the finest aspects of our revolution. His audacity is an inspiration to all American youth. His understanding of the worldwide implications of the Russian beginning is a reproach to every Stalinist maligner of the permanent revolution. His devotion to the founding of a party to serve as an instrument for extending the revolution is a pattern for every member of the Fourth International. And he has left as a deathless contribution to the history of man’s struggle tor freedom a clear and inspiring record of the first act in the remaking of the world. We salute his memory.  
They Remember His Death We Revive His Work
Last week the Stalinists commemorated his death with a meeting. These people are always safest commemorating deaths. There is no fear that the one whose memory they insult by their vicious perversions of truth may rise up and answer back.
Let them try to explain why John Reed neglected to mention even once the name of Stalin!
That of all the figures of those ten days it was Stalin whom they call “the greatest genius of all time,” who completely escaped John Reed’s attention and record! That the name of the executioner of all the Old Bolsheviks could be smuggled into this great work, with its laudatory introduction from the hand of Lenin, only via editor’s notes in the back! Let them explain John Reed’s constant coupling of the names of Lenin and Trotsky throughout his book.
How Jack Reed would have despised the Stalinist record of pandering to the most putrid parts of the decayed body of capitalism! How his rebel soul would have shuddered at the sterility which the present-day Soviet bureaucracy tries to pass off as proletarian art! How he would have wept that they could build a physical monument in America to literary boot-licking and the Cossack knout of bureaucratic censorship and call it by his name – the John Reed Clubs! Let them celebrate the death of John Reed. We shall celebrate that part of him which cannot ever die:
TEN DAYS THAT SHOOK THE WORLD
 




Dirtiest and most cynical of all the political opportunists trailing in John L. Lewis’s wake are the Stalinists and their CIO henchmen. Ever since October 25 when Lewis made his historical radio betrayal of American labor, the Kremlin boys have been outdoing themselves in the art of double-dealing.
The Daily Worker blossoms out before its startled public one day with a full-page advertisement for Willkie and a Voice of the People speaks up in the columns of its brother sheet, Freiheit, wondering how come. Whereupon the editors of Freiheit “explain.” The Communist party, they say, cannot be held responsible for sources of income through the sale of ads by the Daily Worker, since the paper was “sold” and is now owned by two old ladies of virginal political innocence (the third of the trio having recently died and turned up in her obituary as a member of the Communist party.)
Stalinite stooge Len De Caux, editor of the CIO News, in its issue of November 4 throws the party line around like a rope artist. The paper beams with praise of Lewis and his “great role,” “courageous leadership” and “constant wise guidance.” One after another of the second and third-rank leadership of the CIO (known through sad experience to the rank and file as close “fellow travelers” if not actual members of the C. P.) comes forward in its pages with wreaths and garlands to place on the brow and lay at the feet of their “great leader,” John L. Lewis. Sometimes one almost feels they have him confused with another opportunist betrayer of labor named Joseph Stalin.  
Harry Bridges for Willkie
Loudest and most obscene of them is Harry Bridges who on November 1st stood up and did his well-known trained seal act before 700 members of the CIO Industrial Union Council in San Francisco. He repeated for Willkie’s benefit the little trick of sell-out he perfected in 1936 when he conducted his labor agitation under the slogan of “Defeat Landon at all costs” and used his influence to postpone strike action of the Maritime Federation in order not to embarrass Roosevelt, then running for a second term.
Although “not endorsing any candidate,” Bridges made it very plain that the most important job before labor was to see that Lewis remained as president of the CIO. Since John L. himself has already declared he will resign from the CIO presidency if Willkie loses, the conclusion is obvious that Stalinist Harry is asking for votes for the Republican candidate.
“The New Deal doesn’t like me,” wails Bridges, “and wants to get rid of me – and soon will if I haven’t got the support of organized labor and its leaders.” Having thus belatedly admitted – and only because his own miserable hide is in danger apparently – that not the bourgeois government but the strong fist of organized labor is the only guarantee of protection to the trade union movement, Bridges pulls the knife out of one side of the back of labor and plunges it into the other by asking support for Willkie.  
Support Lewis “100 Percent”
Claiming that Roosevelt is heading toward a form of dictatorship which will smash labor’s right to organize, he says “with the reelection of the president now in the White House you’re well on your way to that kind of a set-up.” So far so good! But then comes an unequivocal statement: “I am 100% in support of John L. Lewis on everything he said.” Since Lewis was heard to say that he favored the election of Willkie, Bridges must take the next logical step, which he does in true Stalinite fashion. “It takes a man like Roosevelt,” he theorizes, “to be a dictator because a Willkie never could.”
What is there to stop him? Who is Willkie anyway? Does he have less Wall Street backing than Roosevelt? Is he less conscious of his class role in support of capital against labor than Roosevelt? Bridges, Stalinist betrayer of the working class, does a clumsy job of white-washing John E. Lewis’s – and Wail Street’s – alternative candidate for the presidency. Incidentally, he also puts the C.P. in an embarrassing spot in respect to its Election Platform of 1940, published before Lewis made his deal and speech. Will they suppress the sentence on page 7 which reads, “Republican advocacy of the interests of Wall Street may be more open and outspoken, but it is not more effective than that of the Roosevelt Democrats”? Must they now edit out the sentence on page 13 which correctly declares the Republican party to be “the party of the Associated Farmers and the open shoppers”? Do they still want to mouth the statement – still impeccably true – that “both parties are war, parties, M-Day parties, parties of imperialism, reaction and hunger”?  
In Line with the CP
The CIO NEWS of November 4 reports some 5,000 wires received at Lewis’s office. 90% of them acclaiming his stand. The list of signers of these love-notes reads like a roll-call of Stalinist stooges in the CIO, including such well-known figures as Joseph Curran, president of the National Maritime Union. Michael Quill, president of the Transport Workers Union, Edward T. Cheyfitz, national executive secretary of the National Association of Die Casting Workers Union. Lewis Merrill, president of the United Office and Professional Workers Union, Henry Johnson, assistant director of the Packing-house Workers Organizing Committee, and J.F. Jurich, president of the International Fishermen and Allied Workers of America.
The well-practiced technique of telegram sending has been played for all it’s worth in this campaign of support Io Lewis’s new political betrayal. Not only every kind of CIO organizational setup from organizing committees through unions to state and regional bodies, but every Townsend unit, Negro organization, farm association and youth group where the C.P. could wangle endorsement of a message got its pat across to John L.’s shoulder. Even a number of AFL “rank and filers” were persuaded to give voice to their synthetic enthusiasm.  
Panegyrics to the “Leader”
If there were any doubt as to the source of inspiration for many of the telegrams reproduced, one look at their wording is a dead give-away.
“Congratulations on the most glorious and courageous position taken by a real leader of labor. I wholeheartedly support your objectives.” (Jurich, International Fishermen)
“We ... pledge our unstinted and wholehearted support to follow his (Lewis’s) great leadership and to go along with the policies as outlined in this presidential election.” (Packinghouse Workers’ officers)
“We declare our sincere belief that the millions of workers and their families will ... bring about an overwhelming defeat of F.D. Roosevelt.” (NMU)
“Your leadership needed more than ever. Count me in as one of those who stand solidly behind you.” (Edward T. Cheyfitz)
“I am in complete agreement with your objectives.” (Lewis Merrill)
“Endorse your stand 100% and urge all our members to vote for Willkie.” (Utility Workers Organizing Committee)
“Congratulations on your stand in refusing endorsement to Roosevelt because of his failure to fulfill obligations and promises to labor.” (Michael Quill)
“The officers of this local will exhaust every avenue to convince our membership that your position is correct.” (United Rubber Workers)
“We shall do everything possible to make your speech come true and also make it impossible for you to resign as president of the CIO.” (Robb, Indiana Industrial Union Council)
“I associate myself with you and all that you have said and approve without reservations.” (Berry, Printing Pressmen)
These opportunists and lickspittles! How they trample each other in the mud to get on the handwagon. They long ago lost all regard for principle and all concern for the basic political interests of the working class. Now they haye left only that cheap consideration which is the one item in the baggage of every opportunist: “Who can pay me the most; to him I shall sell out!”
 




Editor:
So without a shot being fired or a command to surrender being uttered, the Daily Worker has gone underground – behind three skirts! And no ordinary skirts, either! I refer to the Daily Worker’s announcement of its sale to three ladies.
There’s Ferdinanda, who’s 63; and Susan, still going strong with a camera and lecture notes at 71; and Caro, delving daily deeper into research despite her 81 years.
And lest you think that years be the most notable of their assets, be assured that these three venerable dames began collecting background decades before they popped into the world singing the Star Spangled Banner.
Take Ferdinanda, for instance. Hers is a Wesselhoeft skirt, flouncing in and out of America, Europe and the USSR these six decades, sweeping in its wake a collection of artistic accomplishments covering sculpture, music and classical literature. Reeking with tradition, it walks in the noble memory of such names as Harriet Beecher Stowe, Martin Van Buren, John Calhoun, Horace Greeley and Carl Shurz, some of whom in their weaker moments put themselves trustingly in the hands of Grandpapa Wesselhoeft and his “famed Brattle Sanitorium” Ferdinanda learned about the class struggle from a book called Through the Eye of a Needle by William Dean Howells.
Susan is a D.A.R. and veteran of the back-to-the-land struggle. Her 71 years of historical reminiscence include the thrilling rescue of “two wagon-loads of priceless archives from the Navy Department and the White House” by her great grandfather who seems to have been around when Dolly Madison needed help. She was practically born into the staff of the Bankers Magazine.
And Caro has had 81 years of Puritan inheritance complicated with a degree from Vassar. Most of her life has been spent in research. If she is responsible, not the least of her research contributions to the Communist Party has been the digging up of three such fossils as herself and her two associates in this democratic binge they are out on – buying up newspapers to insure “freedom of expression” in a cock-eyed and decaying society. It’s only too bad they should right crack out of the box get stuck with the Daily Worker.
Imagine Earl Browder though, grooming himself for the historic moment when the forces of reaction pounce upon his erstwhile official organ. He is probably at this very moment standing before a pierglass declaiming with heroic gestures the lines which ring through the corridors of every little schoolhouse (out of consideration for his feelings, we left out the adjective “red”) in the country:



“Who touches a hair of yon gray head
Dies like a dog! March on! ...”



Contemplate if you will the impenetrable bulwark of defense the brain trust of the Comintern has thrown around their press: three females; three almost or actual octogenarians; three members of the firstest families. One can see capitalism cringing before it!
We should like to be allowed a few friendly words of advice to the new owners of the Daily Worker. To Ferdinanda: If you want to know how really little the eye of a needle can be quit staring at the veracity record of the Daily Worker for a while and try smuggling a few copies of the Russian Bulletin of the Fourth International over the Russian borders. To Susan: Why not really emulate your illustrious ancestor and tear over to the Kremlin with a couple of wagons while there are still a few “priceless archives” of the Russian Revolution still undestroyed by Stalinite vandals.
And with Browder and company we should like a word too. If the Communist Party, trembling before the possibility of imminent illegality, wants to save its press by a legal transfer of ownership we have absolutely no objection. Even if it has in mind only the avoidance of payment on judgments against it for libelous statements we still say all right With us. But why the monkey-business with octogenarian skirts of good family? Who the hell do you think you’re kidding – us, yourselves, the capitalists or the three old ladies?



Chicago


Lydia Beidel



 




Background
In Germany: By 1931, German economy fell to such a low level that the United States had to intervene in order to save German capitalism. Unemployment and hunger were rampant. The mood of the proletariat and lower middle class was explosive. The Social Democratic Party maintained its hold upon a dominant section of the workers and continued its policy of depending on the “liberal” capitalists to solve the workers’ problems. The strength of the Communist Party grew, but because of the sectarian and adventurist policies of the “Third Period,” not at the rate made possible by the growing economic political crisis.
The Weimar Republic was bankrupt; cabinet followed cabinet in rapid succession, each moving further to the right.
 
The Rise of Nazism
The last hope of the capitalist class was the Nazis. This party mobilized the desperate, ruined middle class in the service of monopoly capital. By demagogic promises to solve their problems, the Nazis got middle class support for attacks on the workers’ organizations.
The Nazis, financed by big business, grew rapidly. They increased their strength by more than 5 million votes in the period from 1928 to 1930, polling 6,406,397 votes in the Reichstag elections of the latter year. In March 1932, Hitler received 11,338,571 votes, while in April of the same year Hitler got over 13,000,000 votes.
 
Reaction of the Stalinists in Germany
In 1930, after the election figures showed such a large increase in support for Hitler, the official organ of the C.P. of Germany said:
“14th of September (election day) was the high point of the National Socialist movement of Germany. What comes after this can only be decline and fall.”
In 1932, Remmele, a C.P. deputy in the Reichstag, stated (on October 14):
“... once they (the fascists) are in power, then the united front of the proletariat will be established and it will make a clean sweep of everything ... We are not afraid of the fascist gentlemen. They will shoot their bolt quicker than any other government.”
 
Trotsky’s Warnings
Trotsky and the Left Opposition warned of the need for a united front of the workers’ organizations against the fascists. This was the crux of the matter. After Hitler came to power, it would be too late; what was necessary was the formation of a united front so that Hitler never would be able to come to fewer.
During this period, Leon Trotsky, forced into exile by Stalin to Prinkipo, Turkey, wrote several masterly documents on Germany. In Germany, the Key to the International Situation (December 1931) he condemned the false policies of the C.P. leadership, warned that a victory of fascism in Germany would lay the basis for war upon the Soviet Union, and proposed the institution of a militant united front of action between the Communist and Social Democratic Parties.
A later work (September 1932) entitled The Only Road for Germany, was a brilliant analysis of the German situation, and presented the program for defeating fascism.
 
Stalin Shackles Workers Before Hitler
In place of instituting a movement for a united front of the two workers parties, the Stalinists shackled the workers with the theory of “social fascism”. Instead of seeing that the social democracy as a reformist workers’ organization was bitterly opposed to and incompatible with fascism, the Stalinists claimed that social democracy was a form of fascism, was social fascism. Therefore they refused to form a united front with the “social fascists” (social democrats) against the fascists and the workers were left disunited.
In place of a real united front, the Stalinists said to the Socialist workers: “Let us form a united front, not from organization to organization, but from below, and against your leaders.” But since the Social Democratic workers still had confidence in their leaders, they refused. In this way, Stalin sabotaged the effort to form a united front of workers organizations differing in ideas, for common action against fascism, by his burlesque “united front from below.”
 
Fascism Takes Power
On July 20, 1932, Chancellor Von Papen dismissed and arrested two Socialist officials. The masses were ready for action, but no call for it came from their leaders.
Taking this inaction as a signal for assault, the Nazis increased their offensive, murdering 25 workers during the weekend of July 31. Still the leadership of the two workers’ parties remained passive. Terror raged against the workers.
Hitler, on January 30, 1933, became Chancellor of Germany.
The C.P. issued a perfunctory call for general strike, for which no preparation had been made; nothing came of it.
In March, Hitler staged the Reichstag fire and used it as a pretext to outlaw the Communist party.
May 1, the workers’ holiday, was celebrated by the Nazis with the launching of a systematic campaign of extermination of all workers’ organizations.
 
End of the Communist International
On April 1, 1933, the Communist International declared “that the political line and the organizational policy pursued by the Central Committee of the C.P. of Germany ... before and at the time of the Hitler coup, was quite correct.”
The C.P. of Germany was dismembered and driven underground. Hitlerism was in power. The defense of the Soviet Union was immeasurably weakened. Stalin had cracked one of the strongest sections of the organized revolutionary movement of the capitalist world. With the German defeat, the Communist International was ended as a progressive workers organization.
 




Background
By the end of 1927, Stalin and the Communist Parties were suffering the blows which the opportunist course of the preceding several years had brought. To cover up his criminal mistakes, Stalin now forced a violent and extreme turn to the left, no less disastrous in its effects than the period before it.
In the USSR: Stalin’s concessions to the rich peasant (kulak) and the small trader (Nepman) had enhanced the relative strength of these capitalist elements, which were menacing Soviet economy. Stalin now swung away from them and launched a program of forced collectivization against the peasantry as a whole. Trotsky, exiled to Alma-Ata, warned against the danger of this pseudo-left turn of Stalin, both for the Soviet Union and the parties of the Communist International,
In the International: Despite the opportunistic alliances formed by Stalin, he was in a position of isolation by the end of 1927. The British trade union leaders had broken from the Anglo-Russian Committee. after using it for their own purposes; Chiang Kai Shek had crushed the Chinese Communist Party and the Chinese revolution.
In the capitalist world: Capitalism was plunging headlong into the greatest economic crisis of its history, bringing mass unemployment, starvation and unrest to the workers and the poorest sections of the middle class.
 
The “Third Period”
The Stalinist bureaucracy abandoned for the time being the policy of collaboration with capitalist groups that had proved so ruinous in the period between 1924 and 1927, went into reverse and adopted a policy which in effect excluded united action with even working class organizations.
In July 1928, the Sixth World Congress of the C.I. convened and its theoreticians laid the basis for the “Third Period”. They discovered that the post-war era was divided into three periods, and that capitalism would never survive the “third period.” According to this scheme, the first, from 1917 to 1924, was the period of capitalist collapse and the first wave of proletarian revolutions; the second, 1924 to 1929, was the period of the stabilization of capitalism; and the third, from 1927 on, the period of successful workers’ revolutions.
The “Third Period” was characterized by the adoption of a series of ultra-left tactics by the parties of the C.I, and the abandonment of all alliance with non-Communist elements in the working class and peasantry. Purges in the International removed the leaders of the “Second Period,” the right-wingers, the followers of Bukharin, of whom Lovestone-Gitlow-Wolfe were the American representatives.
Stalin enunciated the theory which formed the basis of the “Third Period” tactics: the theory of Social-Fascism, according to which “fascism and the Social-Democracy are not antipodes, but twins.” With one gesture, the Nazis and the large numbers of workers who still followed the leadership of the Second International were lumped indiscriminately together. As a matter of fact, the main blows of the Communist organizations were directed against the Social-Democratic and other workers’ parties in this period, for according to the Stalinist theory, they were the main obstacle to the overthrow of capitalism.
 
“United Front from Below”
The Second Congress of the C.I. under Lenin and Trotsky had developed one of the most valuable tactics in the possession of the revolutionary party, the united front – to win support of the masses still unprepared to accept revolutionary leadership.
A vulgar perversion of this tactic was now dished up by Stalin, under the name of the “united front from below.” This was to operate by appealing to the Social-Democratic masses to desert their party leaders and follow the C.P. Its effect was to nullify the entire policy of the united front (intended to swing masses of organized workers into joint class action against common enemies and for common objectives) and substituted for it an exaggerated recruitment campaign employing all the wrong methods, which resulted only in repelling the worker Socialists from the Communist Parties and leaving them fully under the influence of the treacherous reformist leaders.
 
Effects of the Stalinist Line
In the USSR: By 1930, Stalin’s policy of forced collectivization had driven the peasants as a class into open revolt. They refused to grow grain and the Soviet Union faced famine. In his article, Dizzy With Success, Stalin finally called a halt, but too late to forestall the horror of mass starvation which descended on the Soviet Union in 1931–32.
In the unions: Communist workers were ordered to withdraw from the large trade unions under the control of reformist or Socialist leaders and were organized into separate “Red Trade Unions.” As a result, Communist and progressives were isolated.
In the International: As economic conditions worsened internationally from 1927 to 1933, class antagonism increased and the need for real united working class action (the united front) became imperative.
In China, the Communist Party retreated to the remote provinces, there to operate without a base in the proletariat, and consequently without any real influence.
In England, America, France and the other countries where the Communist Parties existed, the membership of the parties now stood isolated and discredited, without influence among the workers.
But the false and ruinous policies of “Third Period” Stalinism, at a time when the unity of the class front in the struggle against fascism was indispensable, had succeeded only in further dividing the ranks of the working class and confusing them as to the main enemy and their main tasks.
At a time when capitalism was in the throes of its gravest crisis, the vanguard of the working class, betrayed by Stalinism and the Social Democracy, was prevented from taking advantage of its historic opportunity, and fascism was permitted to come to the rescue of the decaying social order.
 




The Krivitsky murder exhibits the stereotype of the GPU crime. Unhappily for Stalinism, the pattern of circumstances surrounding each of its major political murders has a glaring and betraying flaw, with which, however, it cannot dispense: a written document. The necessity for casting suspicion elsewhere than upon its own bloody head has forced it in each instance to produce documentary evidence of some other perpetrator of the act. That is why, in every case, a letter or several letters appear as “explanations” of the death or disappearance of the victim.
In two major murders preceding that of Krivitsky – the assassination of Leon Trotsky and the murder of Rudolf Klement, secretary of the Fourth International, on July 13, 1938, the technique of the “letter of confession” has been used, each time to the grief of Stalin.
The latest use of the letter has shown only one sign of improvement over the clumsy method employed heretofore. This time, politics and international intrigue are carefully avoided and the suicide tone is adhered to with religious care.
It was because of glaring discrepancies in historical fact and inconsistencies in philosophy and motivation, that the patent falseness or previous “letters of confession” were proven.
The implications of the letter of Jacson, GPU killer of Trotsky, have been admirably and thoroughly treated in a pamphlet by Albert Goldman entitled The Assassination of Leon Trotsky, now available through the editorial offices of The Militant. We therefore content ourselves with only one observation in respect to the murder of Leon Trotsky. The mistakes of that Jacson letter seem to have taught the crime-sodden minds of the GPU one thing at least: to avoid delving into the political ideas of their tools or victims in their letter-writing exploits.
 
Same GPU Methods Used On Klement
An examination of the letters forged by the GPU and left as Krivitsky’s shows an amazing similarity in important details to a similar letter forged by the GPU when it killed Rudolf Klement, secretary of the Bureau of the Fourth International. Six weeks after the letter, allegedly written and sent in explanation of Klement’s “break with Trotskyism” the dismembered body of the “writer” of the letter was found in the Seine river.
When the Klemcnt letter was first received – before Klement’s body was found – its existence and content seemed entirely inexplicable. The handwriting appeared authentic, even at first to the keen eye of Trotsky himself. Then it became clear that an extremely clever case of forgery had been perpetrated, later substantiated as a forgery by the investigation of handwriting experts in Paris. Krivitsky’a lawyer has with great justification raised doubts as to the authenticity of the handwriting in the letters found beside Krivitsky.
There were three copies of the Klement letter prepared by its authors, each one signed with another of the pseudonyms Klement had used in his political work. One bore the signature Frederic; another Adolf: and the third, Camille. Since the GPU had no way of knowing which was currently used by their victim, they tried to play safe by using all of them. Their error lay in using the oldest and most completely abandoned (Frederic) in the letter which was sent to Trotsky.
 
Suspicious Aspects of the Krivitsky Letters
In the case of Krivitsky, too, three letters have been left, signed in three ways: Walter Krivitsky for the English letter; Vella for the Russian; and Walter for the German. There is only one explanation for this: a desperate attempt to make these letters look intimate, legitimate and valid. Incidentally, the writing of a German letter to Suzanne LaFollette is a minor mystery in itself, especially since the victim proves his command of English in the letter to his lawyer. The GPU handwriting artists appear to have been determined to show their versatility! It seems to go beyond the point of accident that the elements of each of the letters which could be written only at the precise moment of the crime appear not in the bodies of the letters but in postscripts. The acquisition of a gun and his trip all the way to Virginia to get it are handled as an after-thought, even in the letter to his wife. WEre the bodies of the letters composed in the mood of imminent suicide somewhere else and some time ago, whereas the specific details of his last trip had to wait until the propitious moment and then be added by the murderers?
A reading of the two more important of the Krivitsky “suicide” notes brings several questions to mind: Why the brevity of the note to his lawyer? Krivitsky was supposedly voluntarily terminating a political life; his lawyer is a prominent co-thinker of his in the labor movement; Krivitsky surely would have had something more to say as a final word to such a confidant than the simple words about his family – and again, as in the other letters – the postscript about the purchase of the gun.
Why the tone of the letter to his wife? He offers her no single word of explanation save the silly phrase, “I think my sins are big,” a phrase entirely foreign to the tongue of a man engaged as he had been in the conscienceless intrigue of Stalinist politics for decades until his break with the Kremlin late in 1937.
 
A New Blunder by the GPU
The most incriminating circumstance, however, centers around the absolute absence in any of these letters of mention of the GPU or any of its agents. The fact of his leaving a note to his wife would indicate, presumably, that he felt moved to vindicate himself somehow for an act which he knew was to bring her intense grief. He had a moral alibi if ever a man did: his persecution by the GPU and the Stalinist parties of France, Switzerland and the United States. Yet not a word, even of pathetic complaint, against his having been subjected for years to incessant terror and hounding, appears in any of the letters. In its recently acquired and legitimate fear of political angles to its murder letters, the Kremlin has bent so far backward that it has fallen once more!
A final highly significant parallel between the GPU murder of Rudolph Kleiment and the violent end of Walter Krivitsky appears in the handling of their personal affairs in the final hours of their lives. In this connection, the mysterious disappearance of another victim of the Kremlin, Juliet Stuart Poyntz, comes immediately to mind. Klement left his table set or dinner, his room in order, his intimate personal matters unfinished when he left his room for the last time. Juliet Stuart Poyntz went for a walk in New York wearing light clothing, left her personal effects and duties incomplete and never again was seen. Walter Krivitsky was in the midst of preparation for securing the safety and happiness of his family by moving them to a farm in Virginia, had applied for the right to protect his life by carrying arms and was in the midst of work which he considered important. In a word, these “suicides” gave no indication whatever of not desiring to continue their lives.
The GPU has executed with much skill another political murder. But no skill can cover up the fatal flaws in its crimes. Even this first cursory examination of the circumstances surrounding Krivitsky’s death makes clear he was a victim of the GPU.
 




Background of the 1925–26 Events
In the Communist International: Under the pressure of world capitalism, reflected in the USSR by the rich peasant (kulak), Stalin moved to the right. Politically, this turn manifested itself within Russia in a great campaign against “Trotskyism” and the enunciation of the theory of Socialism in one country; in other countries, it appeared as a desperate courting of bourgeois elements.
In England: November 1924 – Hardly a month after the official birth of Stalin’s theory of Socialism in one country, a delegation of British trade union leaders, headed by A.A. Purcell, president of the Trade Union Congress, visited the USSR and returned to write a glowing report of conditions there.
May 1925 – A Russian delegation, headed by M. Tomsky, chairman of the Central Council of the Russian trade unions, returned the British T.U.C. visit by attending the Hull Trades Union Congress.
May 14, 1925 – A protocol was signed by the leaders of the British and Russian trade unions, dedicated to the furthering of international trade union unity, the struggle against capitalist reaction, and the fight against a new war. Thus was the Anglo-Russian Committee formed, with equal representation from each country.
The Committee, from the standpoint of the Soviet Union, might have performed a useful function to the working class, if the Russian trade union leadership and the British Communist party constantly warned the British working class of the character of the reformist trade union bureaucracy.
Anticipating the disaster to come from Stalin’s opportunism, Trotsky wrote a bitingly critical work entitled Whither England, in which he warned against every move which was to come in the ensuing disaster; it was condemned by Stalin as more evidence of “criminal Trotskyism”.
 
General Strike of 1926
May 1, 1926 – After a year of wide-spread local strikes of increasing seriousness, the British trade unions, by a vote of 3,653,529 to 49,911, declared a General Strike in support of certain miners’ demands.
The British Communist party, poised at a turning- point in its history, threw its support (following the line of its guide, the Anglo-Russian Committee) wholeheartedly behind the bureaucracy of the T.U.C.
The General Council of the T.U.C., meanwhile, in the persons of Arthur Pugh (later Sir Arthur), Walter Citrine (later Sir Walter) and J.H. Thomas, grovelled on the doorstep at 10 Downing Street, begging to be allowed to betray the strike to the Prime Minister, who was so frightened by the solidarity of the British workers that he feared even their misleaders.
Tension increased; the Prime Minister gave orders to the troops to fire if necessary; the workers raged at the signs of capitulation on the part of their leadership.
In a few days the General Strike was called off by the General Council. The workers of England, in a mood of political rebellion, were leaderless and the Communist party found itself bound and gagged by the bonds of the Anglo-Russian Trade Union Committee.
 
Problem Facing the British
The Left Opposition in the Russian Communist party immediately demanded of Stalin-Tomsky that they withdraw at once and demonstratively from the Anglo-Russian Committee, in order to permit the British C.P. to raise its voice and organize the workers against the betrayal.
 
Stalin’s Policy
From the day the Anglo-Russian Committee was formed until the British labor bureaucrats broke it up, Stalin looked upon the Committee and the General Council of the T.U.C. as a “bulwark against capitalism.” He stubbornly refused to admit bureaucrats were basically instruments of the bosses.
In July 1926, at a meeting of the Central Executive Committee of the Russian Communist Party, Stalin summarized his attitude: “If the reactionary English trade unions are willing to enter a bloc against the counter-revolutionary imperialists of their own country – then why not make this bloc? ... And so, the Anglo-Russian Committee is the bloc between our trade unions and the reactionary trade unions of England ... for the purpose of struggle against imperialist wars in general, and against intervention in particular ... Comrades Trotsky and Zinoviev should remember this, and remember it well.”
At the end of July, the Committee met in Paris. The Russian unions issued a criticism of the conduct of the General Strike; the General Council protested against it, refused to discuss the strike and rejected an offer of monetary assistance for the British miners’ strike from the Russian unions on the ground that the offer constituted meddling in British affairs. The Russian criticism was promptly modified and the betrayal became simply a display of “unforgivable tactics”. The General Council retaliated by passing a resolution accusing Russia of “intolerable interference in the domestic affairs of the British trade union movement.”
In May, 1927, Chamberlain raided the Soviet Trade Commission (Arcos) buildings in London and broke off relations with the Soviet Union; the General Council withdrew from the Anglo-Russian Committee and handed over the corpse for Stalin to bury.
 
Effect upon the British
For three critical years in British history, the Communist Party had been hamstrung. It could not strike out for independent leadership of the working class; it could not even criticize the treacherous policies of the British labor bureaucracy.
Because of the false theory of Socialism in one country and Stalin’s cowardly belief that the Soviet Union could be saved from intervention by a policy of placating bourgeois elements in the capitalist countries, the British Communist Party was fatally compromised and crippled. Stalin, the great “organizer of proletarian defeats”, already in 1927 had betrayed the British revolution.
 




The Background of 1923 Events
In Germany: The full and horrible implications of the Versailles peace had become apparent. Mass starvation ravaged and haunted the proletariat; the petty-bourgeoisie was being rapidly ruined; a catastrophic inflation menaced all of society. The French ruling class, taking its pound of German flesh, occupied the rich coal and industrial area of the Ruhr.
In January 1923, the Social-Democracy was driven out of power by the open capitalist regime of Cuno, which began an offensive against the working class in order to satisfy the demands of the Allies and to stabilize German capitalism. By the second week of August, Cuno’s government was driven out of power by a general strike.
Mass unrest and definite mood for revolution (recognized and admitted even by Stalin’s closest henchmen after it was too late) characterized the German proletariat.
In the Communist International: Lenin was ill; Trotsky had been isolated by the Troika (an anti-Trotsky alliance of Stalin, Zinoviev and Kamenev).
 
Problem Facing the German Communists
The Social-Democracy had disclosed itself in all its nakedness as a willing tool of capitalism against the socialist objectives of the working class. The remaining sterile shell of the Independent Social- Democratic Party spent itself in loud talk but did nothing.
Every shop election, every governmental election, indicated a steady growth of the influence of the Communist Party. The rival parties of the working class showed rapid disintegration and the masses gravitated toward the C.P., looking there for leadership and decisive action.
The obvious political necessity of the German Communists was to cut loose from any parliamentary flirtations with the Social-Democrats and prepare to strike for power – against the Versailles peace and for socialism.
 
Stalin’s Policy
In a letter to Zinoviev and Bukharin in August 1923, Stalin thus clearly formulated his attitude toward the situation in Germany:
“Should the Communists strive (at the given stage) to seize power without the Social Democrats? Have they sufficiently matured for that? – that’s the question as I see it ... Should the power in Germany, so to speak, drop now, and should the Communists catch it up, they’ll fall through with a crash. That’s ‘at best’. But if it comes to the worst – they will be smashed to pieces and beaten back ... The Fascists, of course, are not napping, but it is to our advantage to let the Fascists attack first: this will fuse the entire working class around the Communists (Germany is not Bulgaria). Moreover, the Fascists, according to all reports, are weak in Germany. In my opinion, the Germans should be restrained and not encouraged.”
Here we have the fatal germs of the false policy which today has allowed Fascism to reach the very gates of Moscow: Don’t launch an offensive against fascism! Let it kill itself by feasting upon the body of the working class! Give it state power – or give it Soviet territory, – only don’t organize the masses for revolutionary assault!
 
Actions of Stalin
Brandler, the leading figure of the German Communist party, journeyed to Moscow in September, seeking the advice and aid of the Comintern in this critical situation. He was instructed by Stalin-Zinoviev-Kamenev to use the influence of the German party against any attempt to seize power and instead to enter with the Social-Democrats into the government of Saxony. Brandler vacillated. Stalin’s line was acceptable to him because he himself was a Centrist.
From then on, the Communist Party of Germany deliberately discouraged all mass demonstrations and barred all the avenues to the struggle for power. Abortive uprisings in Saxony and Bavaria, products of the spontaneous but unguided revolutionary spirit of the masses, were drowned in blood by the German bourgeoisie. Stalin-Brandler, working toward an amorphous “workers’ government” and away from the dictatorship of the proletariat, betrayed the German revolution of 1923 and cleared the way for the future ascendancy of Fascism.
 
Effect upon the World Revolutionary Movement
Upon realization that the Communist Party of Germany was unwilling to conduct a revolutionary struggle under the most auspicious conditions, the workers turned away from the C.P. The party was declared illegal; more than 9,000 workers were put on trial. There was an epidemic of “prison suicides” and of workers being “shot while attempting to escape.”
When Trotsky finally succeeded in bringing to the attention of the Comintern the strangling of the German revolution, Stalin vehemently defended Brandler (and thus himself) and renewed his attack upon Marxism and Leninism, under the guise of a struggle against Trotskyism.
The German revolution – and the world revolution – had received its first stab in the back at the hands of Stalin. By that time the General Secretary was well along in his career as the great “organizer of proletarian defeats.”
 




I. How Stalin Throttled the German Proletarian Revolution – 1923

II. Stalin Wrecks the British Communist Movement – 1925–26

III. Stalin Beheads the Chinese Revolution, 1925–27

IV. Stalin Goes ‘Left’ – 1928–33

V. Stalin and Hitler’s Seizure of Power, 1931–33
 




In China: The struggle of the masses against feudal oppression and foreign imperialism took on a new form in 1923; the proletariat underwent a rapid independent development, organizationally and politically. Trade unions mushroomed and strikes grew in number and size, taking on a distinctly political quality. By 1925, union membership in China was higher than in Russia in October 1917. Tremendous general strikes shook the main industrial centers; the peasant masses and middle classes were in revolt; British, Japanese and American imperialism were on the defensive. Political leadership of China’s unrest lay in the Kuomintang, a party of national liberation formed by Sun Yat-Sen.
In the Comintern: Lenin’s last illness removed him from active leadership; Trotsky fought adamantly against the threatened mishandling of the Chinese situation, but was completely isolated by Stalin, well along in his anti-Trotskyism campaign. Trotsky presented his criticism in a brilliant series of articles entitled Lessons of the Chinese Revolution.
In the Theses of the Second Congress of the Communist International (1920), Lenin formulated Bolshevik policy on the Chinese revolution.
Oriental parties of the C.I. were urged to enter into united front movements with organized sections of non-proletarian oppressed classes (peasantry, urban middle class), always, however, “preserving the independent character of the proletarian movement, even though it be still in its embryonic state.”
 
Stalin’s Invention
Stalin in 1925 invented a new political concept: the “bloc of four classes” (proletariat, peasantry, petty bourgeoisie, and a section of the native big bourgeoisie).
Application of Stalin’s ideas could have but one practical result: to bind the revolutionary proletariat to the program of the native capitalist class. Such a concept springs from a gross and criminal misjudgment of the Chinese revolution as purely bourgeois- democratic in nature – the Menshevik error of 1917 repeated by Stalin in the case of China.
Lenin taught that the native capitalist class of a colonial country is torn between its desire to fight off foreign imperialist domination and its fear of the worker and peasant masses at home. Experience has proven that the fear of unleashing the masses for revolt against imperialism is greater in the last analysis than the desire for independence from foreign domination, and that the native capitalists of such countries try to betray the exploited classes.
 
The Revolution Begins
1925 opened two bloody years of Chinese struggle against native and foreign capitalist oppression, in which the membership of the C.P. took heroic part, though prevented from assuming political leadership by Stalin and his henchmen in China.
In January 1924, Stalin sent the entire membership of the Chinese C.P. (as individuals) into the Kuomintang, a “four-class party” ready-made for him. Borodin, Stalin’s agent, was sent to China to carry out the line. From then on, members of the C.P. were subservient to the discipline of the liberal bourgeoisie.
On March 20, 1926, General Chiang Kai-Shek, representative of the Chinese capitalist class, who had been flirting with the Stalinist C.I. since Sun Yat-Sen’s death, staged a coup d’etat and assumed leadership of the Kuomintang. He immediately laid down stringent rules paralyzing the activities of the C.P. members in his party; Borodin-Stalin agreed. Chiang outlawed the magnificent Canton strikes; Borodin-Stalin acceded. Chiang launched his Northern campaign, using C.I. propagandists as a front. Workers, under the C.I.’s misleadership, flocked to the warlord’s support. He thanked them by destroying their unions. Not a word of warning came from the Communist Party under Stalin that Chiang Kai-Shek, representative of the native capitalist class, would turn on the workers and peasants.
Still the fever of rebellion rose. The role of the C.P. of China was limited to fighting in the spirit of Chiang’s first slogan: “A 20% reduction in rent.” Trotsky persistently demanded that the C.P. withdraw from the Kuomintang and conduct an independent struggle for the formation of Soviets.
The crassest expression of the Stalinist policy appeared in a manifesto issued by the Chinese C.P., saying: “We must carry on a minimum of class struggle ...”
 
Defeat and Disaster
In February 1927, as he waited to enter Shanghai, General Chiang delivered a pogrom speech against the C.P. Reply came in the form of instructions from Mandalian, C.P. leader, ordering the party “not to provoke Chiang” and “in case of extreme necessity to bury their arms.” Stalin and Chiang exchanged autographed pictures. The C.P. and the Kuomintang issued a joint statement calling for unity behind Chiang.
Chiang entered Shanghai, welcomed by the masses who were misguided and lulled by C.P. policy. He quickly established connections with the imperialists, and on April 12, 1927, he struck, literally hacking the militant working class movement to pieces. All trade unions and the C.P. were driven underground.
In an attempt to save face, Stalin now at last announced that the Chinese revolution had really begun and influenced the Canton party in December 1927 to organize an ill-timed and poorly prepared uprising. But the workers’ organizations were now, thanks to Stalin, bewildered or smashed, and the Canton Soviet after three days was drowned in blood.
 
Effects on the Chinese C.P.
The Communist Party of China grew between 1925 and 1927 from 800 to over 60,000 members, most of whom were proletarians. It enjoyed the support of the great mass of the peasantry. On November 8, 1928, a circular issued by the Central Committee of the Chinese C.P. stated: “The party does not have a single healthy party nucleus among the industrial workers.” By 1930, less than 2% of the membership was proletarian. The unions were smashed. Capitalist terror against worker and peasant raged.
Stalin, organizer of proletarian defeats, had helped to behead the Chinese revolution and give new life to imperialism in the Orient.
 




You would hardly believe it, but even political reaction has its funny phase. The Roosevelts, Bill Greens and Sidney Hillmans do the strong-arm job of clamping the leg-irons of capitalism on the workers; and that’s not funny. But then come the little, cowardly, short-sighted, thick-skulled, moronic camp-followers who highlight with their antics the whole vicious campaign of reversion which cannot be sated until mankind is pushed back into the cannibalism out of which it is just beginning to pull itself.
The National Association of Manufacturers, no less, is out to teach the teachers of America a thing or two, especially those who take modern science too literally. With $1,600,000 in hand and a staff of stooges (including one from the Stalinite-dominated periodical Science and Society) this Association of Past Masters of the Arts of Swindling, Fraud and Adulteration has set out to censor and purify the textbooks of the country. Six hundred social science works have come under the eagle eye of Dr. Ralph West Robey and his associates.
The purpose of the scrutiny is to ferret out all books which either speak in favorable terms of the theories of socialism or communism or fail to paint a glowing-enough appreciation of the profound virtues of capitalist free enterprise, which parades in the lingo of N.A.M. as “the American way of life.” These are to be consigned to the flames forthwith.
Dr. Robey should know about integrity and ethics and the deep virtue which underlies American business; he is assistant professor of banking at Nicholas Murray Butler’s University and was at one time part of the brains behind Alf M. Landon and his cohorts. He is one of the nation’s chief snooper-outers of “socialism,” having found a horrible amount of it in the New Deal.
Let us, however, live up to the high level of objectivity which Professor Robey and his N.A.M. display and observe the purposes announced by them. They are out to disseminate public information – that is all – on the content and philosophy of all the social science textbooks used in American schools. They should know about public information, too! Aren’t they the inventors and promotors of advertising, that greatest of all historical swindles? Aren’t they the ones who hail as the profoundest discovery of modern research, Barnum’s declaration that there’s a sucker born every minute?
The guiding lights of N.A.M. think the spirit of America is dying from want of a faith; and they have faith to give away, we gather. Maybe they want the kind of faith fostered by them – the kind that requires the capitalists themselves to set up a whole governmental department to look into the products marketed by members of N.A.M., in order to give some measure of assurance to a suspicious public that arsenic will be kept out of toothpaste, that horse-meat will not be sold as beef, that vermin and rats and filth will not be used to season canned soup, that chalk will not be advertised as flour. We suspect, however, that the kind of faith they really want to recapture and cultivate is that which leads a poor sucker to buy watered-down, flavored alcohol as a cure for cancer, or pink water at 69¢ a pint for antiseptic uses, or perfumed machine-oil to restore lost hair.
What hurts N.A.M. is that the system of free enterprise in America is not being talked up in the schools as it should. Now, for our side, we say we have absolutely no objection to taking a scalpel to this famous free enterprise and. in the bright light of day – every day – dismembering it with care and scientific precision, provided when we get down to Hopson and Whitney and Insull we can hold them up in their reeking nakedness for all the students to see.  
Home Work for the Manufacturers
Let it not be supposed, however, that the individual manufacturers are being let off easy by N.A.M. Dear me, no! They have a series of duties to perform. Each manufacturer “should read in full any book which seems of questionable merit.” Since this means all the best books on social science written in the last two decades, this phase of organizational activity in itself ought to cut the ranks of the Association by about 50%, putting half its membership into institutions for the mentally injured. Every member of the Association is further urged to “get in close touch with school boards and individual teachers,” the closeness to the boards amounting, we suspect, to complete identity.
The final organizational directive is most subtle of all: N.A.M. members are to “encourage educators to realize the merit of the private enterprise system.” Or else! What visions of persecutions and purgings, of private examinations, of classroom spyings, of bribes and threats! N.A.M. knows its power, and that power came in a flood of gold from all the billions of lies told on all the millions of billboards in America. There lies the sole educational instrument N.A.M. knows and can appreciate; it brings in dividends.
In 1815, after reaction had caught up temporarily with the great French Revolution, the Pope issued orders to tear down the street-lighting system introduced into Rome by the Napoleonic regime, to rip up the botanical gardens planted there in the interest of science, to burn and tear and cut out every index of progress to be found in the city. These things were done, and now we laugh at them. We know when we look at the past that history never marches backward. We sometimes forget that, when we look at our crazy contemporaries.
 







“THE CASE OF THE 166 WOBBLIES”
Sentenced to jail in United States Penitentiaries in August, 1918
Twenty-nine members of the Socialist Workers Party and of Motor Transport and Allied Workers, Local 544-CIO, are today awaiting trial in St. Paul on an indictment brought against them by the Department of Justice at the instigation of the warmongering national administration and some of the reactionary leaders of the American Federation of Labor. The developments in this Minnesota case bring strikingly to mind many of the similar circumstances surrounding the famous case reviewed below.
“We are not criminals and not in prison because we committed crimes or conspired to commit them. From the beginning justice has been denied us and the truth of our case withheld from consideration of the public ... We are working men, conscious of our position in society and guilty only of championing the cause of the class to which we belong ... Our imprisonment was the starting-point of the open-shop drive of the movement toward establishing the Industrial Court, the Landis Award, and the recent wage-cut, union wrecking campaign of the militant employing class ... Liberty is sweet to any man in prison, but not sweet enough to us to be purchased at the price of principle.”
– Open Letter to President Harding, signed in
August 1922 by 52 I.W.W. defendants at Leavenworth
 Penitentiary, refusing to apply for individual amnesty




Background of the Case
President Wilson and the Congress of the United States had declared ,war on Germany. “Civil peace” was necessary, and that meant terrorizing the working class into acceptance of the war regime.
At the same time shrewd little Samuel Gompers, boss of the AFL, pledged his organization to 100% support of the war and rushed to Attorney-General Palmer of the Department of Justice with a proposition: Smash the I.W.W.
Gompers had tried vainly for years to combat the fighting philosophy of industrial unionism. Here was his chance to get rid of a rival and build himself up as a war-mongering “patriot”.
Palmer agreed, and a wave of Department of Justice assaults began, aimed primarily at the I.W.W. but hitting an untold number of militant workers belonging to other organizations or simply fighting for decent working conditions.
The climax came on September 5, 1917, when, in more than 50 cities, Department of Justice men invaded I.W.W. headquarters and the homes of individuals with warrants which the courts later declared “void and illegal”, and confiscated “several thousand pounds” of printed material. A few days later 166 members of the I.W.W. were arrested and on September 28 indicted for “criminal conspiracy”.
 
The Indictment
The indictment contained five counts, charging the defendants with having:

“unlawfully and feloniously conspired, combined, confederated and agreed together ... by force to prevent, hinder and delay the execution” of laws covering the the Selective Service Act, the Espionage Act, the act declaring a state of war against Germany, certain war-time appropriation bills and sections of the Penal Code;
 
conspired to “injure, oppress, threaten, and intimidate a great number of citizens of the U.S.” (employers of labor) in the free exercise of their right to profiteer on sales of war supplies to the government;
 
attempted to induce 10,000 draft eligibles (not one was ever named or brought into court to testify!) not to register and to persuade 5,000 draftees (nobody ever saw one of these either) to desert;
 
conspired to “cause insubordination, disloyalty and refusal of duty” in the armed forces of the U.S. in a time of war;
 
conspired to execute a “certain scheme and artifice to defraud the employers of labor” by mailing propaganda materials (2,020 crimes – one for each piece mailed!).

17,020 crimes were charged against each one of the 166 defendants!
 
The Trials
Trials of the 166 I.W.W.’s took place in the .Federal Courts of Chicago, Sacramento, Wichita, Omaha and San Diego, the largest number (113) going before a jury in the court of Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis in Chicago.
In Sacramento the defendants, in protest against an obvious frame-up, refused to defend themselves, remaining mute while witness after witness poured out perjured testimony. Their silence was broken only once when, upon hearing sentence read, they arose and sang the International.
At Chicago, the trial displayed every evil and farcical aspect of a political frame-up. It began in April 1918 and continued for five months. Defense witnesses were intimidated and arrested for admitting membership in the I.W.W. The newspapers wallowed in lurid stories of I.W.W. “crimes”. A bomb went off mysteriously in the Federal Court House itself. Influential people concerned with the defense were told “in secrecy” that the Departrnent of Justice was in possession of evidence against the defendants “too important to be presented at the trial.”
Washington interceded early in the case and set the tone for the trial. The first prosecutor was removed and supplanted by a hand-picked agent of Palmer. The first jury, upon suggestion of the Department of Justice, was summarily dismissed before completed and a new one of “better” composition selected.
Although the prisoners were theoretically on trial as individuals and not as members of an organization (the U.S. Department of Labor itself having found the I.W.W. to be a legal organization devoted to economic ends), every shred of evidence submitted dealt with the program and policies pf the I.W.W. Judge Landis justified this procedure by claiming that the documents indicated the “frame of mind” of the defendants.
It was proven that the I.W.W. had conducted strikes; that it had sent $3,000 in strike relief to Bisbee, Arizona; that a pamphlet by Pouget entitled Sabotage had been circulated; that one of the organizers had suggested “a general strike” in defense against vigilante and government terror; that Bill Haywood had authorized a strike by telegram; that the defendants were almost all members of the I.W.W.
The fifth count of the indictment was stricken out at the opening of the trial and the other four were completely ignored so far as proof of guilt was concerned.
Two prisoners (one an Oxford graduate) went insane as a result of torture; one died before the trials began.
 
The Defense
The General Defense Committee of the I.W.W. had to face as vicious a battle outside as the defendants did inside the courts. Mail from its headquarters was arbitrarily marked “Nixie IWW” and confiscated without warning or explanation. The express companies were persuaded to refuse to handle defense literature shipments.
On December 17, 1917, U.S. marshals and detectives invaded Defense Committee headquarters and occupied them for 12 days. When, at the end of that time, a court order commanded their withdrawal, they left in a ten-ton truck loaded with defense literature, envelopes, collection blanks and even a considerable – and to the Defense Committee, valuable – quantity of blank paper. But the Defense Committee persisted and succeeded in raising a magnificent defense fund.
 
Sentences
The Sacramento defendants were all found guilty and given heavy jail sentences. Some of the defendants in other cities were dismissed.
In Chicago, the case went to the jury on August 17, 1918. The twelve “good men and true” examined the 15,000 documents introduced by both sides as well the the 40,000-page record – and returned in 25 minutes with a verdict of “guilty on all counts”.
On August 30, Judge Landis passed sentence. Like sledgehammer blows came the terms: 20 years, 10 years, 20 years, 5 years, 20 years, 1 year, 20 years, 10 years – an aggregate of 878 years in jail for all the Chicago defendants!
Two prisoners – each having received the minimum of 1 year and 1 day – muttered in protest against the ghastly terms meted out to their comrades. Whereupon Judge Landies summarily changed their sentences to 20 years each. “The U.S. has seen fit to make me the judge in this case,” was his retort to the storm of indignation raised by this action.
The defense promptly entered a motion for appeal. The judge countered with a speed equalled only by his brazenness and slapped fines ranging from $5,000 to $20,000 on the prisoners – a sum, with court costs, totalling $2,570,000! – and cancelled bail pending the appeal.
 
Subsequent Development of the Case
On July 28, 1919, Bill Haywood was granted bail and bonded out, leaving the country for the U.S.S.R. where he remained until his death.
The case was appealed to the Federal Circuit Court and on December 9, 1920, the sentences and fines on Counts I and II were struck out although a new trial was denied. In the same year, 44 convictions were reversed and the misconduct of the public prosecutor and Judge Landis denounced by the higher courts.
In April, 1921, the U.S. Supreme Court denied a plea for a new trial.
Most of the prisoners served from 4 to 5 years until released by a general post-war amnesty extended to political prisoners and C.O.’s.
 
The Question of Individual Amnesty
As a move to break the morale and solidarity of the I.W.W. prisoners, President Harding in 1922 offered them freedom if they petitioned him individually. The prisoners at Leavenworth Penitentiary consulted among themselves. Sixteen of them capitulated; three others, all dying of tuberculosis, were reluctantly persuaded to request amnesty on the grounds of health; the 52 remaining prisoners drew up and submitted to President Harding an Open Letter explaining why they disdained his offer.
They denied they were criminals and declared that, having been condemned as an organization and not as individuals, they would remain in jail until all could leave together. Four concepts, they said, were sacred to them and could not be denied:

the class struggle;
 
the international solidarity of labor;
 
the criticism of the so-called “rights of private property”;
 
the conviction that wars “are largely the result of capitalist intrigues for plunder and spheres of influence”.
 

Their reply was a long one and at the end it turned from President Harding, president of the plutocracy, to the class which knew that 166 men had served long sentences in jail and some had died because the class struggle was their first thought and first devotion:
“To those who know the truth, we say: ‘Go, traveller, to Sparta, and say that we lie here on the spot at which we were stationed to defend our country.’”
 







EUGENE V. DEBS
Sentenced to ten years in the Federal penitentiary at Cleveland, Ohio, on September 14, 1918
“They are trying to send us to prison for speaking our minds. Very well, let them. I tell you that if it had not been for men and women who in the past have had the moral courage to go to prison, we would still be in the jungles.
“No, I am not opposed to all war, nor am I opposed to fighting under all circumstances, and any declaration to the contrary would disqualify me as a revolutionist ...
“I am opposed to every war but one; I am for that war with heart and soul and that is the world-wide war of the social revolution. In that war I am prepared to fight in any way the ruling class may make it necessary, even to barricades.”
– From the Speeches of Eugene V. Debs





Background of the Case
In June, 1917, the St. Louis convention of the Socialist Party of America adopted a famous declaration in which the World War was denounced as an imperialist venture and the international solidarity of the working class in opposition to the war was proclaimed. Many militants in the Socialist Party and the Industrial Workers of the World carried on agitation against the capitalist war.
Eugene Victor Debs, one of the founders of the IWW and the most prominent member of the Socialist Party, devoted himself tirelessly to the propagation of the ideas of the St. Louis Declaration. “When capitalists declare war,” he said, “it is then for us to declare war on them ... and fight every battle for the overthrow of the ruling class.”
 
The Canton Speech
On June 16, 1918, at the Ohio State Convention of the Socialist Party, Debs spoke in the City of Canton. He reiterated his opposition to the war, declared his solidarity with the Russian Bolsheviks, and was arrested and charged with treason under the Espionage Law of June 15, 1917. He delivered his now famous speech immediately after having visited a number of his comrades, held in jail for speaking out as he did against the mass slaughter of workers for profit. Thinking of them, he said,
“I may not be able to say all I think, but I am not going to say anything I do not think. And I would rather a thousand times be a free soul in jail than a sycophant or coward on the streets. They may put those boys in jail and some of the rest of us in jail, but they cannot put the Socialist movement in jail. Those prison bars separate their bodies from ours, but their souls are here this afternoon. They are simply paying the penalty that all men have paid in all the ages of history for standing erect and seeking to pave the way for better conditions for mankind.
“They who are animated with the unconquerable spirit of the Social Revolution, they who have the moral courage to stand erect, to assert their convictions, to stand by them, to go to jail or hell for them – they are writing their “names In this crucial hour, they are writing their names in fadeless letters in the history of mankind ...
“In all the history of the world, you, the people, have never had a voice in declaring war, and strange as it certainly appears, no war by any nation in any age has ever been declared by the people.
“Wars throughout history have been waged for conquest and power. The strong have always tried to rob the weak. The masters have always declared war. They never did any of the fighting; they have always sent the workers to fight for them.
“The masters alone declare war and they alone make peace. They have everything to gain and nothing to lose. You, the workers, have nothing to gain and everything to lose – especially your lives ...”
 
The Trial
In Cleveland on September 9, 1918, Eugene V. Debs went to trial in the court of Judge D.C. Westenhaver on a charge of treason. The case of the Federal government was based entirely upon statements made by Debs in his speech at Canton, Ohio, recorded by a government agent stationed in the crowd.
Debs delivered the plea to the jury himself.
“When great changes occur in history,” he said to the jury, “when great principles are involved, as a rule the majority are wrong. The minority are usually right. In every age there have been a few heroic souls who have been in advance of their time, who have been misunderstood, maligned, persecuted, sometimes put to death. Long after their martyrdom monuments were erected to them and garlands woven for their graves.
“I cannot take back a word I have said. I cannot repudiate a sentence I have uttered. I stand before you guilty of having made this speech. I do not know, I cannot tell, what your verdict may be, nor does it matter much, so far as I am concerned ...
“Revolutions have a habit of succeeding, when the time comes for them ... The most heroic word in all languages is Revolution.”
On September 14, he was sentenced to ten years in the Federal penitentiary. Taking advantage of his right to make a final plea to the court he said:
“Years ago I recognized my kinship with all living things, and I made up my mind that I was not one bit better then the meanest of the earth. I said then, and I say now, that while there is a lower class, I am in it; while there is a criminal element, I am of it; while there is a soul in prison, I am not free.”
His lawyer’s immediately appealed to the Supreme Court and Debs was released on bond and allowed to await the decision of the higher court at his home in Terre-Haute, Indiana.
 
The Supreme Court Decision
On March 10, 1919, prosecutor Wertz telephoned. Debs at his home and informed him that the Supreme Court had upheld the decision of the lower court – with the concurrence of the liberals Holmes and Brandeis. Debs, 65 years old and suffering from heart disease, packed his bag and took the train for Cleveland, to surrender to the Federal police.
“The decision is perfectly consistent with the character of the Supreme Court as a ruling class tribunal,” he said.
“Great issues, are not decided by the courts, but by the people. I have no concern in what the coterie of begowned corporation lawyers in Washington may decide in my case. The court of final resort is the people, and that court will be heard from in due time.”
It was on April 19, 1919, five months after the World War had ended, that Debs entered Moundsville jail in West Virginia, since the Federal jails were too crowded with political prisoners to accommodate him. He was later transferred to the penitentiary at Atlanta.
 
Candidacy from Jail
In the elections of 1920, Debs was nominated to run as a candidate for the presidency of the United States from behind prison bars. Appealing to the working masses of the country from behind the locked doors of his cell, he polled the imposing total of 919,799 votes.
Once during his term he was offered a pardon on condition that he recant. He declined the offer and said to would wait until he could leave jail without having to violate his principles.
 
Commutation
Two years and nine months after he had entered prison, Debs was pardoned and on December 25, 1921, he left Atlanta on his own terms, having repudiated none of his ideas and none of his words. His health was broken, but that great spirit, which set him apart as the kind of man who would “go to jail or to hell” for his revolutionary principles, was untouched and unblemished.
“I am not a capitalist soldier; I am a proletarian revolutionist. I do not belong to the regular army of the plutocracy but to the irregular army of the people. I refuse to obey any command to fight for the ruling class, but I will not wait to be commanded to fight for the working class.”
That was Gene Debs.
 







NICOLA SACCO    BARTOLOMEO VANZETTI
Electrocuted by the State of Massachusetts on
August 22, 1927, at midnight
Statements made by the prisoners upon hearing the death sentence pronounced against them by judge Thayer on April 9, 1927:




SACCO:
“I know the sentence will be between two classes, the oppressed class and the rich class and there will always be collision between one and the other. We fraternize the people with the books, with the literature. You persecute the people, tyrannize them and kill them. We try the education of people always. You try to put a path between us and some other nationality that hates each other. That’s why I am here today on this bench, for having been of the oppressed class. Well, you are the oppressor!”


 


VANZETTI:
“If it had not been for these thing, I might have live out my life talking at street corners to scorning men. I might have die, uhonored, unknown, a failure. Now we are not a failure. This is our career and our triumph. Never in our full life could we hope to do such work for tolerance, for justice, for man’s understanding of man as now we do by accident. Our words – our lives – our pains – nothing! The taking of our lives – lives of a good shoemaker and a poor fish peddler – all! That last moment belongs to us – that agony is our triumph!”





Background of the Case:
At the end of World War I, upon the demobilization of the AEF, a crisis hit American economy. Unemployment and starvation led first to panic and then to unrest among the workers. To crush the rebellious spirit of the masses, the federal government launched a vicious assault upon trade unions and radical organizations and especially against those foreign-born workers who had militant influence among the unskilled in the basic industries of the country. Headquarters were wrecked, meetings broken up, homes raided, workers mercilessly beaten and subjected to “third-degree” tortures. This brutal period is known in labor history as the time of the Palmer raids, named for the then Attorney-General of the United States.
Among the victims of this attack was an Italian immigrant, Andrea Salsedo, whose body hurtled fourteen stories to a New York pavement on May 3, 1920, after a “third degree” questioning by the police. The crime aroused Italian workers in every city. In the neighborhood of Boston, two friends of Salsedo’s, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, prepared to conduct an investigation into Salsedo’s violent death and to urge their comrades to protect themselves against similar outrages.
 
Basis of the Frameup:
Oh December 24, 1919, at Bridgewater, Massachusetts, a payroll holdup was attempted by a gang of bandits driving a Buick car.
On April 15, 1920, at South Braintree, Massachusetts, a successful payroll robbery resulted in the fatal shooting of Frederick A. Parmeniter, paymaster, and Alexander Berardelli, guard, for the Slater and Morrill shoe plant. This holdup was also conducted by a gang using a car for their get-away.
 
The Arrest:
On May 5, 1920, Sacco and Vanzetti were arrested as they rode on a streetcar in Brockton, Massachusetts, on their way to the homes of some f their Italian comrades to organize a meeting of protest against the terror which had resulted in Salsedo’s death. Each of them carried a gun, a practice which the nature of their work had demanded for many years. Their first reaction to the crude questioning of the detectives was to protect the identity of those associated with them in the arrangements of the meeting. Believing that they were being arrested for a political crime, they lied about their destination and purposes. When these statements were proven false, the behavior of the men was entered into the court as “consciousness of guilt” and their explanations entirely disregarded.
They admitted having tried to borrow a friend’s Buick car, which happened to resemble the one used in the South Braintree crime. This car, the “consciousness of guilt,” and the “foreign” appeara’rice and behavior of the men constituted the bulk of the case against them.
 
The Victims:
Nicola Sacco was a skilled shoe-worker, active in union organization among his fellow-workers.
Bartolomeo Vanzetti was a fish peddler, seriously devoted to the radical education and organization of Italian workers. He was an avid student of revolutionary philosophy.
 
The Trials:
Vanzetti was rushed to trial for complicity in the robbery at Bridgewater. He was bewildered at the conduct of the trial and was foolishly not permitted by his attorney to testify in his own defense. Witnesses offered perjured testimony for the prosecution; the testimony of nine witnesses who testified to having bought eels from Vanzetti miles from Bridgewater on the day of the crime was disregarded. The court was viciously anti-radical and anti-alien; conviction with a fifteen-year jail sentence resulted.
Later developments made it clear that this conviction on a lesser charge was secured in order to establish a “criminal record” for the more important of the two prisoners when the Braintree case came to trial.
Indictments against the two prisoners in the payroll murders at South Braintree were brought on September 14, 1920. From May 31 to July 14, 1921, the farce of this notorious trial went on before Judge Webster Thayer at Dedham, Massachusetts.
Visitors to the courtroom were searched. Bomb scares were thrown out. “Witnesses” for the prosecution poured out fantastic and obviously perjured testimony Witnesses for the defense were terrorized and fired from their jobs after testifying. Snobbery and hatred of the foreign-born and the “agitator” thickened the atmosphere. The prejudice of Judge Thayer appalled even his reactionary associates.
After five hours’ deliberation of the mountainous record of testimony, cross-questioning and debate, the jury returned a verdict of guilty and sentenced the two men to death in the electric chair.
 
The Seven-Year Defense:
The more alert organizations of the working class – militant trade unions and radical political parties – sensed at once that this case was something beyond the simple framing of two Italian workers; that it was an act of terror on the part of the bourgeois state against the working class.
The liberal American bourgeoisie was horrified at the crass misconduct of the case. It organized for the defense of two unfortunate Italians.
Two defense committees launched their campaigns: the Sacco-Vanzetti Defense Committee, composed of indignant liberals with Eugene Lyons as secretary; and the International Labor Defense, with James P. Cannon as secretary.
The Defense Committee oriented itself on the court record. It publicized the flagrant errors and evidences of prejudices on the part of judge, specialists, and witnesses. It sought to force a reversal by legalistic maneuverings and indignant speeches.
The International Labor Defense, on the other hand, played every legalistic angle to its limit and went further. It handled the case as an encounter in the class war: the capitalist state vs. the working class.
The Defense Committee compiled a long list of impressive names of intelligent, highly respected people of means and social station who considered the conviction a miscarriage of American justice. They fired the attorney for the men – a fighting westerner connected with a number of I.W.W. cases. To them his presence in court was an affront to the culture and dignity of Judge Thayer. He was replaced by a man whose cultural background did not clash with the judge’s.
The I.L.D. fought with revolutionary vigor. Street demonstrations were organized not only in every American industrial center but in every city were there was an organized proletariat. Moscow, London, Berlin, Paris, Vienna, Canton, Shanghai, Rio de Janeiro, Sydney – all of these and more shook with demonstrations against American class justice. In Paris, the proletariat threatened to take the American consulate building apart brick by brick. The names of Sacco and Vanzetti became the tocsin of an aroused working class fighting the bourgeois state.
For seven years the fight raged. Motions for a new trial were denied; higher courts of the State of Massachusetts upheld their Judge Thayer; Governor Alvan T. Fuller reviewed the case and stood behind his class brother, denying a pardon. The liberals on the U.S. Supreme Court bench, expressing a cowardly sympathy with the defendants, refused to stick their necks out and move to review the case.
 
The Counter-Campaign of the Bourgeoisie:
The ruling class was frightened.
It resorted as always to terror and further frameup. Black-jacks and night sticks, even tear-gas, then relatively untested in civilian disorders) were given a good work-out on the demonstrators.
Mysterious, unexploded bombs were “discovered” under circumstances that cast a shadow on militant workers. “Anarchists” and “bolsheviks” were uncovered in very alley. Sacco and Vanzetti were almost forgotten and the assault of the state went directly where it was intended – to the organized working class.
Almost two years before the execution, a fellow prisoner, Celestino F. Madeiro, confessed to Vanzetti and the police that he had been involved in the South Braintree murders. He swore that neither Sacco nor Vanzetti was implicated and although he declined to name any of the participants, the police were able to identify them as members of a certain Morelli gang which operated in the neighborhood of Boston. Despite this spectacular turn in the case, a new trial was denied and Maeleiros died in the electric chair with Sacco and Vanzetti.
 
The Execution:
Twice, the fury of an aroused working class forced the State of Massachusetts to grant a reprieve, once to the week of August 10 and again to August 22, 1927.
A wild hope surged in the breast of the proletariat. Its sense of power and determination to fight grew. For a while it forgot that the bourgeois state was still on top and believed that the two symbols of working class strength and revenge might be released.
The world-wide demonstrations for the two men were climaxed in a magnificent wave on the night of August 22. Tens of thousands of demonstrators milled through the streets of the citadels of capitalism, waiting for midnight. The police were apprehensive. At 12:19 the news flashed that Sacco was dead. Five minutes of stunned silence gripped the masses of waiting workers until word came that Vanzetti too had been burned to death by the class enemy. The silence broke in a torrent of rage and a bitter resolve that the names of the two great martyrs of labor must be inscribed on the red banners under which the working class marches to its final victory.
 




According to a London dispatch of October 19, 1,500 delegates to a convention of the Engineering and Allied Trades Shop Stewards have issued a memorandum to Prime Minister Churchill demanding the immediate opening of a “western front” and a reorganization of British industry in order to facilitate aid to the Soviet Union. This organization claims a following of 500,000 workers in shipyards, steel plants and tank, truck, aircraft, gun and ammunition factories but it is not affiliated to the Trades Union Congress. The text of the memorandum clearly indicates that this body is Stalinist inspired.
The Memorandum is a shock to anyone interested in the genuine defense of the Soviet Union, and the welfare of the British working class.
Four months after the invasion of the Soviet Union by Nazi forces – at a time when Hitler pounds at the gates of Moscow – at a time when one would feel there must be an end to begging and crawling at the feet of the British ruling class, the British Stalinists speak up. And what do they say?
The memorandum deplores the failure of the British army to launch an offensive at Hitler’s rear. One could expect that four months would be enough to convince even the blindest of Stalin’s followers that the British ruling class has no stake in the victory of the Red Army over Hitler’s troops. Churchill and Co. want nothing beyond the weakening and destruction, of both Hitler and the Soviet Union.
Yet this Stalinist-inspired document strives to pin blame upon a section of the imperialist ruling caste of Great Britain while in effect exonerating the rest. It discovers that the “presence of the Halifaxes, Moore-Brabazons and Margessons is the reason why there is no second front.”
When will the Stalinist rank and file realize that the voice of reaction is the genuine voice of the rulers of the British Empire? After it is too late to save the Soviet Union? The Halifaxes and Moore-Brabazons will always be welcome guests at the state functions of imperialist Britain; the proletariat will never be invited.
 
Winning Workers’ Confidence – For the War
“Once the political confidence of the British workmen has been won,” continues the memorandum, “they would display an initiative, drive and energy that would increase the production of this country to an unparalleled extent.” One can hardly believe one’s eyes in reading these monstrous words. If they have any meaning at all, they mean that the Stalinists are ready to pay any price in return for so much as a promise to open up a “western front.” They pledge themselves not only to suspend the class struggle for the duration of war. not only to reject and oppose all struggle for the political independence of the British working class, but to rally to the side of the British imperialists and help them conquer “the political confidence of British workmen.”
Nor is that all. They promise Churchill such a conquest of “political confidence” as would unleash – for the imperialist slaughter! – “initiative, drive and energy that would increase the production ... to an unparalleled extent.”
 
Setting a “Personal Example”
Still more, the British government, as is well known, has yet to prove itself worthy of any confidence on the part of the masses of England. The Stalinists know this, they even complain about it not only in England but in the United States. Nowhere do they so much as imply that they intend to use even the threat of organized protest, of strikes, of any show of political and economic pressure upon the imperialists. No, they pledge in advance to curb the British working class. They are ready to leave the decision solely to the “good will” of Churchill and Co. Here is their pledge:
“Council members were told to do everything in their power by personal example to attain a threefold objective: namely, to assure for Britain a single plan for war production, the opening of a second front and the strengthening of the government so as to remove all existing doubts.” (Our emphasis)
And, as if this pledge were not sufficient, they guarantee to help the British imperialists bind the workers hand and foot in advance of any promise by Churchill to open a “western front.”
It is “no longer enough to discuss the waste, mismanagement and mistakes of the present methods of control and direction of production, but rather that men should apply themselves to the task of doing a better job.”
This cry for a “western front,” for which the Stalinists are ready to pay such a price, – not only in England, but in America and elsewhere – is only the latest of a series of panaceas which the Kremlin in its panic has been circulating.
Stalin began by promising that Hitler would suffer the fate of Napoleon. Then, it was the Soviet guerrillas that would halt the German advance. Next the idea was circulated that the advances of Hitler’s army were really a devilishly clever trap set up by Kremlin. Stalin’s “bait” for this trap was – the vast areas of Soviet territory. Hitler, you see, would bleed to death by penetrating deeper and deeper into the heart of the USSR. Now that Hitler’s armies are battering at the very gates of the Kremlin itself, Stalin has discovered a new panacea – a “western front.”
The tragic thing is that under the spell of the old hypnosis – that is to say, their failure to distinguish between the Soviet Union and Stalinism – many workers still drag helplessly at Stalin’s heels hoping against hope for miracles.
Stalin, the organizer of one defeat after another – for the USSR and for the world working class – is now telling his last lies, among them the lie that a “western front” will save the Soviet Union.
No bourgeois government will ever open a “western front” against Hitler for the purpose of saving the first workers state. Such a front, if and when opened by the “democratic” imperialists, would be designed to serve their interests and not to rescue the beleaguered Red Army. Only the international working class, acting independently of all capitalist political parties and conducting a struggle against the imperialist war, can or will open a front in the west – a class front – against imperialist reaction. That is the only real defense of the Soviet Union. The real “western front” Is this class front. Open up this front, open up the fight for the Socialist United States of Europe, of the Americas, of the world – and the Soviet Union is saved!
 




THOMAS J. MOONEY
WARREN K. BILLINGS
Sentenced at San Francisco in Jan. 1917 to death for Mooney
and life imprisonment for Billings.
* * *
Background of the Case
In July 1916, the United States verged on war. Wilson had been re-elected to the presidency on a pacifist program, but the American invasion of Mexico to protect American oil interests indicated the actual tendencies of the administration. Feeling for and against war naturally expressed itself strongly in class terms: strikes and lockouts; open-shop drives; flourishing business for strike-breaking agencies. The “American Plan” – a fancy term for a national open-shop policy – was pushed by boss agencies.
San Francisco was the scene of a labor upsurge. Strikes tied up the waterfront,, restaurants, automobile machine shops. The Chamber of Commerce at once raised the “Red” issue and a howl went up for an assault upon labor unionism. This howl emanated loudest from the mouths of the owners of United Railroads –  controllers of San Francisco traffic – and allied electric-power interests, among whose employees a campaign of union organization was going forward.
Charles M. Fickert, a profane, obscene, vicious ignoramus whose Stanford University associations had enabled him to advance from strike-breaking in the San Francisco trucking industry to the California bar, was put into office as public prosecutor by United Railroad money.
A 33-year-old left-wing labor organizer, Thomas J. Mooney, and his automobile-mechanic friend, Warren K. Billings, were militantly engaged in the organization of United Railroad’s street car employees. By July 1916, they had staged one abortive strike in their campaign.
On July 10, the San Francisco Chamber of Commerce held a notorious meeting to lay out a strategy which would smash unionism in the city. Captain Robert Dollar here delivered himself of the guiding slogan to symbolize the “noble” work: “If a law-abiding working-man is beaten up, then beat up two strikers!”
Aroused to a fever of enthusiasm by such talk, the bosses at the meeting voted to raise $1,000,000 for the cause of anti-unionism. A spectacular aspect of the plan, was to be a “Preparedness Day Parade.”
 
Basis of the Frame-Up
July 22 was chosen for the great pro-war, anti-labor parade. The provocative nature of this demonstration was recognized by everyone in the city. Liberals condemned it for its “militaristic” import; the labor unions unanimously denounced it as air “open-shop parade.” Business clubs, veterans’ organizations; some non-union workers and the jingoistic public officials joined the Chamber of Commerce in support of it.
Great tension and feverish excitement were whooped up and developed to a point of mass hysteria by the day of the parade. In the two weeks preceding July 22, more than 200 notes – all written by the same obviously demented person – were received by various individuals, threatening disaster and violence if the parade were held. No attempt to find the writer was made by the police.
At 1:30 p.m. the parade swung out of the Embarcadero into Market Street. At 2:06, a bomb went off at Market and Steuart Streets, killing 10 people (6 outright) and injuring 40, including on-lookers as well as paraders. The bomb was evidently a homemade instrument, of relatively small force (as bombs go), but its actual composition could never be determined, for, at 3:30, the police turned a fire hose on the street and sluiced down the sewers every speck of material evidence experts might have used to establish the origin of the bomb.
 
The Arrests
A certain Martin Swanson, ex-Pinkerton man employed at the time of the bomb outrage as private detective for the United Railroads, had for some time had Mooney and Billings constantly shadowed. On the 23rd of July Swanson appeared at Fickert’s office and was hired, as a special investigator on the Preparedness Day case.
Immediately the tone of the horror stories about the bombing took on a new tone. “Anarchists,” “fanatics,” “labor terrorists” began to be featured. A huge reward was offered for the one who could do most to stop “anarchy.” After several days of well-planned anti-labor hysteria-rousing, three arrests were made and it was announced that Mooney and his wife, also sought for arrest, had fled.
The arrested were Edward Nolan and Israel Weinberg, both friends of Mooney and associates in his labor activities, and Warren K. Billings, who was arrested at Lane Hospital, where Swanson knew he had an appointment (for treatment for a minor ailment). None of the arrested offered any resistance. All were held incommunicado.
Mooney and his wife, on vacation at Montesano, California, read of their having “fled arrest” as they were rowing on a river. Still dressed in bathing suits, they walked to the nearest telegraph office and wired the San Francisco chief of police of their return by the first available train. Upon their arrival in the City they were arrested without warrants and also held incommunicado.
 
The Trials
On August 2, an indictment for nine murders each was brought against the prisoners. The trial was set for six weeks later. The newspapers increased their howl against “labor terrorists” and “anarchists,” remembering suddenly that Mooney had once written an article for an anarchist paper, The Blast.
Billings was brought to trial first. It was expected that conviction in his case would hasten conviction for Mooney. Billings had once before been put on trial for having allegedly transported explosives on a public conveyance and had been convicted; this record was held against him now. A string of “fixed” witnesses was brought to testify; but the prosecutor, mistrusting his own case, did not ask for death although the charge was serious enough to warrant his doing so. The jury, after a few hours’ deliberation, returned a verdict of guilty, ano Billings was sentenced to life imprisonment.
Mooney’s trial began on January 3, 1917. The prosecutor, determined to get a death sentence for his prisoner, spent a good deal of time and energy building his case. A fantastic theory was concocted, involving the moving of Weinberg’s taxi loaded with five persons and a suitcase full of dynamite against the stream of the parade for three-quarters of a mile, the placing of the suitcase against a wall and the rapid escape of all five criminals through a dense mass of humanity.
Although it was obvious from the testimony presented by the prosecution that every move of the two important prisoners was known to Swanson and Fickert, not one single detective took the stand to testify to the whereabouts of the men on the day of the bomb outrage.
Not only was the testimony of the witnesses for the prosecution mutually contradictory in many instances, but the people themselves who appeared to do their bit for Fickert and the Chamber of Commerce were an amazing lot: a prostitute, a convicted perjurer; the unbalanced inmate of a charity lodging house who died later with $83,000 on his person; two religious maniacs with a “gift-of-tongues”; a syphilitic convicted wife deserter; and a weak-minded derelict who was later condemned by another court as a “psychopathic liar.”
The cream of the crop, however, and the star witness for the state, was one Frank C. Oxman, an “honest Oregon cattleman” whose wide-open weather-beaten countenance and homely drawl seemed the very essence of unimpeachable integrity. He claimed he not only saw Mooney and Billings and the rest, get out of a taxi and place a suitcase against the wall of a building, but he even – with a foresight evidently peculiar to Oregon cattlemen – took the license number of the taxi; it was, “of course”, Weinberg’s car!
Oxman’s testimony cinched the ease. The jury took it and shortly returned with a verdict of guilty punishable by death by hanging.
Hardly had the echo of the sentence died when Oxman was disclosed as a perjurer of the highest order. Not only had he not seen the bombing, but he had been actually in Woodland, California until nine minutes after the explosion occurred. He had done his best to persuade a friend to perjure himself by substantiating his story but the friend had declined. It was this friend’s horror at the verdict that made him denounce Oxman. The labor unions of Illinois (where the friend lived) took up the fight to disclose Oxman’s criminality and led the fight to have the man tried and convicted of subornation of perjury and perjury.
Rena Mooney, Nolan and Weinberg were released finally after spending a year or more in prison without having been convicted.
 
World Protest
Now began the twenty-one-year straggle of organized labor in every part of the world to open the jail, door for Mooney and Billings. So loud and demonstrative a protest rose immediately upon the convictions that first the governor of California was forced to issue a reprieve of Mooney’s death sentence from October to December 13, 1918 and later to commute the sentence to life imprisonment.
President Wilson was forced to intercede for clemency since the case had, as he put it, “assumed an international importance.” Two government commissions were appointed to review the case and each reported that the evidence did not warrant conviction. All attempts on the part of the defense to have the case reversed or to effect a pardon met with failure. As in the Sacco and Vanzetti cases to follow, the bourgeois state machine was stubborn in its determination not to permit labor to win a victory.
 
The Pardons
By 1938 the Mooney-Billings case had become so outstanding an issue that the gubernatorial elections in California featured promises made by the candidates concerning their behavior toward the two famous prisoners if they were elected. Culbert L. Olson, who was elected, had promised that the release of American labor’s two most famous living prisoners would be one of his first administrative acts. On January 7, 1939, Mooney left his prison cell, followed on October 17, by his fellow worker, Billings.
Thus did Mooney and Billings, victims of the anti-labor, pro-war bosses in World War I, finally gain their freedom on the eve of World War II.
 

