


Wall Street and The City (London banking center) wish to rule Italy but greatly fear the intervention of the Italian people. The Italian masses overthrew Mussolini and the Allies were quick to hoist into power the Badoglio-Emmanuel regime, one notch to the left of fascism. The people would not stand for this, and the Bonomi regime, a coalition “New Deal” government, came into power.
Even this regime, trying to please the Allies, and at the same time rule Italy independently, does not satisfy the AMG. The main contradiction that besets it is the army. There exists the partisan army, composed of anti-fascist guerrilla fighters, which has been fighting vigorously against the occupying German fascists, sometimes in concert with the American armies, often independently. But it is the practice that after the Allied officers obtain information of military value from the village partisans, and the fascists are driven from the town, the partisans are disarmed and their weapons taken by the Allies. In some cases the Allies have used the stratagem of having the Committee of National Liberation take arms from the partisans. The partisans are consequently disillusioned with the Allies and bitter at the order which robs them of their weapons to fight the fascists.
The Allies, at the same time that they disarm the partisans, are keepings the regular Italian army going. This is the Royal Army, headed by monarchists and conservatives. In it are between four and five hundred ex-Mussolini army generals, of the three thousand Mussolini had. The remainder are in various administrative posts in “liberated” and unliberated Italy.
The chief of staff of the Royal Army is one Marshal Giovanni Messe, beloved of the Allies, unbeloved by even the Bonomi government, which desires to keep in Allied good graces. Messe deserves mention as having fought for fascism on the Russian front and the Tunisian front, where he was captured in a campaign against Americans and British.
The Allied policy of frustrating the ing monarcho-fascist army is diplomatically known as “non-intervention.” What the Italian masses are muttering about and shaking their heads over is the “war against fascism” of these political “non-interventionists” who supported fascists and monarchists in power, uphold the Royal Army, with its fascists in command posts and – disarm the only real and consistent fighters against fascism, the armed people!
As bluntly stated recently by Churchill, the war between fascism and the democratic capitalist powers is not an “ideological” one. That is, it is not a war of the democratic capitalist nations to destroy fascism, but a war of competitors for markets, one of the opponents happening to have a modicum of democracy because it was enriched by the spoils of the First World War. Only such an understanding can explain the problems of Italy and the policy of “expediency,” i.e., collaboration with fascist elements on the part of the Allies, which has characterized the course of the war.
 
An Italian Comment
An Italian stated the problem thus:
“England and America want Italy to solve her problems in terms of capitalism and not in terms of socialism. But Italy cannot solve her problems, except in socialist terms. Italy has neither the capital nor the capitalists to do it. You can let us rebuild Italy with American and British capital, which means we become a kind of colony. Or yon can let us rebuild it out of our own resources, which inevitably means socialism. And even then we will need help.
“The question is, to whom will the help go, the Italian people or the Italian reactionaries? That is one of the questions the American tax payer is going to have to answer for himself one of these days.”
To us, however, there is no question as to where the help from the Allies will go. It will go where it has gone in the past, to the reactionaries. A people’s government in Italy would mean the end of Allied domination, which is precisely what they don’t want. How the old socialists overlook the problems of Italy is seen in the proposal of Pietro Nenni, editor of Avanti. He would solve the problem of the reactionary Royal Army by having it simply take an oath of loyalty to the nation, as the “republican” government has done. Presto-chango! a fascist becomes a democrat.
The communists would aid the Italian people by conciliating the Pope, who sat in his pontifical silence while fascism grew on his doorstep. The ethical ends of Catholicism and communism are identical, you see.
 
The Struggle Goes On
But Bonomi, Togliatti, Nenni and the AMG cannot stop the will and resources of the Italian people, who want genuine democracy and independence from foreign domination, German and Allied. The Bonomi government is now faced with the demand of the people for publication of the full armistice terms. They can be published only with Allied permission. Bonomi and the liberals are urging a softening of the peace terms, lest his government also be toppled by the resentful people. A Liberal Party leader stated to the Allies:
“After what our Navy has done, after what our soldiers have done – and it is not a greater effort only because you wouldn’t let us do more – after what the Partisans have done and are doing, if you don’t modify the terms, as you promised you would, then we must ask ourselves what worse could have happened to Italy if she had not surrendered.”
Only unconditional democracy, unconditional independence can meet the problems and desires of the Italian people. And their realization lies, inevitably and fortunately, with the Italian people. The Italian revolution is unreeling. First, Mussolini. Then, Badoglio. Bonomi will go one of these days and, given a leadership to match their courage, the Italian masses will come into their own. The American workers have an important task: stand by the Italian masses, Italian labor!
 




A Midwestern front has been opened in the drive of big money against the poor working man. Calling themselves the Twin Cities Research Bureau, Inc., a group of big business men from Minneapolis and St. Paul has launched a tax scheme against labor for the post-war period. Their plan, which would lower corporation taxes and steepen those of working people, if adopted, will just about “research” labor out of its last dime through a brand new five per cent sales tax in addition to those already existing.
The Twin Cities Research Bureau, Inc., is a high-sounding, misleading name for companies like General Mills, Inc. (the Cream of Wheat Corporation), the Minneapolis-Honeywell Regulator Co., the Soo Line Railroad, the Minneapolis-Moline Power Implement Co., and many others worth over half a billion dollars. Their president is F.K. Weyerhaeuser, a representative of wealthy lumber interests.
 
Cooking It Up
Expense was not spared in launching this post-war plan. The Washington representative of Cowles Brothers’ Look magazine invited correspondents of the wealthy capitalist newspapers to dine on filet mignon and to wine on Scotch liquor and cocktails at the Statler Hotel. Lavishly printed explanations of the plan were given to the correspondents, along with an oral sales plea by John L. Connolly, tax expert for the Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co. of St. Paul. Press releases were printed in color.
The appealing ballyhoo for the plan was that “relatively heavy corporate incomes tax rates” must be continued after the war in order to reduce individual income taxes and to encourage venture capital. But the program proposed, in order to continue these “relatively heavy corporate income taxes,” to CUT the present rate from fifteen billion dollars a year to five billion! Two and two are five, you see. In order to maintain this high rate of corporate taxes, undoubtedly, all corporation excess profits taxes would be repealed, and all other corporate taxes except the basic forty per cent normal tax.
Individual income taxes would be reduced from seventeen billion to five billion dollars. That sounds like easing the burden of the poor. Except that the greatest easing occurs in the upper income brackets, especially among the wealthy with their dividends. Four per cent of the hard-earned gains of coupon-clippers would be exempted. How the lower bracket incomes are to be aided remains a little obscure.
 
Laying It on the Poor
While venture capital and monopolies would be freed of taxes, the plan of the “researchers” would retain the war sales taxes and throw in an additional five per cent sales tax for good measure, chiefly on those who don’t make enough now to pay income taxes.
The fathers of the plan stated: “If this two billion (to be raised by the sales tax – Ed.) or any substantial part of it is to be removed from the taxes of the low-income group on the political ground that there are more voters in that area, the free enterprise system will be seriously jeopardized.” (“Free enterprise” is what capitalists and their publicity agents call the profit system.)
All taxes would bring in an estimated total of eighteen billion dollars a year, which these business men figured would finance the government – exclusive of a new WPA and unemployment relief. Working people would contribute more than a third of these taxes.
Labor does not need a research corporation to know that business is planning for its own prosperity in such a post-war scheme – and for labor’s continued poverty. The plans of these money-mad corporations do not even foresee jobs for workers after the war. Labor should free itself now from its no-strike bonds, raise its standard of living and place the tax burden squarely on the shoulders of those who can best afford to pay it, the big corporations! Labor should demand a one hundred per cent tax on all war profits above five per cent of their invested capital!
 







The Charter’s Still Alive in Poland, Frankie?
“2. They desire to see no territorial changes that do not accord with the freely expressed wishes of the people concerned.”
And How Does This Apply to Greece, Winnie?
“3. ... They respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live; and they wish to see sovereign rights and self-government restored to those who have been forcibly deprived of them.” – From the Atlantic Charter.





Poland is a nation which has been conquered and partitioned many times.
This oft-repeated destruction of the Independence of the Poles has produced in them a strong desire for their freedom from foreign domination. It has repeatedly served to unite all Poles.
The issue over which the Second Imperialist World War broke out in September 1939 was violation of Poland’s territorial integrity, when Hitler and Stalin partitioned the country between them. England and France had treaties with Poland, shrieked to the heavens about “poor Poland,” and declared war over the outrage of Poland.
 
Flip-Flop of the Allies
It was of no moment to Russia that she had a pact with Poland, guaranteeing its independence. It said in part:
“The two contracting parties ... have renounced war as an instrument of national policy in their mutual relations ... undertake to refrain from any aggressive action against or invading the territory of the other party, separately or together with other powers.”
This treaty between Russia and Poland was signed in 1932, extended in 1934 to 1945, and remained in existence during the invasion of 1939!
And what of the Allies, who made so much of defending Poland’s integrity, who said it was because of their sacred pledge and high honor in relation to Polish guarantees that they must go to war, and who winked at the swallowing up of Austria and Czechoslovakia, but could not go back on their word in the case of Poland?
When Prime Minister Winston Churchill laid before Parliament what he termed the “grim, bare bones of the Polish question,” he was in reality exposing the “grim, ,bare bones” of the imperialist nature of war. This latest sacrifice of the independence of a partially “liberated” country on the part of one of the signers of that dead document, the Atlantic Charter, was due to the recent grab for Greece on the part of England. “You Russians can have Poland,” Churchill said in effect, “only let me have a free hand in Greece.”
Let us reveal the “grim, bare bones” of imperialist treachery to the Polish people.
When the Russians and the Nazis engulfed Poland, the Polish colonels, government leaders and men of wealth and noble position – as has been their custom in every occupied country in the course of this war – fled, leaving the Polish people, the workers, peasants and middle classes to fight their oppression.
Throughout these horrors the Polish people never ceased fighting their oppressors. The political parties, Socialists, Communists, Democrats, Christian Socialists, worked underground. Underground labor organizations sprang up under the Nazi heel. In the meanwhile, Russia changed sides when Hitler attacked her, and all Poland was over-run by the Nazis.
 
London Poles vs. Lublin Poles
The official claimant to represent the Polish people fighting in the underground was the Polish government with its seat in London. As is the custom of such leaders, it fought in armchairs and in the diplomatic offices of England. Its foremost representative has been M. Mikolaczyk, leader of the reactionary landlords’ Peasant Party.
This is the group that ruled Poland since the dictatorship was established in 1926. It reduced the Polish peasants to extreme poverty. It was slightly less brutal than the Nazis in its treatment of the Jews. It seized Teschen from the Czechs in a deal with Hitler. In truth, the London group is as anti-Russian as it is anti-democratic since it wants a Poland “independent” and intact so that it can resume the lucrative sport of milking the peasants and the working people of Poland.
The other claimant to represent the Polish people is the made-in-Moscow Lublin committee. This committee consists of fourteen members, including the usual puppet members of the Polish Communist Party, some peasant leaders, a Zionist leader and a general. The correct stamp is put on the committee by one of its star members, General Rola Zymierski. This man led the Second Polish Division against the Soviet Union when it was a genuine work-ers’ fatherland, in 1920. He was also a member of the Polish Officer Corps and cooperated with Colonel Beck in supporting Franco in the Spanish Civil War.
The London group and the Lublin group have been seesawing for the control of the underground and, through it, control of Poland, since the Lublin committee was formed in July of this year. This contest led to the tragic massacre of 250,000 Poles in the Warsaw uprising which began so heroically in August. The Polish people fought with bare hands and gasoline-filled bottles against the mechanized might of the Nazi Wehrmacht and were bloodily defeated in October, due to the failure of adequate aid by either side.
In the struggle for domination between the London and the Lublin Poles, the Moscow group is now on top. England, hoping originally for a reconciliation between the contestants, was banking on Milokaczyk, who went to see Stalin and became convinced that Poland should give up to Russia the “marshland” east of the Curzon line. Russia then guaranteed that parts of German territory would be included in Poland at the end of the war, including all of East Prussia, Danzig, Stettin, Upper Silesia.
 
What Price Liberation?
This territory in Germany, of course, is not Stalin’s to give. It happens to be populated by several million Germans who have been victimized by Hitlerism. This arbitrary disposal of these people must be worth several divisions in morale to Hitler’s legions, as is every Allied reference to parcelling out Germany to the victors and every plan for harsh punishment of the Germans, including those workers who fought Nazism when the Allied leaders applauded Hitler.
This offer of German territory would seem generous on Stalin’s part. But the Poles in London realize that surrendering the Curzon territory only brings Stalin that much closer to the heart of Poland and toward making Poland a vassalof the USSR. Now the London Poles not only demand that Poland be returned intact, but that they head the new Poland, including East Prussia and part of Silesia!
The one thing that these leaders are ignoring is what this war is supposedly being fought for – the liberation of the people. The choice is not London’s or Lublin’s. It is the Polish masses who should decide whom they want for their government. It is the Ukrainians and White Russians in eastern Poland who should decide whether they wish to be incorporated in Poland or Russia, or if they wish to be independent of either.
Churchill is forced to give the go-ahead signal to Stalin because he is impotent to do anything about Russian expansion and because of his own designs for control of the Greek government, carried out to the point of shooting down the Greek anti-fascists, who want their own government.
Roosevelt has spoken through the new Secretary of State, Stettinius. Yes, the division of Poland is okay with us, providing the countries involved agree, he says. He does not mean people, naturally, but the usurping “leaders.” Churchill is right in admonishing the U.S. for its pretense of “hands off” since he let the cat out of the bag in relating that Roosevelt agreed at Teheran and Quebec to this division of the spoils of war. So, while the U.S. nominally maintains “hands off,” she is really party and partner to the whole dirty deal.
Let the people of the conquered countries choose their own governments!
And that means to the empire-grabbers of all countries: HANDS OFF EUROPE!
 




The State Department has become a millionaires’ club. Only a few weeks after millions of American workers cast their ballots for that “friend of labor” Roosevelt, he hoisted Wall Street into the saddle in the most important department of the Government.
 
The Line-Up
Edward Stettinius, the new Secretary of State, is the son of the wealthy J.P. Morgan partner, has been associated with the Morgan interests, General Motors, and was chairman of United States Steel. His appointment by Roosevelt, and the sloughing off of Wallace, choice of the labor leaders and liberals, caps the climax (the Infamous “Little Steel” award) of the President’s recent anti-labor acts.
Wallace has been offered the job of Secretary of Commerce, it is reported, and the reactionary Jesse Jones will be out. But to make sure that this other “friend of labor” would have no power, Roosevelt has lessoned the responsibilities of the Commerce Department and placed its important functions in the hands of the State Department – under Jesse Jones’ friend, Will Clayton!
If being a friend of Jesse Jones is not the kiss of death (to honest labor people – not “friends of labor”) it should be sufficient to add that the man who is in charge of foreign economic relation’s is the cotton broker whose firm collaborated closely with German interests, helped them obtain raw materials for war, and who latterly participated in the new “land grab” scandals to turn over government acquired lands to the monopolists.
As though he wanted to clinch his own statement that the “New Deal” is, ended, Roosevelt added another millionaire, the ex-Ambassador to Japan, Joseph C. Grew, also a Morgan man. Grew admires Shintoism, the Japanese emperor-worship, and thinks it would be a good thing to keep the Japanese workers under this feudal-fascist hypnotism, if only the Japanese military could be eliminated, or brought on our side. Grew was Ambassador during the scandalous period of shipments of scrap-iron and steel by U.S. firms to Japan – which aided the war against China.
Nelson Rockefeller, formerly of the Office of Inter-American Affairs, has been moved, along with his old functions, by Roosevelt, into the State Department, too. In his dealings with South American countries he has never lost his Wall Street accent.
The addition of Archibald MacLeish, poet and ex-librarian of Congress, to handle culture and information must have been a whimsical touch by Roosevelt. The “culture and information” of this department is obviously to be couched in terms of dollars.
They’re not necessary to prove our point that the Roosevelt Administration is a pro-big business government, but a couple of other people the President is said to be considering for the Department are of great interest.
One is James Clement Dunn. He is a wealthy, notorious apologist for the Franco regime in Spain. He is for a “soft peace” – for the German industrialists. The other is Leon Fraser, Wall Streeter, current president of First National Bank and former president of the Nazi-dominated Bank for International Settlements. He is slated for the post of Assistant Secretary of international finance.
Labor cannot afford to take the attitude that the State Department, since it is in charge of international affairs, is none of its business. Labor’s brothers in Europe, together with the farmers and poorer middle classes, are trying to set up their democratic rights as the Nazis are being driven out: What happens in their fight is of paramount significance to American unionists. Their fight may determine whether fascism is liquidated, or grows again, or whether there will be a new World War after this one is over.
As the Nazis are driven back, the role of the State Department becomes more and more important. Now, reflecting the desires of Roosevelt, it is the direct personal property of big business interests. What can the European masses, the resistance movements, the underground workers’ organizations expect from these men who have the interests of profit-making at heart?
Formerly, under professional statesmen, like Hull, the interests of business were indirectly promoted, by the State Department in their international relations. Now, big business and the governmental agencies are formally wedded. What this means is that the policies that big business carried on internally against labor in this country will be extended abroad – and with a vengeance. Most of these men have had connections with international Cartels – both Axis and Allied – so that they know how to do business with fascism. This bodes ill for the future of European workers, and consequently for the future of the American workers.
Roosevelt has not “betrayed” his worker-supporters in the elections. He has remained faithful and kept the pledge to his business supporters, for he is a capitalist candidate who ran on the platform of the capitalist Democratic Party. Labor’s only assurance of the interests of labor being furthered is its own candidates running on a labor platform. And only then can the European workers be assured of their democratic rights and the destruction of fascism.
Roosevelt has merely placed his cronies in office – men who were born into the same class of wealth and privilege and who think like him. The State Department is a transmitter for the foreign policies of the Administration, therefore it is dead certain Roosevelt appointed the right personnel – for the capitalists.
 




On December 18, the ranks of the UAW will decide by referendum whether or not they wish to maintain the no-strike pledge. While their convention voted to re-affirm the no-strike pledge, given originally by the union leaders over the heads of the rank and file, they left the final decision to the ranks.
The officials of the UAW were forbidden by the convention to use union time or money, to campaign on the issue, but the CIO convention itself was used as a platform by union leaders to sound off against the UAW ranks who are opposed to the pledge. Many other spokesmen, including the President and military leaders, are trying to sway the members to keep the pledge.
We should like to deal with one of the most powerful and, at the same time, fallacious, arguments against labor’s once more asserting its right to strike. It is an argument that, in the mind of the rank and file union member, is often the main or the only one he has against rescinding the no-strike pledge.
That argument is: STRIKES IN WARTIME HOLD BACK SUPPLIES TO OUR BROTHERS AT THE FRONT AND MAY PREVENT VICTORY OVER FASCISM.
Now, first of all, it needs to be pointed out that rescinding the no-strike pledge will not mean a strike-wave. Strikes have occurred, regardless of the pledge, and workers have refrained from striking in the past when they had no pledge against strikes. Strikes are generally the result of intolerable conditions in the shop. No working man or woman who has ever been through a strike embarks upon one light-mindedly. But in the face of an actual pledge not to strike, the employer is given an additional MORAL weapon against labor. He goes blithely about speeding up the work, turning down wage demands, shoving off all grievances to the War Labor Board. In the interests of an all-out effort to speed up the war? No. Solely in the interests of his profits.
Proof that the employer is interested in his profits and not the war effort? Merely the fact that the large industrial concerns went on strike before they signed their contracts With the government to produce weapons of war. They sat down and refused to turn a single wheel for war production until the government, met their demand for high profits.
(This comparison of the corporations with labor is most unfair – to labor. When the corporations went on strike they did it to increase the multi-million revenue of the Sixty Families who own and control the country and who, like the lilies of the field, neither toil nor spin nor do any productive work whatsoever. On the other hand, when union members strike, representing hundreds and thousands of workers and their families, they do so for five or ten cents more an hour, to gain a few more groceries or the down payment on a radio or refrigerator.)
There are some who, aware of these facts, say: “Yes, but regardless of the role of the companies, labor has a responsibility to the men in uniform. They are mostly our relatives. We should keep our pledge for their sake.”
Part of this argument is true. Labor does indeed have a responsibility to its brothers in arms. Labor has, first of all, the responsibility of seeing to it that good conditions are maintained for the returning servicemen who will come back, most of them, to take up their jobs as workers again.
What are the servicemen coming back to? What are the conditions that exist in industry which they will face?
The price ceiling pledge given by Roosevelt in return for the no-strike pledge has been broken. But the ceiling on wages, exemplified best by the recent insulting decision of the WLB in the steel workers’ case, remains intact. Is that what the ex-steel worker now on a gunboat in the Pacific, is fighting for?
Behind the recent strike of the telephone girls were wages of $18 and $21 a week. Is that what their brothers and husbands in the armed forces are fighting for?
This is most emphatically NOT what the workers in uniform are fighting for. This fact can be documented by thousands of letters from men overseas, some printed in union papers, some testified to recently by the telephone operators – letters of encouragement to strike for a decent living wage against the offensive of big business.
 
Soldiers Oppose Strikes
Now, it is also true that many soldiers are bitterly opposed to strikes in wartime. But their reaction is the result of the propaganda campaign of big business, which is on a union-busting and profit-making spree. All types of anti-labor propaganda have been used among servicemen and it is regrettable that much of it has had effect. Naturally the capitalist press is the worst offender. But it is also a result of the failure of the unions to put their case vigorously before the armed forces. What would be the reaction of these soldiers if they knew the truth of the matter – that while they are living in slit trenches, crawling through jungles, fighting and dying, big business is making the biggest profits of all time!
These same soldiers and sailors are supposed to be liberating the countries oppressed by fascism. What does “oppressed by fascism” mean? The working class is the first victim of fascism. Its right to strike is taken away. Its unions are destroyed. The profiteers, the wealthy, the business men – they get along well under fascist oppression. They can do – and have done – business with Hitler!
Strikes would take away weapons from the front, they say. But what a weapon is handed over to Goebbels by taking away the right to strike! The plutocrats rule in the democracies, he would say, and the workers do not have the, right to strike. So what hope do the German workers have at the hands of their democratic “liberators”? They fight all the harder against our doughboys.
On organized labor’s shoulders rests the responsibility for securing and maintaining conditions for the veterans. Business won’t do it. When a strike occurs, or when there is talk of rescinding the no-strike pledge, and business spokesmen squeal, “Think of the boys in the foxholes,” they are simply hypocritical and desirous of creating antagonisms between labor and servicemen. They didn’t think of the boys in the foxholes when business held up the war contracts, and when they peddled goods to Japan, Germany and Spain. And they don’t think enough of them now to give them severance pay, cumulative seniority for the time they are in service, vacation pay. They don’t think enough of them to guarantee, them, or any workers, jobs after the war is over. And the politicians in Washington of both parties don’t think enough of them to give them a clear right to vote.
What rights the veterans have now are due largely to the efforts of organized labor. But organized labor hasn’t done enough. Organized labor has to go forward to a guaranteed annual wage, to full employment, to make an end of poverty in the midst of plenty.
But for labor to stand still today means to go backward. Big business is out to “get” labor. Since labor made the no-strike pledge, big business has the Indian sign on unions. It has experienced the supreme delight during the war – for the first time in years – of making profits hand over fist without haying to jump the workers’ pay. The no-strike pledge is the root cause of the offensive of big business against labor and the plight of the labor movement today.
Labor has produced the goods for the war. Every government body and especially production boards, have been compelled to praise American workers for the colossal production of war goods. This alone gives the lie to their propaganda against strikers. Of that there can be no question. But business has taken the gravy.
In order to smash the vicious Little Steel formula, which is holding up increases, and restore collective bargaining, it is necessary to rescind the no-strike pledge. This is the key to progress in the labor movement today. If labor resumes the offensive, raises wages and betters conditions, it aids the veterans of World War II. If it remains subservient to big business, it only helps betray them.
 




November 7 marked the twenty-seventh anniversary of a unique event in history – the Russian socialist revolution of 1917. Of what interest is this event to American workers today? This question is of special importance in view of the fact that, as the readers of Labor Action know, we, together with militant workers, are opposed to the practices of the Communist Party, which takes its line from Moscow, and equally opposed to Russian imperialism which in the course of this war is adding to its national prison most of the populations of Eastern Europe.
 
What Is a Revolution?
In a revolution, the power and wealth of society change hands. They are transferred from one class to another. In our time, there are two fundamental classes in society, the working class and the capitalist class. The minority class owns the wealth, profits from it, keeps down the standard of living of the majority class which has no wealth. In order to protect its wealth from competitors and to secure new sources, the capitalist class is compelled periodically to go to war. The workers are cajoled, propagandized and conscripted to fight the war in behalf of “their country” – whose wealth is owned by the ruling class!
The theory of revolutionary socialists is that if the enormous wealthy of society, controlled by the few, were controlled by the majority of the people under a government representing the majority, poverty could be eliminated, an end could be made to the mass murder of war, and mankind could live in peace and plenty.
To achieve its final goal, this kind of revolution would be necessary on a world scale, since, as long as a capitalist country of any importance existed, it would fight to maintain the profits and privileges of the ruling class. Also necessary is a party representing the interests of the majority, the working class, to lead the workers and intermediary masses of the people, farmers, middle classes, etc., to victory. And finally, that party must have a program which speaks the needs and desires of the class it represents.
 
First Workers’ State
As a party with a workers’ program and a will toward the socialist goal, the Workers Party looks with reverence toward the Russian Revolution. For it was the first successful socialist revolution of all time! No matter if it was later turned off its course, no matter if its leaders were imprisoned and shot, no matter if it is now a monstrous caricature of a “socialist fatherland.” The victory of the workers in Russia over their oppressors proved for all time the possibility, feasibility and advisability of the socialist revolution.
Russia, in 1917, had all the essential ingredients of a revolution. The workers and peasants were fighting in the trenches, suffering severe defeats and dying while the profiteers were fattening on the war profits. At home, industry was booming under government war orders, while the workers in the factories and the peasants on the land were paying the costs of the war. In addition to these things that all workers “normally” suffer in wartime, Russia happened to be more backward than the United States or England, for example. She was ruled by a Czar, mass lynchings of the Jews was an accepted thing, her standard of living was among the world’s lowest, her illiteracy rate among the world’s highest – that is, for the majority. For the tiny minority, her luxury was on a par with the most advanced countries of the world.
In the era when the capitalist class was the new, progressive revolutionary class which destroyed feudalism, it overthrew the vested powers of monarchy, clergy. But Russia’s rate of development had been so slow that its capitalist class grew up under the feudal government of the Czar without being able to overthrow. him.
Then capitalist industry brought as elsewhere, something new to Russia – a class without any land, without any property, without any stake in the old society – the working class. It was this class, that was destined to form the army to lead the assault against czarism and against so-called democratic capitalism, which lived for a day in Russia after the Czar was overthrown.
Out of the modern development imposed on the backwardness of Russia, there also developed sterling revolutionary leaders and an indomitable revolutionary party: Lenin and Trotsky and the Bolshevik Party. Lenin combined the character, talent and revolutionary insight to make him the commanding authority without peer in the revolutionary party and among the masses, to lead them to victory. Trotsky possessed the intelligence and skill to form a Red Army out of raw recruits and war-weary workers and soldiers to fight off and successfully defend the revolution from the combined armies of the rest of the world. Without these leaders and without the Bolshevik Party, it can confidently be said that the Russian Revolution would not have occurred, or, at least, not at the time it did.
 
Two Revolutions
In the February revolution which overthrew the Czar and which was accomplished by the workers, the slogans expressing the needs of the masses were (1) the democratic republic, (2) confiscation of the landed estates, and (3) the eight-hour day. The workers led this revolution, since the capitalists were joined with the feudal nobles and too weak to defeat czarism. The workers set up their own soviet committees, what we in America call workers’ councils, and seized the factories; the starving, land-hungry peasants took over the estates; the soldiers, sick of the war, left the front.
A provisional, “democratic” – really capitalist – government emerged, tried to stop the oppressed people, refused to divide the landed estates, continued to prosecute the war. In June 1917, the first congress of the Soviets, the workers and peasants and soldiers’ own councils, occurred. Representing millions, directly elected by and responsible to the workers, it was the most democratic parliament the world had ever produced.
This new power of the workers challenged the government of the capitalists, Who were unable and unwilling to meet any of the demands of the workers, until they toppled the old regime in November 1917 in an almost bloodless revolution. Led by the Bolshevik Party of Lenin and Trotsky, they took over under the slogans of all power to the Soviets, an end to the war, land to the peasants, and bread to the people.
Capitalism was dead in Russia. A genuine government of the workers was in existence. The land belonged to the peasants who tilled it. The factories belonged to the workers who toiled in them. The people were willing and able, despite the long years of war and civil war, to fight off for several years more the internal and external enemies who took up arms against the new workers’ government.
 
The Degeneration
To understand how Russia changed from the workers’ fatherland to the prison of the peoples it is today, it is necessary to recall one point in the theory of revolutionary socialists. That is, socialism must be accomplished on a world scale. But the expected world revolution did not occur. Russia was isolated, surrounded by capitalist enemies. Stalin, representing this reaction, enunciated the theory of “socialism in one country.” Russia alone could not produce plenty for all which socialism should guarantee. This caused the regrowth in Russia of the “have” and “have-not” classes. It also generated a policeman, the Stalinist bureaucracy, to keep the “haves” on top and the “have-nots” in their places.
An understanding of the Russian bureaucracy explains the role of the Communist Political Association today. Believing in “socialism in a single country,” which means no socialism at all, they are the abject tools of the Soviet government. Whatever serves Stalin, the leader of Russian “socialism,” they do. That means fomenting strikes in the “imperialist democracies” in the period of the Hitler-Stalin honeymoon. Today it means carrying out the no-strike pledge more vigorously than the leaders of the labor movement or the employers themselves. Tomorrow, after Hitler is defeated and if Stalin does not get all he wants of the spoils of war, it may mean a resumption of strikes before the conclusion of the war against Japan. All in the name of “socialism.”
 
Socialism Today
Real socialists today rally to the ranks of the Workers Party, the bearers of the traditions of the Bolsheviks. The program of the Workers Party serves the “have-not” class, workers, poor farmers, the exploited middle classes. It stands for the abolition of the profit system, workers’ management of industry, a workers’ government, the end of wars growing out of the profit system – peace and plenty for all.
Despite the Stalinist destruction of the Russian workers’ state created in November 1917, the glorious example of the Russian heroes proves that socialism can and will be accomplished!
 




If Phil Murray, head of almost six million CIO workers, has a dyspeptic look these days, it must be because he is having some difficulty digesting his own words. We refer to the statement made at the UAW convention, where Murray said: “I am as sure as I am living that the Little Steel formula will be revised.”
The cowardly, pro-employer War Labor Board is doing no revising. FDR, to whom the board leaves the question of wage raises, is keeping silent. Fred Vinson, Director of Economic Stabilization, says that the rise in living costs must stop, recognizing, as does every last man, woman and child in the country – from coolie-paid textile workers to even the employer members of the WLB – that living costs are way out of line with the formula.
At the CIO national convention, being held currently, Murray went about as far as he could go in lambasting the War Labor Board. It made a “travesty” of the wage increase demand, he stated. He assailed its “weakness,” its “lack of courage,” its “policy,” Said Murray: “In the face of labor’s no-strike pledge, such policy is the equivalent of denying labor any such benefits during wartime.” Unassailable fact!
Murray was forced to say:
“... The board, after a full year of encouraging the unions to submit their cases on the basis of voluminous records, has refused to discharge its obligation ... Employers are permitted to enjoy a field day through long delays, appeals and reconsiderations of cases which actually result in a complete denial of an effective relief to a labor organization and its members which have submitted its case to the machinery of the board ... The board has to date refused to direct employers to grant such concessions [sick leave, group insurance, etc.] when the latter refused to do so in collective bargaining.”
Equally unassailable truths!
Does Murray then conclude logically that the WLB is anti-labor and that labor should have nothing to do with it? That genuine collective bargaining should be restored?
No, says Murray, he agrees with the board in principle and adds there is no question but that labor must retain its no-strike pledge.
Doesn’t Mr. Murray know that it is only because of the helpless position of labor that the WLB and FDR hold the line on wages? That the only action that is causing sleepless nights to these people and might give rise to a revision is the fear of the pending no-strike referendum in the ranks of the UAW? That “collective begging,” companion to the no-strike pledge, will continue as long as labor has no recourse but to think, speak and write against the anti-labor practices of employer and administration – and can DO nothing?
If Mr. Murray meant what he said about the WLB policies, he would demand categorically that every labor representative immediately get off the board. Labor leaders on the board are parties to the “travesty” made of wage demands, the “weakness” in the face of public need, “lack of courage” to recommend a wage increase.
The War Labor Board system is the price of the no-strike pledge.
Dropping the pledge would mean the resumption of genuine collective bargaining. Then there would be no year-long and longer delays in handling demands for overdue increases. Employers would come to heel, and wages and conditions could be maintained not only for the mass of workers new in the shops, but for the returning veterans.
Philip Murray, at the top of the union, can see the employers’ point of view more easily than the ranks of labor. Believing in the “principle” of the WLB and the “principle”
of the no-strike pledge, he is confined to speaking against the board policies.
We repeat: he’s gone about as far as he can go. Action by the ranks of labor is necessary to rescind the pledge and get the labor men off the WLB.
 




This is the Era of the Wage Freeze. The theory behind the wage freeze is FDR’s “equality of sacrifice” program. The wage freeze has been translated into a bitter fact, as every working man and woman knows. Equality of sacrifice was never more than oratorical fireworks to dazzle and blind American people while the profiteers were coining money out of the blood and devastation of the war.
Now that the war in Europe is drawing to a close, a more complete balance sheet can be drawn of the debits and credits of labor and capital in the war. Labor sent its millions to the battlefield. Its birthright, the right to strike, was sold to Roosevelt by its leaders for the mumbo-jumbo of “equality of sacrifice.” It suffered high prices and shoddy goods, since the price ceilings did not hold.
Labor enters the fourth year of the war decidedly in the red.
Elsewhere on this page we find representative figures showing how capital has fared under the “equality of sacrifice” program. Contrary to the assertion of Roosevelt that “there will be no new war millionaires,” these have appeared, while the sacrifices of big business are invisible. Their profits beggar all description.
Business enters the fourth year of the war decidedly in the black.
 
The War Anti-Labor Board
The thermostat to keep wages frozen, controlled by FDR, is that object of hatred and subject of curses by all union militants, the War Labor Board. The CIO and AFL have presented the figures to show that prices have raced past the ceiling imposed by the Little Steel formula. “Too bad,” says the WLB in effect, “but FDR says no wage raise.” And what do the labor leaders do? Tell the rank and file unionists to tighten their belts, sit it out for the duration, keep the no-strike pledge, and, of course – elect the sponsor of the wage freeze, Roosevelt.
The AFL has gone a little farther, recently, in refusing to sit on the board during the hearings on the CIO steel workers’ case. The steel workers can get a few crumbs in retroactive pay under the “wage stabilization” clauses in their contracts, while the AFL can get practically nothing until the whole matters of the revision of the Little Steel formula is taken up. The CIO members of the board are content to argue for a few cents’ increase, believing it will satisfy the rank and file a little because of the retroactive clauses in contracts. After all, the salaries of the officials are not involved; they are guaranteed by the dues of the members of the union.
The recent move of the WLB to refuse even to recommend a wage increase, to state that the matter of upward revisions is outside of its province since it doesn’t know what the effect will be on the rest of the economy and to put the question into the hands of Roosevelt is a bald revelation of who its master is. And when FDR has spoken on wages, which is a rare thing these days, it has been against any revision.
Roosevelt’s silence speaks louder than promises who his master is. Every worker knows the wage freeze benefits the capitalist. Less wages, more profits. This babbling about “equality of sacrifice” is just to confuse us.
To buttress the case of the WLB and Roosevelt, the Bureau of Labor Statistics continues to issue its phony figures on the cost of living, trying to prove that it has not risen substantially above the fifteen per cent range allowed under the Little Steel formula. Its latest statistics say that while the cost of living has risen 26.5 over the base years of 1935–39, the increase since the formula was adopted has been only a little over nine per cent. But while even the BLS figures show labor is entitled to an increase over and above the Little Steel formula, the figures of the AFL and CIO show labor is entitled to an increase of AT LEAST A THIRD OF THEIR PRESENT WAGES! Any small increase FDR gives labor as a “reward” for its support can never begin to make up this figure, let alone the retroactivity of labor’s loss in wage?
No “foxhole” arguments can defeat this claim of labor. Not while profiteering exists. The references all the labor leaders made at the recent conventions to “our boys” in order to retain the no-strike pledge are beside the point. While the sons, brothers and husbands of working people are fighting in the jungles and foxholes, they are being let down by their relatives here when labor gives up the fight against the profiteers.
There’s only one way to fight for higher wages, to maintain standards for the boys who are coming back from Guadalcanal, Aachen and all the far-flung battleposts of this war:




Withdraw from the War Labor Board.
 
Rescind the no-strike pledge.




 




The “Big Three” has now become the “Big Four.” Following closely the Allied recognition on October 23 of the French provisional government headed by General de Gaulle, formal invitation to sit in full membership on the European Advisory Commission in London was tendered France on November 11.
This step, after long delay, in addition to early American-British jockeying over Giraud versus de Gaulle, repeated missions of the self-appointed and self-styled messiah, Charles (“Clemenceau” – “Joan of Arc “) de Gaulle, came as a necessary culmination in Allied strategy to prevent a second French Revolution.
The French people desire a change, not only from pre-war conditions, but from the chaos that exists in France today. They have gone through four years of occupation, during which time they have seen the rich fare well through collaboration while they bore the brunt of forced labor, conscription of goods, and material, physical and moral privations. The French workers, the “little people,” organized into the French Forces of the Interior (FFI) helped liberate the country and are today the only genuine and reliable anti-fascist force in France.
As an abject satellite of the Allied powers, the de Gaulle government would lose face with the workers. Yet France today is bankrupt; its army and navy are disorganized and weak; nobody knows how much the franc is worth; shortages of goods are so severe as to cause looting of Allied army supplies. Therefore, France must be helped to “independence” and “sovereignty” in order to forestall a workers’ seizure of power. This the Allies fear, and thus they waited to see if de Gaulle was their man.
 
Promises and Reality
De Gaulle’s promises before returning to France resembled somewhat those of the early New Deal period. De Gaulle professed to speak for the common man, flung invectives against the “200 Families” who control the wealth of France, spoke against the trusts and hinted at nationalization of big industry. But this long-standing friend of the Vichyite Petain has nationalized only where an industrial crisis exists, to prevent strike action by the workers, workers’ control of the factories or to prop up a sagging industry – and then only TEMPORARILY.
“Expropriations” by the government of factories of collaborationists are either indemnified, or handed back. Further proof of his virtue to the Allies was his order for the surrender of arms by the French Forces of the Interior, since they all fear the armed strength of the workers. (No matter if the prematurely disarmed FFI soldiers were attacked by Nazi forces which had not yet been expelled from the country, as happened in Brittany.)
Punishment of collaborationists, which worried the Allies at first because it seemed to be “too thorough,” has been toned down so that apologies are now being made for the thoroughgoing pro-Nazi, Pierre Laval. The French provisional government is out to maintain “order,” i.e., to uphold and secure the domination of the “200 Families.” Yes, France, under de Gaulle, well deserves a place in the Allied scheme of things.
 
The New “Big Four”
Now that it’s the “Big Four,” Germany is to be divided into four zones. France will no longer be a jackal but a lion at the imperialist feast which the Allies are counting on after Hitler’s defeat. While the Foreign Minister of France said that she was opposed to any “artificial” dismemberment of Germany and the inclusion of a German minority within her borders, she is prepared to ask for annexation of all German territory on the left bank of the Rhine. (This is not “artificial,” obviously, since the claim was presented at Versailles, after the First World War, when it was turned down.) Also, she will probably demand military occupation of the Rhineland and the Ruhr Valley, the heart of German industrial concentration. She will also ask for rights over labor and industry in Germany along with Russia, Britain and the United States, for the purposes of “security. “
Agreement on French plans and spheres of influence in Germany have been tentatively reached in the de Gaulle-Churchill tales. Churchill is particularly anxious for complete recognition, and participation of France in order to maintain a balance of power among, the contending interests of Russia, Britain and America. The “entente cordiale” is being revived.
A reserved seat on the council of the world police force agreed to at Dumbarton Oaks – paid for by the Allies – is also being turned over to France.
 
What the Masses Want
The masses of France want peace and security. The plans of the Big Four for a crushing defeat of Germany, military occupation and dismemberment only guarantee new wars and prevent security. Already a revival of the French army is being undertaken. Military necessity and bankruptcy prevents a revival of French industry.
The Allies – all four of them – act to prevent a second French Revolution, we said. But since they act to preserve the outmoded, rule of wealth and privilege, they only compel the exploited, suffering, toiling people to rebel against that rule.
The first French Revolution replaced the feudal aristocrats with the lords of money. The second French Revolution will forever, wipe out private wealth and special privilege and place in power those who represent the will of humanity to peace, security and abundance for all – the working people.
 




(Conclusion of last week’s article)
The CIO and labor generally are being bribed to support the Bretton Woods agreement by the promise of five million jobs, which are supposed to issue from expanded world trade. The CIO has already written favorably of the plan in its national paper. Labor Action maintains that support of this international extension of New Dealism by American workers means support of American imperialism: depressing the standards and exploiting the workers of the world for a short-lived American prosperity, to be followed by another world depression. This is the era of the U.S. empire, of dollar imperialism, and American workers should not be hoodwinked into supporting it.
 
U.S. the Power Behind Conference
All American workers have gone through at least one depression and are now bearing the brunt of the Second World War. By identifying themselves with the country as a whole, they get the illusion that “Uncle Sam is being placed for a sucker,” “We are fighting Britain’s war,” etc. The role of the U.S. at the Bretton Woods conference should chase away that illusion. Under capitalism, money is power, and in. “the struggle for power on a gigantic scale,” as the conference was described by one of the delegates, the U.S. won hands down.
Now, how does the U.S. exercise control? Votes are apportioned according to the money contributed by the respective countries. In the fund, the U.S. member would cast the largest vote, 27,000 out of 99,000. This country, acting either with Britain or Russia, would be in a position to control policy. In the bank, the U.S. share is thirty-five per cent, while that of all other countries combined is sixty-five per cent. Not all of the Bretton Woods agreement was made public, and it is rumored that the U.S. has special veto powers over combined action of the other nations.
Last week we discussed how the scramble for markets on the part of the major powers leads to depressions and war over those markets.
The trouble with all the capitalist countries of the world is that they are naturally competitive, not cooperative. For instance: all the advanced countries, like England, the United States, Germany and France have more or less identical industries in steel, oil, rubber, automobiles, etc. Now, not every worker by a long shot has an automobile in these countries, because, he isn’t paid enough by the capitalist. But the capitalist has gotten enough out of him to have excess factories, machinery, automobiles and profits. He can’t sell or use them at home, since the home population hasn’t been paid enough to buy this excess goods in the capitalist’s hands. Therefore, the capitalist looks abroad for markets. Here is where the collisions come with capitalists of other countries in the same position.
 
It’s the Taxpayer Who Pays
This is a basic contradiction of capitalism that the Bretton Woods agreement cannot overcome. The proposed world bank can lend money to bankrupt nations like England, Italy, and the Balkans, prime their industries to recreate what the war destroyed. After this initial impetus, furnished mainly by the U.S. dollar, the old business cycle of short boom, long depression and war will set in again. All that the fund and bank can do is cushion the shock.
When a country cannot afford to pay back its loan, the loss will be borne by the governments of the various countries concerned. It will not be borne, as in the case of a private loan, by the bank’s investors. Since the government stands for the loss on a bad debt, losses will actually be passed on to the taxpayers, the majority of whom are workers. In other words, we are financing the post-war trade. Then we ought at least to see where it will take us. Henry Morgenthau, chairman of the conference and foremost United States representative, announced that the gathering concerned itself with “economic,” not “political,” matters. There was never a more misleading statement. The power of money, to grant or to withhold a loan from an impoverished country, compels an interest in and an intervention into the affairs of that country.
 
The Flag Follows the Dollar
An instance of the political “disinterestedness” of the conference was the squeeze put on France. A war-devastated country, she is still, however, second in the size of her monetary gold holdings and third in point of pre-war trade. The conference relegates her quotas and consequently her powers to use the fund and bank to rebuild herself after the war, to fifth place.
Put above her on the list was China, whose fund will come largely from the United States. Those additional votes of Chinese representatives, whose government is pretty well subordinated to Washington, will come in handy to the U.S. It is to be noted, too, that in comparison to France, China is a far greater potential market for American capitalists and therefore a greater source of exploitation and profit. The conservative U.S. News states that the “first United States-British objective will be to prevent violent revolution after a German defeat, to prevent loss of political power by business-financial groups.” It requires no imagination to envisage those “business-financial groups,” who financed Hitler into power, being propped up by the world bank, to prevent a workers’ Germany. And only an idiot could imagine the bank making a loan to help out a genuine, democratic, workers’ government. Purely “economic”? Not “political”. That’s for the sheep.
 
Eliminate Wasteful Competition
Because capitalism produces for profit and not for use: Because these profiteers own identical plants and agricultural interests; because they won’t nationalize or internationalize competing industries to eliminate competition – compete they must, world stabilization fund and bank notwithstanding. The U.S. and another powerful country or two might have a short prosperity by stifling the rest of the world. But over a period, if the rest of the world can’t export profitably, it throws its workers on the breadlines, and we, too, find no market. The capitalist stops producing, and “prosperity is just around the corner” again.
So, in the 1ong run, U.S. workers get it in the neck, too. An attempt is being made to buy off their class solidarity with the working people of other countries by the promise of five million extra jobs. In this same fashion were class feelings of the British workers blunted – at the expense of starving India. Let American workers not be fooled. The U.S. is out to control through filthy lucre what the British got by plunder. The results are the same.
Profiteering prevents capitalism from planning for use on a world scale and assuring prosperity, regardless of stabilization fund and bank. Capitalism has the interests of the financiers and coupon-clippers at heart, not the security of its workers through full employment and a high standard of living.
The workers and the working farmers all over the world have always borne the brunt of capitalism’s wars and depressions in every country. They alone, organized in unions and working class parties, have the power and possibility of organizing production to eliminate destructive competition and profits, and to erect as their guiding slogan’s: PRODUCTION FOR USE AND NOT FOR PROFIT! FOR A WORKERS GOVERNMENT IN THE U.S. AND A SOCIALIST UNITED STATES OF THE WORLD!
 




(This is the first of three articles on the Bretton Woods Monetary Conference.) [1]
If a union member rose on the floor of a union meeting to discuss the recently concluded conference of Allied nations’ representatives at Bretton Woods, N.H., he would be faced with yawns or boos and probably be called out of order for discussing something that had nothing ing to do with union business.
Yet the Bretton Woods agreement may have an effect in determining whether union members go back to apple-peddling, whether coffee-burning in Brazil and ploughing-under of corn in the United States occurs when the cupboard is bare again.
The conference, composed of delegates from forty-five nations, white men and black, yellow men and brown, met to consider the problems of world-scale post-war financing. The conference drew no color lines, but it drew an unmistakable class line: no working people’s representatives participated. But they decided on matters that affect us. Therefore, we must translate the complex language of international money experts into that of our own needs.
 
Alleged Aims of Agreement
Presided over by U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau, the conference proposed to establish an international monetary fund, a pool of United Nations’ money of $8,800,000,000, and a Bank for International Reconstruction and Development to the tune of $9,100,000,000.
The original fund and bank plan originated with the United States. The dominion of the U.S. was obvious throughout the conference. Not only did the U.S. have the chairman. The conference was held here. America’s contribution to the fund more than doubled that of the nearest competitor, Great Britain, and her share in the bank is thirty-six per cent of the total of all participating countries combined.
Of the conference, Henry Morgenthau said: “The purpose is very simple, wholly within the American tradition and completely outside political considerations. The United States wants, after the war, full utilization of its industries, its factories and its farms, full and steady employment of its citizens, particularly its ex-servicemen, and full prosperity and peace. It can have them only in a world with a vigorous trade.”
Again on the parley’s aims, Morgenthau stated: “We are to concern ourselves here with the essential steps in the creation of a dynamic world economy in which the people of every nation will be able to realize their potentialities in peace; will be able, through their industry, their inventiveness, their thrift, to raise their own standards of living and enjoy, increasingly, the fruits of material progress on an earth infinitely blessed with material riches ... Prosperity has no fixed limits ... the more of it that other nations enjoy, the more each nation will have for itself.” So much for the alleged high-sounding aims.
 
International “New Dealism”
One of the stated aims of the U.S., and its actual need, is for a thriving post-war world trade. “Whereas in the five pre-war years, U.S. exports amounted to three billion dollars, in the post-war years we must have seven billion dollars of exports or accept a depression,” stated one of the conferees. In order to trade, there must be a period of stability, and other nations must have the wherewithal to buy products.
The other powers represented at the conference, England, France, Russia, China, etc., all have as their primary aim the rebuilding of their war-devastated economies.
How are, the fund and the bank supposed to solve these problems? The Stabilization Fund is a kind of international Office of Price Administration. It would try to prevent underselling, accomplished through “competitive depreciation of currency,” as was done in depression days due to the shrinking world market.
The aim of the World Bank, also couched in a catchword of the Roosevelt regime, as Morgenthau expressed it, would “drive the usurious money-changers from the temple of international finance.” It would make long-term loans at relatively low rates of interest, or back loans of private investors. If a default on a loan occurred, the bank would make good. Will the conference do what it proposes – by harmonizing world trade, assure peace everlasting and plenty for all? This question can be answered only by looking at world trade as it exists today.
 
The World We Live In
We live in the era of monopoly capitalism. By this we mean that in a few advanced countries, such as the United States, England, Germany, huge manufacturing enterprises and much of the farm land is in the hands of a few owners. Instead of many small, competing firms, we have a few giants controlling the market, as exist in auto, coal, steel, rubber, etc. And control is reduced to fewer hands through control by financiers of more than one company, thus largely eliminating competition. The workers have nothing but their ability to labor and, periodically, jobs. This is what Labor Action means when it say the Sixty Families own and control America. The same situation exists in other countries.
Now, these profiteering monopolists squeeze dry their home populations. They produce as cheaply as they can, pay as low wages as they can, and sell at a profit. A time comes when the home market is exhausted, and they can’t make a profit at home. So they go abroad.
In the past, before the world was divided up and possessed by the powerful nations, they obtained these markets for their excess goods and money by outright robbery, cheap goods to crowd out competitors or small wars. Now, since the world is an economic unit and all of it is under the ownership or control of one or another group of capitalist powers, a world war is the inevitable outcome of this struggle for markets, for land, for raw materials.
Depressions today are the result of monopoly capitalism. Home markets become exhausted. The fight for world markets becomes intense. So many powers fight for the same thing that, in time, the world markets are also glutted. The monopoly-capitalist stops producing, since no possibility of making profits exists.
The capitalist is slightly inconvenienced, too. He has his accumulated billions to weather the hard times, of course, but the golden stream of prosperity profits has been reduced to a mere trickle. This condition always gives rise to sharper competition between the capitalist powers, each trying to emerge from the crisis at the expense of the others.
 
Why the Plan Won’t Work
How can the fund and bank prevent depressions and assure prosperity through expanding world trade?
Example: England borrows from the bank to rebuild its damaged industry. She starts producing again – iron, steel products, rubber goods, etc. The loan comes due. Can she pay by exporting her manufactured goods? She can’t send them to the U.S. We already have them. South America? The U.S. gobbled up that market through producing cheaper than England, and taking advantage of her earlier preoccupation with war. India? India already is owed four billion dollars by Britain. Asia? She conflicts with U.S. interests there.
The only way England can pay her loan is to lower the prices of her goods and consequently lower the wages, raise the taxes and depress the standards of the English workers.
Another example: India wants to participate in vigorous post-war trade. England owes India over four billion dollars for war goods. By Empire agreement (the sterling bloc), India cannot use her credit to purchase elsewhere except in England. But England has nothing to give India.
S.A.D. Shroff, representative of the Indian delegation at the conference, proposed that four billion dollars of British indebtedness to India, represented by this blocked sterling, be converted into American dollars at the rate of forty to sixty million dollars a year. Shroff compared India to “a man with a billion dollars in the bank balance but not enough money to pay his taxi fare.” Britain refused to unfreeze Indian money in a statement by her monetary seer, J.M. Keynes, who said Britain had fought the war “on the principle of an unlimited liability and reckless disregard of economic consequences.” England needs the Indian market and Indian goods and will not release its hold.
These two examples suffice to show that no world prosperity will issue from the Bretton Woods agreement. The United States, financial and therefore political master at the conference, can expand its trade – at the expense of the workers of the rest of the world. But by depressing other nations, she will eventually find herself without a market.
The old days of “Prosperity is just around the corner” will be with us again!
(Next week: Mechanism of bank and fund, and U.S. domination)

Note by ETOL
1. In fact only two articles were published.
 




How good the war has been to U. S. capitalism, the readers of Labor Action already know, because we have been indeed scrupulous in keeping tab and informing bur readers of the runaway profits of big business. We now wish to call attention to some left-overs of this great profiteering feast.
The OWI (Office of War Information) reports that surplus war production will amount to FIFTY TO ONE HUNDRED BILLION DOLLARS! There is already half a BILLION surplus in the hands of manufacturers today. Included in this excess property are the huge, government-built, gratis-to-manufacturers, plants. It covers the multitude of things that have been produced and built for war – food, clothing, air fields, camp sites, motor trucks, shoes, razor blades, medicines, adhesive tape, etc.
The Surplus War Property Administration has divided the list of expected surpluses at the end of the war into the following categories: (1) industrial facilities, (2) merchant ships, (3) military construction, such as air fields, camps and Navy yards and bases, (4) war housing, including living accommodations for workers, hospitals and community facilities built as federal projects, (5) finished goods, such as blankets, shoes, airplanes, (6) stock piles, such as tin, copper and other controlled materials, and (7) inventories in the hands of war contractors, including raw materials, goods in process and equipment.
 
No “Chaos” – They Promise
Now, these fifty to one hundred billions in leftovers of war belong to the “free enterprisers” and their enterprising government. How will they handle what the OWI describes as “a major peace problem”? The Surplus War Property Administration says it does not look for the “chaos” which developed early in 1919, following the First World War. The milestones of this period were: Armistice, termination of war contracts with large inventories piled up, unemployment due to shutting down of war industries, consequent lack of purchasing power, no stimulus for business to produce. This was the last post-war depression, which occurred not only in the U.S., but on a world scale.
The SWPA says that plans are being perfected now to taper off war production gradually as military requirements decrease. But military requirements do not necessarily decrease gradually, but depend upon the fortunes of war. The Brewster workers in New York were not eased out gradually, but several thousand were fired at a clip, when that war contract expired. Too many other workers have experienced dis-employment in the midst of the war for us to have any faith in the “plans” of the capitalists for gradual reconversion.
And what will they do with the excess munitions and war facilities? Some of these will undoubtedly be used in the post-war policing of Europe to assure the Four Freedoms – for the “free enterprisers,” of course. The rest will be utterly useless – save to put down popular rebellions of the discontented peoples of Europe, or till the period of the next world war. But even then they are quite likely to be obsolete, since the advent of the robot bomb has caused U.S. specialists in the technology of mass murder to perfect this and newer military instruments.
It is estimated that there will be several million tons of food in government stores at the war ‘s end. The OWI hints of aiding 30,000,000 stranded people in Europe. But despite this abundance of food in the U.S., Labor Action has pointed out previously the low-calorie diet planned for starving. Italy. This is not to mention the past record and probable future role of U.S. food as being a weapon of politics.
 
Excess Goods Abroad
Surpluses of American goods have also accumulated abroad, in northwest European countries from France to Norway; in Mediterranean countries; in India, Burma, South Pacific islands, the East Indies and in many countries in South America. The OWI report states that the sale of surplus property abroad will be “regulated to support American foreign policy and the interests of American business and take into consideration the probable effect on future export markets.” In other words, the sale of these surpluses of food, machinery, ships, etc., will NOT be undertaken to satisfy the needs of the people of the world – who have been taxed, starved and bled white by the war – but their sale will be subordinated to the profit-lust of American capitalists who will export and sell according to the profits they can make.
The American workers will have no surplus at the end of the war. They will be lucky if they have shirts on their backs and a roof over their heads. They have worked on the farms and in the mills to produce the material with which the war is being fought. They are paying for the war – by reduced wages, higher prices, overwhelmingly large taxes, purchases of war bonds. Far from having a surplus at the war ‘s end, the workers will be treated as a part of the surplus commodities, no longer useful to the capitalists, who are even now emptying them out into the streets.
The war surplus, as well as the entire productive plant of the country, should be managed by their .creators, the working people. Then there would be no chaos, “planned” or unplanned. The distribution of surplus war goods would not be dependent on the profit motive, but the genuine needs of the people. War industry would not await the caprice of profiteers to reconvert to needed civilian goods, but would change over immediately to meet civilian needs for goods and jobs.
OPERATE ALL BIG INDUSTRY FOR THE WELFARE OF THE PLAIN PEOPLE, WITH WORKERS ‘ CONTROL OF PRODUCTION THROUGH THE UNIONS AND PLANT COMMITTEES!
 




This is the season when the hired hands of the capitalist press are assigned to dig up the facts on the “human interest” side of candidates running for public office in order to sell to the public whichever man they are backing. Their lot is not a happy one, particularly when they delve into the personal life of the ex-racket-buster who “busted into” the bigger racket of capitalist politics – Thomas E. Dewey. What they choose to write down for us from his past in order to prove he is the man to vote for to head a country of 140,000,000 is a commentary on at least two things: contempt of the capitalist press for the workers who make up the majority of the population – and a revelation of Dewey.
Dewey in his childhood, we are informed, was such a model boy that his little schoolmates looked upon him with suspicion. He was never willfully absent from school. He picked up his toys without being scolded and kept his room as neat as a pin. As the twig is bent, so the tree is inclined. Today, Life magazine informs us, he is immaculate. He rarely sweats. He employs an occasional “damn” only for emphasis. He is driven to an “Aw, nuts!” only when sorely tried by impatience. He tries to conceal his boredom with people who don’t know what they’re talking about “when they are politically important.”
We are forced to add a human touch to such rectitude. The gang-buster who was Jack the Giant Killer in public life extends his pursuit of things evil to the lowly housefly in his home or office. “His aim is good,” says our Life reporter, “but he swats lightly because he does not want to smear the walls, which are finished in a light tan homespun-type paper which he selected himself. He prefers to stun the fly so that it falls on the rug where he can finish it off neatly.”
Dewey also has a passion for the “deep freeze,” that is, frozen food lockers. Of the deep freeze, he says: “I think it will revolutionize the family.” For fear you think he’s going off the deep end, we quickly add another statement that shows he’s not becoming too radical.
We are further informed that the basso (not profundo) from Owosso has said: “I have the best mother in the world.” This indicates that the urban lawyer has not become too urbane. He is really “homey” and “folksy” and stands foursquare for the Preservation of the Family, that burning question in American politics.
 
Dewey, the Unsullied
Dewey’s favor of frozen things included not only frozen food, but also frozen wages. Here he treads on the toes of many millions of workers. It may be remarked, however, that these workers are biased, since if the wage freeze were lifted, they would stand to gain. Dewey, however, having been born the only son of the richest man in town, and currently served by two butlers who wear morning trousers at breakfast, and change to tuxedos for dinner, has not been scathed by the moil and toil of a workingman’s existence. He is therefore unsullied by the prejudices of labor against the wage freeze.
 
Dewey, the Man of Culture
A note about Dewey’s cultural background would not be amiss since we are interested to know what manner of man it is who wants to head the country. We are told he studied operatic singing in college and, according to Roger Butterfleld, Dewey’s voice instructor remarked “he had never seen nor heard a more dramatic portrayal” of The Love Song of an Idiot than that rendered by Dewey.
Another note reveals his love of literature as much as his sense of humor. When asked what book he likes best he is likely to quip, with those “flashing eyes,” “The one I read last.”
This is obviously a man for the ages!
 
Dewey, the Administrator
Due to his experience in administration, Dewey is described as “a genius for putting other people to work.” If there is one thing every man, woman and child in the country would agree on it’s that in the post-war period we will need someone or something that will put people to work. It seems the Republicans banked their faith in Dewey’s ability to “put people to work” to the extent of voting down (together with a goodly number of Democrats) the Kilgore unemployment benefits bill.
 
Dewey, the Philosopher
While Dewey is a shade more shifty than the Democrats on questions like post-war employment, and it has been remarked, not without point, that he trails behind in the Gallup polls on matters of public sentiment, it would be unfair to say he has not a conviction or two. In his personal philosophy, rigidly embedded as a fish in ice, is the belief that the world is divided into two classes of people, the Good and the Bad.
All things are simple to simple people, Dewey may be mocked. But wait! There is more to come. Dewey also believes that the Good People had better be aggressive and run things or the world will go to pot. Now, obviously, since he is running for the Presidency, all this puts Dewey into the category of the Good People, and naturally he would associate only with Good People. That makes his sponsors in the Republican Party – men like Boss Pew, Kemper, etc. – Good capitalists. That makes his supporter, Elizabeth Dilling, a Good red-baiter and Good pro-Nazi; his supporters, George Deatherage and Gerald L. K. Smith, Good rabble-rousers – a little fascist-minded, perhaps, but in the same way as you can speak of Good and Bad fascists.
Dewey, according to his Life magazine biographer, is not only willing to admit “ignorance when he is ignorant” (a virtue in any man’s language, we confess), but is also willing to take advice from someone he trusts. In fact, his most trusted adviser is a former adviser of trusts, one John F. Dulles. According to Drew Pearson, the international lawyer Dulles has argued personally for Franco of Spain against the U.S. Treasury; had legal relations with Count Rene de Chambrun, son-in-law of the French Quisling, Laval; and in 1940 defended the character of Dr. Gerhard Westrick, a German agent making business contacts in Wall Street. But, lest we condemn Dewey’s choice of an adviser on foreign affairs unwittingly, let us not forget that touchstone of Goodness and Badness – Good fascists, Bad fascists; Good Quislings, Bad Quislings.
An old music instructor of his heard the mellifluous tones of Dewey’s acceptance and wrote to him: “How proud we were when we heard your beautiful acceptance speech – – I might almost say there is a new ‘The Voice’ and I don’t mean Sinatra.”
We agree. “The Voice” is a new one. But the tune is old and familiar. And calling the tune are the big capitalist politicians of the Republican Party.
 




For labor, there is no difference between the Republican and Democratic Parties. If you are an ornery Doubting Thomas, let us demonstrate this from the record, platform and campaign issues of the two candidates and parties’.
DEMOCRATS: They take credit for rescuing the country from the clutches of what they like to call the “Hoover Depression.”
REPUBLICANS: They take credit for the fabulous era of “Hoover Prosperity.”
To give Hoover credit or blame for either the period of prosperity or that of unemployment is to be as wrong as to identify him with the vacuum sweeper. All that such logic omits from the analysis is the system of capitalism itself. The capitalists could no longer make a profit, they turned the workers out of the stuffy plants to more healthful outdoors occupations such as apple-peddling or leaf-raking. While Hoover coined the immortal phrase, “Prosperity is just around the corner,” this “much-misunderstood” man did not cause either prosperity or depression.
Nor did Roosevelt rescue us. The capitalist ship of state was leaking in the depression and was menaced by the rising tide of breadlines and unemployed. All FDR did was to help bail. If saving capitalism meant talking radical about “throwing the money-changers out of the temple” and throwing the workers a few crumbs – well, no sacrifice was too great to save the system. And being a wealthy man himself, Roosevelt was a good man for the job since he understood the problems of America’s Sixty Families.
DEMOCRATS: They are pledged to uphold “free enterprise,” promote the success of small business, foster the well-being of the small, independent farmer, encourage “risk capital” after the war.
REPUBLICANS: They stand pledged to uphold “free enterprise,” promote the success of small business, foster the well-being of the small, independent farmer, encourage “venture capital.”
To set at ease the brokers and financiers who consult Labor Action, the distinction made in the two platforms between “risk capital” and “venture capital” does not constitute a real difference between the two parties.
An item of interest to this class of readers as well as to thrifty soldiers is the war property being offered for sale by the war surplus bureau of the government. There is a large supply of only slightly used war factories in the ten to one hundred million dollar brackets. Also, for the smaller business men there are available a number in the five hundred thousand to one million dollar bracket – practically a song. Even the small, independent farmer might grab off a few of these. There is no conniving with the monopolies in getting rid of this property. Everything is to be offered at public sale, so that everyone will have a crack at it. While this is being done under Roosevelt, the Republicans are equally determined to get rid of monopoly by the same drastic means.
DEMOCRATS: They claim credit for the National Labor Relations Act, the Wage and Hour Act, and the Social Security Act.
REPUBLICANS: They go for these acts, too, and promise to continue them. Nay, they promise to do even better.
Tie score.
DEMOCRATS: Their supporters claim Dewey has the American pro-fascist elements on his bandwagon.
REPUBLICANS: Their supporters claim that Roosevelt is supported by the Communists; enemies of labor and servants of the Russian bureaucracy.
They’re both right.
DEMOCRATS: Their platform, adopted by them in convention assembled, says nary a word about guaranteeing full employment after the war.
REPUBLICANS: Their platform, also adopted in convention assembled, and much longer than that of the Democrats, has not a single syllable on guaranteeing jobs after the war.
Now, it may be assumed that since the bright, halcyon days of WPA, the Democrats have learned a thing or two about the evils of pampering the people of this country. And the Republicans, who have ever been the guardians of “individual initiative” could not be expected to rob the worker citizens of this birthright. It does something to a man’s morale to be handed a job on a silver platter. (We’re not saying what, for the moment.)
DEMOCRATS: They picture Dewey as a babe in swaddling clothes, not old enough to run the country.
REPUBLICANS: They picture Roosevelt as a man with one foot in the grave, and therefore too decrepit to continue in office.
These about cancel each other out.
DEMOCRATS: Their platform says they issued a “new Magna Carta for labor” and they take credit for giving labor the right to organize.
REPUBLICANS: They call themselves “the historical champion of free labor.”
The statement of the Democrats is not literally true. The “Magna Carta,” as a matter of record, came after the tremendous organizing campaigns of the trade unions, the strike struggles, the picketings, the battling of unionists against strike-breakers’ clubs and coppers’ tear gas. These contributed a mite to the formation of the giant union movement of today. We hope you do not think us quibbling that we place this molehill beside the mountain of the “New Deal Magna Carta.” The Republicans contribute a point about “free labor,” and they mean to “free” it of the nasty union restrictions which a man like, say, Westbrook Pegler has pointed out, and which keep it tied down.
DEMOCRATS: They authored the Smith-Connally bill, which was vetoed by Roosevelt only because he thought it didn’t “go far enough” toward preventing strikes.
REPUBLICANS: They helped pass the Smith-Connally bill and are against strikes.
Tie score.
DEMOCRATS: They are for the wage, freeze, and their candidate, Roosevelt, has stood pat on maintaining the Little Steel formula.
REPUBLICANS: They say they are opposed to the “freezing of wages at arbitrary levels.”
While it might seem offhand that the Republicans have the edge over the Democrats here, that gain is offset by something else. The Republicans would allow prices to rise also. Roosevelt, however, claims to keep prices frozen. Some radicals, the AFL and the CIO complain that the cost of living has risen by 45.3 per cent. But there are always cranks.
DEMOCRATS: Many of them were influential in defeating the Kilgore bill for unemployment compensation. FDR was totally silent on this bill.
REPUBLICANS: They helped, with an overwhelming majority of their representatives voting for the big business George bill.
For an analysis of their motivation on this issue, refer back to the section on “pampering” labor and encouraging “individual initiative.” And remember, too, that Roosevelt signed the “inadequate” reconversion bill.
DEMOCRATS: Their program states they believe that “racial and religious minorities should have equal rights with the rest of the citizens to live, develop, vote, etc.”
REPUBLICANS: They are for a Constitutional amendment to abolish the poll tax, and for full democratic rights to Negroes.
It would be unfair to call Roosevelt’s party the “poll-tax party” just because he has to appease a few lynch-law Democrats from the South, or just because Southern Democrats run a large section of the party and are a big power in all its deliberations. What about the Republicans? There is a certain tradition that this party SPEAKS radically on the Negro problem. But it has been in power many years and did little enough about it. Their utterances are vote-grabbing schemes, while Republicans in Congress vote with the poll-taxers.
DEMOCRATS: They take responsibility for the foresight in arming the country, “quarantining the aggressors,” and prosecuting the war for the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms jointly with the Allies. They condemn the Republicans for hindering the war effort.
REPUBLICANS: They support the war for the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms and the United Nations. Some of them point out that Roosevelt promised he would not send our boys overseas.
The point about “hindering the war effort” and FDR’s promise cancel out. While Churchill fights to defend British enslavement of India, however much FDR objects, he holds his tongue. While presumably the war is being fought to liberate people under a foreign oppressor, you can have too much of a good thing, and Roosevelt undoubtedly realizes this. Roosevelt, with his flexible statesmanship, also recognizes de Gaulle, who presides over France’s African colonies. And he preserves a judicious silence over Stalin’s rude grabs in Eastern Europe. But Dewey shows himself a good sport and says he is willing to go along. Furthermore, the criticism of his youthfulness does not stand up under the fact that he clings to the tried and true methods of FDR rather than venture something new.
DEMOCRATS: They do not promise to end war.
REPUBLICANS: Neither do they.
Having learned their lesson in the “war to end all wars” neither party is so foolish as to envisage a future without war They both recognize that more wars are coming, since they are both in favor of a United Nations police force to take action against the future “aggressors.” They both believe in capitalism an imperialism and are firm defenders of the profit system and the rights of capitalists to exploit labor.
No, thanks. For us there’s no choice between the Republocrats and the Demopublicans. In politics, we don’t believe in choosing the “lesser evil” over a greater evil, when such a choice exists But these two parties are both monstrous evils for the working people. We choose instead something good for working men and women: A LABOR PARTY!

Our Program for A Labor Party






Abolish wage-freezing and job-freezing.
 
Rescind the no-strike pledge. Repeal the Smith-Connally anti-strike law.
 
A higher, not a lower, standard of living.
 
No tax on wages. No sales tax on consumer goods. Abolish all taxes on annual incomes of $5,000 or less.
 
For labor control of rationing and price-fixing.
 
A one hundred per cent tax on all war profits.
 
A $25,000 ceiling on all individual incomes.
 
A year-around job and a guaranteed annual wage.
 
A two hundred and fifty billion dollar five-year program for housing, public works, etc.
 
For unrestricted democratic rights of servicemen; doubling present dependency allotments, with no deductions from servicemen’s pay.
 
Two years’ base pay grant to all veterans, with government-financed job training and education.
 
Against all forms of race discrimination, Jim Crow, anti-Semitism, etc., in civilian life and the armed services.
 
Adequate government aid to small farmers. Abolish tenancy and share-cropping by turning the land over to those who till it.
 
For a break with bankrupt capitalist political parties and complete independence of labor from them. For a workers’ government to organize the country for freedom, security, peace and plenty for all!
 
For an end to war and fascism by a democratic people’s peace, without annexations, indemnities, tribute or the dismemberment and oppression of sovereign nations and peoples.
 




 




The latest round in the epic battle of labor to obtain a wage increase goes to the employers. The National War Labor Board, with the usual gang-up of industry and “public” members against the labor members, refused, eight to four, to ask Roosevelt to end the wage freeze by modifying the Little Steel formula. The majority stated it was not within its province to say what effect a wage increase would have on the price structure of the country as their excuse. This does not incapacitate them, however, to make recommendations on wages for the reconversion period.
Labor Action does not need to labor the point further which has so often been stressed in its columns, of the validity of the, demands of the ten millions of organized workers in the AFL and the CIO. The daily strain of making ends meet on the part of workers and their families is more damning evidence of the justice of their demands than a table of figures, although the figures prove their case too.
This latest reprehensible blow delivered to workers is one more proof of what we have said about the WLB since its inception. It is not an impartial body, mediating fairly between right and wrong, between labor and the employer. It is a tool of the capitalist administration, designed to stave off the demands of labor and keep wages down. Roosevelt, too, has stood pat on the wage freeze, and it is therefore unthinkable that; the WLB should reverse his policy. He is so certain that the labor leaders can deliver the vote of union and labor supporters through the PAC that he can afford to be arrogant and hold the line on wages.
What about the labor members on, the WLB – George Meany, Matthew Woll, R.J. Thomas and Emil Rieve? They castigated the majority report. The board’s statement that it could not go beyond presenting data on the relationship of wages to living costs they called “tantamount to an admission by the public members of the board that they are not competent to perform their duties.” The labor members, you can see, were plainly very bitter about the decision.
What the labor members did not, say, but what is as transparent as a plateglass window, is that the WLB carried out, as usual, not the wishes of labor, nor of the “public,” but of industry. The industry members issued a statement saying that the board was not the correct administrative body to investigate whether the wage freeze should be changed and “that the matter is one for Congress to consider.”
The industry members know whereof they speak. They realize that the WLB is their show, and furthermore, that passing the buck to Congress means that Congress will pass a few more bucks to the capitalist magnates of industry. This has been amply demonstrated by the solicitude of Congress for industry during the reconversion period and after, to take care of its losses and guarantee its profits. Our story in this issue on steel profits shows how industry is faring. As far as labor is concerned, Congress does not wish to destroy its individual initiative and pamper It by guaranteeing substantial unemployment compensation or jobs.
The labor members were reported as saying they would not resign from the board, even though they will make, their own recommendations to the President.
“Hit me again, I love it!” is their credo.
For labor to achieve a wage increase two things are necessary. First: no fiddling around with the WLB. Labor members should withdraw. Second: rescind the no-strike pledge. This is the lever necessary to pry open the lid on wages.
 




The United Rubber Workers of America was one of the first offsprings of the CIO and was nursed on heroic and violent organizing struggles in the cradle of sit-down strikes in Akron, Ohio. Since the war, the union has expanded to over 180,000 members. While in comparison with the unions of the miners, steel or auto workers, its numerical strength is small, its strategical importance is great. This fact is due not only to its militant record, but to the vital role of the industry in both peacetime and wartime.
As a microcosm reflecting the general unrest of the American labor movement over the no-strike pledge and War Labor Board restrictions imposed by the labor officialdom, the rank and file in the “Big Four” Akron locals carried on a five-day strike in May 1943. The strike, following that of the miners, influenced by it and accompanied by mass picketing and skirmishes at the plant gates, was due to the War Labor Board’s refusal to grant the wage increases asked by the union. It was stopped only by the intervention of President Roosevelt. The strike-breaking role of Sherman H. Dalrymple and his Stalinist and run-of-the-mill bureaucratic consorts on the International Executive Board in that strike, started an active tide of opposition to him in the ranks of the union which grew with his subsequent actions on behalf of the corporations.
Last January, Dalrymple undertook an action which aroused the entire Akron labor movement. When a strike of the bandbuilders occurred at General Local over company cheating on wages, transfers and other abuses, Dalrymple expelled the strikers, who were then fired by the company. He also expelled two past presidents of the union who took up the fight on behalf of the expelled strikers. The latter were then fired, blacklisted, had their draft deferments withdrawn and were immediately ushered into the army. This outrage moved Goodrich Local to expel Dalrymple from his own union, an action that may have been constitutionally questionable but one which placed Dalrymple in a ludicrous and precarious position. He was reinstated by the General Executive Board and the case was to be brought up by the Goodrich Local under “appeals” at the convention.
A weakness of the fight subsequently waged in behalf of the General strikers was that it was conducted not on the forthright basis of the right of these men to strike for redress of their grievances and in opposition to the no-strike pledge, but on the basis of “unconstitutionality” on the part of Dalrymple, and the fact that not all the expelled “instigated” the strike. It was an oblique defense of the right to strike, made at a time when the defense should have been a head-on collision with the policies of the officialdom.
 
The Nature of the Opposition
Goodrich Local, under the presidency of George Bass, then began its campaign for the international convention. This local was the core of progressive sentiment among the big rubber unions and was on record against the no-strike pledge. At the 1942 covention, Bass led a lively minority group opposing the pledge, labor-management collaboration, labor participation on the War Labor Board and standing for a general program of union democratization. He did not challenge the leadership for office, however, nominating Dalrymple instead! At the 1943 convention his fight was not so aggressive, although (and because) he was closer to declaring himself a candidate in opposition to Dalrymple. At the convention just concluded, where he ran finally against Dalrymple, he soft-pedalled all issues.
We are not concerned with Bass’ personality save as it is an indication of his politics and a reflection of the movement he leads. A leader who rose from the ranks and still has their interests at heart, he is described, not without justice, by the press of the rubber barons, the Akron Beacon Journal, as “a man of whom it never can be said that he is a friend of the rubber companies” Bass responds to and reflects the pressure of his ranks but he lacks a definitive program. At the same time, he has withstood the pressure of the reactionary newspapers, the government agencies and the Stalinists who characteristically but erroneously call him “an agent of the Trotskyites and John L. Lewis.” To call him a minor John L. Lewis has some aptness.
This year the opposition to the international leadership spread rapidly in all the Akron locals. It was consciously organized for a fight at the coming convention. Goodyear Local, long languishing under the domination of the Stalinists, overwhelmingly elected a progressive slate for the convention. General, smarting under the blow dealt it by Dalrymple, joined the movement. Firestone was in the majority sympathetic.
In the last stages of preparation for the convention, city-wide caucus meetings were held. The opposition was united on rescinding the no-strike pledge, opposing the Dalrymple administration with a slate of their own, contesting the reversal of the ouster of Dalrymple, appealing the General Local’s cases and a sheaf of demands to curb the bureaucracy and democratize the union. Some attempts were made to circularize the out-of-town locals with the case against Dalrymple involving the General firings and the program of the opposition.
 
What Happened at the Convention
Came the convention. Dalrymple, in effect, appointed his own trial committee by using his constitutional authority to appoint all committees, including the one on appeals which would hear the case against him. A test vote came in the early sessions over a motion by the progressives to have locals approve international representatives and to prevent international board members from being representatives at the same time. It was defeated, two to one, and this figure became the typical one on all contested questions throughout the convention. The Akron delegation, with one-third – and the most substantial third – of the convention assured in advance, failed with few exceptions to make any inroads on the out-of-Akron locals.
One reason for this failure was the above-mentioned tactic of Bass, to soften his resistance the nearer he comes to power. This was evidenced in the convention by the fact that he did not lead the opposition; rather, he let other progressive spokesmen speak first and exhaust the main arguments on most questions, thereby drawing fire from himself. This was a poor stratagem for a man who was bidding for the presidency on the basis of a program. His device did not fool the waverers, who saw him nevertheless vote with the Akron bloc on all questions. Another reason the pro-Dalrymple locals could not be won over was the amateur and opportunistic corridor and hotel-room procedure employed by the Bass supporters to garnet votes for their candidates. With their own ranks critical, the Bassites were out to gain executive board posts, not to discuss the program of opposition to Dalrymple.
Another important factor prejudicing the other delegations against the Akron caucus was the pre-convention campaign of the Dalrymple machine itself against the Akron group. Many of the delegates from other locals refused to speak to the Akron members in the first days of the convention. These other locals, being outside the main center of the rubber union, are more dependent on the international and have its representatives, either Stalinist or machine-men, stationed in their unions. Their delegates also included southern locals and representatives of unions in the “war babies,” i.e., plants whose unions were new and inexperienced in the fighting traditions of the labor movement. These things forced the Akron bloc to remain a minority throughout the convention.
 
Struggle on Appeals
The minority report of the appeals committee, condemning Dalrymple for his action in the General affair, might have gained the Akron candidates some votes in the elections, since the evidence of Dalrymple’s high-handedness and flouting of the constitution was amply supported. However, the union leadership had set the time for elections in advance of the report of the appeals committee, a characteristic bureaucratic trick. Also, the two contending sides agreed to a compromise on the two major appeals. Goodrich Local agreed to drop the appeal on the expulsion of Dalrymple. Dalrymple agreed to restore the expelled members to their former status, return fifty per cent of the fines imposed on the strikers, while back pay claims were denied.
Although it is probable that Dalrymple with his mechanical majority could have made the penalties on the strikers stick and, even more easily, thrown out the appeal on his own expulsion, he could have done it only by having the report on his behavior and the damaging testimony of many of the members against him made public to the convention. The opposition would have lost any restitution for or vindication of the strikers. But the compromise was therefore really weighted in their favor. It was, in effect, an admission of guilt by Dalrymple.
Despite the fact they remained a minority, the Akron delegates did not break ranks throughout the convention. Bass ran against Dalrymple and lost, 394 to 756. There was a a high esprit and a will to continue the progressive caucus based on the unity of the convention and founded on a pro-grogressive program. The defects of the opposition were that it was on the instinctive-progressive level: while it opposed the no-strike pledge it supported the candidacy of him who demanded it – Roosevelt. The idea of a Labor Party is almost totally lacking from the consciousness of the rubber workers. What the opposition in the rubber workers needs is a leavening of conscious rather than instinctive action, in its political as well as its economic program. When the rubber workers struck for higher wages, it was Roosevelt, whom they support through the PAC, who broke their strike and upheld the WLB. Inside their union, it is Dalrymple’s upholding of the no-strike pledge, supported by Roosevelt and the corporations, which hinders their progress.
 
What About the Future?
The struggle in the URW is by no means over, for the simple reason that the issues which confronted the convention will remain with the union. No matter how many times votes may be obtained to reaffirm the no-strike pledge and to support FDR, the sponsor of the wage freeze, the Little Steel formula and the WLB, these issues constantly recur. With each passing month the effects of Roosevelt’s policies become increasingly disastrous for the rank and file union member. The fight against the policies of the President and his Administration thus becomes a matter of life and death for the average worker.
Dalrymple won a victory over Akron. He succeeded in creating an antagonism between the small locals which dot the country and the large Akron locals which constitute the flesh and blood of the union. Only a little intelligence will reveal to one that in the coming post-war period it will be the Akron unions which will continue to be the strongest defensive and offensive weapon the union has in its fight against the bosses’ drive to destroy the labor movement. Without the Akron unions, which make up the strongest single section of the URW, the union would be doomed. Does Dalrymple understand this? Maybe. But he conducts himself as though the Akron militants are the greatest clanger to the union, rather than the rubber barons. In the coming struggle, however, the Akron locals will wield the great power in defense of the Rubber Workers Union.
The defense of the union will depend upon the kind of policies that are developed to fight for the maintenance of the union standards won after many years of heroic struggle. This is the decisive question and it is on this question that Bass and his followers present their weakest side. They failed to understand that a clever evasion of a dispute on issues, on the ground that they might be “unpopular,” played into the hands of Dalrymple. This was foolish because, as already pointed out, on the differences which existed between the bureaucracy and the progressives, Bass and his followers voted against the former. But in failing to make a clear and uncompromising struggle on issues, Bass aided Dalrymple in his strategy to present the progressives as a power-mad group seeking only to win offices. That is why it is doubly important for the Akron progressives to wage their struggle around the important issues which divide them from the conservatives, who, if allowed to continue in their course, will run the union into the ground. A great responsibility rests on the Akron militants, the men who made the Rubber Workers Union and whose struggles have won them the plaudits of the entire labor movement. That responsibility is to prepare now a program for revitalizing the union, for strengthening it in preparation to meet the bosses’ anti-union offensive.
 




It is a rare reactionary who opposes openly and forthrightly the concept of “full employment.” Occasionally one pipes up with, “Full employment is incompatible with the system of free enterprise.” But he is drowned out in the chorus of manufacturers, liberals, labor leaders, Governor Dewey and even the President, with their “plans” for “full employment.” All God’s chillun got plans. Everyone is for the “ideal” of full employment.
Attention is now focused on the Murray bill, a revised version of one that was backed by President Truman when he was a senator. The essence of the Murray bill is contained in two points:

The President is to estimate “the aggregate volume of prospective investment and expenditure” for the country for the coming fiscal year.
 
The President is to estimate the “aggregate volume of investment and expenditure required to assure a full employment volume of production.”

The President is then required to fill the gap between guess (1) and guess (2) by “suggestions” to industry and “compensatory” spending on the part of government as a last resort.
Fearful employers are assured that the Murray bill does not envisage planned production or government control of industry. “Free enterprise,” that is, capitalist production for private profit, is not to be interfered with.
With the sole exception of the socialist solution to the problem of full employment, all plans, including those of labor officialdoms, do not touch a hair on the head of free enterprise. They are therefore all doomed in advance. Why?
 
Business’ Failure
Before the war private enterprise was incapable of insuring full employment. As late as 1940, ten million men and women were on WPA or relief. Government had to fill in the gap between what the Murray bill calls “aggregate volume of prospective investment and expenditure” – labor’s needs for jobs and industry’s inability to meet them – and aggregate volume ... to assure a full employment volume of production.” For more than ten years of the Great Depression, all the king’s horses and all the king’s men couldn’t get capitalism to employ everybody able and willing to work. Government had to give the unemployed a dole and “prime the pump” of industry.
But did free enterprise restore fuili employment by its managerial genius, its proven capacity for leadership? Not on your life. The government again came to its rescue. It furnished business with war orders. About half of all production is now directed to the implements of destruction.
Now, the war market is diminishing and will practically vanish in a few months or a year when Japan is defeated.
But the problem is greater than it was before the war. We have more plants, more workers, more skills, more efficiency, more productivity arid more machinery due to wartime expansion. We have, in short, more of all the means necessary to a high standard of living, shorter hours and certainly – full employment for every able-bodied person. But the problem is greater than it was before the war – under the system of free, private, capitalist enterprise.
Depressions and low employment are caused under capitalism because TOO MUCH is produced not TOO LITTLE. The crises of capitalism are crises of OVERPRODUCTION, not lack of production. It is not overproduction in the sense of the needs of the people, but overproduction for the market. Capitalism does not produce for needs, consequently underconsumption accompanies overproduction. Capitalist enterprise overproduces precisely because it is not a system of overall planning, but a system of competition for private profit. All businesses, small and large, compete with each other. All rival automobile corporations compete with each other. Where competition has been eliminated in a single branch, like aluminum, the aluminum trust competes with other trusts, like steel, plastic wood, etc.
All private enterprise is out to produce as much as it can, to grab as much of the market as it can, for it is in sales that it realizes its profits. Hence it overproduces, the people cannot buy what has been produced because “free enterprise” robs them of a part of their pay envelope in the form of profits. Then come layoffs and the inevitable depression.
 
Gov’t Aid Necessary
That is why government must come to the aid of-business. It must subsidize business through loans or through providing purchasing power to the jobless through government expenditure. This is what Roosevelt did during the last depression. The Murray plan proposes no more than this. The bill does not move one flea-hop in the direction of full employment. It will, at best, provide the old WPA in a new form.
Big business is afraid of even this limited intervention into economic life by government. It is afraid that when it is so apparent that business is dependent on the government, reasonable people will demand that government take over all of business and industry and eliminate the competitive drive for profits and plan production totally for full employment and full satisfaction of the needs of the people.
Therefore, a conservative Southern Democrat like Vinson (who held down wages to the Little Steel formula when he was Economic Stabilizer) supports the Murray bill, but with a note of “warning.
“National economic policies must not be allowed to develop into regimentation of business or labor, or agriculture, or of the people. Direction of private output by public authority in peacetime is repugnant to American ways of thought.”
The only thing repugnant to the ways of thought of the American worker is an insane profit system of production for private profit which can no more guarantee full employment than water can run uphill.
The Workers Party proposes as the only solution to full employment that the government take over every branch of every plant of every industry which cannot guarantee jobs at adequate wages for its workers.
Management which cannot provide jobs for its employees has forfeited the right to manage. The organized workers can set up their own management committees which alone can plan for use and not for profit.
This is the only road to full employment.
 







President Truman’s Proposal: A MAXIMUM of $25 a week for all workers for twenty-six weeks.
Workers Party Proposal: A MINIMUM of $30 a week for single men and women for the duration of the period of unemployment.




On May 28, President Truman requested of Congress emergency legislation extending the present coverage of unemployment benefits and increasing the maximum payment to $25 a week.
This is late recognition of the fact that NOTHING has been done for the workers who have toiled, fought and borne the cost of the war.
 
Congress and Business
Not so with big business. Congress guaranteed the profits before they took the “risk” of converting to war production. That was in the period of “priorities unemployment” when the workers walked the streets, haunted employment agencies and suffered below subsistence living. The war assured business undreamed of profits. And Congress again guaranteed its post-war profits through refunds out of the excess profits taxes.
The workers have gotten the wage freeze, job freeze, high taxes, a rising cost of living, deductions for war bonds, etc. They are going to be more than a little fed up when they go on the dole, whose present maximum is from $16 to $18 a week.
President Truman is belatedly recognizing this fact – when cutback unemployment is already throwing thousands out of work.
But $25 a week is the minimum on which a single person can live and receive the minimum necessities of life. Twenty-five dollars a week for a family of any size means a substandard of existence! If you multiply the present benefits of $16 a week by the rise in the cost of living (45.3 per cent – CIO figure) the result is about $25 a week. In other words, the President’s proposal, aside from extending the workers covered, does no more than compensate for the increase in the cost of living. And this is the MAXIMUM!
 
Only Decent Proposal
The Workers Party proposal for unemployment insurance to all workers for whom government and industry do not find jobs, beginning with $30 a week for single men and women, is the only proposal that will guarantee a decent standard of living to those who have toiled and are now being arbitrarily tossed out of their jobs.
This is only a beginning for labor. It should also fight for the incorporation into its union contracts of a clause calling for the absorption of workers thrown into unemployment in the re-conversion period by a reduction of the work-week with no reduction in weekly take-home pay. It has to proceed to the guarantee of a year-around job, a minimum of $2,500 annual wage to each worker, and a rising standard of living by means of government planning to assure a $5,000 annual income to all workers’ families, together with a thirty-hour maximum work week.
All these things are within labor’s grasp. It is the biggest, mightiest organized force in the country. All that is necessary is that it rise up on its feet, repudiate the supine policies of its leadership, such as the no-strike pledge and the support of capitalist candidates who refused last year to give labor $25 a week unemployment benefits but guaranteed the billions to big business!
(And it ought to be noted that one of the houses of Congress just voted itself $2,500 a year “pin money” in addition to present salaries of $10,000. This is only four times the maximum unemployment compensation a worker could obtain in a year!)
Labor must get back on the high road of independent class action and form an independent class party of labor!
 







“A job! We want a guaranteed job and a guaranteed annual wage.”



These are the demands foremost in the mind of every worker.
To the unemployed worker who has already suffered loss of his job due to current cutbacks; to the war worker who has a year at most to work before he undergoes reconversion unemployment; to the returned war veteran who has no job yet; to the youth who are coming of age; to the soldiers’ widows who must support families – every one of them is in deadly fear of the material and moral insecurity that accompanies unemployment.
The Workers Party offers in adjoining columns its plan for jobs for all. The plan is concerned with the needs of the workers for jobs, better wages, a guaranteed annual wage, special needs of veterans, better housing, etc. It begins and ends with the needs of the working people.
It is not concerned with the needs of industry for profits. The government has more than adequately taken care of converting industry for war, providing it with a market for all its war-time products, guaranteeing its war profits, allowing it tax rebates for reconversion and guaranteeing its profits for peacetime.
Aside from the fact that the plan of the Workers Party makes more adequate demands than any program presented by, either the Truman Administration or the official labor leaders, it differs from all other plans in one decisive way. The Workers Party plan tells not merely; what is wanted, but HOW to get it.
 
CIO, AFL, Truman
The UAW-CIO wants no idle factories which produce unemployment. But the former workers of Willow Run are stalking the USES for jobs or a few of the luckier ones are working at beginners’ rates while R. J. Thomas still piteously begs
Henry Kaiser to take over Willow Run. Thomas doesn’t know HOW to get security for the workers.
Or the CIO leaders want to raise the present starvation dole of unemployment compensation. They visit President Truman, who remembers suddenly he had forgotten the “human side of reconversion” and recommends an emergency act by Congress to raise compensation to a maximum of $25 a week. Congress, having guaranteed profits to industry and tided it comfortably over re-conversion, and tipped its own salaries in one House, prepares to vacation. Meanwhile thousands of workers are on enforced vacations – without pay. The CIO leaders don’t know HOW.
The Truman Administration plan for “full employment” is embodied in the Murray bill. This bill, mentioning “preservation of free enterprise” in practically every paragraph, would do no more than bring back the WPA days of “fake jobs” and “made work” that characterized the pre-war period. It is worth about as much as a prayer. President Truman doesn’t know HOW.
 
Jobs for All Possible
The reactionary AFL leaders not only don’t know HOW. They don’t merely propose nothing themselves, but demand that the government do nothing; leaving everything up to private enterprise.
All of the plans of all of the planners do not fall short because full employment, a guaranteed annual wage and genuine security are impossible.
The national income of the country has been raised during this war, to over $190 billion. The previous all-time high was in 1929, when national income was only $90 billion. Bear in mind that this more than doubling of goods and services has been accomplished with only a twenty per cent increase in the working force and much of this increase was from the ranks of the unskilled who had never worked before!
Up to the present we have had full employment – no, an actual manpower shortage – for war production. Why no jobs for all in peacetime?
There have been produced more factories, more machinery, more skills – for war. Why cannot they be used to create the jobs for peacetime?
It is possible in peacetime to secure jobs for all. It is possible when you KNOW HOW, when you have a complete program to assure full employment.
 
“How” of WP Program
Therefore the Workers Party calls for “conscription of all war industries ... no handing over of government-built and government-owned plants and facilities to private ownership.” Let Willow Run and other plants like it be owned and operated by the government since it is not profitable for fee. enterprise to do it!
Therefore the Workers Party calls for a “100 per cent tax on all war profits above a five per cent maximum on invested capital” and a “$35,000 ceiling on individual income, plus a levy on all accumulated wealth over $50,000 to cover war costs and provide post-war security for labor.’’
With this revenue the government could operate every outlet, branch, plant, factory and industry that cannot guarantee jobs at adequate wages for its workers.
As for management, which has shown its “genius” for organizing production only in wartime (with government money and orders), it has lost its right to manage. Let the organized workers elect their own management committees which will plan production for jobs, needs and security.
Who will carry out this program? Not Murray, nor Green, nor Thomas, nor Truman; nor “free enterprise,” which is already breaking down now that the war market is shrinking
Only an independent Labor Party composed of the working class who lack jobs, security and a guaranteed income can achieve these things.
 

   “A triumvirate of truly global dimensions, which commands virtually all the effective power on earth, meets in Potsdam ... to lay the cornerstone for a new world.” Thus a New York Times editorial described the meeting of the Big Three. Truman, Stalin and Churchill, sitting in imported comfort and luxury in the former shrine of militarism, surrounded by the ghosts of sixty million military casualties of the Second World War, meet rather to lay a tombstone on the aspirations of the peoples of the world for freedom, security and an end to war. They meet to divide further the booty of conquest. In each successive Big Three conference, from Teheran to Potsdam, the military might based upon the industrial and financial power of the Big Three has determined the strategy of the war and the division of the world into spheres of influence. The closer the powers come to complete victory and cessation of the present war, however, the more the exigency of unity for winning the war is subordinated to the centrifugal national tendencies based upon imperialist rivalry for the markets of the world. The old slogans of the Four Freedoms and the democrats principles of the Atlantic Charter for which the peoples of the world were mobilized behind the Allies are buried deeper. That the course of the war with Japan will be one of the major points involved in the discussions was only highlighted by the summoning of Admiral Land by Truman to the conference. Here arise difficult problems. The United States has bigger stakes in the Far East than in Europe, but the other powers also have vested interests. They don’t want to see the U.S. “monopolize” the war against Japan. There has already been some complaint by Britain that the U.S. is not sufficiently utilizing British ships in that area. If the other big powers do not come in for a good share of the responsibility for the military victory, they will have no moral basis for a claim to the Far Eastern spoils. Russian participation requires a settlement of the Chiang Kai-shek dispute with the Chinese Communists. Of key importance to both Russia and the Anglo-American powers is the disposition of Germany. There appears to be extreme skittishness on both sides, not merely because of the significance of Germany’spower, but its location as meeting ground of the big powers, separated up to this point by their buffer states, puppet regimes, protective boundaries and spheres of influence. The dual policy of Russia on the one hand and the Anglo-Americans on the other will have to be solved. Russia, while calling for the maintenance of “free enterprise,” has  been enterprisingly carrying off machinery and industrial equipment to incorporate into the Stalinist empire. Nor does she allow much leeway to the business men who remain. A Jewish publisher, for example, a genuine “free enterpriser” of the house of Ullstein, which was confiscated by the Nazis during the Hitler regime, was refused the management of his business by the Russians for being “too Western-minded.” The vaunted “democracy” and “fraternization” in the Russian area of Germany, coming through censored news dispatches, conceals the ruthless suppression of serious democratic opponents by the NKVD (Russian secret police), the utilization of the made-in-Moscow puppets of the “Free Germany” committee, etc. But Russian policy, emanating as it does from a totalitarian régime that permits no opposition, is easily carried through. That of the United States, for example, is confused and uncertain. There are proponents of the restoration of German industry to take care of civilian needs for Europe, and proponents of the Morgenthau-Baruch school which would raze industry and agriculturalize Germany. While the Russians hoist picked and safe anti-fascist parties into power and here and there an ex-Nazi who is willing to exchange the Nazi insignia for the hammer and sickle of the communists, the Americans have barred anti-fascist parties in Bavaria and openly supported outright Nazis in administrative posts. Meanwhile the economic problems that beset Germany, flowing in no small measure from its tripartite division, are acute. The heavily industrialized American zone is cut off from the breadbasket, which is in Russian hands. This problem, in miniature, is the problem of all Europe, split up into artificial zones, divided by tariff walls and political barriers.  Italy, Middle East Italy has recently declared war on Japan as a bid to become part of the United Nations and to effect the settlement of her status. Yet there is some reluctance, even on the part of Italian leaders, to make public at this late date the terms of the armistice, which are undoubtedly severe. This will bring up immediately the disposition ofthe Italian Empire and consequent squabbles among the big powers. France may make her bid for Tripolitania to add to Tunisia. Britain would find Italian Somaliland a convenient neighbor to British Somaliland. Greece would like to stake a claim to the Dodecanese Islands. The Italian port of Trieste, seized by Stalin’s Marshal Tito in a “unilateral” action and claimed by Italy, is up for solution. The question of the Middle East, a pot pourri of oil imperialism, strategic ports and inflamed national sentiments for liberation will be up for bargaining among Truman, Stalin and Churchill. There have already been military clashes between the Levantine states and French soldiers, with Britain magnanimously recognizing the demand for independence of these people because of her own interests in the area. Of foremost concern is Russia’s demand on Turkey, made unilaterally and now in the hands of the Big Three, for a change in the status of the Dardanelles, Russian outlet to the Mediterranean, plus perhaps a demand for Turkish European territory for one of her Balkan satellites. She also backs Turkey’s demands of Britain and the United States for Iraq oil. This Turkish demand arises as aresult of Russian monopolization of Rumanian oil through reparations and commercial agreements. At the other end of the Mediterranean, Tangier hangs as a counterweight to the Dardanelles. France appealed to the British and Americans, in a sort of trilateral action excluding Russia, to internationalize the area opposite Gibraltar, forming the lower lip of the western entrance to the Mediterranean. Britain and America proposed British-American-Spanish-French control – at which point Russia stepped in. If the fate of the Dardanelles is to be decided by Big Three arrangement, so will that of Tangier. How the great powers chafe under the bonds of the “United Nations” and how they struggle to make separate agreements!  New, Old Tasks The aspirations of the European and Asiatic masses for freedom from a totalitarian, foreign yoke have not been met in Allied victory. In practically every case the conqueror and enslaver has merely changed nationalities. At the same time, the world division of natural resources and the world division of labor are pressing for an international solution, an international federation of free, democratic states, a free international exchange of the products of labor. The domination and division of the world by the Big Three perpetuates the chaos of society, its misery, starvation, crises and wars. These will be gotten rid of only through socialism. In order to achieve socialism today it is necessary for the newly enslaved Europeans to regain their democratic rights. To aid in that task as well as achieve their own freedom, American workers should demand withdrawal of the occupying forces of their own government from Europe which are holding down their fellow workers.   



Many of our overseas veterans have been found fit for combat but unfit for army insurance!
Yank, the army weekly newspaper, has carried a series of letters from overseas veterans, some of whom have been in combat, who register this complaint.
 
Bill of Complaints
“Government insurance ... was disapproved because of physical disability. Yet I have already been on the frontlines. Is it true that if the Government won’t approve insurance for me I should be discharged? Also the Veterans’ Administration in Washington won’t approve.”
“Upon my arrival in the China theater I received notice that my policy was rejected because of a previous case of syphilis before entering the Army ... I have a wife and four children who are depending on me for support. If I were killed they would be left alone without support.”
“I lost my right eye in an accident a year before I was inducted into the Army. At the time of my induction I was informed I was in limited service and wouldn’t leave the States, so I only took out $5,000 insurance. I filled out an application for an additional $4,000 before leaving the States but received a letter from the Veterans’ Administration informing me that it was turned down because of my eye. Incidentally, when Iw as given my overseas physical, the vision of my glass eye was registered as 20/40 (!).”
So go the letters.
Yank also prints the reply to these complaints by Veterans Administrator, Frank T. Hines. Hines defends the policy of the Army and the Veterans’ Administration on the grounds that the acceptance of “substandard risks” would cause “impairment of the equities” of other veterans. Beneath the jargon ofinsurance lie these facts:
All soldiers pay for their own insurance. It is not, as commonly believed, any sort of “gratuity” on the part of government to the men who have risked their lives or died. The life expectancy tables show that so many men will die in battle, and hence so many insurance policies will have to be paid. This is “term,” or “mutual” insurance. Those matured policies are paid out of the premiums taken out of the soldiers’ meager pay. Life insurance costs the government nothing.
Now, Hines means that literally there would be added expense to the “other policy holders” if “substandard risks” were also given the usual $10,000 policies. It is true that men with more than ordinary physical disabilities are likely to produce more casualties.
Then, one must ask, why were these men sent overseas in the first place, and why were some of them sent into combat in the second?
And the question of all questions is: why does the National Service Life Insurance not give protection to all the wives and children of all the men in the service who are in danger of losing their lives?
Soldiers would not have deducted $6.70 a month from their pay for life insurance for the protection of their families in the event of their death if they did not fear a great insecurity. The widespreaduse of insurance, aside from enriching the great insurance trusts who prey upon fear of insecurity, testifies to the widespread existence of fear of poverty.
The very least that the government could do for the handicapped men it sends into war to protect the very investments of the insurance businesses among others, is to provide the insurance for the families of those soldiers!
The standard, everyday milking of the civilian worker by insurance companies, through various insurance schemes (“endowment,” “twenty-year life” and other appealing policies) which cause the “beneficiary” to pay over and over again for his insurance benefits, is bad enough.
Swindling the soldier who suffers a physical disability which fits him for combat but not for insurance, is even worse.
 
Let Government Pay
If the soldier had any feeling that he was returning to – or, rather, since there was no guarantee that he would return, that his family would live in – the “century of the common man,” and a peaceful, abundant society of plenty for all, he would not have the fearful anxiety he does about security for his family.
In an equitable society, in a reasonable society, in an abundant society, which everyone admits is possible, but which only the socialists have some idea of achieving, the insurance racket would not exist. The breadwinner of a family would not have that gnawing doubt – which makes him victim of the insurance business – as to what would happen to his family in case of his death.
Socialists advocate that the government do the least it should pay for the insurance of the handicapped soldier without raising the premiums of “other policy holders.”
Fit enough for combat, fit enough for insurance!
 

   No more communist than their American counterparts, no wiser after a dozen years of fascism, no less treacherous to the interests of German labor movement than they were in 1933, the Communist Party of Germany has issued a manifesto (June 25) revealing Stalin’s aims in Germany. The main points in the manifesto are:  Repudiation of the Soviet system for present-day Germany.   Support of free enterprise and the profit system.   Declaration of the guilt of the German people for fascism, since they “became a weapon of Hitler and his imperialistic masters.”   A confession of self-guilt, because “... we also feel ourselves guilty, inasmuch as, despite all sacrifices costing our best fighters, we were not able, as a consequence of a series of mistakes, to force an anti-fascist unity of workers for the overthrow of Hitler.”  The statement that the German communists are opposed to soviet, i.e., workers’ democratic councils, should cause no one to lift an eye-brow. In Russia – and the Communist Parties all over the world merely echo the policies of Stalin – the soviets were long ago dissolved. And in country after country that the Russian armies have overrun, it has been Stalin’s policy not merely not to foster soviets, but where they sprang up spontaneously from the ranks of the anti-fascist workers, ruthlessly to exterminate them.  For Private Property? While the communists are the foes of workers’ councils, on the other hand, it would be stupid to take their manifesto seriously when it says they uphold private property and the profit system. The manifesto itself gives a clue to their real intentions ,when it states that all German property owners and landholders “except the Nazis and rich collaborators” may retain their property and lands. That “except” covers the bulk of all German property owners. The bulk of large industrialists and large landowners are precisely those who supported Hitler. They were the “rich collaborators.” The resolution therefore serves Stalin’s professed and already executed purpose: to pilfer, pillage and plunder German property for the benefit of the Russian bureaucracy. It has been unsensationally disclosed in more than one news dispatch that this is exactly what the Russian army has been doing. Therefore, the manifesto plays up prominently the support it pledges to free enterprise for one reason. That is to soothe the apprehensions of the Anglo-American allies who, as imperialist rivals of Russia, are wary of the incorporation of German assets in land and property into the Russian sphere of influence. The accusation of “guilty” in reference to the responsibility of the German workers for fascism also has to be assessed in terms of Stalinist policy. This point, too, serves Stalin admirably. It allows him to vassalize the workers in Germany and totransport others to the Russian slavehold in the same cattle cars that were used by the Germans to transport Russian workers toHitler’s forced labor camps! For if the German workers areguilty and fascist-minded, there attaches no moral guilt to Stalin’sactions. The debasement of the communists, in “confessing” their own guilt, reveals the role Stalin has assigned them. First, it is a warning to any communist who still has illusions that his party has any revolutionary or socialist goal, that this is decidedly not the case. Stalin has his NKVD (secret police) to deal with any member who has gotten “out of touch” with the party line during the years of fascist repression and still tries to act as a leader of the working class towards its emancipation.  Communists Are Guilty This is not to say that the communists are not guilty for the victory of Hitler and the present barbaric plight of the German workers. Acting on the theory of “social fascism” at the period of Hitler’s coming to power, they considered the socialist and trade union leaders as the main danger. They considered Hitlerism only a passing evil, after which their day would come! This theory made it possible for them to repudiate any united front actionwith other workers’ organizations and even to hold united fronts with fascists. When Hitler’s armed bands were terrorizing the workers, the socialists forbade their workers’ militia, the Reichsbanner, to fight back, while “The League of Red Front Fighters,” communist militia, had abandoned its former policy of strike the fascists wherever you find them. Wilhelm Pieck, one of the communist leaders who signed the present manifesto, uttered this policy of capitulation on the eve of Hitler’s assumption to power, on February 26, 1933, “Let the workers beware of giving the government any pretext for new measures against the Communist Party.” The more the Stalinists excuse themselves, the more they accuse themselves of their betrayal of the workers. The German workers were ready, willing and able to strike down fascism. It was their false leadership that frustrated them and paved the way for the forced labor camps. Stalinism has long been, and still remains, the main danger in the working class movement, to German labor and all labor.   



Having offered the Ford Motor Company an infamous company “security” plan, the UAW leadership, including Leonard, Thomas, Reuther and Addes, has no right to be “staggered” (New York Times, December 19) at the counter-proposal of the corporation made this week. Since Richard T. Leonard, head of the Ford UAW committee, showed such solicitude for giving the corporation guarantees such as would lead to a complete weakening of the union and which immediately focused the attention of General Motors on similar guarantees which had not been made to it, what could he expect but an attempt to strengthen these “security” guarantees?
The Ford Motor Company offered a pay increase of 12.4 per cent, or approximately fifteen cents per hour. But the wage increase was linked to a production goal of 80,000 units per month (November production was only 22,500 units) and a series of company guarantees. The latter include elimination of "unauthorized” work stoppages; management “prerogatives”; reduction of the number of union committeemen, and no new wage demands based on raised price ceilings. The company security plan included fines that were less than the original proposal of the union!) to be deducted from the check-off of dues and paychecks of workers, for instigation of “wildcat” strikes.
The avowed motives of Ford in presenting its “gamble” on a wage increase were indeed noble. They want the “confidence and cooperation of our employees.” (Rather than that the union should have it.) They want to stay in production and keep men employed. (They don’t want a strike.) They want to sharpen production skills and to “meet and beat competition.” (True enough.) They want to break the “log-jam of postwar mass production” and “halt inflation” by bringing supply up to demand. (These are meant to sound public-spirited.)
The union rejected the offer. It falls far short of thirty per cent and is integrally bound up with union-breaking measures.
Just as the strength of the case presented by the UAW against General Motors permeated the struggle of every CIO union engaged in a wage fight against a corporation – the UAW against Ford, the Oil Workers’ negotiations and the pending Steel Workers’ fight, the Rubber Workers, etc., so the show of weakness on the part of the Ford union, a retreat acquiesced in by the whole UAW leadership, has similarly infiltrated every union battle.
The UAW was the spearhead of the post-war fight of labor against capital to secure a living wage, full production and full employment. Their demand to open the company’s books, to have a look at profit statements and to determine wage increases on the basis of profits without raising prices to punish the consumer, was a unique, revolutionary demand for the CIO.
The union leadership has exhibited a strange timidity in following up this demand. They behave as if they thought they had gone too far. They have in only one sense: they lack a perspective to follow up their militant demand. Once the corporation has refused the inspection of its books, or says on the basis of its figures that it cannot pay a decent wage nor assure full employment, what is the union going to do? The CIO leadership, while having made a denunciation of Truman, still corrals the labor vote through the PAC for the Democratic Party.
Since the corporations have openly confessed their bankruptcy, there is only one answer for the unions to the corporations’ openly expressed alternative of a return to Hooverism: if the corporations cannot guarantee security through full production, full employment and a high standard of living, labor must manage production!
Instead of consent to the fact-finding stall of President Truman, labor must make a break once and for all with the capitalist parties of big business, their ten-year alliance with the Democrats and their present flirting with the “progressive” Republicans. They must turn the PAC into a genuine Labor Party with a labor program to set up a Labor Government in Washington!
 




Philip Murray’s December 4 radio address, in which he announced the first political break in the ten-year alliance between the CIO and the Democratic Party Administration, has added a new significance to the already significant battle between labor and capital.
Speaking on the proposal of President Harry Truman to Congress calling for “fact-finding boards in major industries” accompanied by a thirty-day “cooling off” period, Murray stated the CIO’s case against the Administration and declared flatly:
“The CIO is ... opposed to the basic policies pursued by the Administration.”
Other labor leaders have joined in the denunciation of Truman’s strike-breaking proposal. John L. Lewis called Truman’s program a “fooler bill to straight-jacket American industrial relations” and William Green joined in the unanimous protest.
Murray’s stinging indictment of Truman came as a direct result of the unprecedented kind of strike the UAW is making against the auto corporations.
Labor Action has detailed the new element in this strike: in the UAW’s fight for security and a living wage the union has had to demand a say in the determination of profits and prices of private industry, thus invading the closely guarded domain of the companies.
The answer of the Truman Administration has been to intervene in the auto strike and the pending steel strike as a strike-breaker and to demand coercive legislation to “settle” all labor disputes.
Just as Reuther presented for the UAW ah incontrovertible, damning case against the auto capitalists, Murray has stacked up the evidence against the servants of capital in Washington.
Murray cites the Office of War Mobilization conclusion that industry can raise wages and salaries 24 per cent and still earn more than twice as much take-home profits as it did before the war. Then he charges:
“It [the Federal Administration – Ed.] has completely Ignored human rights. But American industry has been appeased with ever greater opportunities for increased profits at the expense of the American people.
“The Administration has given lip service to, a suggested need for federal legislation that would increase unemployment compensation benefits and acknowledge a federal obligation for full employment. The complete failure to obtain such legislation has proved that the activities have been limited to a mere gesture.
“But at the same time, in the face of the astounding profits of American industry, legislation has been swiftly enacted to eliminate excess-profits taxes so that these profits can become. even more extortionate.
“In addition he Federal Administration tolerates, without adverse comment, a sitdown strike by industry – knowing that the American people are financing industry’s arrogance and making it profitable.”
After continuing his attack on the government, Murray points out that the “sole answer of the Federal Administration is to seek legislation against labor.” For all its show of impartiality, the legislation proposed by Truman can only result in the “weakening of labor unions – the curtailment of the right of free men to refrain from working when they choose to do so” and amounts to the “appeasement of American industry.”
Let us recall that this same Truman Administration is a CIO-PAC-backed Administration. That until the war ended and the post-war struggle of capital and labor began, Murray and all his associates were engaged in a vigorous support of that Administration. Now, Murray makes a ninety-degree turn.
Let us also recall how the auto workers proceeded when they had made their case against the corporations and the latter answered “No.” The General Motors workers took the road of independent, class action. In their organized strength as labor unions, they went on the picket line.
Murray has drawn up his case against the capitalist administration. Truman already has delivered his anti-union, pro-industry answer in his legislative proposal on which he consulted industry representatives, but not a single representative of the organized labor movement which, unfortunately, helped put the Democratic Party in power.
 
Political Action Needed
What does Murray propose? He has proposed nothing so far. But the conclusion is obvious. Just as labor has had to take independent, class action in the economic sphere, it must take independent, class action in the political sphere. Just as the UAW, in order to attain a living wage, had to demand a voice in the determination of profits and prices and responsibility for the public weal, so organized labor must demand the legislative helm of the country for its own and the public welfare.
It is not a question of “good” or “bad” capitalist politicians, as Murray implies in his address. He says that Truman is making a departure from the policies of President Roosevelt. Not so, Mr. Murray. There have been no more restrictive legislation and policies aimed against organized labor than during the war administration of the late President Roosevelt. Have you forgotten the Smith-Connally Act, which Roosevelt felt was not strong enough, Mr. Murray? You can’t help but remember the recently relinquished no-strike pledge, requested by – Roosevelt.
It is not a question of “good” or “bad” politicians. It is a question of class politics.
Where are you going now, Philip Murray? We hope it is not backward to the old game of supporting a “friendly” capitalist politician as against an “unfriendly” one. We hope it is forward to a definitive, all-time break with capitalist politics and capitalist politicians, forward to a new and genuinely independent political organization of labor, which will usher in a workers’ government. A workers' government representing the backbone of our country, those who toil in the mines and factories, is the only government which can organize our economy democratically and plan for the stated objectives of the CIO – jobs, security, full employment and peace.
There is only one way to go forward – that is by the formation of an independent Labor Party.
Break the PAC from the capitalist parties!
Turn the PAC into a genuine Labor Party!
 




Two significant events of the past two weeks testify that the wholesale disgust of labor – CIO, AFL and UMW – with the labor-backed Truman Administration can become a groundswell for the formation of a genuine independent labor party.
The first, most forthright and most significant was the approval by the UAW strike committee representing 42,000 workers in Flint, Mich., one of the principal centers of General Motors production, of a resolution calling for the formation of an active political force to represent labor under its own name. The resolution Requested the conference of 200 UAW representatives of GM locals which met in Detroit last Saturday to:

Mobilize the American people against the anti-labor conspiracy in Congress.
 
Lay the groundwork for the formation of a labor party.
 
Mobilize a mass march on Washington to halt congressional offenses against labor.

The second and less forthright, but nevertheless significant event was the action taken last Sunday by the New Jersey State Industrial Union Council, CIO, which followed the suggestion of the National CIO Executive Board that all state industrial union councils take over political action committees, and ordered the formerly autonomous New Jersey PAC to become a committee of the state council. A move for the outright formation of a labor party was defeated in the New Jersey meeting.
These events were preceded by the radio address of Philip Murray, analyzed last week in Labor Action, which announced the first break in a ten-year alliance of the CIO with the Democratic Administration.
President Truman, inheritor of the policies of former President Roosevelt, has provoked the anger of both ranks and leaders of the entire organized labor movement by his strike breaking, pro-corporation intervention in the General Motors strike.
Organized labor is fast finding out that in order to gain higher wages, strikes, picketing and economic action are not enough.
The United Auto Workers, massed in the union halls and on the picket lines of the country, have found out that economic action is not sufficient to win their battle. They have demanded in their struggle for higher wages that the auto corporations OPEN THEIR BOOKS, that is, reveal their profits and their wage costs, so that the union may demonstrate that it is possible to pay .the wage increases and yet maintain prices of GM products so that the consumers will not be penalized by increased costs.
The company has said in effect: labor and the consumers be damned! Our ability to pay is none of your business! Determination of prices and profits is the prerogative of private enterprise! And swiftly to the aid of the corporations come their legislative representatives in Congress and their friend in the White House with his strike-breaking proposal and his “fact-finding” committees.
The action of the Flint strikers to buttress their ECONOMIC CLASS ACTION with POLITICAL CLASS ACTION must not only be lauded by union men and women everywhere. It should be EMULATED by them. They know that a labor government in Washington would not stand for the arrogant, public-be-damned attitude of the corporations. They would have control over their own labor representatives in Congress, just as the corporations now control the capitalist politicians who represent them there.
The company’s books would be opened quickly if a labor government was in Washington. If the corporations showed that they were unable to manage their enterprises so that labor could receive a decent wage and security, a government of the workers would nationalize industry and so plan production under workers’ control that unemployment would be eliminated and a high standard of living secured for all.
The Flint workers are moving in the right direction.
It is impossible to say how definitive is the break between Murray and the other CIO leaders with Truman. The break may be only temporary. It may lead merely to the support of another Democratic politician a little friendlier to labor, such as Wallace. It may lead to the support of a “progressive” Republican of the Willkie school, such as Harold Stassen. Or it may lead to the formation of a “third party” that is not a labor party but an aggregate of farmers, labor and middle class elements such as was proposed by the Communists in the.New Jersey CIO.
Any of these alternatives to the formation of a real labor party and an all-time break with capitalist politics will keep labor in the same old rut of electing “friendly” capitalist politicians, that is – friendly enemies.
Labor should take the road of the Flint workers. Break once and for all with the enemy parties of labor, Republican or Democrat, and get on the high road of independent labor politics.
 




The vigor and determination of the striking automobile and oil workers, the strike votes of half a dozen other CIO unions and, above all, their far-sighted demand to “Open the Books!” have wrung from President Truman the interpretation that his fact-finding board shall “have the authority, whenever it deems it necessary, to examine the books of the employer.”
Truman’s proposal, while falling far short of labor's needs, gives recognition to the principle of “ability to pay,” that is, the profits of the corporation, as a basis for increasing wages.
The weaknesses in Truman’s proposal, which should be recognised immediately by organised labor, can be summed up briefly: (1) the contents of the books shall not be made public, out of respect for the competitive character of business; (2) the inspection of the company’s records shall be made by government bodies, such as the fact-finding boards, which are composed of industry, government and “friends of labor” representatives; and (3) the authorisation to inspect the books is turned over to Congress, the legislative servant of big business.
But even this partial recognition of what the union is seeking is too much for the representatives of the corporations. In a chorus of unanimity, they and their legislative and journalistic spokesmen label the opening of the books “dangerous and revolutionary.”
 
Dangerous ...
How is the demand to “open the books” dangerous? The workers organized into their unions want security and a living wage. They want full production and full employment. The corporations have refused to guarantee these things. Yet it is common knowledge that, they have heaped up a mountain of war profits while labor endured the no-strike pledge, bought war bonds, suffered from frozen wages, scarcities and shoddy goods. It is also common experience that the corporations were not able to guarantee employment for all, let alone a living wage during the last peacetime period. They went full blast only during the war when they were furnished orders by the government and had their profits guaranteed by the government Yet they demand to continue their management in the same old way. They insist on keeping their corporate secrets. They shout that corporation profits have nothing to do with granting a wage increase. They want to continue monopolizing control of their production.
 
... to Profits
Opening the books IS dangerous to the precepts of monopoly capitalism. The handful of very rich who own and control the industrial wealth of the United States want no tampering with their property and their property rights. And foremost of these is the appropriation by them of the profits of industry. Touch their profits and you wring their hearts. For the heart and soul of the corporation is profits. When the UAW couples its demand to base a wage increase on profits with the demand . not to raise prices to the consumer, it has General Motors in a vise, where the wage increase can only be squeezed out of the hoard of profits.
Ira Mosher, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, attacked even Truman’s plan to use profits as a partial basis for determining wage increases. He poses as a champion of the “public” and even of labor’s interests. “Ability to pay as measured by earnings would mean that whenever there is technological improvement in the productive process, thereby reducing the cost of production, the full benefit of the improvement would be passed along to a small group of workers in the form of higher wages instead of to the public in the form of lower prices.” This from the head of an organization which has been trying to break the price ceilings of OPA since they were imposed! Mr. Mosher omits the fact that labor demands no price increases, merely a wage increase, out of the golden hoard of profits.
Then Mr. Mosher displays some partial statistics to show that the “ability to pay” principle would work to the detriment of small business and labor.
“In every year between 1913 and 1940,” says Mosher, “except during World War (1916-19), at least forty per cent of our business corporations showed no net income, and in 1932 almost 84 per cent showed no net income. In other words, except in wartime, never more than three out of five business corporations have any net earnings and in all but the most prosperous years never more than two out of every five have net earnings.”
These figures are purposely deceptive: the major part of industry is composed of large corporations and the greatest number of workers are employed in the big companies. We need only ask, when Mosher complains that “businesses with established earning capacities ... would be the only ones able to pay the wages established under this formula:
“Why should any business be permitted to operate if it cannot assure a high standard of living for its employees?”
Then Mosher cries for labor: “It would hurt labor, because under this formula wage rates must be reduced when earnings decline ...” What big crocodile tears! Labor under this or any other formula is not going to press for a reduction in its wages. If corporate management is so bankrupt that it cannot plan an ever-increasing standard of living for the workers, then it will have to forfeit its right to manage and let labor take over. Labor has no ties to the profit interests of the corporations, and will have as its sole criterion production for abundance.
 
“Revolutionary” ...
Mosher states that with the principle of “ability to pay” ... we move to the corporate state with the government determining prices, profits, investment and who shall work where and for how long and at what wage.”
That is not what Mosher really fears. That is what the government did during the war, and big business was mighty pleased with the results: no labor trouble to speak of, and a steady flow of profits.
Mosher and the men he represents fear the implications of the demand of labor to have a say in prices and profits. They fear that labor will not stop with opening the books. If the corporation’s books show ability to pay – which has been conceded in advance, even by the Administration – the union can press for its wage increase with no price increase.
The books will also reveal (see editorial, page 3 – Ed.) according to Walter Merritt, GM counsel “... forecasts, projections, guesses at the cost of raw materials where future policies are speculative,” etc. In other words, the books will reveal all the inner secrets of corporate operation. The union will demand a voice and a vote in the affairs of business. Is this illegitimate? It is not, inasmuch as the ability of business to operate, pay wages, keep employment at a peak, etc., is of concern to all of society. The production of the corporation is social but its management remains private.
... to Labor
This invasion of its private, privileged ground is what big capital fears. That is why it characterizes labor’s demands as revolutionary. This new type of fight on the part of organized labor is indeed a revolutionary step for labor. As a large organized labor movement, it has shown its social responsibility as never before in United States history.
If labor pries open the secret accounts of the monopoly capitalists in auto, steel, rubber and other mass production industries, it will learn how production takes place, how it is controlled. It is a short step to the conclusion that production can be undertaken not for profit but for use.
Labor can then challenge industry. “You haven’t the ability to pay decent wages or to produce for the good of society as a whole,” says labor. “Your lust for profit strangles industry and brings depression and war. You are bankrupt. We know how to undertake production for use. We know how to plan production. We are not interested in profits; we are interested only in full production, full employment and an economy of abundance. We demand workers’ control of production.”
A revolutionary demand, indeed. If labor wins the right to inspect the books and make ability to pay a principle in bargaining, it will take a giant stride forward.
What has been gained so far has been due to the fighting strength of strikers and pickets, the rank and file of organized labor. They must not retreat. They must halt the tendency of their leaders to compromise with dangerous proposals of “union security,” such as the one made by the UAW leadership to Ford.
Labor must carry on the fight until victory has been won for all of its demands.
 




That weathercock for the Bureaucrat of All the Russias, the Communist Political Association, has endorsed and is beating the drums for universal military training.
Their attitude could have been predicted. It was natural, inevitable, foreseeable, ineluctable. Just as they labelled the war aims of the U.S. government “imperialist” and opposed all preparations for a war against the Stalin-Hitler combine in 1939–40, now they are the loudest yea-sayers for any measure – the no-strike pledge, the May-Bailey slave labor bill and peacetime conscription – which will aid the Russian-Allied combine.
There is nothing new in their arguments in behalf of conscription. They wish to train all the young men, not merely of the United States, but of Britain and Russia as well, in the arts of killing in order to assure – peace!
 
A Mental Conscript Writes
“After the experiences of the last decade it should be clear to all thinking people that this United Nations organization will need the backing of military organization,” writes Robert Thompson in the Daily Worker of February 4. “In fact,” he continues, “it will require the support of an effective monopoly of the world’s military strength and it will require this until such a time as the last vestige of fascism has been wiped out and the peace is so firmly established that there no longer exists danger of its being broken.”
Military preparedness never guaranteed anything but war. Look at Germany and all the European nations which had compulsory military training for their youth. Observe the effect of military training on German youth. Yet the Communist Political Association would Prussianize all youth of every country.
Militarism is not a curative for war. It is one of the causes. In a class society the army is used to protect the interests of the ruling class. Today the ruling class is the capitalist class – the profiteers of big business, including the armaments manufacturers and the munitions makers, the direct beneficiaries of war.
Our conscript army will be used to further the interests of the capitalist class – abroad and at home. Abroad, to secure and hold other people subject to our economic domination. At home, to send against striking workers or bonus marchers.
The Communist Political Association is in the van of strike-breakers today. And if it were to occur that the permanent no-strike pledge advocated by one of their spokesmen, Harry Bridges, were enacted, they would no doubt call for the sending of the army against all strikers.
 
The “Goosestep” – Mental And Physical
The “goosestep” is the symbol of the bodily slavery that goes with militarism. When the commander calls “Attention!” the conscript straightens. When the commander says “Forward!” the conscript advances. When he says, “Fire!” the conscript shoots. All young men are trained in the same way – to act like robots, to take orders, to act without thinking.
More serious than the physical slavery of military training is the mental slavery which accompanies it. It induces in all the spirit of unquestioned obedience, so aptly expressed by Tennyson:



“Theirs not to make reply,
Theirs not to reason, why,
Theirs but to do and die.”



It is fitting that the Communists, who have induced in Russia .and throughout the Communist International an attitude of blind, unquestioning obedience, should not hesitate to proclaim universal compulsory military training.
The labor movement, however, even the official leaders of the AFL and CIO, have taken a stand against peacetime conscription. That is fortunate, since the working people are the victims of military training. They are the ones who are killed at home by their brothers in uniform in labor disputes. They are the ones who are sent abroad to kill their working class brothers of other countries.
 




While at this writing, Roosevelt has not yet appeared circled with the halo of Yalta, wearing the mantle of the Big Three to make a personal appearance to speak again for a slave bill, he and the Navy and Army chiefs appear to be losing the present round for a work or fight bill. The Senate Military Affairs Committee ignored the plea of Secretary of War Stimson and another written directive of the President to pass the May-Bailey bill and voted it down 12–6.
Undoubtedly, the men in Congress who are there by virtue of the labor vote, knuckled under to the heavy pressure of labor, unanimously opposed to “work or jail” with the exception of the Communists.
The fight is not yet over, however. A substitute, less drastic bill is being introduced by Senators O’Mahoney, Kilgore, Wagner, Chandler (D.) and Ball and Ferguson (R.). This bill would give the War Manpower Commission statutory powers to transfer labor. It would penalize employers rather than labor. It would offer transportation to transferees. But it is still a COMPULSORY measure. It is still a slave act, however modified.
And regardless of this “softened” slave bill, and the failure to pass “work or jail” legislation as yet – work or fight already exists! Men who leave war jobs are being transferred to Camp Ellis, Illinois, where they are given a month’s training in the army, then a choice of either going back on the job or continuing as soldiers. This is being done without a partial national service act! This is being done under current manpower controls! This is a fascist technique!
Strengthening the controls of the WMC, which are already used to draft workers who leave war jobs, only means the government will sink its teeth deeper into the freedom of labor. We have no doubt that Roosevelt will ask again that more drastic controls be imposed on labor.
 
Why They Insist
What is his motivation? Stimson complained in his plea to the Senate that the United States alone has no compulsory service law. Our Allies, Russia and Britain, have had national service legislation since the beginning of the war. And moreover, our enemies, the Nazified countries, are fighting us with weapons made by slave laborers. A national labor draft is indeed a totalitarian measure, and its adoption by our Allies means only that they, too, are moving in the direction of totalitarianism.
Roosevelt wants compulsory work for private profiteers because the voluntary method will mean transfer of workers to places where higher wages prevail, or to peace-time industries because of the cutbacks. Slave labor means you do not need to raise wages or revise the Little Steel Formula You can force labor to work for any wage. Freedom of labor under capitalism means freedom to work or not work, freedom to leave one employer and work for another, freedom to work or starve.
Compulsory labor means abolition of even this questionable freedom – the best capitalism has to offer, however – and chaining the worker to his job. This means enslaving the worker even more to produce for private profits, and then – especially and most quickly in the war industries – summarily dumping him when munitions are no longer needed and the plant shuts down. Capitalism does not guarantee him a job nor adequate unemployment compensation.
 
Draft the Profiteers
So, because Roosevelt, being a servant of the capitalists, cannot and does not want to force them to guarantee adequate wages and compensation for unemployment out of their mountainous profits (all made in the name of the war for “democracy”) he wants to force the workers to stay at their jobs. The controls are for the post-war period, too. Work-or-jail, no strikes, a dead calm of labor-management collaboration – these will aid American imperialism to carry on its trade and money-making without disruption.
Labor’s answer should be: Draft capital not labor. Since capital makes the profits, since it and not labor benefits from the war, let it pay for the war. Let the government take over all war industry. Let industry operate under workers control and supervision of production. Let profits – since they profess it’s a war to “destroy fascism and preserve democracy” – be eliminated.
Guarantee the workers a high standard of living out of the blood-profits of industry. Guarantee them high unemployment compensation in the post-war period.
DRAFT CAPITAL, NOT LABOR.
 




If “war is the continuation of politics by other (i.e., forcible) means,” then the peace is the continuation of the politics of the war. It is in this light that the San Francisco Conference to form a new “League of Nations” and to construct a new peace must be viewed.
The First World War was a struggle for profits and markets between two groups of imperialist powers which ended in a robbers’ peace at Versailles. The victors of that war formed their organization to keep the peace, the League of Nations. How well they kept it is shown in the accompanying list of thirty-odd big and little wars since 1918!
Just as the “war to end wars” ended in a mockery, so is the “crusade against fascism,” the war for the principles of the Atlantic Charter, ending in a betrayal of its professed aims. While fascist arms have been defeated by those of the United Nations everywhere in Europe, no real democracy exists on that entire continent. Fascists less conspicuous than Hitler, Goering and Goebbels – but fascists, nevertheless – are used by the Allied Military Government to continue the rule, harassment and exploitation of the German people.
How could it be otherwise? The profiteers and exploiters control the governments of the United Nations. It has been their armies, their policies, their war, and now it is their imperialist peace.
For them it has been a profitable war. Singly or collectively, they have gained control over or annexed outright most of the territories and populations of Europe between France and Russia. Just as great fruits are about to be picked in the Pacific.
But the war has its other side, even; for the imperialist plunderers. It has meant a frightful destruction of the property they value so highly, their own and that of the newly enslaved countries. It has meant the weakening of the faith in their system of the masses of the people who hear the burdens of their wars. They fear too much further extension of the present war. They quake at the anticipation of a third world war.
“We cannot fail,” Said Anthony Eden at San Francisco, expressing their sincere horror at the prospect of lack of agreement among the United Nations; in order to obtain peace. “This pilgrimage of death” must be stopped, said the Prime Minister of South Africa, and war must be made a “moral impossibility.”
And that is the purpose of the gathering in California, to set up a new “League” of the victorious nations to try once again to keep peace. But, however sincere the anti-war wishes of the gentlemen at ’Frisco, they are making an imperialist peace and thereby guaranteeing, as surely as the earth turns, new wars.
 
The Same – Yet Different
Who is at San Francisco? “The same old codgers” as participated at the first League conference, one liberal wails. No, not quite. The same old imperialist codgers – the governmental and diplomatic representatives of the imperialist profit-takers who run the nations.
Some of them, especially the Europeans, are not even the legally elected representatives of their countries, since no elections have been held since the early Nazi invasions.
Practically all of the smaller nations’ representatives are subordinated to one or another of the big powers.
Semi-fascist powers – and Argentina is not the only one, nor even the only Latin American one – are there.
No one at San Francisco represents the millions. The workers and producers and anti-fascists and underground movements and occupants of concentration camps and the forty million fallen of all nationalities have not a single spokesman. It is only to the shame of the labor leaders that they beg across the bay in Oakland for admission to this assembly of the ruling classes.
Did we say that this new “League” was like the old? While its organization, charter and personnel are fundamentally like the old, it reflects the deterioration of capitalism which has taken place since the First World War.
 
Monopoly of Power
Just as monopoly in industry has .broken down free competition in the system of capitalism, so has a monopoly of political power supplanted the free competition among nations, The Big Five run the show. And of those Big Five, China is a satellite of the United States and France is only a second-class power.
Stettinius, in an unguarded moment, stated that if the Big Five disagreed, neither the world security organization nor any of its provisions would mean anything. Incontrovertible fact! The supremacy of the big powers is embodied in the creation of two bodies, the assembly of the smaller and middling nations subordinate in all respects to that of the Big Five Council. This is in contrast to the first League, which gave at least formal democracy and one vote on ALL matters to each of the participating nations.
The monopoly of power is further assured by the right, insisted on by Russia and concurred in by the other great powers, that each of the big powers shall be able to veto any situation involving world security, i.e., war, in which it is involved.
Therein is indicated another retrogressive aspect of this league. Russia, with Lenin and Trotsky at her helm and a program of world socialism as her perspective, boycotted the first “den of thieves.” Now, Russia not merely participates, but is foremost in insisting on the domination of the great powers over the smaller. As for her international “socialist” perspectives, they are for the next century.
 
Sentiments Do Not Count
The charter of the first League made a formal pretense of disarmament and was concerned about the private manufacture of munitions. Disarmament has not even been mentioned this time.
Nor do the United Nations dare whisper the “peace without annexations” slogan – it was, of course, only a slogan – of the first peace. That would be too blatantly hypocritical after all the grabs made in Europe and Africa and the contemplated and announced grabs in the Far East.
The professed anti-war sentiments of the San Francisco delegations cannot be realized in the arena of imperialist power politics. Their rivalries for markets, territories, bases and profits will rend their covenant asunder, just as occurred last time. At the very time of their meeting, the Trieste incident very nearly pits two powers and their major backers against each other with armed force.
The fight over various provisions of the new charter cloaks the tensions and rivalries that will produce the future armed conflicts in one form or another. The latest and current of these are issues of “regional blocs” and the “veto.”
 
Autonomy Issue
The regional autonomy issue stems from the meeting of the Latin American nations and the United States at Chapultepec. There the United States hurriedly and demonstratively organized her satellites in preparation for the coming conference and yielded to their pressure for admission of Argentina. (There was never any principle involved in the U.S. attacks on Argentine “fascism,” and many little South American dictators who pattern their mode of governing on the Argentine model laughed up their sleeves at the demagogy of Roosevelt and Hull. What irked the U.S. was Argentina’s competitive products and its trade with Britain. After all, a little peccadillo like fascism does not stand in the way of friendly relations between our State Department and Spain.)
The Act of Chapultepec pledged mutual assistance of the signatories in the event of aggression by an American or non-American nation, in the event the world security organization “DOES NOT MAINTAIN” peace.
Russia, herself the puppet-master of a sizable group of European nations, waged a fight to subordinate the regional security pact of the Americas to the world organization. The conference agreed finally to recognize the mutual assistance of the regional blocs only if the aggression Breaks out “BEFORE IT [the world council – Ed.] CAN ACT.”
Behind this struggle for nice phrasing lay the fears of the Latin Americans of U.S. aggression and that if the world organization had prior authority, the U.S. could veto any interference from the outside. Behind it also lay the rivalry of Russia and the United States. Now, all agree on the wording of the document. But the tensions, rivalry and power struggle remain.
 
The Matter of Veto
The arguments over the “veto,” currently the thorniest problem of the conference, reveal most clearly and absurdly the intent of the whole organization. There is little attempt to challenge the Russian demand that each of the big powers have the right to veto in any situation or disturbance in which they are directly engaged. While it is reported the other big powers feel more lenient on this question, acceptance of this veto right is the price of Russian participation.
Any big power can go to war, aggressively or defensively, at any time and by vetoing action by the new world council can prevent any action against her! Such a safeguard for peace is the world security organization!
On the matter of the veto power being exercised in cases where the big powers are not involved, the Big Four are inclined toward leniency again, but Russia insists here also. The smaller powers are conducting the fight against this right. How would it work? If Marshal Tito, for example, wishes to take Trieste (an example in which Russia “nominally” is not interested!), Russia could veto the world organization from taking any action. Tito takes Trieste. The world organization is morally bound not to act by provisions of its charter.
But veto or no veto, regional priority or regional subordination, the new league can hang together only so long as the big powers remain friendly. This they cannot do. Not so long as the profit motive embodied in the system of private capitalism, with its constant need of expansion into foreign areas, exists.






How the first League
of Nations, organized after
the First World War, kept the peace ...




1919


Intervention of the Czechs, Rumanians and the South Slavs against Soviet Hungary.




1919–20


Intervention of Poland and the border states against Soviet Russia.




1919–25


The Spanish War against the Riffs in North Africa.




1920


Poland occupies Vilna.




1921–23


Greek-Turkish War.




1921–25


British War against the Wahabites in Arabia.




1922


Japan occupies Vladivostok; the Irish rising against England. [1]




1923


Lithuania occupies the Memel region; the Entente occupies the Ruhr.




1925–26


French War against the Jebel Druses in Syria.




1925–26


Spanish-French punitive expedition in North Africa.




1926


U.S.A. intervenes in Nicaragua.




1927


Italy’s temporary seizure of Corfu; Dutch regime of terror in Indonesia.




1927–34


Seven expeditions against Soviet China.




1930


French punitive expedition against the Annamites in Indo-China.




1930–31


British colonial war in Burma and Northwest India.




1931


Italy occupies Tripoli region.




1931–32


Japan occupies Manchuria; fighting at Shanghai; French war in Morocco.




1932–33


Japan-Chinese war; war between Peru and Colombia; war between Bolivia and Paraguay.




1933


France occupies Yunnan and nine South Sea islands; Britain advances into Tibet.




1934


Spanish-French war against North African tribes; war in Arabia;
Japanese advance into Mongolia; Ethiopia invaded by Italy.




1936–38


Spanish Civil War.




1939


German invasion of Poland; declaration of Second World War; Russian invasion of Poland.




1941


U.S. and Japan declare war; U.S. enters Second World War.




The second “League,” the World Security
Council, is being organized on the
same basic principles
as the first!




Note by ETOL
1. This is not correct. The Irish War of Independence started in January 1919 and lasted until a truce in July 1921. After the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty in December 1921 and its acceptance by Dáil Éireann (the insurgent parliament) in January 1922, the insurgent forces split, leading to a Civil War that lasted from June 1922 to May 1923.
 

   President Truman’s Navy Day speech, hailed by the reactionary United States press with “At last we’ve got a foreign policy,” is a continuation of the basic U.S. policy to dominate the world. If Truman’s speech is stronger than any of Roosevelt’s war speeches, it is because the United States has emerged from the war unquestionably the supreme power in the world. If Truman’s speech is tougher with Russia than any of Roosevelt’s during the war, it is because the war is over and the military necessity of unity among the Allied nations is gone. Obviously, Truman did not say openly that the U.S. is out to dominate the world. That would be too much to stomach for the little people who fought, sacrificed and died for what they were told was democracy, freedom, security and international peace and good will. But the circumstances in which the speech was delivered and a translation of its abstractions into their concrete meaning will prove our contention.  A Show of Force Speaking on Navy Day, accompanied by the display of a huge flotilla of warships, Truman bragged that: “By that day (V-J Day – Ed.), ours was a sea power never before equaled in the history of the world,” He added: “In addition to that naval power, we shall still have one of the most powerful air forces in the world. And just the other day, so that on short notice we could mobilize a powerful and well equipped land, sea and air force, I asked the Congress to adopt universal training.” Later in his speech, the President flourished the proud product of the “arsenal of democracy” – the atomic bomb. He will deign to discuss it with Great Britain and Canada – not Russia, as yet – “But I emphasize again, as I have before, that these discussions will not be concerned with the processes of manufacturing the atomic bomb or any other instruments of war.” The President stated that our huge military forces were not designed for war or conquest but for peace, and that our possession of the atomic bomb is “no threat to any nation.” But this is precisely what Russia, Britain and all the other lesser Allies who have defeated the “aggressor” nations are saying as they, too, preserve their military power and embark on programs of military training of youth. If all the Allies are arming to preserve the peace – why don’t they disarm and truly “renounce war as an instrument of international policy”? The truth is, of course, that the war was not fought to end war, but was a contest between two sets of imperialist nations. Now that one set has been subdued, the victors are beginning to quarrel among themselves over the booty and are beginning the preparations for the next world war. Else what is this huge armaments race for? Against whom is it directed? Weren’t the “criminal, aggressor” nations defeated by the “peace-loving” powers? The brunt of the President’s talk was directed against Russia when he said: “We shall approve no territorial changes in any friendly part of the world unless they accord with the freely expressed wishes of the people concerned,” and “We shall refuse to recognize any government imposed upon any nation by the force of any foreign power.” This refers to Russia’s imposition of governments upon Yugoslavia, Rumania and other Balkan territories which have been the seat of discord in recent Big Three power talks. How fundamental and enduring these “principles” are is shown by the fact that when the exigencies of war so demanded, Roosevelt ceded Poland, whose government bad been “imposed,” to Russia, just as before the U.S. recognized the incorporation of the Baltic countries into Russia. How all-embracing this “principle” is, is further underscored by the fact that the U.S. has never, withdrawn recognition from the British-imposed government of India, the Dutch-imposed government of the East Indies, the French-imposed government of Indo-China or the Axis-imposed Franco government of Spain. The U.S., Truman proudly affirmed, does not seek “one inch of territory in any place in the world,” “Outside the right to establish necessary bases for our own protection,” of course. That’s an easy principle for the U.S., because its tremendous wealth, its productive power and its strength to compete favorably with any other nation do not compel it to grab anything except a few military bases for “protection.” But Russia maintains, from the Stalinist-imperialist point of view, that it is just as necessary for her “protection” that she have a friendly cordon sanitaire of satellite governments ringing Russia.  Russia Understood That Russia understood what lay beneath the surface of Truman’s beautiful generalities about freedom and democracy was manifested immediately. While Russia does not possess the same military might and won’t develop the production of the atomic bomb for five years or so, she, too, has a big stick to brandish. Despite the fact that amity between Yenan and Chungking had been signed, sealed and delivered, as soon as the London fiasco of the foreign ministers was over, “civil war” broke out in China. This is Stalin’s warning to the U.S. The actions of his foreign legions serve a similar purpose to the armed strength of the U.S. While it is impossible to dragoon the war-weary peoples of the world into a new war tomorrow, none of the victors is intent on preserving world peace, feast of all the United. States, If she were, why wouldn’t she really internationalize the knowledge of production of the atomic bomb with her allies of yesterday instead of announcing that an atomic armaments race is already on? Why wouldn’t she demand that all the victors renounce war and armaments and embark upon genuine international collaboration? Why wouldn’t she have spoken for the genuine and immediate independence of all oppressed peoples – India, Indo-China, the Dutch East Indies, the Philippines, as well as Poland, the Baltic and Balkan countries, instead of reiterating the mocking phrase, “independence when these people are prepared [they’re never prepared by their imperialist masters] for freedom”? She wouldn’t because she is not genuinely interested in peace, freedom and security. That is not the way of imperialism, democratic or totalitarian. That is why the job is, up. to the little people, the colonially oppressed people, the exploited workers and farmers of all nationalities. The final liberation of mankind, from imperialist war and oppression is a socialist task.   
   Fresh from the fiasco of the Foreign Ministers at London, whieh was preceded by a long series of declarations, retractions, maneuvers, “unilateral” actions, recriminations and back-trackings, in the course of which the Atlantic Charter and San Francisco declarations were crumpled, torn to bits and tossed to the winds, Secretary of State James F. Byrnes came out with a new statement of “principle” on November 1, in the Herald Tribune forum. Now, says Byrnes, speaking with the atomic production formula in his pocket, the United States grants to Stalinist imperialist expansion in Central and Eastern Europe the status of a Russian Monroe Doctrine. That is, just as the United States considers it in her interests to have friendly nations in Latin and South America, so Russia has, according to Byrnes, “special security” interests in Europe. This latest “principle” to emerge from the big power jockeyings for dominance in the post-war world, comes shortly after both the United States and England have registered their objection to the latest "unilateral” action of Russia, namely, the favorable (for Russia) trade treaty just concluded with Hungary. This seeming contradiction in principles stems from the rivalry among the big powers to dominate the world markets, a rivalry which has not yet been “frozen” in any final peace agreement.  Granting What They Cannot Stop Byrnes’ statement is undoubtedly an attempt to make a fresh start after the impasse at London, to try to throw to the Russians Eastern and Central Europe without any strings attached, if Russia will behave and confine herself to Eastern and Central Europe. As for Western Europe and the Far East, that’s a different matter. Byrnes is merely recognizing actions that have already taken place in Poland, Yugoslavia, Rumania, Czechoslovakia and the Baltic countries previously incorporated into the Russian Empire, and about which the United States can do nothing. After recognizing Russian control of the smaller countries in Europe, Byrnes tries to clothe this naked power politics with the following statement: “In centuries past, powerful nations have for various purposes tried to divide the world among themselves. They failed, and in failing left a trail of blood through the centuries. Such efforts have less chance of success in the modern world, where all nations have become neighbors. Today the world must make its choice. There must be one world for all of us, or there will be no world for any of us.” We can scarcely imagine the great comfort that Russia’s “neighbors,” the Lithuanians, Poles, Czechs and Yugoslavians, must take in Byrnes’ fine words. And, on the other side, his speech must make the Indonesians, Filipinos, Indo-Chinese simply delirious.  What This War Was For The real nature of the war just ended is made clearer by the Secretary’s remarks. It was a war for power,’for the division and domination of the world by the respective powers. If, as the leaders of the United Nations maintain, this was a war for peace, a war between peace-loving nations against aggressors, why is it necessary for them to carry on in this way? Why is it necessary for Russia to acquire “special security interests?” Against the weak Eastern and Central European countries? If this was a war for freedom, peace and democracy, why does the United Nations Organization find it impossible to really organize a peaceful post-war world? Why is it necessary to grant Russia a special European “Monroe Doctrine” just as America has one for the Western Hemisphere? It is because there is no peace in the world. It is because there is only an armistice which is punctuated by the heavy preparations the powers are now making for the future when, as they expect, a new struggle will break out in an effort to bring about a new redivision of the world in their respective interests. Byrnes’speech is an additional indictment of the war which has cost the peoples of the world tens of millions of casualties, loss of homes, starvation and endless misery. This is what the organizers of chaos have achieved in the Second World War.   



The lower depths of the Nazi hell are being daily revealed. We have been filled to surfeit with the horrors of the concentration camps like those of Belsen and Buchenwald – the planned starvation on potato-peeling soup; refined, mechanized torture; ghoulish surgical experiments; human vivisection, etc. Our indignation and outrage against these crimes is almost inexpressible.
Millions of these victims were Jews; hundreds of thousands, Poles. Many were the enslaved workers of countries over-run by the Nazis in the blitzkrieg days. They were imprisoned and wantonly killed by the degenerate agents of capital. They included prisoners of war from all countries.
But to look upon these thousands of imprisoned, tortured and slain merely as victims of Nazi bestiality is to see but half the picture. To conclude from these horrors what the propagandists want you to conclude, that “All Germans are guilty and all must be punished,” is to fall into a deadly trap.
Other thousands of these victims of Nazi terror were German anti-Nazis, German resisters of fascism, German left-wingers, German radicals, German political prisoners, German protesting workers. Despite eleven years of rule by club and bayonet, as late as last July there was a roundup of left-wing working class leaders by the Nazis – so unconquerable is the desire for freedom from exploitation! Every working man and woman should stamp this upon his conscience. The stinking death camps are witness not only of unspeakable cruelty but of incredible heroism. This was the price of revolt against Nazism.
There is nothing new in the crimes of fascism. Its rule of terror and murder against the workers and their militant spokesmen has gone on from its very inception. It is not peculiarly German. It existed in Italy, until the masses overthrew it. It exists in Spain; where thousands of its opponents are in jails and concentration camps like the German. It is not confined to the Axis camp. There are fascistic regimes in Brazil, Argentina and other South American “republics.” It is combined with a feudal type of regime in Japan, where more than 60,000 workers are presently in jail.
Fascism is not specifically German. It is not European. It is not confined to the Axis. It is not limited to any hemisphere. Fascism is the rule of naked force by decaying capitalism in order to prevent the workers from socializing the private property of the financiers and industrialists and organizing production for the benefit of society as a whole, German capitalism was on the verge of this workers’ revolution in 1933. That was why the big “free enterprisers”’ poured their money into Hitler’s treasury, helped him build a mass movement of the middle classes against the threatening revolutionr
We are for, and every thinking worker must be for, a punishment of the war criminals, those responsible for the atrocities. But we have no confidence in the intention of the Allied War Crimes Commission nor the Russians to bring all of the guilty to trial and judgment and punishment. There are a host of facts to warrant our lack of confidence.
 
Not an Anti-Fascist War
First, the war did not break out because of the Nazi acts against its own working class or against the enslavement of the peoples of other nations.
Nazism was appeased by the rulers of every Allied country until the life-blood of their profits was threatened.
Churchill, for instance, openly blessed Italian fascism as against the impending Italian workers’ revolution. Britain has starved and killed many more Indian slaves than Nazism could ever aspire to. She has had three centuries of practice in impoverishing and browbeating the colonial masses of India.
Stalin was able to conclude a pact of mutual assistance with Hitler, and his spokesman at San Francisco was able to say without batting an eye: “Fascism is a matter of taste”! For the Russian workers and oppositionists in Stalin’s concentration camps, which outnumber Hitler’s, and for the additional slaves the Russians are taking out of Germany, fascism may indeed be a matter of taste when it’s a choice between the two totalitarian states.
During the Spanish civil war, when both Italian and German fascism were sending arms to their brother Franco to use against the masses, neither Britain nor the United States would lift the arms embargo to permit assistance against this Spanish butcher.
Therefore the Big Three leaders have no right to be indignant about the Nazi atrocities. The indignation they are arousing has one purpose: to saddle all the German workers with the war guilt, to allow harsh punishments to be inflicted upon the German masses, to permit Russia to enlarge its slave-hold with German labor.
Aside from their past record, the current role of the Allied Military Government in the “liberated” areas is additional proof of their hypocrisy. They placed a friend of Mussolini in power in Italy. Only the fierce resentment of the Italian people forced his removal. The AMG cooperates with former fascists all over Italy – persons the Italian masses want removed. A notorious fascist, Roatta, was allowed to escape from prison with the purported assistance of the British. In both Italy and France, it is the members of the popular resistance movements who are demanding a real purge of the fascist elements.
 
Banishment of Criminals
Further, we have the policies of our own State Department. Roosevelt’s appointees, James Dunn and Julius Holmes, have both stated that punishment will be meted out for “specific criminal acts.” This would eliminate the real sponsors of Nazism, like, the representative of the Krupp munitions industry, Alfred Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach, recently captured in his 800-room palace; like Von Papen, former Vice-Chancellor under Hitler, and many similar evil geniuses and brain-trusters for Nazism. They were not the ones who wielded the truncheons or cremated the Jews. They did not commit “specific criminal acts.” They merely financed, planned and ordered them!
In Germany, representatives of the trusts are used as advisers to the Allied Military Government. No worker, social democrat, communist, trade union official or even left Christian is permitted in office in the German civil government.
The Russians have promised to shoot first any revolutionaries who want to overthrow the existing social system in Germany.
Labor Action believes that every war criminal should be brought to justice.
The war criminals are all those in both camps, Axis and Allied;, who temporized with, aided or abetted fascism in any way.
The war criminals are those on both sides who carried out a war of imperialist plunder and enslavement under false slogans of “liberation” or “freedom.”
The war criminals include the authors of specific criminal acts, the thinkers and organizers of those acts and the profiteers for whose freedom of exploitation the acts were carried out.
Labor Action believes only the workers can punish the real war criminals. In Germany, only the slaves are interested in getting rid of their slavemasters. The same is true of every oppressed nationality. The task of American labor is to solidarize itself with its exploited European brothers.
We have no doubt that however many youth fascism was able to captivate, such a regime of terror could only throw most of the population in opposition to it. Those very atrocities are heartrending proof of the unquenchable will to resist all exploitation. We have no doubt that the German masses will one day rise to deliver themselves from their oppressors. If the policy of Nazism-in-reverse is carried through in Germany and a new enslavement is brought about, they will deliver themselves from the new oppressors.
The surest way to guarantee the punishment of the Nazi beasts and their sponsors, the German industrialists and financiers, is to give the enslaved German, masses, the imprisoned, tortured, starved workers, complete freedom of action. But this the Allied governments have refused to do. They fear that the victims of the people’s revenge will be the true authors of the Nazi atrocities, the business partners of Standard Oil, General Electric, Alcoa, Imperial Chemicals and Vickers!
 




The Case Against Compulsory Peacetime Military Training
by Roscoe S. Conkling, Lt. Col., J.A.G.U.S.A., World War I, Lt. Col., Army of the U.S., World War II
Published by Post-War World Council, ten cents.
*
At a time when the Army and Navy brasshats, some of the brasshat legislators and the President are trying, under cover of the hysteria created by radar and robot bombs, to pass universal peacetime military training legislation, an indictment by a man who has been a high-ranking officer in both major world wars deserves special comment.
Roscoe Conkling’s indictment of the system of militarism begins with the fact that he had to resume civilian status before he could speak out against peacetime conscription.
“Recently revised Army regulations provide that (emphasis supplied) ‘Except as authorized by the War Department, efforts by any person in the active service of the United States ... to procure or oppose or in any manner influence legislation affecting the Army ... are forbidden.’”
Conkling tried to obtain the permission of his superior officers to present his case. His application found its way to the wastebasket. Ten million men and women in the armed services are similarly disfranchised! So much for the vaunted “democracy” the Army is supposed to imbue in young manhood! Meanwhile the four-star generals and Navy gold-braids continue to beat a tattoo for conscription.
Conkling vigorously scores the attempt to steamroller a training bill through while the world is war-conscious, while the GI’s who are fighting on the world’s battle fronts are away and cannot express their feeling, which will undoubtedly be one of abhorrence of war and anything related to it – especially peacetime conscription.
“Defense,” the shibboleth under which all armies are raised, under which all wars are undertaken, is shown by Conkling to have been used by Hitler too. “In the early days of the Nazi regime,” he writes, “it will be remembered, Hitleresque abhorrence of the mere thought of aggression was vehement indeed – vocally.”
 
Beneficiaries of Conscription
Most potent are his arguments concerning the self-interest of the regular Army and Navy in passing a bill.
“With the expansion of our Army to 10,000,000 or thereabout, regular captains and lieutenants have been promoted to brigadier generals; majors, lieutenant-colonels and colonels to major-generals, lieutenant-generals and generals. Reduce that army to 1,000,000 or less and, with exceptions here and there, generals again become colonels, lieutenant-colonels and majors. Their pay is decreased, their authority, contracted and their social positions receive a jolting setback, ... The reduction of base pay together with longevity accumulations and “incidentals” aggregating six, eight, ten, twelve or more thousand dollars annually, to base pay of $333 a month for a colonel, $300 for a lieutenant-colonel, $250 for a major, and correspondingly reduced ‘incidentals’ cannot be thrust out of mind, however conscientious the effort.”
It should not go unnoticed, too, that it is the non-fighting major-generals and the desk strategists who are spending their time and our money in drawing up plans to militarize our young manhood.
Conkling does not forget the civilian proponents, those who make fabulous profits from the sale of military products, uniforms, quartermasters’ supplies,” “constantly obsolescing air, sea and ground vehicles, armament, etc.”
Nor the ideological profiteers in the campaign, exemplified by the Fortune magazine poll which “purported to indicate public favor for peacetime drafting of boys as they become eighteen years of age.”
Nor the legislators like Representative Wadsworth who, when not shouting for complete regimentation of all Americans through National Service legislation, lauds the “civic, democratic and physical” aspects of regimentation of the youth. With the lives of unborn generations mortgaged to the near-$300 billion public debt of the United States, it is of great interest to know the cost, which will be borne by the taxpayer, for this proposed reserve army. The uniformed “planners” of rank estimate that it will cost about $1½ billions per million trainees; about $1,000 to $1,500 a “head.”
All signs point to a lessening of the present relatively easy burden of taxation upon the corporations. Readers of Labor Action know who will foot the vast military bill. This huge military budget, supported by the people, was what Karl Liebknecht, in the most famous anti-militarist pamphlet of all times called the “Douloureuse,” or the sickness of all the European nations.
Conkling asks:
“Does America need a peacetime army 2,500,000 or more men – almost thirty per cent of its male citizens between eighteen and twenty-six constantly under arms? It would be fatuous to suspect the ‘army planners’ do not know the answer is overwhelmingly negative.”
The author of the pamphlet makes short shrift of the “selling arguments” for peacetime conscription. Democracy?
“... When we consider the barrier of rank set up between them (enlisted men – Ed.) and commissioned officers – necessarily, perhaps, in war but strictly observed in peacetime as well – the plea of ‘inculcating the democratic spirit’ falls, flat, as every soldier or sailor who has served ‘in the ranks’ well knows.”
This is from a man who served as lieutenant-colonel in both wars!
Civic affairs?
“In wartime, as we learned in the pre-election period of 1944, soldiers and sailors are permitted to learn about ‘civic’ affairs back home just what government boards and bureaus in power decide is good for them and nothing more.”
Morals?
“And even to suggest sojourning in military barracks as aiding in developing high moral standards of eighteen-year-old boys is an outright insult to the intelligence of anyone who knows anything about army life.”
Conkling shows that the real benefits of militarizing the boyhood of the U.S. accrues to the machine of the Army and Navy. That even “preparedness for defense” will not be served, since the specialists concede that a year’s training “wears off” after two years without training. Therefore, in the next war, of what benefit will have been the years, the money, the moral sacrifices, when new training will be necessary?
Conkling shows that, the generals plan “refresher” courses. General Palmer wrote in the August issue of The Reserve Officer, “Every able-bodied young American should be trained to fight for his country if a War should come within three or four years after he completes his training.”
“The smallest possible professional organization!” This seemingly modest, vague plea of General Marshall and the “planners” is scorned by Conkling. How small is “Small”? “How ‘small’,” he asks, “could the professional organization possibly be to prevent too many demotions?”
 
Conkling Stumbles
The kernel weakness in Conkling’s otherwise imposing structure of argumentation is found in what he himself advocates. While opposed to conscription of the youth, he says:
“We must always maintain a not oversized, but sufficiently large and fully equipped standing army and navy, which includes formidable air forces and underseas craft, as well as a highly developed personnel and the most progressively modern machinery of war American ingenuity can devise.” (His emphasis)
Conkling now lays himself open to attack. Whereas he began his pamphlet belittling the idea of “defense” as a pretext for conscription and cited Hitler as a murderous example, now he himself concedes “defense” is necessary. Not by a large army of reservists gotten by compulsory peacetime military training, to be sure, but a “not over-sized” (how small is not oversized?,) and a “sufficiently large” (how large is sufficiently large?) standing army.
He has reduced ail his excellent supporting arguments to one question: How large and what kind of army for the “defense” he first scorned and now upholds?
 
How to Fight Militarism
Labor Action is opposed to conscription for all the good arguments that Conkling musters. The lack of democracy, the financial burden on the working people, the financial benefits to the Army and Navy cliques of officers, etc.
But we oppose it for a fundamental reason, too. We agree with the implication in Conkling’s earlier description of “defense.” But we go further. We believe capitalist nations go to war not for defense of the homeland, but for the sake of their profits and investments. They either want to obtain what they haven’t got (the “aggressor” nation, such as Japan, Germany) and which their rivals possess; or they wish to keep what they have (the “defending” nation, such, as the U.S., Britain), and which is threatened by their rivals.
Hence the army and navy in a capitalist society become the force through which the private monopolists and industrialists maintain their privileged positions. The armed forces may be used against internal enemies, class enemies. Some people may have forgotten the Palmer raids of 1920–21 following the First World War. Few have forgotten that General MacArthur sent the Army to shoot down the bonus marchers. Many of the far-sighted capitalist politicians are thinking of the post-war. Not as an era of peace, plenty and prosperity, but a time when, as labor presses forward its fight to secure these things which capital is not prepared to give, it will be necessary to tame it.
The advocacy of peacetime training means that the second “war to end wars” has failed. Conkling does not even see this eminent contradiction. The U.S., emerging on top of the heap in the profit scramble, will be hard pressed to maintain the spoils. The vanquished capitalist nations – perhaps a super-Hitler – will arise to challenge her.
The proposal for peacetime military conscription is part of this post-war pattern and is advocated by Roosevelt himself as such. And only when you recognize that for capitalism, all militarism is a “link in God’s world order” can you consistently oppose it in every form.
 




wo types of news items appearing this week on Germany are of vital interest to Labor Action. The first type, which everyone has seen, read or turned away from out of sheer nausea, are the atrocity stories of Nazi enslavement and criminality. We have no doubt that many of them are true. We doubt that all of them are, since in the last war so many atrocity tales proved false. We do not doubt the Allied side has its atrocities, ranging from the “looting” by U. S. soldiers already described in the press to Russian maintenance of the infamous Nazi camp of Maidanek in Poland, and the enslavement of German labor.
Where the authors of crimes on the part of the Germans are revealed, it is always the SS troops, the Nazi Elite Guard, or some, of the other specialists in brutality and murder that are involved. It has nowhere been demonstrated that the German people as a whole took part in or in many cases were even aware of these outrages. Even Nazi partisans, when paraded past some of the scenes of Nazi carnage, expressed disbelief. A burgomeister committed suicide after viewing one of the scenes.
But none of the stories traces the atrocities to their source. And herein lies the pertinence of the second type of new item.
 
Who Are the Criminals?
An Associated Press dispatch from Frankfurt-on-the-Main disclosed that Dr. Rudhard Duisberg, manager of Handels-Kammer, and W.C. Boehnert, an official of the vast I.G. Farben enterprises,” were cooperating with AMG in its reconstruction program.
The second item of this same type is a story by Pertinax in the New York Times of April 11, which tells of the “Locarno” spirit living among certain sets of British bankers.
“The ‘Locarno’ bankers,” he writes, “who provided short-term loans for Germany, twenty years ago, have retained a hold on political circles and on the press. They loudly protested against the decision arrived at in the Bretton Woods conference to do away with the Bank for International Settlements in Basle, whose assets had long been frozen in Germany.”
Britain, it must be remembered, will be in control of Germany’s industrial heartland, the Ruhr.
The I.G. Farbenindustrie was the backbone of Hitler’s support. This most powerful unit in the world-wide Nazi business network, through cartel organization intertwined with U.S. and other firms, provided the money to uniform, equip and educate the Hitlerites. In return, the Nazis stamped out all the workers’ and socialist organizations in Germany. Officials in such enterprises are now being used by the Allied Military Government to “advise” them in their “reconstruction” program! The real guilty are going unreconstructed!
The rain of stories of Nazi crimes has one main purpose. It is to condition the people for the acceptance of the harshest possible peace terms – harsh for the German little people. The stories are all captioned, Why We Can’t Like the Germans, We Can’t Permit a Soft Peace, etc. Thus are the crimes of a few, sponsored by the German industrialists, made to appear the crimes of a nation. Thus are the American workers made ready to accept a hard peace, the levy of reparations, or de-industrialization – all of which will be paid for by their German working class brothers.
A glance backward at the occupation of Italy shows the design of Allied imperialism. After the Italian workers joyously threw out Mussolini, the AMG put into office an old fascist campaigner, Marshal Badoglio. They did not purge the guilty elements readily enough to suit the Italian masses. Fascist officials were left in power all over Italy. A genuine mandate of the people has never been taken.
The handwriting on the wall could be seen in 1918. With the necessary changes being made, a repetition of Allied behavior is seen today. Then, however, the German revolution produced soldiers’ and workers’ councils. The system of councils is based on the fundamentally democratic principle of gradual election from the ranks up to the top of the state structure.
In the Germany of 1919 the revolution could have swept away all the representatives of the old powers. It could have nationalized industry, distributed the landed estates of the Junkers among the small peasants, liquidated the war criminals. Along with the latter, it would have gotten rid of a few hundred nationalistic agitators, including Adolf Hitler.
However, one of the first decrees of AMG of 1919 was to bar all soldiers’ and workers’ councils in the occupied Rhineland. By doing this, the Allies provided the current tools of the industrialists, the social democratic leaders, with the opportunity of dealing all the more ruthlessly with the revolutionary councils. Backed by the Allies, the social democrats crushed the German revolution, and hence paved the way for Hitler.
 
A New Nazi Movement?
The Nazis are not unaware that the Allies are as anxious as they to prevent a new attempt at a workers’ revolution. Reports from many sources, including the British Secret Service indicate that the Nazis are forming underground cells, are infiltrating their lesser known but trustworthy members into strategic positions so that they may escape a purge and be able to deal with the Allies. There is no reason to believe from their behavior in present-day Italy, or now in Germany that the Allies will not sponsor and support these formations to prevent revolutionary upheavals.
 
A New Hitler?
The German workers were first victims of Nazism. The industrialists have been its sponsors. Only the German workers can cleanse Germany of Nazism. To take reparations, indemnities, and slave labor means to penalize again the first victims of fascism and to allow the real criminals, the Nazi big business men and their international collaborators, to go free to fight another day. This new enslavement of the German workers may give rise to a super-Hitler.
 




Last week the Prime Minister who sent Spitfire planes and lend-lease Sherman tanks against the Greek people lighting for liberation made an appeal to his allies, Roosevelt and Stalin, to refrain from utilizing the cold-blooded slaughter of innocent Greeks to turn sentiment against Britain.
Of the war in Athens between Greek anti-fascists who had had to turn their guns against British imperialist armies to protect themselves against “liberation,” Churchill said:
“For three or four days or more it was a struggle to prevent a hideous massacre in the center of Athens in which all forms of government would have been swept away, and naked, triumphant Trotskyism installed. I think Trotskyism is a better definition of Greek Communism and certain other sects than the normal word. It has the advantage of being equally hated in Russia.”
The Prime Minister did not mean “Trotskyism” in the sense of organized Trotskyist parties in Greece. He meant Trotskyism in its political sense – the permanent world struggle of the exploited to emancipate themselves from their exploiters. The astutely class-conscious Churchill (class-conscious of Tory imperialist interests) saw that the ELAS forces which had struggled for years against fascism did not do so to pave the way either for the return of a British puppet king or for subservient native exploiters.
In effect he said to Stalin:
“Your policy is not for the people to take charge of the government, either. Don’t forget, you hate Trotskyism, too. You saw to it that a pro-Russian ‘people’s’ government was set up in Poland, Yugoslavia, Hungary, etc. I agreed that you should have those ‘spheres of influence.’ Now, for whatever part of the militancy of the Greeks you’re responsible, please call your dogs off. We agreed at Teheran that England should have Greece! I scratched your back, now it’s your turn to scratch mine.”
And to FDR, Churchill meant much the same thing:
“The American press and public opinion are being allowed to go too far against the role of Britain. You know at Teheran we agreed to government of, by and for the people (what a demagogic appeal to American democratic traditions!) providing the people will submit to us. After all, we’re all in debt to you for the cost of the war, and if you want us to pay back, we’d, better have our stake in Greece. If the Greek people take over, it’s goodbye to the returns on your investments.”
Churchill thus makes a bid for the combination of the reactionary powers of the world against the Greek people. The Greeks were heroes as long as they were fighting, the Italian and German fascists. Now that they want to preserve their hard-won liberties, they are brigands and, even worse, “Trotskyists,” that is, true fighters for Greek independence, freedom, peace and security.
Even the Daily Worker editorialists, critical of Churchill because they’re hustling for Stalin’s imperial interests in Greece, say “The Truth is that Churchill is catering to the most reactionary sections of American life to gain their support.” How does Churchill “cater” to the “reactionaries”? By ringing the alarm – “Trotskyists!” But for many years the Stalinist-Communists have called the Trotskyists “reactionaries.” Thus they lie about Trotskyism – and not very cleverly.
If you’ll pardon us for belaboring the obvious, Communists have ceased being champions of the working class.
What the reactionaries fear is what Churchill calls “naked, triumphant Trotskyism,” i.e., the struggle of the workers of the world for their complete economic, social and political emancipation.
The shots of the Greeks in their fight for genuine liberation have been heard ’round the world.
 




Along with his “work or fight” directive in his message to Congress, President Roosevelt laid down another totalitarian dictum: anyone who speaks of the disunity of the Big Three should have his remarks labelled “Made in Germany.”
It would be difficult, indeed, to find a phrase more cynical, more characteristic of a dictatorial mind, more contemptuous of the mentality of the people.
The whole world knows there are differences among the Allies on policy in the “liberation” of Europe – in Italy, in Greece, in Poland. The reporters and what Mr. Roosevelt disdainfully refers to as “excrescences” – the columnists’ – in most all of the British papers, American big business newspapers and even in the loudest shouter for unity among the United Nations, the Daily Worker, record daily the differences among the Allies over the disposition of the European peoples.
PM, for example, which fawns and slobbers all over the Roosevelt Administration, entitled a dispatch Polish Issue Threat to Allied Unity in its issue of January 5.
What is the President so fearful of, say, in the case of Poland?
On the last day of 1944, the Lublin Polish Committee of National Liberation proclaimed itself the provisional government of Poland. Following as fast as an echo came Russian recognition of the new “government.” Soon, but without unseemly haste, General de Gaulle is expected to ape his “dear and powerful” friend in the Kremlin. (So dear, so powerful! So powerful, so dear!)
 
Riding Two Horses
Britain and the United States continue to recognize the Polish government in exile seated in London.
The Atlantic Charter (may its soul rest in peace!) said that the liberated countries were entitled to governments of their own choosing.
The foisting of the made-in-Moscow Lublin provisional government on the Poles was a flagrant violation of the Atlantic Charter principle. Now, to any stern devotee of the Charter, the Russian rape of Polish independence and democratic rights would be cause just enough for disunity.
But that’s not it. Roosevelt has said the Charter was not capable of practical application, but was nice to have as a motto hanging around on the wall, like “God Bless Our Home.” Churchill, knowing what a motto is useful for, openly told Stalin to go ahead and take Polish territory, only let him take care of thrusting a “democratic” government upon the unwilling Greek people. (King George, a right regal “democrat”; or Papandreou, also “democratic,” but whose chances were spoiled by British guns; or Regent Damaskinos, who, after all, represents the “democratic” King. But anyone or anything, except a representative of the Greek people. After all, what do they know about democracy? They’ve had so little of it.)
 
Neither London nor Lublin!
The Poles, too, for the past decade have had little enough democracy. It has been suppressed, as Jewish pogroms and poverty have flourished, at the hands of that gang of landlords and assorted “socialists” in London whom Churchill and Roosevelt formally recognize. They would restore in Poland the fascist constitution of 1935. They would claim as their own not only the piece of Russian territory taken by Polish imperialists in 1920 from the former workers’ state, but all of East Prussia and more generous slices of other territories and more peoples than Russia how offers the new “independent” Poland.
The Lublin Committee is no better. Despite the parcelling out of a few hectares of land to the land-hungry peasants (it leaves the sacred estates of the Catholic Church untouched) it makes no fundamental changes, does not interfere with the property rights of business. Said its president, Osubka Morawski: “The authorities of the state will prosecute ruthlessly any lawlessness and infringement on private property.”
But there is no question that the Lublin government (containing at least one pro-fascist, General Rola Zymierski, now “converted” to Moscow’s way of thought) will infringe on the rights of the Polish people. That is the way of Stalinist totalitarianism. If there weren’t a thousand other proofs, it could be seen in the way the Russian army as well as the “London-Committee-loving” Allies left the Warsaw uprising to be crushed by the Nazi military machine. The reason? The uprising was not under the control of the Stalinists or even of London. It was largely the Polish workers and peasants standing off Nazi tanks with home-made, weapons.
It would seem that neither set of scoundrels – London or Lublin – could keep the Polish people in control to suit the tastes of the Allies. What is the bickering about then?
 
Disunity Within Unity
It just so happened that Stalin installed his scoundrels without previously getting the agreement of his other two partners. And Roosevelt and Churchill are getting a bit worried about these unilateral agreements and decisions Stalin makes. He’s getting too powerful to suit them.
So they must meet again to try to get each other to be more reasonable, to play their murderous game of cricket in a more sportsmanlike manner. Greece had been laid out for the British Empire – so Stalin should call off his Communists in Greece against Churchill, and FDR should not act so standoffish. Poland had been laid out for the Russian sphere of influence – but Stalin must not be so hasty and greedy. And again, FDR must not act as though he was so lily-pure and did not know about these deals.
There is a unity among the Allies – a “unity among thieves” – a unity with differences among themselves, but against the interests of the people’s of the world.
What is necessary is a counter-unity among the oppressed peoples of the world. For their salvation lies in their own hands. The Poles have had five years of invasion, partition, murder and war. They are not going to be willing to give up the fight to become serfs of Russia.
They will fight for their liberation, we are certain.
 





Gentlemen:
Enclosed is a subscription for your paper. Just under the wire in your subscription drive. I am an industrial worker and I realise that while some of your statements are deliberately exaggerated, you come nearer the truth than the big daily papers like the Cleveland News.
I like the way you dish out the facts on the telephone strike, the shell shortage, the cigarette shortage, the whiskey shortage, income tax, etc.
The big daily papers were seen to retract some of their statements on the shell shortage. I wish there could be a daily paper in Cleveland that would print things from the worker’s point of view.
I have just finished talking with a factory owner. His viewpoint on industrial policy is narrow, selfish and entirely one-sided, yet sane, orderly and sensible within itself. That guy believes in the divine right of management and that the entrepreneur can do no wrong. Well, Louis the XIV and Marie Antoinette felt that way too before they had their heads chopped off.
Now, I sound like a red hot revolutionary but I am really a conservative person with a “middle class” background. At times I burn up when your paper seems to be a colored man’s paper, but I suppose that is only my Anglo-Saxon prejudice.
I know you favor abolition of the wage system as a whole. I realize this is just a corollary to the abolition of piecework. That the two sort of go together. I’d like to hear news of the various shops in Cleveland, because I have worked in quite a few of them and know a lot of guys who work there.



 


R.K., Willoughby, Ohio



*

Dear R.K.
Thanks for your subscription and your interesting letter. You raise some questions that we think many of our readers would like to see taken up.
Does Labor Action Exaggerate?
We believe that your reaction (“some of your statements are deliberately exaggerated”) comes from the contrast between a militant paper fighting in labor’s interests, such as Labor Action, and what you refer to as the “big daily papers,” which are in reality big business enterprises and give us a daily dose of big business propaganda.
We try to present our news and views in a dramatic fashion, but above anything else, we believe in telling the truth to labor. We believe only the truth can serve the cause of labor’s progress. Contrary to the big business newspapers, we print facts they wish to conceal; we play up the profits of big business on page one, whereas “they bury them in the financial columns if they print them at all.
 
“Divine Right of Management”
And just as your entrepreneur has a point of view, so do we. Whereas he believes in the “divine right of management,” we believe that the only progressive force in society is the working class. The vast majority of industrial magnates did not get there by “working their way up,” but by piracy, robbery and milking the public.
Does this statement seem “deliberately exaggerated”? We refer you to Gustavus Myers’ History of the Great American Fortunes or Ferdinand Lundberg’s America’s Sixty Families for confirmation of the origins of great wealth.
And we can assemble a whole army of facts to show that only the workers, organized and still-to-be organized, are the only progressive force in society.
Capitalism is outlived. It has submitted the people to two imperialist world wars within the space of one generation. It has submitted us to recurrent crises, each one worse than the previous one, with a post-war depression just around the corner. It is minting profits, while forty per cent of American workers still make under sixty-five cents an hour. (Again, this is not an overstatement, but on of those facts you like to read in Labor Action.)
On the other hand, it is only labor which fights for progress, for higher wages, against profiteering. Labor, being the biggest single organized force in the nation, Without a stake in the profit system, has the potentiality of organizing its own political party to take over the complete administration of government and industry. Not all of labor is yet conscious of its historic mission. To help make it conscious is the purpose of Labor Action.
 
“A Colored Man’s Paper”
While our ideas for complete political, social and economic equality of the Negro conflict with many workers’ “Anglo-Saxon prejudices,” we can only be proud that you and others sometimes think of Labor Action as “a colored man’s paper.” In a society of inequality, which capitalism is, the Negro has been, relegated to the lowest position due only to the color of his skin.
This menial position has been reinforced by prejudice, tradition, competition between Negroes and whites for jobs, etc. It is made all the more difficult to overcome this prejudice when the federal government and the state legislatures embody Jim Crow in law and practice – the poll-tax in the South, which prevents millions of Negroes as well as whites from voting; Jim Crow practices in the Army, Navy and Air Forces.
You know that the prejudice against and treatment of the Negroes in this country is no different from Hitler’s handling of the Jews. Do you know also, that in other countries – England, France, Italy – where people have not been brought up in prejudice, they cannot understand the American attitude toward colored people? That Negro soldiers are accepted into the homes and hearts of the people, like any white soldier? That any prejudice which exists is imported from the U.S.?
But again, through cooperation and understanding in the unions, black and white are learning that their interests are identical, that they are both part of the working class, which must unite in the struggle for a government of labor. The first step toward breaking down the barriers is to recognize a prejudice for what it really is – as you have already done.
Abolition of the Wage System?
Yes, we’re for it. We believe the “divine right of management,” acquired, not through Providence but through the unholy exploitation of the people, should belong to those who do the work of society. Let the organized working people manage industry, eliminate private profit, plan production to suit the needs of the people – for peace, prosperity and plenty for all!
M.B.
 




If one scans the headlines of the past year, they seem a hodge-podge of events, with little rhyme and less reason to them. As the year began, the railway workers and steel workers were taking strike votes; the Italian people had overthrown Mussolini and were being Amgotted. Later occurred the invasion of Fortress Europe, for which the world had been holding its breath in horrible expectation. The French people, aided by the Allies, expelled the Germans. A half dozen labor conventions were held in this country throughout the year, and the announcement was made of more than half a million American casualties in the course of the war. The year has ended in a new, bigger, deadlier battle on the Western front in Europe, with new heaps of twisted metal and torn bodies.
A year is an arbitrary division of time and a short one, reckoned by the span of history. But since this is the era of machine production, mass output, motor-driven transport, jet-propelled planes and rocket bombs, events occur rapidly. And it seems particularly fitting at the close. of 1944 to assess the important events of the year from a SOCIALIST point of view.
The locomotive of history, according to socialists, is the struggle of classes. Today, In capitalist-imperialist society, it is the struggle of the working class and the “little people” of the world for security.
Let us examine this struggle of the workers to better their existence and attain security.
 

Battle on the Home Front
Overall employment was still pretty close to the wartime peak. Unemployment was at an all-time low. But wages were way out of line with prices. Part of the class struggle was a battle of statistics, labor maintaining the cost of living had risen 45.3 per cent, the Bureau of Labor Statistics that it had risen only 23.5 per cent.
But the President’s directive had frozen wages to the famous Little Steel formula, by which they were not permitted to rise more than fifteen per cent over a 1941 average! Those anti-labor forces who ranted about the “wealthy war workers” stubbed their toes over the hard fact that 40 per cent of all American workers still make under 65 cents an hour, Senator Pepper’s recommendation for a minimum wage.
Of all the proposed freezes, only the wage and job freezes, those which lower the standard of living of the working class, held.
(Readers of Labor Action know that there was one exception to the “hold the line” of the wage freeze, That was in the upper brackets, among the captains of industry. Alfred P. Sloan, of General Motors, received $200,000 for his year’s work, or slightly under $100 an hour, on a forty-hour week. Some will say that prices went up for Mr. Sloan, just as much as for the sixty-five-cents-an-hour factory worker.)
The overall profits of industry for 1943 were announced in 1944. World War II proved a mint to business, which garnered ten billion dollars of profit during the year, according to the report of the Truman Committee.
The wage freeze for workers held for one reason only. Labor in 1944 celebrated the black mass of the third anniversary of the no-strike pledge, given originally by the top leaders of the unions over the heads of the membership.
 

WLB and the No-Strike Pledge
The corollary of the no-strike pledge, the War Labor Board, has become renowned throughout the labor movement as the cemetery of a|l labor disputes. When Van Bittner of the CIO was asked about the possibility of speeding up War Labor Board procedure, he replied with a contemptuous summing up of labor’s attitude toward FDR’s brain-child; “Yon can’t de-lonse a louse.”
The rank and file of labor became restive under the pledge, the high cost of living, long hours at no greater real wages, exhortations to speed up, to “sacrifice,” etc. The high peak of this dissatisfaction came at the UAW convention, where the ranks voted to submit to a nation-wide union referendum, the question of whether they want to retain the no-strike pledge. This action signified a mistrust of the leaders who gave the pledge and a strong sentiment against the pledge.
The struggle of the working class meant in other unions a struggle against the leadership, which was suffering from no-strike-pledgitis. These included the straight, old-fashioned, rock-ribbed type of Sherman Dalrymple, whose own local of the United Rubber Workers expelled him for a period when he went too far in firing and fining men for company-provoked walkouts.
Opposition was mobilized against the Stalinists (the label was changed on the bottle, but the Communist Political Association is still poison to the working class) in. the shipbuilding union, the electrical workers and others. The Communist bellwether in the NMU, Harry Bridges, nominated himself for the least popular man of the year by proposing a permanent no-strike pledge.
Since the unions were manacled, big business had a field day, not merely in the realm of profit-taking, but in a real offensive against the labor movement. The knight of this crusade was Sewell L. Avery, who pays his employees $21 a week, who has managed to defy the War Labor Board for over a year and who has provoked a strike in the citadel of labor in Detroit, where even the local labor leaders are forced to support the picket lines.
Reimbued with courage due to the business offensive against labor and perhaps realizing the government was more serious in crushing the left (the leaders of the Socialist Workers Party, who spent the year in prison for opposition to imperialist war) than the right (the assorted Bundists, Christian Fronters and pro-fascists whose prosecution has not yet been completed), such rabble-rousers as Father Coughlin and Gerald L.K. Smith took to the air and activity again.
 

Labor Politics and Reconversion
Labor did the usual thing politically in 1944, i.e., supported Roosevelt, but NOT in the usual way. The CIO Political Action Committee, organizationally independent from the Democratic Party, was born. Its prominent role in re-electing Roosevelt posed a question which unionists are still mulling over: If labor can do so much wth a political organization of its own, what could it do with its own program and genuine labor candidates?
Michigan brought forth a form of a Labor Party, the Michigan Commonwealth Federation, with a labor program. This organization, however, crossed class lines on Election Day and its evolution is still in doubt.
The soldiers’ right to vote was curtailed by the failure of Congress/to pass on a uniform federal ballot.
The first crack in the employment structure appeared at the very beginning of the year and was followed at intervals by others. We refer to the shock of the Brewster cutback, followed by others in Buffalo aircraft, National Tube, steel, etc.
The slogans of the sit-in of the Brewster workers, dramatized the plight of millions of workers to come:



We’ve got the tools,
We’ve got the ability,
We’ve got the experience,
We’ve got the will,
But we ain’t got the work!



In anticipation of the usual post-war depression and the growing cutback unemployment, labor became concerned in 1944 with full employment. Roosevelt was moved to promise sixty million jobs. But the pronouncements of capitalists gave the lie to any fulfillment of a promise by a capitalist politician to achieve that goal.
Ten million unemployed are normal, say the capitalists. In other words, except in time of war, when the factories and farms are used mainly to create goods of destruction, the U.S. must have a permanent depression. That is, if “free enterprise” – the system Roosevelt is pledged to uphold – remains, the days of apple-selling, ploughing-under and WPA will return.
They will return unless labor draws the lessons of the year 1944, and all previous years of capitalist exploitation, and forms its own political party, with its own program, to run society not for profits, but for peace, plenty and security for all!
 

The International Scene
Domestic anti-labor, pro-capitalist politics were carried abroad.
Despite propaganda to the contrary, the overthrow of Mussolini proved that most all Italians except the capitalists and upper classes were opposed to fascism, and were merely waiting for the opportunity to overthrow it.
The armistice imposed on the Italians grants to the Allied powers the right virtually to select the Italian government, despite the proclamation of the Four Freedoms and the Atlantic Charter.
The French people, too, showed their hatred of Nazism by helping to oust the invader. But no elections have yet been held in France. A usurper, General de Gaulle, has proclaimed himself leader of the French people, with Allied backing. Despite the aspirations of the people which he voiced prior to returning to France, such as expropriation of the monopolies and greater representation of labor, these have been unfulfilled, the Nazi-collaborators have not been wiped out, and France continues through him the exploitation of 10,000,000 colonial Arabs.
Again, in flagrant violation of the asserted principles of this war, Poland became a vassal to Russia. She was marked as part of the Russian sphere of influence at Teheran, and our State Department has agreed to this division of the spoils. Other parts of the Balkans, including Romania, where even the anti-Jewish laws remained intact, fell to the Russians in this second redivision of the world.
If the Atlantic Charter was torn and riddled before, it was buried in Athens at the end of, 1944. Here the ELAS, military organization of a people which had never compromised with fascism and which was on the side of the United Nations, was forced to fight the British for the right of self-rule. Britain imposed a government which represented no one in Greece save a handful of royalist reactionaries to maintain her hold on one of the outposts of her empire.
In Greece, Stalin too sees another neighboring state, with the possibility of a Mediterranean port, so valuable to trade, that would be a fitting jewel in the new Russian Empire.
And Roosevelt has acquiesced in these imperialist acts.
To the end of United States imperialism, Roosevelt has studded the new State Department with eighteen-carat millionaires, including Stettinius, formerly associated with J.P. Morgan and steel interests, and Clayton, cotton broker, who did business with fascism.
As for the solution to the war and international ills, it remains the same as for domestic unhappiness: the forward march of all laboring and exploited masses, to eliminate the profiteers, the war makers the class oppressors.
Socialists are for genuine national independence for the liberated countries, and a workers’ government.
 




The President’s proposal for peacetime conscription, slipped into his annual message to Congress calling for a National Service Act, is a confession of failure and a further move toward totalitarianization.
What kind of confession of failure is it? We were told that we were one of the democratic, peace-loving nations, and that fascism, the brutal aggressor nations, started the war. We are supposed to be fighting to rid the world of fascism and war. If what we were told were true, the victory over fascism should mean the end of war and hence the end of the necessity for armaments, armies and soldiery. (Let us forget, for the moment, that the First World War was also a “war to end wars”.)
Sending our youth, to army camps, drilling and training them in the arts of warfare, means to do what Hitler did with the German youth. Those who argue that peacetime conscription is the best preventive measure against war can be dismissed out of hand. Its existence in the European countries did not prevent war. Conscription merely meant that the war-makers were guaranteed trained armies to send to death on the battlefield. It meant that the Merchants of Death continued their profiteering in peacetime, too.
Listen to some of the arguments being used in behalf of peacetime conscription of young men.
 
Wadsworth at it Again
Representative James W. Wadsworth, who headed the Senate Military Affairs Committee from 1919 to 1927, said as part of his argument that the United States “will undoubtedly take a leading part in the formation and maintenance of an international organization whose chief objective is the maintenance of world peace.”
What a contradiction! The implication is that we are going to maintain peace, therefore we have to be strong militarily to guarantee that peace. If some other country, doubtless with its own trained reserves, also for the purpose of “maintaining peace,” breaks the peace, then we mobilize our trained youth to fight to keep the peace. (Peace, in the minds of our capitalist rulers, is something for which you go to war every so often to maintain.)
“Our motives cannot be questioned,” said. Mr. Wadsworth, and added that there is “no brutal or aggressor spirit in the American people ... we can lead the world along paths of decency but merely to be decent is not enough.”
We agree that there is no brutal or aggressive spirit among the American people, save where it has been implanted by false propaganda of the capitalist overlords. But to omit for the present the brutality and aggressiveness of the United States in the Philippines, and Cuba and Puerto Rico, let’s look at its role in the present war. How was the peace-loving, unaggressive, democratic nature of our administration shown in Greece, where one of our allies, Britain, turned its guns on the Greek people, who had fought against the fascists? Or how could the Belgian people, demonstrating against their collaborationist leader, Pierlot, make a distinction between the “peace-loving” American shells that were fired on them and the ”brutal, aggressive” shells of the Nazis?
 
Equality and Health
Another argument Mr. Wadsworth uses for compulsory military training is that “poor boy, rich boy would sweat and sympathize together, and that it would bolster the democratic spirit of this country.” That is a laughable argument to a socialist. To propose a totalitarian measure to “bolster the democratic spirit”! The democratic spirit might be bolstered a bit more effectively if the system of inequality were eliminated which creates “poor boy, rich boy.” If private monopoly, whose interests wars are fought to defend, were eliminated.
Wadsworth and others use the time-worn argument that military training would strengthen public health. “The cause for rejections would become known,” he stated, “and medical authorities would be able to seek out the sore spots and correct them in early youth.” Selective Service records revealed the appalling state of American health by the tremendous percentage of rejections for the Army. If a fraction of the money poured into war and military training were spent for public works to assure full employment and public medical service available to all, this physical condition of the American youth could be largely eliminated.
The key argument of Wadsworth is the “bitter experiences” of the first eighteen months of the present war, during which times our Allies were “holding down the trenches”’ while the U.S. “was in the throes of building an Army and Navy.”
 
Preparing for Another Slaughter
There it is! When the THIRD WORLD WAR comes, Mr. Wadsworth is saying, we shall not be unprepared, if we have an army of trained youth.
How bitterly ironic! Our statesmen and public officials talk in the same breath about “international co-operation for world peace” and propose getting ready for the next world slaughter!
And the Third World War is just around the corner, unless the common people, the workers and farmers in their organizations, the vast majority of the population, assume their responsibility. Their responsibility is to take over the leadership of society in which they are the majority, through their own party, through their own government, to eliminate the root cause of war – private ownership and profiteering.
 





Dear Editor:
I am getting your paper. Find inclosed some reading matter according to my way of thinking.
I am unable to see any difference in “Pure Socialism” and “Pure Communism” and the pure brand is the only brand I care for. I can’t see how any socialist or communist could differ on fundamental principles. In either instance it would be a workers’ government administered in the interest of workers. I am for either one or both if you prefer.
Right now organized labor has the situation in hand, if they don’t split up. William Green, John L. Lewis, Sidney Hillman, Philip Murray and other influential leaders should get together and stay together, and pilot this post-war world. Organized labor has all the power and influence needed for that purpose. If it’s left to capitalism, hell will be to play, and if they get labor down it will be labors own fault. Well if labor hasn’t got sense enough to lead, they will just have to fall in behind and good-bye unions. It will be a crime for any differences to come up that can’t be ironed out – for together we win, divided we fall, and this time we will fall hard. This is to be the last kick of the dying capitalist, or it may survive. It’s up to labor. I for one believe every leader in the movement will get together and stick. The responsibility is great.
It might behoove us to become less interested in other countries and think more of what is the best program for this country, devise it, blueprint it and stick to it until it’s accomplished. IT’S ALL UP TO LABOR. Organized labor is the only constructive force in America. Capitalism is destructive of every interest of the working man or general welfare.



 


J.R.W., Glen Allen, Mo.



*

Dear J.R.W.:
Life would be much more simple if socialists and communists agreed on fundamental principles. But it is unfortunately true that the Communist Party has abandoned socialist principles. Only a few facts are necessary to prove that.
The Communist Party supported Roosevelt in the election. It opposed us of the Workers Party and all workers who wanted to build a Labor Party with genuine labor candidates on a program for labor. Their leader in the United States, Earl Browder, has said that capitalism is workable, and the communists will support it.
At the present time they are conducting a vigorous campaign in their paper, the Daily Worker, against rescinding the no-strike pledge in the referendum vote now taking place in the United Auto Workers Union. The strike, as you imply an another letter you sent us, is a necessary weapon for labor to be effective in its struggle for better conditions against the employers and complete emancipation. Abroad, their members have participated in the neo-fascist cabinet of Badoglio in Italy, and in the British puppet government of Papandreou an Greece (until the movement of liberation on the part of the Greek and Italian masses forced them out).
(See the description by Reva Craine elsewhere in this issue on a factory boss in Russia. What a degrading departure from the communist principle of “workers’ control of industry” which existed after the revolution in Russia! What an unmistakable departure from the democratic principles of communism!)
The explanation for this? The Stalin government in Russia took the reins away from the workers. This was possible because of the poverty of Russia and the fact that ONE socialist state was surrounded by hostile capitalist states. True socialism is passible only on an international scale, with an international division of labor, an elimination of rival states competing arid warring with each other. The inequality in Russia generated the policeman – the state – to keep a few in power and prosperity and to keep the impoverished masses down.
 
Our World Interests
This brings us to the point in your letter that “it might behoove us to become less interested in other countries and think more of what is the best program for this country.”
We recognize that the primary task of the Workers Party lies in convincing the labor movement of the United States of its historical responsibility to form its own party and take over the leadership of the nation. But, to achieve this goal, the workers of the United States must have an understanding of, and a solidarity with, their international class brothers.
They must have an understanding of why it is that the workers-in-uniform are facing each other on the world’s battle fronts, while the capitalists of all sides are safe and secure and waxing fat on the profits of war.
Perhaps another country will create a workers’ government before the workers of the United States do. Then we should expect the sympathy and solidarity of that government toward our own struggles. And if we should have a genuine labor government in the United States, do you think that the other capitalist nations would treat us any differently than they did Russia after 1917, when both German and Allied armies forgot their differences in order to send their soldiers against the new workers’ state?
Just as the capitalists have an international solidarity against the workers, so must we have an international solidarity of labor. Our workers’ government would call upon the workers of other countries to try to prevent their rulers from crushing us. We should tell them to form similar governments of their own in their own countries, to bring an end, all over the world, to the system that breeds poverty and war, and to usher in an era of peace and plenty for all.
We think that labor organization should be united, too. The rank and fliers’ desire unity, but we cannot put our faith in Green, Lewis, Hillman, Murray and their like, who act as stumbling blocks, who have their posts, salaries and prestige at stake. These are the big-salaried men of labor, who have one face turned toward the bosses and the government and the other turned toward labor. Proof? In the interests of “national unity” for the war effort, i.e., national unity between the millionaire and the moneyless, Murray, Green and the others have sacrificed the independence of labor. They gave up the no-strike pledge. That leaves labor defenseless. The capitalists, on the other hand, have their industry, their farmland, their banks, their newspapers, their radio, their movies – and their war. But labor is paying the bill, enduring the speed-up, suffering the shortages, doing the fighting and dying.
As: you say in your letter, “IT’S ALL UP TO LABOR.” It is up to rank and fliers like yourself to push for unity over the heads of the labor bureaucrats and create the greatest, largest, best organized force for progress the world has even seen – thirteen million workers and their families! It is up to you, and other progressives like you, to join the ranks of the Workers Party to fight for a workers’ world.
M.B.
 




Apparently alarmed at the independence and the slowly but surely awakening class-consciousness of the American workers, the Stalin School of Falsification has produced a new pamphlet to instruct its followers and confuse trade unionists. The pamphlet is The Trotskyist Fifth Column in the Labor Movement, written by the Daily Worker’s (Communist Party newspaper’s) labor expert, George Morris.
The pamphlet abounds in lies. But before we can discuss the lies it is necessary to disclose the reason for them, which is found in the policy of the Communist Party, American representative of the Stalinist slavocracy in Russia.
 
Pre-1939 Honeymoon
Prior to 1939, before the war broke out in the invasion of Poland by the Hitler-Stalin partnership, the Communist Party lived at peace with the ruling class in the United States and other democratic capitalist nations. Here, they supported Roosevelt and plumped for American-Russian friendship. Motivating this friendship for capitalist democracy was the hope that the U.S., as well as Britain and France, would line up with Russia against Hitler in the coming imperialist war.
The Allied powers were not prepared for war, however and this resulted in Hitler’s “peaceful” aggression in Europe and “Munichism,” i.e., compromise with Hitler. The “democratic” nations had hoped that Hitler would war against Russia, not them. Russia feared that the Allied powers, instead of fighting Hitler, would join sides with Germany and jointly assault Russia.
At this juncture came the Hitler-Stalin pact. The Communist Parties about-faced. Since Stalin was now allied with Hitler, everything that would lead the Washington-London-Paris axis into War against Stalin’s ally, Hitler, was opposed.
 
Anti-War Phase
Overnight, the Communist Party became anti-war. Wrote Earl Browder, Morris’ leader, in the Daily Worker of September 13, 1939:
“The character of this war in no principal respect can be said to differ from that of the late World War. This war has nothing to offer the masses of any participating country except death and destruction, further miseries and burdens.”
In a speech delivered at Philadelphia Town Hall, September 29, 1939, the same person said: “The Communist Party has issued as the slogan of the day: ‘Keep America Out of the Imperialist War!’”
This present-day defender of American capitalism went even further in a speech of May 3, 1940, in New York City when he said:
“The second imperialist war, through the struggle of the masses to bring it to an end will give birth to a socialist system in one or more other countries.”
Note: dates are especially important in Communist Party history. In May 1940, the Stalin-Hitler pact was still in effect.
Since Roosevelt represented the war-makers in the U.S., the “third term” became hateful to the Communists. They even spoke for a third party. Said Browder in the introduction, to his book, The Second Imperialist War (the title is instructive), written (the date corroborates the line) May 13, 1940:
“... and the popular will can find no channel of expression until it breaks out of bounds of the traditional parties, and founds that third party which is quickly destined, as the issues mature, to find its modern Lincoln and become the first party of the land.”
We cannot resist giving a lengthy quotation from the former Communist Party presidential candidate, William Z. Foster, since it illustrates so well the Communist position of a few years ago:
“The claim of the Allied governments that they arc fighting this war for democracy constitutes only so much propaganda to lure the masses of their peoples and ours into supporting the war. The Allied powers did not fight for democracy during the World War (despite their democratic slogans) and they are not fighting for democracy now. What they are doing, even as they did in the World War, is defending the sordid interests of British and French imperialism against their great enemy, German imperialism. It is not a war of rival ideologies, but of rival imperialisms. Therefore, the Soviet Union is correct in supporting neither camp of the warring imperialists.
“If the British-French-American imperialists were to win this war, their course as the victors would be even more reactionary than it was after the World War. They would head for fascism, adapted to their various countries. This is because the capitalist system, already deeply decayed by its general crisis, will receive such a shattering blow from this war that the only way it can be held together even temporarily in the face of the rebellious masses will be through fascist terrorism.
“What will create a democratic Europe and a free world is not a victory of British and French (and American) imperialism, but the victory of the great world democratic masses of the people over all the imperialists.”
This sounds like a radical party, indeed!
This was no simple American deviation, either. (Anyone who deviates from the Communist Party line is “liquidated.” Liquidation means expulsion from the party or physical extermination.) Listen to Georgi Dimitrov, general secretary of the Communist International. The date is October 1939:
“For the working class there is only one true stand – irreconcilable, courageous struggle against the imperialist war, struggle against the culprits and vehicles of this war primarily in their own country, struggle to end this predatory war. This is the most just of causes, one dictated by the fundamental interests of the proletariat and all working people.” (Emphasis in original)
 
1941 Flip-Flop
Then in August 1941 Hitler attacked Russia. The Communist Party somersaulted. The war was no longer an “imperialist war” on the side of the Allies – not with Russia in the alliance. It became a sacred war for democracy. The Communist Party became the most vigorous defender of the no-strike pledge, labor-management peace, buying of war bonds, etc.
That is why the Communists attack not only Trotskyists, who have considered the war imperialist all the way through, but any militant, who defends the rights of the union against these patriots-come-lately.
That is why the Communists, publish the piece of filth, lies and slander titled The Trotskyite Fifth Column in the Labor Movement.
Let’s list the lies in fact first:
 
Trotskyists and Fascists
LIE No. 1 – “Among them [friends of the Trotskyists – Ed.] are the Norman Thomas Socialists, whose position is hardly, distinguishable from the Trotskyite; John L. Lewis’ agents, Coughlinites and Klan groups, all known; for their policy of sabotage of the war effort.”
First, we have always repudiated the Norman Thomas Socialists for their milk-and-water socialism, and, above all, for their backhanded support of the imperialist war.
Second, while we support the militant struggles Lewis has made in behalf of the miners in contrast to the cringing policies of the CIO and AFL leadership, we lambaste the bureaucratic way he runs his union, his own pro-war stand and his support of Republican capitalist politics as opposed to the Democratic capitalist politics of the Communists.
Third, the attempt to associate us with Coughlinites and fascist elements is an old Communist lie, written by journalistic prostitutes.
 
Trotskyists and Militants
LIE No. 2 – “A sample of Trotskyist provocation was the shutdown of the Johnsville, Pa., plant of the Brewster Aeronautical Corp. for a week ... The Trotskyites in the leadership of the union, Local 365, UAW, felt that a U.S. Navy oath thereby superseded union discipline and called out the 6,000 workers on strike against the Navy.”
Local 365 was led by militants opposed to the no-strike pledge, not Trotskyists. The Communists here identify in customary fashion all opposition to them as either “Trotskyite,” “fascist” or “Trotskyite-fascist.”
LIE No. 3 – “Or take the case of the Detroit ‘soda pop’ war. The dispute originated when a Trotskyite in charge of the Detroit affiliate of Samuel Wolchok’s Retail and Wholesale Union provocatively entered the field of the AFL’s Brotherhood of Teamsters with a claim of jurisdiction over a couple hundred Pepsi-Cola deliveries. Other Trotskyites at the head of a UAW local in the Highland Party, Chrysler plant, came to the aid of their associates in the retail union by bodily ejecting AFL soda pop deliverers from the plant ... From there the Trotskyites, in alliance with the Socialists, rushed to other plants to develop more shutdowns:” Etc., etc.
False again. The same technique is used here as in Lie No. 2, identifying union militants with Trotskyists.
LIE No. 4 – “The perfect team is where an employer is of the most rabid reactionary stripe, like the America Firster, Sewell Avery, head of Montgomery Ward; while the union is under Trotskyite control, as proved to be the case in the well-known Montgomery Ward dispute in Chicago. In such a case the employer and union officials have far more in common than in dispute.”
The union is not under Trotskyist control. And let George Morris try to tell the Montgomery Ward strikers, as well as their allies among the auto workers that they “have far more in common than in dispute” with Sewell Avery! Morris, of course, “forgot” to mention that Bridges, the Communist trade unionists, the Communist Political Association and the Daily Worker scabbed on the Ward workers!
 
Briggs Local 212
LIE No. 5 – “Briggs Manufacturing, Local 212, Detroit, has been one of their [Trotskyists’ – Ed.] outlets for a long time. Hardly a week passed without several strikes at that vital war plant. The delegates of this local were the very center of the so-called ‘rank and file’ combination at the 1944 Grand Rapids convention of the UAW, where they worked to kill the no-strike pledge.”
Here the Communists join the industrialists and manufacturers who are carrying on a campaign against the militant Briggs Local – which is not, however, an “outlet for Trotskyites.” What few Trotskyists there were at the UAW convention joined with the heroic, progressive minority to defeat the pro-employer no-strike pledge. True. But it was the uncorrupted (by Communists or bosses) rank and file which pushed through a referendum vote on the no-strike pledge.
 
“Union Wrecking”
LIE No. 6 – “At the Federal Shipbuilding Corp. yards, Kearny and Port Newark, N.J., a large union was whittled down to a membership of 5,000 under their control. Several months after they were cleaned out, the union grew to be the largest affiliate of the IUMSWA, with more than 20,000 members.”
This is pure, unadulterated falsification, from beginning to end.
 
“Nazi Agents”
Then a whole series of lies, distortions, half-truths and falsifications is strewn throughout Morris’ pamphlet. Many of these allege that Trotsky and his followers in Russia collaborated with Nazi Germany and Japan against Russia. The American Communists follow here in the footsteps of Stalin. Stalin staged phony “Confession” trials in Russia and executed all his opponents, Trotskyist and otherwise. American and French commissions of inquiry examined Trotsky and found him unqualifiedly innocent of Stalin’s frame-up charges. But a henchman of Stalin, a member of the Russian secret police, finally murdered Trotsky, as his fellow-socialists had been murdered by other agents of Stalin in many countries.
Stalin got rid of Trotsky, as he did all revolutionary opponents, because Trotsky and the others still stood for world socialism, for the cause of the workers, without subordinating that cause to the aims of Russia.
The Communists oppose the Trotskyists and all militants in the labor movement today because the latter stand foursquare for the rights of labor, as opposed to collaboration with the bosses for the benefit of Russia.
 
Reason for the Lies
To genuine socialists and communists, the war is still an, imperialist war – a war for the redivision of the world and not for “democracy” – and it hasn’t changed just because Russia is on “our” side.
To genuine socialists and communists, the only war worth fighting is still on behalf of the toilers and exploited of mankind – in the labor movements of every country, against all the capitalists and fascists and exploiters, Russian, German, British, American.
Morris’ pamphlet was written to push back the rising tide of militancy in the labor movement. The fear of death was thrown into the Communists by the decision to take a referendum by the UAW convention. They would rather foist upon the labor movement a permanent no-strike pledge such as proposed by their west coast spokesman, Harry Bridges.
The Communists are the main danger in the labor movement today. They\subordinate every interest of labor to the interests of so-called “national unity,” because this nation is in the same camp with Russia. They therefore try to identify all militants with Trotskyism, and the latter with fascism.
Trotskyism, however, means a clean-cut fight for labor’s interests, no compromise with the bosses, no support to the capitalist political parties, democratic trade union practices, and the perspective of socialism. No amount of lies can crush this truth.
 




Two independent unions of New York telephone operators have filed their intention to strike on behalf of 17,800 switchboard operators.
The issue? After a War Labor Board panel recommended a $5.00 increase to operators working for $21 a week (the wage of $32 a week, which is an exception in this industry, makes a telephone operator an aristocrat of labor), the companies offered $4.00; the WLB came across with $3.00; the company failed to back up its $4.00 original offer. This promise of $4.00 by the American Telephone & Telegraph Co. came in answer to a strike threat last January.
At the time of this threatened strike, liberals, communists and labor leaders shed crocodile tears for the poor exploited operators and shouted in unison:
“No! No! You mustn’t strike – our men in uniform – the war for democracy, etc.”
Some of the girls had an answer that almost stopped this anti-labor chorus. Their sons and husbands in uniform who knew of their plight supported their intention to strike.
It was only because of the serious resolution to strike that the WLB was moved to recommend the partial increase that would raise the operators’ wages from sub-sub-standard to plain, everyday sub-standard wages.
Those who are against strike action by the terribly underpaid operators are for the company. Let’s take a look at the company, American Telephone & Telegraph.
 
AT&T Colossus
AT&T is part of the golden J.P. Morgan dynasty. Its gross assets of over five billion dollars are estimated by Berle & Means to exceed in value the wealth of twenty-one of the forty-eight states taken together. It is controlled by a few of the Sixty Families who own and control most of the resources of the country.
Its annual gross income of more than one billions dollars is larger than that of most of the governments of the world. It is the largest private employer of labor in the U.S. Over 300,000 people work for this industrial kingdom.
We reprint from Labor Action of December 4, 1944:



AT&T Income and Salaries
(1937 pre-boom figures):




Net Income
$179,834,815


Dividends
$168,180,906


Surplus
$11,652,909




1944:


 




Total Income
$700,000,000


Taxes Paid
$400,000,000




Net Income
$300,000,000


Dividends Paid
$81,000,000




Income after taxes and dividends: $219,000,000






Salaries of executives
in pre-boom year 1938:




President Gifford


$209,350




Vice-President Cooper


  102,699




General Counsel


    75,000




Vice-President Page


    67,500




Vice-President Jewett


    65,000



And this corporation is unwilling to have its operators earn more than $21 a week!
The advertising ballyhoo of AT&T boasts that no individual owns so much as one per cent of its stock – therefore it is publicly owned and its policies are publicly determined. This is a farce. The wide dispersal of ownership only makes that much more possible the control by a few large, wealthy owners, who act in concert, or by holding shares nominally, while brokers manage their holdings.
The twenty largest owners of stock held only 4.6 per cent of the total, but that was enough to establish control – simply because the rest of the shares were spread so widely.
 
Contrast with Workers
Men who are wealthier than princes of the Indies, who inherited their wealth, married into it or got their start in piracy, plunder or pure and simple exploitation such as the telephone girls are being subjected to – these private owners of AT&T are the ones who determined the wage policy of the operators.
What the corporation refuses to pay the operators furnishes the wives and these men with $500,000 necklaces, $75,000 sables, hand-painted swimming pools, Carrara marble floors, yachts, palaces, etc.
“No! No! Don’t strike, girls. The boys in the foxholes, the war for democracy –”
Present the truth to the boys in the foxholes. Tell them “both sides” of the story – that of the profiteering corporation and that of the underpaid working women. Then we’ll take our chances as to which side they’ll support, the empire of AT&T or the right of these operators to a decent standard of living.
 




“Simply intolerable.” Thus Philip Murray described labor’s situation in the face of the latest War Labor Board report. Only a violent word could express the situation. For the WLB, far from granting a revision of the Little Steel formula that all labor wants, had the brass to say that wages are in advance of the cost of living! They dare to write it, black on white, for all the housewives of the nation to see.
The War Labor Board’s figures on the increase in wages are based on increases in take-home pay due to promotions and hours worked in excess of the normal work week. But basic, straight-time hourly earnings are behind the WLB’s conservative estimate of the rise in the cost of living. The increase in take-home pay has meant a huge increase in production and hence, in profits.
 
Exposing WLB Report
Murray rightly stored the “fallacies” and “weaknesses” in the WLB majority’s report. They failed utterly to consider the looming cutbacks due to the cessation of much war production when the war in Europe ends. These cutbacks, which are occurring even now, will mean cutbacks in hours and promotions that will far offset the temporary war gains in wages. OPA has declared that this loss will approximate $17 billion annually.
Here are the WLB public members’ strange figures:



Increase in average straight-time hourly earnings
from January 1941 to October 1944


36.7%




Increase in cost of living for same period


29.4%




Increase of wages over cost of living


  7.3%



The dissenting labor members of the WLB concede for the purposes of argument (although the CIO reports show it nearer 44 per cent) that the cost of living has risen a mere 30 per cent. That makes their computations something like this:



Increase in cost of living
from January 1941 to October 1944


30,00%




Increase in basic wage rates for the same period


less than 20%




Basic wages lag behind cost of living


more than 10%



If they used their own figure of 44 per cent for the increase in the cost of living – a figure that takes into consideration deterioration of qualities, disappearance of cheaper goods and other factors that affect workers’ standards severely – they would show a lag of about twenty-five per cent!
Roosevelt’s “equality of sacrifice” program means that when the war, boom ceases, workers’ wages will be three-fourths of what they were prior to the war for “democracy.”
The “equality of sacrifice” notion, for which labor ceded its right to strike, means that the employers of the U.S. have bagged the biggest profits of any country at any time in history!
 
An “Intolerable Situation”
So whether you take the employer-minded public members’ figures, or labor’s own figures, labor is solidly behind the eight-ball. Or, as Murray genteelly says: “The situation is intolerable.” Well, where do we go from here, Mr. Murray?
Phil Murray is not going to be caught out on a limb again as he was at the UAW convention. There, to stifle the move to rescind the no-strike pledge, he safd: “I am as sure as I am living that the Little Steel formula will be revised.” The WLB sawed that limb off too quickly. So Murray quickly follows up that “intolerable” with:
“Now, more than ever, it is of the utmost importance to our war effort that there be maintained uninterrupted production. The CIO and its members are fully conscious of this need and therefore shall observe their no-strike pledge.” – CIO News, February 26.
No, sir. No “intolerable situation” is going to trick Murray into rescinding the no-strike pledge. He’s going to call a meeting of the Executive Board of the CIO to “tackle this crucial problem.”
Now we know what to expect. Murray, as well as his followers on the board, are going to do as they have been doing throughout the war. They are going to ask, beg, plead, request, urge, call upon, insist on – even DEMAND – revision of the Little Steel formula. And if that doesn’t work, they will wheedle, cajole, supplicate, whine, petition – to get the revision.
That won’t work. We know. They’ve been doing it all along.
 
“Ace in the Hole”?
But the CIO and Murray have an ace in the hole. They gave up the right to strike, to be sure, but they do have a weapon. What it is is revealed on the last page of the aforementioned CIO News, which, let it not be forgotten, is mailed to the mighty, multi-million throngs of CIO members all over the country.
That weapon, to be used by each of the six million members of the CIO, their wives, husbands and other kin is –
SEND A POSTCARD TO YOUR CONGRESSMAN TO REVISE THE LITTLE STEEL FORMULA!
To us, the spectacle of Phil Murray, president of a union whose members struck, fought on picket lilies and died to organize themselves to get a little more bread and butter – the spectacle of Phil Murray pleading with the boss-minded WLB, the boss-financed Congress and the super-boss of them all, FDR, is what is intolerable in the situation.
Forced by the utterly wretched condition of its members, the Textile Workers Union withdrew from the WLB and released its members from the no-strike pledge. That is an example to follow. To try to get raises with a labor movement bound to the no-strike pledge is as futile as trying to lift a rug you are standing on.
 
Stop Begging!
The begging, pleading, urging, etc., tactics of Murray and the rest of the big labor leaders have driven the situation from bad to intolerable. Formerly, the War Labor Board, with that dispatch for which it is noted, would get around in two or three years to a two or three cent increase.
Now, the WLB’s power to make decisions has been taken away, usurped by Economic Stabilizer Vinson. And Vinson means to stabilize. That’s what FDR appointed him for. No more of these wild, abandoned, runaway-inflationary wage increases like the WLB used to hand down. No, sir. Wages are going to stay frozen as hard and cold as a brass monkey.
A few more CIO executive board petitions, a few more postcards – and we’ll have an actual cut in the hourly rates. And Phil Murray might say at the next CIO convention: “I’m as sure as I am living that we shall soon return to the high standards of the Little Steel formula.”
It’s high time for labor to repudiate all the big and little editions of Phil Murray in the labor movement, to strike out for wage increases in the only way:
STOP COLLECTIVE BEGGING!
GET OFF THE WAR LABOR BOARD!
RESCIND THE NO-STRIKE PLEDGE!
 





To the Editor:
Your story in the last issue of Labor Action on George Morris’ vicious lies in his new pamphlet The Trotskyist Fifth Column in the Labor Movement, was a bit confusing because it was really incomplete.
Several of Morris’ lies were answered by merely saying that Morris lied. That’s true enough. A Stalinist hack of his standing is incapable of doing anything else. But I think that the readers of Labor Action deserve some more explanation so that thy really know how and precisely where and in what way he did so.
Add to the general confusion the fact that the Morris pamphlet condemned many non-Trotskyist union leaders that the CP disagrees with as Trotskyist. In answering it was merely pointed out that these leaders were not Trotskyists. It leaves the impression that Labor Action may also condemn the union militants. This I know is not so ... so why not a little more on the rot that Morris dug out of the sewers.



 
New York, March 3, 1946


S.L.
 



*

It is much easier, to lie than to tell the truth, especially when the whole structure of our own society is woven together with lies.
Lies about the war for “democracy”; lies about the guilt of, the whole German people for Hitlerism; lies about the world peace and security that will come out of this war; lies peddled freely in this country about the Japanese race of “half-men, half-apes”; lies about the inferiority of Negroes; lies about Jewish bankers being the beneficiaries of the war, etc.
A liar has no responsibility for checking facts. One who tells the truth does. Consequently his is the much more arduous job.
 
How They Lie
There are many ways of lying. One can use distorted facts, false logic, wrong conclusions from correct facts, half-truths, truths juxtaposed to lies, etc. The Communists, to whom no one can hold a candle in falsifying, use all these methods.
Here is an example of the typical Communist Party method:
It is a fact known to every high school student that the Communist Party represents the interests of Stalinist Russia. The Workers Party says: The Communist Party subordinates the interests of the working-class to the Stalinist bureaucracy. The Hearst press writes that the Communists are “Russia Firsters.” Therefore, say the Communists, the Hearst press and Labor Action are identical. It’s so easy!
As you point out in your letter, Morris identifies labor leaders who have not come under the thumb of the Communists, who divide their support of the war with the interests of the workers, as Trotskyists.
Under this interdict come Walter Reuther of the UAW (a “subversive” according to Morris’ lights!), David Dubinsky of the ILGWU and Samuel Wolchok of the United Retail and Wholesale Workers (who “give the Trotskyites shelter and support, using them chiefly as tools for Red-baiting and anti-Sovieteer purposes”).
Briggs Local 212 in Detroit is considered by the Communists under Trotskyist leadership because it is a militant local whose members have struck and whose delegates backed the move to rescind the no-strike pledge at the UAW convention.
 
Whom We Support
De Lorenzo, of Local 365, militant union president who fought hard in guarding the interests of his membership, becomes a “Trotskyite” too.
If my article contained the impression that because such leaders are not Trotskyists, why, then, we do not support them, that is incorrect. Space did not permit a full explanation and exposure of all the lies in which Morris’ pamphlet abounds.
Labor Action and the Workers Party support these leaders WHEN, AS and IF they defend the interests of the workers. We think we would do a better, more thorough and consistent job were we in their places. We condemn them insofar as they all, to one degree or another, support the imperialist war or the pro-employer no-strike pledge.
These aforementioned leaders, like John L. Lewis and many others, are not under the Stalinist hypnosis, as are Murray, Hillman, Thomas and others who are holding hands with the Russian totalitarian leaders in the World Labor Conference. Therefore, you see, they’re anti-Soviet, pro-Hitler and Trotskyite! It’s so very, very easy.
But for the smart, class-conscious workers, who see the Communists acting as strike-breakers in the Montgomery Ward fight, who know that their spokesman, Harry Bridges, proposed a permanent no-strike pledge, who know that Earl Browder now defends capitalism and postpones socialism to the millennium – it’s not so difficult to nail the lies.
M.B.
* * *

Enthusiasm – to Order
According to the Daily Worker (Wrecker), the pamphlet by George Morris, its anti-labor expert, is being received very enthusiastically in the unions. Such a statement is obviously suspect, and when we read the whole story our suspicions were completely verified.
Minnesota Labor, organ of the Minnesota CIO, according to the Daily Worker, published a review of the pamphlet by William Mauseth, lousiness agent of the Moline, Ill., local of the United Electrical Workers. There is the give-away. The Communist-Stalinists control the Minnesota CIO. They also control the national organization of the UE. William Mauseth is an old-time member of the Communist Party. So there is really nothing strange about the Communists promoting their own pamphlet in the unions which they control. They need such propaganda to bolster their anti-labor, scabbing policy.
Nor is it strange that Daniel Tobin, president of the Teamsters International, is helping the Stalinists in promotion of this pamphlet. Tobin is a reactionary labor leader and the only top-flight labor leader who defends the Little Steel formula (see editorial on page 3). Two groups of reactionaries have merely clasped hands! They would look much better outside the labor movement. The labor movement Would certainly be a healthier place without them.
 

   The eyes of the world’s workers and oppressed have been turned hopefully upon England, just as those of the world’s rulers and exploiters have turned anxiously in the same direction ever since the election victory of the British Labor Party. The English workers, through their tremendous mandate for thorough-going social change at the polls, have given a mighty impetus to the battle of all workers for complete emancipation from capitalist exploitation and ushering in a new era of prosperity, peace and socialism. If British labor were to cast off its profiteering, imperialist ruling class, this would be only the beginning of a chain-reaction which would spread immediately to the enslaved continent of Europe and the colonies and to the United Slates as well. How far the British Labor Party can go toward achieving the ideal of world labor depends upon many things: (1) how far the Labor Party itself pushes its avowed program of nationalization of basic industry and banking, (2) how militantly the British workers press for a solution of their problems, (3) how strongly British and world reaction wage a counter-fight against the Labor Party and (4) how swiftly world labor advances toward social change.  Grave Problems for Labor The tasks that confront the British workers and the British Labor Party are immeasurably difficult. British imperialism, although on the victors’ side in the war, emerges in little better position than a vanquished power. She is debt-ridden as a result of the war. She suffered tremendous physical destruction through the bombing raids during the war. She who lives by international trade, has lost many of her markets in the war. Six years of war have resulted in a heavy loss of markets and credits. Being the oldest capitalist nation, Britain finds herself handicapped with antiquated machines and factories, which add to her difficulties in competing with the United States, her chief economic rival. This is the legacy that Tory imperialism bequeaths to the Labor Party. Such a heritage – which produced the poverty, slums and bombed-out houses of the English working class – is the major reason that that working class put the Labor Party into office. Since Britain is so nearly bankrupt, she depends upon foreign loans and economic concessions to prime the pump of British industry. Foreign loans come exclusively from the United States, the seat of world financial power. The abrupt cessation of lend-lease, therefore,was an unbearable blow to both British capitalism and the new Labor regime in England. Sir Stafford Cripps, new president of the Board of Trade, warned that “If lend-lease were cut off at once, obviously it would be a difficult problem to get enough imports to keep us alive, much less rovide us with beautiful clothes.” U. S. generosity is tied to its purse-strings, and as long as lend-lease served the common interest of England and America to defeat the Axis, American aid was forthcoming. Now American capital is racing its rival to get its export products to the market first. If the U.S. is opposed to nursing enfeebled British capitalism normally, how much more aggressively she is against aiding a Labor government which is “pledged” to do away with private property in certain mass and basic industries. This explains the abruptness of the lend-lease termination,  American Tories Squeal Typical of the American reactionaries expressing this opposition is the statement of Mark Sullivan in the Herald Tribune of August 28: “Help from us would be an aid in making the British experiment in socialism successful.” The British Labor Party hasn’t even begun to execute its mild “experiment,” but U.S. reaction is ready to crush it in the egg. Sullivan continues to explain how socialization would affect U.S. capital adversely, in that: “... any help we gave to Britain under an extreme socialist government would work to our detriment in international trade. In Britain under socialist government international trade must become a government monopoly ... At present an American business firm can do business direct with an English firm ... But if Britain makes international trade a government monopoly the condition changes, greatly to the disadvantage of American business. All business in Britain becomes one buyer or one seller, as the case may be, while in America business remains hundreds of buyers and hundreds of sellers acting individually. Where in any transaction there are on one side 100 sellers and on the other side a single buyer or 100 buyers withone seller, the individual is under a hopeless disadvantage ... “In short, with British international trade a government monopoly, American business would be forced to one of two alternatives. Either we should be obliged to abandon international trade, with seriously detrimental effects on our own property and standard of living, or we should, in self-defense, make our own international trade a monopoly. The latter course would be on our part a long step toward going into socialism ourselves.” While the squeeze put on Britain affects capital as well as the Labor Party, and throws Churchill squealing into the same chorus with Attlee and others, other Tories are busy pointing the “moral” to the Labor MP’s. Said Oliver Lyttleton: “If you wish, to obtain assistance from the United States you must be careful about the nasty things you say about private enterprise that will affront American opinion.” The Tory ex-president of the English Board of Trade is saying, along with the American Tories who wish to cut off loans to “socialist” England: “Don’t touch private property, boys, or Uncle Sam’s going to get you.”  For a Bold Policy That the U.S. and British Tories had “got” the Labor government for the moment was evidenced by the immediate announcement of Cripps that even with the war over, clothes rations will be reduced and the numerous statements of others that Britain’s standard of living threatens to sink beneath the low mark of the blitzkrieg days. U.S. action in stopping lend-lease is the cue for the British Labor government. It should make good its promises to nationalize the Bank of England and the joint stock banks as well. If capital is needed to run British industry, let the wealthy profiteers furnish it. And since support will be lacking from foreign capital for British enterprise, the only method of assuring support is for the Labor government to follow a socialist international policy as well. That would mean immediate and unconditional freedom of the 400 million Indians and the inhabitants of the crown colonies now ruled by England. It would mean a renunciation of the reactionary, pro-imperialist foreign policy speech of Ernest Bevin, the new Foreign Minister, a speech to every word of which Winston Churchill agreed. A truly socialist program abroad and at home would win to British sympathy the legions of labor in every country, including the United States. If ever an internationalist working class program was dictated to a labor movement that wanted to achieve socialism – and it is dictated to all – it is doubly true in relation to the British. Their island geography, their concentration of industry, their lack of self-sufficiency, their dependence upon export and import all demand a program of appeal to the international working class.  Labor Party On The Spot In view of the foregoing, all the more criminal and harmful to British labor interests as well as those of international labor was the support given to Bulgarian, Rumanian, Hungarian, Greek and Spanish reactionaries! There are cynics who like to say to socialists who want a Labor Party, a Labor government and socialism, that “Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.” However, the pro-imperialist speech of Bevin and the wishy-washy internal actions of the Labor government thus far are not due to their being corrupted by office. They are due to the heterogeneity of the Labor Party and the reformist program it holds. In the statement of its so-called left-winger, Harold Laski, whose “extreme” policies have already been disclaimed by Bevin and Attlee, the most the British Labor Party stands for is a GRADUAL changing over from capitalism to socialism, making a “revolution by consent,” and compensating the property owners for the confiscation of their property (property which was obtained by its owners through years of confiscation without compensation to peasants and workers!). And one has only to recall that no ruling class in history has ever “consented” to a revolution, to realize how utopian their program is. But one cannot reckon without the rank and file of the British working people. Their mandate in the elections was clear. They want an end to poverty, joblessness, insecurity and war. They will demand more drastic action on the part of the Labor Party. They will find their desires may be achieved only through socialism. If the British labor leaders betray them, they will take other means to achieve their end.   
   Among five million members of organized labor who are now demanding a thirty per cent increase in wages, the United Aut oWorkers Union is spearheading the post-war drive of labor against the profit-swollen auto industry. A strategy board of the UAW is petitioning the National Labor Relations Board for a strike ballot in all plants of the automotive “Big Three.” The union has airtight arguments in its case for the wage increases. Cutbacks have reduced the average straight time reconversion pay to $1.17 an hour, which amounts to $46.80 per week in contrast to the $60 which forty-eight hours would bring. In addition, the union spokesmen have shown what an enormously profitable business the war was to the automotive companies, putting them into a position where they eminently can afford to pay at a minimum the wartime rates of pay (which weren’t high, what with taxes and high prices) without putting more than a slight nick in the companies’ profits. But when labor touches the profits of a corporation, it touches its soul. Chrysler, General Motors and Ford have already stated privately, if not officially, that they will not grant a thirty percent increase. The thirty per cent increase would not advance the wages of the workers substantially. It would rather keep them at the wartime par. Anything short of the thirty per cent increase would mean a cut in the take-home pay of the workers compared with their wartime take-home envelopes. The achievement of this demand is the least the UAW leadership should strike for, given their “moratorium” on fighting for labor’s rights during the war, their adoption of the no-strike pledge, their sacrifice of the workers’ standards for “victory,” etc. “Victory” was the business and what a lucrative one! – (see top of page one) of the auto barons! Originally, Walter Reuther, vice-president of the UAW, announced that the General Motors corporation was to be singled out as the first target under the strategy of “concentrating your fire,” and would be struck singly if it did not accede to the demands of the union. This would presumably put GM, the largest corporation in the industry and the bell-wether for it, in a bad spot to compete in the post-war car market, since its competitors would be in production. There is some evidence to indicate that this policy has not been settled and that any one, or all three, of the major corporations maybe tackled.  Kelsey-Hayes Strike A strike has been in progress at Kelsey-Hayes Wheel Co., supplier of Ford parts, for over three weeks, provoked by the company’s firing of union officials and general offensive against the union. The day before the strike policy of the international was announced, the international executive board suspended the executive board and officers of Local 174 for failing to end the “unauthorized” strike. An administrator is in charge of the local. The reason given by the international was that the strike was holding up reconversion and that such lack of discipline jeopardized the bargaining position of the union vis-à-vis the corporations which have charged the union leaders with failure to keep their membership in line. As we go to press, after all other pleas of UAW officials have failed, Richard Frankensteen, so-called labor candidate for Mayor of Detroit, is being called to try to persuade the Kelsey-Hayes strikers to go back. A fine preview of what this “labor” candidate’s administration would be! However the Kelsey-Hayes strike meshes in with the intentions of the international leadership, there is no doubt that the international acted in a high-handed manner with the strikers of this militant local, who were fighting hard to preserve the elementary rights of the UAW itself. The international’s behavior provoked the picketing of the rooms of R.J. Thomas by UAW militants who were opposed to this cracking down by the top officers. There is no question but that the regression of the rank and file by the UAW officialdom throughout the war, their servile acceptance of the no-strike pledge while labor’s gains were being steadily whittled away by the auto magnates, topped by this latest action, makes many a rank and filer distrustful of the manner in which the leadership will carry out its present campaign. Further, the leadership should recognize that it is going to have to arouse and depend upon the courage, initiative and sacrifice of its ranks, such as was displayed in the Kelsey-Hayes strike, to win its fight. And still further, it should take a tip from the class solidarity of the companies against which it will have to fight. Whatever their individual rivalry, they are united against organized labor. When Ford closed his shops throughout the country and fired some 50,000 workers, using the Kelsey-Hayes strike as an excuse, he was acting in the interests of all the capitalists, who are seeking to destroy organized labor. While the UAW heads have announced their preference for settling the issue over a conference table, there is little likelihood that the matter will be solved in this fashion. The companies are now appealing to President Truman and Secretary of Labor Schwellenbach –who has just reorganized the Department of Labor, largely precipitated by the Detroit situation – to intervene in their behalf. Their plea will be that any strikes now would cripple their “reconversion effort,” just as during the war it was that strikes would cripple the “war effort” and just as in the future they will cripple “peacetime production.” Only labor is crippled by yielding to such argumentation. The role of government agencies in this strike will be what it has been during the war. In return for unkept promises of “equality of sacrifice” labor was to maintain peaceful relations with industry and give up its strike weapon for the duration. Now, in return for a quick reconversion and the promise of “full employment” labor will be asked to hold its punches again. The government, in whatever form it intervenes, will effect a“compromise” – of labor’s interests, in the“national interest” – of the capitalist class. President Truman has already indicated, in his recent address to congress, that he stands for some kind of reorganized conciliation or arbitration through the Department of Labor. The companies are calling for compulsory arbitration of all labor disputes and permanent outlawing of the right to strike. An all-out struggle for the thirty per cent increase is indicated. The rank and file of the auto workers will see that such a struggle is waged.   
   The newspapers continue to headline the meetings going on in London by the Foreign Ministers, James Byrnes, Vyacheslav Molotov, Ernest Bevin, Georges Bidault and Dr. Wang Shih-Chieh as the “Big Five” conference. They err in one respect. There are two dominant world powers which are calling all the turns: the United States and Russia. France was a fallen star among the great imperial powers even before the time Hitler was able to conquer her, and the depths to which she has sunk is attested by the recent visit of General de Gaulle to this country to beg for financial assistance. There followed on his heels Lords Halifax and Keynes, also come a-begging the U. S. to bail out the bankrupt British Empire. China’s role in the war has been that of a satellite to the United States, and her Foreign Minister in London is doing little other than rubber-stamping the decisions of Byrnes. China, too, is hoping for a two billion dollar U.S. loan for postwar reconstruction. While Russia is asking financial assistance from the No. 1 world power, she has plenty of weight to throw around, which lies in her military might, backed by her industrial strength, plus her vast extent and resources, made vaster in the course of this war through her imperialist swallowing up of smaller countries and her share as a victor in the spoils of war. Now that, the fighting is over, now that it is no longer necessary to convince the masses of the people that the war is worth fighting for, and now that the rival German-Italian-Japanese imperialisms are subdued, the conquerors demonstrate callously what they were fighting for. That is the exploited colonies, semi-colonies and small nations that were once under the control of their Axis rivals and as much as they can get from their very allies. They, the Big Five, dominated by the Big Two, are disposing of the fate of a dozen nations and the lives of millions over a conference table where sits not a single representative of the exploited masses of the world for whose freedom and independence the war was supposedly fought! There has been much high-sounding, humanitarian talk about the “international trusteeships” over the Italian colonies. This was never proposed for the colonies of the victor nations, Not for India, not for the Dutch East Indies. Nor for the Philippines, nor Martinique, nor French Indo-China, nor any other colony possessed by the victors. Stalinist Russia, however, who more than any other country pretends to be for the liberation of the exploited and oppressed, asked not for “international trusteeship," but individual trusteeship over the Italian colonies of Tripolitania and Eritrea. Russia, said Molotov, was “extremely interested in the future development of the Mediterranean and Africa and believed with modernization of communications it was fully qualified to undertake this job.” How fortunate, indeed, that “communication” has been so “modernized” that Russia is at last able to emulate the older imperialisms and assume her share of “developing” the backward Tripolitanians and Eritreans! Molotov stated) that these demands were “logical” also, in view of Russian interest in the Dardanelles. Quite logical, indeed. The Western powers are finding “international trusteeships” as dangerous a formula as that of the atomic bomb. Anyone may use it. It may be applied by Russia to the colonial countries now under the individual trusteeship of the U.S., France or Britain. But the mills of the gods grind slow, and since Britain, for instance, has had a bare two centuries to civilize the Indians, it is obviously premature for the Russians or the Americans to be invited into a collective trusteeship. Therefore, the Russians can on}y fall back on the formula of “individual trusteeship” Yugoslavia also has demands to make of the conference. This Country enjoys the refined type of democracy which exists in Russia and the latter’s border states. Its democracy is so refined, in fact, that over 100,000 prisoners jailed by the Yugoslav government (generously aided by the NKVD, Russian secret police) are not yet sufficiently elevated to enjoy it. Yugoslavia put in a bid, vigorously backed by Russia, for Trieste and Fiume, Venezia Giulia, Istria, Gorizia and half a dozen Adriatic inlets and islets. Being a shrewd bargainer, she hoped mainly to get the Adriatic seaport of Trieste, to which both she and Italy, who hopes she has paid for her sins by being a co-belligerent of the Allies for two years, make ethnological claim. Neither, of course, is interested^ in the strategic location of the port nor that it leads to sources of coal and bauxite, the latter used in aluminum manufacture: Both stand firmly for the triumph of pure ethnology, i.e., racial and cultural affinity.  U.S. Preferences At the present writing, the United States prefers the ethnological claims of the Italians on Trieste. Too, Italy is in the sphere of that Western bloc of nations that have not fallen under Russian influence. The United States also proposes to give the Dodecanese Islands to Greece. Molotov hasn’t said yes and he hasn’t said no yet: there may be some opportunity to “develop” an island base there, what with the development of communications, etc. Aside from which, Greek “democracy” is unfriendly to Russian “democracy.” The Greek people enjoy what may be called the “Western type” which bears a degree of similarity to the “Eastern,” or Russian, type in that many thousands of ELAS-EAM fighters against fascism must be imprisoned until they are educated to enjoy it. As for the position of the United States on the African colonies of Italy, Libya and Eritrea, she proposes international trusteeship and independence in ten years. Some cynics tell you to look at a map and say that the application of the principle of internationalizing the colonies here puts the United States in good position in relation to the oil routes to Syria-Lebanon and Iran, as well as on the Red Sea route to India. Where the two forms of “democracy,” Western and Eastern; cause, the most conflict among the sparring ministers is in the Balkans – Greece, Rumania, Bulgaria and Hungary (although the latter is not, strictly speaking, a Balkan country). This area, alternately called “the powder keg of Europe,” a “melting pot,” or “Europe’s deep South,” is a strategic area where East and West fuse, almost wholly agricultural, but with a few valuable industrial resources and industries.  Rumania, Bulgaria Provisional regimes have been set up in Rumania and Bulgaria, hot wholly filled with Stalinist-Communists, but wherein, in order to educate people with their customary missionary zeal, the Communists have made sure to control-the Departments of Interior. Backed by an internal army of a hundred thousand or so in Bulgaria, the process of re-educating the Bulgarians has been speedy indeed. The lady Communist, Tsola Dragoicheva, now heads that government, while Petru Grozu flits between Moscow and Bucharest. Every time the Western democrats point to these Balkan states, Molotov shouts: “Greece!” But Churchill and Stalin, with Roosevelt’s blessing, agreed at Yalta on the division of Greece and Rumania into British and Russian spheres of influence, respectively. However, the war was still on then, and agreement was urgent. Now, while Byrnes and Bevin shout for free elections in Bulgaria, Rumania and Hungary, Molotov replies that there is more democracy in those countries than they have ever had before (he could have added: “As much as exists in Byrnes’ poll-tax state of South Carolina, too”). This is true. Prior to June, 1940, only the employed and literate male Rumanians over thirty could vote (nearly fifty per cent of the population is illiterate) and only government candidates were allowed. During the Nazi occupation, no one voted. In Bulgaria, no parties were permitted, the Cabinet being responsible only to the King. It seems that France and England have some interests in addition to their style of democracy in these countries. Here were their pre-war interests: “The French control Yugoslavia copper and lumber industries, Bulgaria’s banking and Rumania’s banking, iron works and cement factories. The British control the Yugoslav lead and zinc mines, the Rumanian oil industry and the Greek nickel mines and public utilities. The Belgians control Bulgaria’s mining and public utilities.” (From Spotlight on the Balkans, Foreign Policy Association pamphlet.) Now, most, if not all, of these properties have been nationalized by the Russian puppet regimes. It is a paradoxical note that it is Bevin, standing on the British Labor Party program of nationalization of basic industries in England, and the minister of de Gaulle, who promised to nationalize French mines, who are protesting the nationalization undertaken in Rumania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria. While Labor Action desires nationalization of all industry, this is a graphic example that nationalization in and by itself is no guarantee of a progressive regime without workers’ control. The question of who is in control of the political regime which nationalizes the property is of paramount importance. The negotiations for the super-Versailles drag on. Bulgarian elections, desired by Russia, have been postponed in response to British and American pressure. Russia opposes immediate elections in Czechoslovakia, where Bevin’s foreign policy speech was supposed to have had an influence, while she is indifferent to them in Greece, since not Russian, but British, troops are there. The preparations of World War III in the making.   
   The post-war battle is on between United States capital and labor, between corporate wealth and poverty, between vested interests and insecurity, between profiteers and wage earners. In the van of the army of capital is General Motors Corporation, described in government reports as the world’s “richest and most profitable,” opposed by the United Automobile Workers, the largest and most militant of the CIO unions. Last August 18, Walter Reuther, head of the GM bargaining unit of the UAW, presented the case for the union. The union wants full employment, full production and full wartime take-home pay, with no increase in prices of cars. The union’s demand for a thirty per cent increase in pay would mean merely a maintenance of the wartime standard which was already being steadily whittled down by rising prices.  The Position of the UAW To buttress the union’s demand, Reuther stated that the financial position of the corporation because of its war-made profits was so sensationally good that it could not only pay the thirty per cent increase but at the same time could cut the price of one of its cars (Chevrolet) by at least $100 and still earn for stockholders “at least $100,000,000 more than the pre-war 1936–39 average of $180,000,000.” (New York Times, October 22) Reuther added: “If GM will pay a thirty per cent increase to its salaried workers also, as we think it should, except for the numerous officials who cut themselves in on the GM payroll for $40,000 to $500,000 apiece, it could still cut $60 off the 1942 prices of Chevrolet and still earn profits some fifty per cent above the high GM average of the last ten years.”  Bosses Want More Exploitation C.E. Wilson, president of the billion-dollar General Motors behemoth, disdaining to meet with the union, has replied to the union’s demands with a defiant “No!” His counter-proposal is for a lengthened work week of forty-five instead of forty hours and a raise possibly from five to eight per cent in the hourly rate. As for Reuther’s proposal for the thirty per cent increase, which could cut the price of cars, increase wages and still maintain the super-profits of war, a company spokesman called this an “Alice-in-Wonderland theory.” The workers want a measure of security – not luxury such as the $200 an hour that C.E. Wilson boasts – and that is compared to a nonsense tale! The union asks that wages be raised without raising the prices of cars, because profits will remain large in any case. They were met with the statement of Harry B. Coen, GM labor relations director that: “It’s none of your damn business what the OPA does with the price of our cars.” The workers want a 40-hour basic work week, and Wilson asks for a 45-hour week which would scrap the Federal Wage and Hour Act and according to R.J. Thomas, president of the CAW, “throw 100,000 men out of work.” Why do the corporations behave in this manner when the workers ask only for the maintenance of their wartime wages which so many returning servicemen found so much lower than they had been led to believe?  Profits vs. a Living Wage! The reason is that the heart, mind and soul of the corporations and their presidents and managers and directors are profits and high salaries for the officials. These are what motivate the industrial giants in depression, wartime and peace-time. In a depression, the companies don’t produce even if people are starving because they can’t make a profit. In a war, they don’t produce, even if the fighting has started, until their profits guaranteed by the government. Now, in peacetime, they refuse to grant a living wage to the workers because that would cut into their profits. Riches for a few, poverty for the many – this is the real Alice-in-Wonderland society! In refusing the really modest 30 percent demands of the UAW for a living wage for its members and the demand of the steelworkers for $2 a day increase, General Motors and U.S. Steel have taken the lead in shouting so that all who are not deaf can hear. We are bankrupt! We cannot afford to pay a living wage to our employees because it will menace our profits! We cannot provide security for workers and their families! The answer is obvious: If you can’t afford to pay a living wage, if you can’t provide security for the people, you aren’t fit to own and manage the mills and plants of the country. Get out! Let the government take over! Let the workers manage production! Let’s produce for human needs and not for profits! All labor must rally to the firm support of the UAW workers in their fight for security and a living wage against these profit-laden corporations who enrich themselves through exploitation of the workers! The UAW is carrying the banner for all of U.S. labor. Nationalize the monopolies! Operate them under workers’ control! Build a Labor Party! Fight for a Workers’ Government!   



No more graphic example exists of what the war was fought for than the struggles for independence from imperialist domination that have taken place in the last few weeks by the Annamese and Indo-Chinese nationalists centering in Saigon, Indochina, and Batavia, Java,
The brutal crushing of the colonial peoples who took the slogans of freedom used during the war too seriously demonstrates again that the war was fought not for the liberation of the oppressed, but as a contest between rival imperialists for the world market. Japan overran these areas to obtain their wealth of raw materials and to sell her products of industry, just as the French and Dutch had done before her. Her conquering of these territories was accomplished with perhaps less brutality than that of the French and Dutch, who took the colonies originally with gunboats and who “civilized” the people by shellfire.
The twenty-five millions of people in French Indo-China have had about three generations of French rule. The inhabitants, eighty per cent of whom are Annamese, were subdued in 1862 only after decades of tedious and costly warfare. There have been sporadic revolts ever since and the main expenditure in this area by the French has been for their naval and military budget.
 
French Exploitation
The French rule in Indo-China is a “model” of colonial exploitation. The natives work for ten to thirty cents a day. The literacy rate is only ten per cent. No unions are permitted. Left-wing nationalists have been jailed. The typical super-profits of imperialism are taken from the colony by imposition of high tariffs on rivals’ goods and the absence of tariffs on French goods.
Indo-China’s chief exports are the products so valuable to the industrialized countries, particularly the United States – rubber and tin, plus the major production of the world demand for rice and cereals, coal, iron ore, pepper, cattle, hides, corn and zinc.
When France became involved in the European war, she lost her hold on Indo-China and failed to arm her, despite the demands of the people for weapons to fight the Japanese. It was an easy matter for Indo-China to drift into the “yen bloc,” since her economy and that of Japan were complementary.
 
The Dutch
The Netherlands Indies, comprising the bulk of Malaysia, with a total population of over sixty million, is also aflame. Here, too, in the “Garden of the East,” the Dutch, displaced for a short time by the British, have been pirating and pilfering since the end of the sixteenth century. They first drained wealth through the Dutch East Indies Company, supported the native regents or princes (a native bureaucracy which at one time composed one-eighth of the entire population) to control the people and froze the feudal system in Java and the other islands which prevented the . development of these economies in the European fashion. In 1941–42 the military budget for the Netherlands East Indies was $250 million.
Here, too, the “wealth of the Indies” has been extracted by the Dutch in the form of rubber, tin, copra, petroleum, coffee, tea, cocoa, indigo, spices, chinchona and sugar.
When the defeated Japanese army granted Annamese independence last March, it was merely sowing dragon’s teeth for the oncoming Allies. But the Annamese grabbed at the opportunity to set up a republic through the Vietminh, a nationalist organization.
The action of the British in fighting the Annamese in the absence of the French, using 5,000 Japanese troops and at least one American garrison, 2,500 British and 2,000 French, was one of mixed altruism, the type of honor that exists among thieves. She realized the support and repercussions the independence move would have in the Dutch Empire, satellite to the British, and in her own Indian colony.
An Indonesian people’s republic has been proclaimed at Batavia. Its president has stated: “We don’t like Japanese oppression and we don’t want Dutch oppression either.” The police chief has admitted the Dutch rule is being maintained only by British and American arms.
Australian dockers and longshoremen have shown their solidarity with the movement for independence and freedom by refusing to send French, British and Dutch munition and supply ships to aid the Indonesian oppressors. Sympathy meetings in Australia have been broken up by police.
Every thinking American worker should support the heroic efforts of these peoples for independence.

U.S. troops should be withdrawn from the area!
 
Let every subject people have the right to independence!

The latter is supposedly what the 100 million casualties and the over one TRILLION dollars expended in this war were to have gone for.
 




LOS ANGELES, Mar. 9 – The figures on employment and unemployment for Los Angeles County are always out of line compared with most of the country. This is true because, of the constantly abnormal increase of the population in this mecca for the sunshine-seeking and the elderly. However, in recent months, the out-of-line Los Angeles, figures are more than usually out of line, to an extent which indicates that more than geography is at work.
The following table is compiled from statistics released by the Research Department of the California State Employment Service in Los Angeles. The figures, which are for Los Angeles County, include Ventura and Santa Barbara. No statistics are prepared for the city of Los Angeles proper. The figures for the civilian labor force include the employable adult population, minus those in the armed services.



 


  


Civilian Labor Force


  


Unemployed


  


Percentage




January 1948


1,735,650


132,000


  7.6




March 1948


1,735,650


147,000


  8.4




January 1949


1,788,050


170,000


  9.5




February 1949


1,788,050


185,000


10.4



Thus current unemployment in the Los Angeles area, which now stands at over 10 per cent of the civilian labor force, is about two per cent higher than last year. In a large population center like Los Angeles County, two per cent is no mean figure, but represents an increase of 35,761 persons out of work, while behind most of these stand families deprived of the earnings of the breadwinner. High unemployment is chronic here, but it is higher now than usual. While not catastrophic, the current figures are a danger signal.
 




LOS ANGELES – The split between “right” and “left” wings which took place in the Communist-dominated Los Angeles CIO Council a year ago in February over the issues of the Marshall Plan and the national elections, when the “right wing” walked out of the Council, is now in the process of being mended through the intervention of the national CIO. Allan Haywood, representative of the CIO Executive Board, arrived at an agreement last week with representatives of both sides.
An administrative committee composed of Wm. Lawrence of the Los Angeles Council, Albert T. Lunceford of the Los Angeles Committee for National CIO and Richard Leonard of the national CIO has been set up to effect a unification. This committee will be in charge until a new, united council can be elected, with the proviso that each officer is bound to support national CIO policy.
At the time of the split, the Stalinist-dominated CIO Council passed a motion not to endorse a presidential candidate, since they were supporting Henry Wallace in the face of the national CIO’s endorsement of Truman. The “right wing” was in a minority at that time and, being unable to get the Council to adopt the national CIO policy, they withdrew.
 
Dismayed by Move
Each group conducted its separate election campaigns and has maintained its separate existence for more than a year, with resulting weakness and confusion among the ranks of the labor movement. However, the original anti-Stalinist minority has gained adherents during this period from auto, rubber, steel and other locals until even its opponents concede it a majority at the present time. The Longshoremen’s Union, in San Pedro, represented heretofore in the Los Angeles Council, two weeks ago resolved to withhold its per capita from the Council and not to receive the Stalinist-line Labor Herald, organ of the Council.
Since the issues which provoked the split have receded, the Stalinist wing of the Council has been calling for unity. The anti-Stalinist wing has been more reluctant. For in addition to the political issues dividing the two groups, the non-Stalinists had long been subjected to the undemocratic, log-rolling, filibustering, party-line tactics with which the labor movement is so familiar.
The manner in which the unity is to be accomplished comes with surprise, dismay and shock to many of the orthodox CIO leaders. There arc several reasons for their reaction. They had anticipated and pressed for a lifting of the charter of the non-conforming Council by Murray’s representative, Haywood, as was done in other places where a council split took place. There is a definite feeling that Murray let them down, especially since the initiative for the original walk-out was not locally inspired and was undertaken to assist the general national campaign against the Stalinists. The “right wing” expected to be better rewarded.
The orthodox CIOers do not look forward to happiness to the projected unity. While they have turned their former minority into a majority during the split period, they lack a clearcut distinctive program which the Stalinist party-liners have. They continue to tail politically the Democratic Party. The pseudo-left, while subservient to the Kremlin, is to that extent independent of the native capitalist parties and has a radical appearance. The “right wing” had a tough time before. It didn’t win a majority in the united council. It may again lose its majority unless it develops its own independent program.
It should be pointed out that what unites the anti-Stalinist group is its anti-Stalinism. It is not a real right wing, despite the popular application of this term, just as the Stalinist group is definitely not a left wing. The Stalinists represent the totalitarian arm of the Russian ruling class within the labor movement. The anti-Stalinist group are the traditional American labor leaders, running from conservative to left wing. Labor Action continues to support the latter against the former, although it cannot defend the unwise strategy used against the Stalinists.
The Stalinists will be defeated in the Los Angeles Council, as elsewhere, by a superior program which represents the interests of the rank and file, speaks clearly what it wants and where it is going and not by an organizational maneuver that has now come full circle, leaving the struggle just about where it was before. The weakness of their opponents is the strength of the Stalinists.
 




This is the story of the evolution of a lie.
On Thursday, January 21, the Akron Beacon Journal published a story under the head Ship ‘Strike’ Ires Guadalcanal Fighters, signed by its most florid writer of sensational stories, Helen Waterhouse.
“Six battle-scarred veterans” (anonymous) reported that the crew of a merchant ship refused to unload supplies on Sunday and that wounded soldiers who had lived on a rice diet were forced to unload their own supplies. “Confirmation has come from a high official source in Washington, who though he witnessed these conditions during his service in Guadalcanal, must necessarily remain anonymous.”
All that was missing were the facts – who, where, when, why, how. Shades of journalistic ethics! On such a foundation was built up what the New York newspaper PM correctly called “the most vicious of all the labor lies used to stampede Congress and the country into repressive labor legislation.”
The small-town Akron Beacon Journal, elated at its “scoop” of the nation, reported in its next issue that the story was “widely copied in the American press.” It was printed as fact by the McCormick-Patterson press and echoed by their spokesmen in Congress. The Chicago Tribune quoted congressmen who said crewmen of the merchant ship stood on the decks jeering and chanting at sick and wounded marines working in the tropical sun. They were supposed to have taunted, according to this paper: “Oh. you fifty bucks a month suckers!”
The truth came later in the Navy’s announcement:
“Admiral William F. Halsey, Jr., commander of U.S. forces in the South Pacific, informed the Navy Department today that in no instance have merchant seamen refused to discharge cargo from their vessels at Guadalcanal or in any other way failed to cooperate with U.S. forces ashore in that area.”
Marshall E. Dimock, in charge of Merchant Marine recruiting for the Maritime Commission, said there was “no case on record” anywhere in which merchant seamen refused to man the winches on Sunday or any other day.
 




AKRON – Twenty-five courageous Negro women have been picketing the Federal Employment Bureau here for three days straight, from opening to closing time.
These women are determined to smash Jim Crow in the war industries and obtain training and jobs for hundreds upon hundreds of Akron Negro women who are ready and able to work.
The picketing, sponsored by the Future Outlook League, aided by sympathetic Negro women’s organizations and cheered by the entire Negro community, was undertaken after other methods had failed. Numerous interviews – with company employment managers, the head of the employment bureau, representatives of trade schools – all resulted in the usual run-around.
 
Got Run-Around
The women were told by various officials:
“You have to present a referment card from the employment bureau. Negroes aren’t trained for factory work. We can’t accept Negroes in the training center because the factories won’t hire you.”
W.D. Westenbarger, supervisor of the local U.S. Employment Bureau, stated that his office “is not referring these women to those training classes, which are maintained, to train workers for employment at Goodyear Aircraft, because the company has informed us they are not ready to hire them yet.”
The company has not indicated when it would be ready to take them, he added. And so the women were handed the same old rotten alibis.
The complete dishonesty of such statements is exposed by the facts. White unskilled applicants for jobs and a very few Negro men are being herded through the training schools in order to supply the enormous demand for labor. A recent newspaper story said that 20,000 more workers are needed to fill production requirements in Akron war factories, while the Akron labor supply is exhausted. It is common knowledge that men and women are migrating from other states to obtain jobs in Akron.
As Mrs. Loretta Ford, spokesman for the Future Outlook League, declared: “There can be no real labor shortage in Akron as long as Negro women are refused the right to train for employment.”
The issue is as clear as daylight. Only the anti-Negro prejudice of employers and employment bureaus is keeping these women from the jobs they need and want. The “labor shortage” is a Jim Crow myth. If Negro men are doubly exploited, as workers and as Negroes, Negro women are triply exploited – as a part of the working class, as a race and as a sex. They are the most oppressed group in society. No job is considered too dirty for them. No wage is considered too low.
Because of this background, the fight of these women for the right to earn a decent living all the more deserves the support of every thinking unionist, every militant, every member of the Negro community. The Jim Crow they are fighting is personified in the bosses, the same bosses the union had to picket and strike against in order to gain wage increases and union recognition.
The employers will not want the unions to support these women. They prefer to have whites and blacks fighting among themselves so that neither will make demands on the employers. The employers will also be able to hire Negro workers – and they will have to employ them eventually because of the enormity of the war effort – at lower wages than white workers, if the unions do not cooperate.
 




A fresh, lesson in how economic rivalry for jobs sets worker against worker was obtained in the three-day unauthorized strike at the General Tire & Rubber Co., June 24 to 26.
Last December, amid the war hysteria and as a factor aiding such hysteria, thousands of aliens were removed from their jobs. After a long period of unemployment, social discrimination, subjection to police investigation, arbitrary suspicion of fifth column activity, some of the aliens are just being re-employed. It was with the return to work at General of 25 aliens that the reactionary stoppage of work there occurred.
The reason for the sit-down, according to the strikers themselves, was the fear that some “citizens” would be ousted because the department was not working full time. The returning aliens, union members and union protected, would receive prior ratings.
The bosses and the boss press were panicky because the sit-down disrupted the continuous flow of materials for war. But it is they who bear the direct responsibility for such actions. It was they who fomented distrust of alien workers and aroused the fears of their fellow workers against them. It is the bosses who are responsible, since it is their war for profits, for the disorganization of production, which makes the workers fear from one day to the next a cut in the days worked per week or the loss of their jobs.
The United Rubber Workers Union, because it is committed to uninterrupted production, accidentally found itself on the progressive side of this issue. It supported the return of the alien workers and threatened to remove the strikers from union membership.
The union, however, since it supports the war for profits and all-out production, finds itself hard put to dissolve the antagonisms between citizen and alien workers competing for jobs and wages.
Only the socialists know, but the workers will learn in the lessons of the war, that all workers are brothers – that the problem of one is the problem of all.
 




AKRON – After picketing a week and two days before the U.S. Employment Bureau, the group of Negro women fighting for jobs in industry was promised complete cooperation by W.D. Westenbarger, supervisor of the bureau.
Westenbarger told the group that a meeting of heads of unions, leaders of industry and government officials would be called within ten or fifteen days to thrash out the problems of Negro employment and those of various alien and age groups.
While picketing has ceased, pending the outcome of this conference, thousands of leaflets are being distributed to call further public attention to the universal discrimination against Negro women in industry. Petitions are being circulated and additional leaflets are being prepared for direct distribution to factory workers.
One mass meeting has been held, sponsored by various Negro organizations and at which a representative of the CIO Council labor supply committee appeared.
 
Boss Prejudice
While it took the militant action of Negro women pickets to force the government-labor-industry conference to recognize their grievance, the problem is really simple to solve. A huge demand for labor in the Akron war factories exists. Newspaper and industrial heads moan about a “labor shortage”in the face of people who are forced to picket, distribute leaflets and hold meetings, demanding the right to be trained and to work! The only thing which prevents these Negroes from being employed is the prejudice of bosses against the color of their skin.
While these Negro women have been admitted to the Hower Trade School (machine shops), this school pays no wage at all during the six weeks’ training period and guarantees no job after the training has been completed. Consequently, Negro women who registered there were forced to drop out of the school. Negro workers come from the lowest income group, and it is impossible for them to sustain themselves during a long training period, consequently they are forced back into domestic work with its near-starvation wages.
 
Demands for Conference
The demands which Negro representatives should make of the coming conference are clear:

Open the trade schools – Goodyear Aircraft particularly, because the greatest demand for labor is there – to Negro women.
A union rate of pay while attending the school. This will eliminate the widespread practice of keeping trainees in the school longer than necessary at lower wages than they would be paid on the actual job.
Prompt transfer of trainees at the end of training period to an industrial job, in order of seniority, with no discrimination because of color or sex.
 

Circulate petition
The Negro people are elsewhere on the move in Akron. The following petition is being distributed by employees of the Firestone Tire & Rubber Co.:
“We, the undersigned, say that the Negro Firestone employees be allowed to eat in the plant cafeterias, without being subjected to coercion and threats by the foremen. Under the deplorable conditions which now exist colored employees are forced to eat in locker rooms and in toilets, facilities which are intolerable to self-respecting citizens of a democracy. If a plant ruling exists which stipulates that Negroes must eat in separate quarters – although they may die together with whites on the same battlefield – it is unknown to us, but if it does exist, we protest it as a policy in opposition to the wishes of our President, in violation of our country’s laws and in direct contradiction to the purposes for which this war is being fought.”
 




The present controversy between the Ohio CIO Council and the Ohio Department of Industrial Relations on whether the state should permit industries to work women employees more than the 45 hours a week legal limit indicates a general problem.
George A. Strain, industrial relations director for the state, reported he had already issued 62 temporary permits to “industries facing emergency need of disregarding the 45-hour limit.” Ted F. Silvey, Ohio CIO secretary-treasurer, vigorously protested the relaxations in the law, stating that the industrial director “is willing not only to blink at violations of the law, but has lent himself actively to set aside a law he has sworn to enforce.” Strain is said to have murmured something about Pearl Harbor.
Colonel Battey, chief of the liaison division of the office of the Undersecretary of War, said:
“Eventually, the only labor supply may be women. The day is past when employers may compete with the Army for physically fit men. That day ended with the treacherous assault on Pearl Harbor. Women can fill many types of jobs, not only as well as but better than men.”
Whatever the proportions, there will be an influx of women into industry. Although in some areas men are being fired because of war priorities, in many the effective male labor supply is being exhausted, making the hiring of women imperative. Employers will try to cut the wages of women workers below that of men employees just, as eagerly in war-time as they have in peacetime. They will also welcome the fact that women can be sweated more than men and are not so likely to join a union.
The basic reason for the double exploitation of working class women is the capitalist system of exploitation and inequality, which encourages passivity in and takes advantage of the physical weakness of women. Unions have often reflected this pressure of capitalists to cheapen labor costs and thus increase their profits by setting up in their contracts lower pay schedules for women. This naturally causes indifference to the union. Also, in times of stress, union men often demand that married women workers be laid off first. However, it is true that married women with families are greatly in need of their supplemental earnings to provide a decent living.
Differential pay schedules for women and union discrimination erect a barrier between women workers and the union which is the only force that can fight to secure better conditions for women workers. Unions which have such barriers also risk losing the active cooperation of women in the shop, a force they need more than ever today, when taxes, rising prices and decreasing real wages make necessary a tremendous fight for higher wages. The Ohio CIO is fighting an exemplary battle for maintenance of the minimum hour law for women.
A union program for women workers should include: (1) equal pay for equal work; (2) good minimum wage and hour laws for women in those states where none or poor ones now exist; (3) no tampering with or violating laws already in effect.
 




AKRON, April 10 – The first sitdown strike since Pearl Harbor, like a flash of sudden lightning, exposed the cracks and chinks in the labor-management co-operation plan now being instituted throughout the country.
The strike, provoked by a speedup and wage cut, occurred at the Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., one of the cradles of pre-war sit-down strikes and CIO organization. Goodyear, a “cooperation-loving” corporation, recently speeded up work on the neoprene fabric 40 per cent and rubber fabric 50 per cent in its spreader room. Its profits rose accordingly, while the men lost at least $1.50 per day. Two complete shifts and part of a third, consisting of 330 workers, stopped work in protest of the cut in pay for 14 hours on April 7 and 8.
Thus the labor-management scheme as practiced by Goodyear. Corp. is revealed as a profiteering device: The speed-up, the company claimed, was in the interest of efficiency for all-out war production. “Efficiency,” to the company, means: speed up the machines, speed up the men, speed up the profits – and cut wages.
The myth of “efficiency” is further exposed by the fact that it is common knowledge that the wastage in the spreader room is tremendous, Great quantities of defective material have been turned down by the Army and Navy. Increasing the speed of the machines, and consequently of the operations of the workers, could only result in increased wastage and inefficiency.
The primary lesson for union men and women to draw from this strike is, as Labor Action has pointed out, that labor-management plans are primarily a company move toward speed-up. The big shots continue to manage and maintain full control of their plant and production planning. Labor is supposed only to co-operate.
 
Union for More Efficiency
Union members are FOR increased efficiency, planning of production and maintenance of work – but not in the guise of speed-ups and wage cuts. The only genuine planning for use – as opposed to thi stupid bungling and wasteful planning for profit that now goes on – will begin under workers’ control of production.
The Goodyear strike only emphasizes the obvious fact that the big shot industrialists are making a mess of things today with their labor-management scheme. The misdirected support which labor leaders everywhere are giving to this plan shows that they recognize in their way the inability of the capitalists to plan, and realize that labor must take a hand. But the only real answer is – WORKERS CONTROL OF PRODUCTION!
The Goodyear strike shows that labor militancy is far from dead, in spite of the war, the no-strike agreement, the official disapproval of the URWA leadership and social opprobrium directed against striking workers at this time. The first striking shift turned down a plea to resume production by a U.S. Air Corps representative. Only when Sherman Dalrymple, president of the URWA, ordered the men back to work, did they go.
They and their sweated brothers all over the country perform all the operations of production except management. The labor-management plan is only holding them off until the day when the workers will manage production themselves for the benefit of society as a whole!
 




The 29,487 unemployment benefit payments made in December for the state of Ohio set a new peak for 1941, according to the report of the Bureau of Unemployment Compensation. As against November payments of $714,564, the December payments ran, to $l,122,967.
The 60 per cent rise in Cleveland of $71,368 was the highest in the State. This has been mostly in the auto industry, where priorities and conversion have shut down some shops completely. In Akron, another drastic increase of 49 per cent was reflected in a rise of $11,866 unemployment benefits paid.
Great secrecy shrouds the lay-offs caused by priorities or rubber curtailment due to the war with Japan. Not a figure on lay-offs due to these causes has appeared an the Akron press, only the above-cited on unemployment benefits. However, the logical effect of abandoning civilian production of rubber has been the immediate lay-off of many salesmen throughout the country. According to the United .Rubber Workers (CIO) the effects have not been severely felt as yet in the production end.
The union has been largely responsible for effecting transfers of laid-off members into other war production industries. Also, due to URWA and management protests, enough rubber will be released to keep workers in the heavy truck tire divisions on a 30-hour week basis for the remainder of January. Thus, expected drastic lay-offs have been averted for a month.
It is reported that some departments in Akron rubber plants are working on curtailed schedules, but the conspiracy of silence of the OPM, companies and the press prevents and accurate knowledge at the present time.
 




AKRON – For the first time in the history of this city, Negro women are being hired in the rubber factories!
This is a victory which the campaign of the Young Negro Women’s Civic League and cooperating organizations have to their credit. By a militant program of picketing, and other forms of pressure and publicity, they have broken through the closed doors of Akron rubber and aircraft industries. Forty have gone to the B.F. Goodrich Co., over twenty have gone to Goodyear’s aircraft training school and applications are still being made.
Labor Action has been informed, however, that discrimination still exists in the aircraft training school. Negro women applicants are required to prove mathematical ability, so that all but the educated are eliminated. No such stipulation is made in the case of white women. Rather, they have been told by instructors: “It doesn’t matter if you can’t do fractions, or even if you don’t learn to rivet. There will be a job for you at Goodyear.”
A spokesman for the YNWCL said they will continue their efforts until the last vestige of discrimination that blocks the hiring of Negro women has been eliminated. They also plan to investigate the rumor that the Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. will organize a Jim Crow plant, just as in the past they have offered to build a segregated cafeteria for Negro men employees.
The method of obtaining their success by the Akron group should not be lost on Negroes everywhere who are attempting to enter industry. These people from the outset of their campaign stated their allegiance to the union movement and used the time-honored methods of union organization, namely, picketing and militant action. They thus secured in advance the cooperation of their only real ally, the labor movement.
The problems these girls run up against in the future on their jobs can also be solved only by militant effort and the intervention of the labor unions. There has already been some indication of friction caused by the heavy concentration of Southern workers in Akron war industry. The problem of educating these workers and building up the solidarity of black and white workers rests squarely on the shoulders of the CIO unions. The problem is well on the way toward being solved by the induction of Negro women workers into the union movement.
 




CLEVELAND – The eighth annual convention of the United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers of America, CIO, was held in Cleveland the week of September 7–12. The UE, according to its officers’ report, has 435,000 members in 810 plants. The UE convention did not represent its 435,000 rank and file members, however. It was controlled from start to finish by the Stalinist machine, and practically every resolution might have been lifted bodily from the yellow pages of the Daily Worker.
There was opposition at the convention, to be sure. But it was a minority, lacking a voice, unorganized, provoked to red-baiting by the Stalinist appeasement tactics, and most important of all – lacking a program of militant union struggle to oppose the Stalinist sell-out.
James Carey, secretary of the CIO, whose home union is the UE, refused to accede to the request of a caucus of sixty delegates to oppose Fitzgerald for the presidency. His main distinguishing characteristic, however, seems to be a rabid anti-Stalinism.
 
Officials Re-Elected
The three officers of the UE who have led the union through a series of constant capitulations were re-elected: President, Albert J. Fitzgerald; secretary-treasurer, Julius Emspak, and organization director, James Matles. There were only abstentions and scattered “no’s” in opposition. The trustees are Charles Fay, Lottie Lee and Francis Bradley.
How the Stalinists packed the convention is shown in the fact that in one Pittsburgh local with a membership of 7,000, only 400 voted; that international representatives appointed by the Stalinist-controlled officers and general executive board entered the locals just prior to elections and had themselves elected as delegates; and by the usual filibustering methods in other locals that sent most of the members home until the Stalinists had a majority to elect their delegates.
They were so confident in their majority that they spoke boldly, openly invoking the names of Karl Marx and Eugene V. Debs to support their anti-Marxist, anti-socialist program of capitulation to the bosses’ war for profits, which Marx and Debs taught and fought against.
 
Stalinist Hand Visible
Beginning with the “second, front” resolution, the crude hand of the Stalinists was visible throughout all the resolutions passed by the convention.
Harry Bridges: Financial and moral support for the CIO’s committee fighting against deportation.
Red-Baiting: This was condemned because it leads to the “disruption of unity within the country.” An attack was made on John L. Lewis in passing.
Condemnation of Lewis and Support of Murray: Could this be because Lewis has maintained standards and wage increases, whereas the Stalinists and officers of the UE have been willing to sacrifice overtime and wage increases for the workers.
Racial Discrimination: The Stalinists are opposed to discrimination against Negroes, Jews or any other minority because “unity of all the U.S. is the prime requisite for victory in ’42” not because anti-discrimination is a principle of the labor movement. And they have amply demonstrated that when the fight against discrimination comes into conflict with “national unity,” as in the March on Washington Movement of the Negroes, they take their stand four-square on the side of “national unity” – and to hell with race discrimination. The resolution on anti-poll-tax legislation was passed with the same choral accompaniment of “national unity.”
Independence for India: Yes, India is to be freed, according to the Stalinists, only to fight beside the .Allies and they exclude mention of England’s centuries-old oppression of India or the kind of wages British industrialists pay Indian workers. The freedom for India is to be achieved by the intervention of Roosevelt with the British government!
Independence for Puerto Rico: Yes, the Stalinists are for this, too – in the name of the Atlantic Charter! And in order that Puerto Rico will not also disrupt Allied unity, although they fail to explain why Puerto Rico will be so eager to defend that American democracy which will not grant to Puerto Ricans their democratic right to independence;
Post-War Plans for Industry: This was referred to the incoming executive board, naturally enough, since the Stalinists have no plan except to win the war through sacrificing all labor gains according to the dictates of Moscow diplomacy.
Political Action: Labor is to be pledged to support any “win-the-war” candidate, regardless of party, just so they’re anti-Axis, pro-Roosevelt, pro-labor. A genuine independent Labor Party resolution, citing the need for independent political action by labor to combat “wage freezing, profiteering, etc.,” was defeated upon recommendation of the resolutions committee. Labor Action can only infer that the Stalinists are not opposed to wage freezing and profiteering!
Autonomy of Local Unions: Since they could get no local union to sanction such an amendment to the constitution, the general executive board proposed under negotiations and contracts to empower a representative of the international to negotiate with the local union on behalf of the international and sign contracts on behalf of the international! Passage of such a measure would have effectively destroyed the independence of local unions and would have put the locals directly under the thumb of the Stalinist officials.
Knowing that there would be stern opposition on this motion and feeling incapable of holding even the Stalinist bloc in line, the proposed amendment was withdrawn. But the fact that the board dared place such a proposal before the delegates shows their contempt for the rank and file union members.
Constitutional limitation, however, will not prevent the Stalinist officers from interfering in local affairs. They proved that when, prior to the convention, an international representative signed a contract over the heads of local officers and membership of Pittsburgh, Local No. 615, surrendering wage adjustments, vacation increases, classification of rates, and permitting time study the way “the company wants it.”
Wage Freezing: The executive board of No. 1237 of New York presented a resolution “condemning the general secretary-treasurer for arbitrarily instructing locals to freeze wages” while even Philip Murray was for wage increases. They disapproved the “undemocratic, appeasing action of the officers for this request to freeze wages” and “voluntarily” refraining from making wage demands in the coming year,
There was a larger minority opposition on this question than any other, although the resolution was, of course, defeated. A representative of Local 435, Long Island City, spoke in opposition to forfeiting premium pay for holidays, Saturdays and Sundays. A delegate from Local 801 complained of the loss of double time. “The workers gave all, the companies gave nothing,” he said. And the only excuse of the officers was that the UAW had given up double time.
Delegate Rubey of Local 425 asked: “Where is your equality which is what this union stands for, when UE officers announce in the paper before the convention that overtime for Saturdays and Sundays was given up?” Genuine applause, not led by the Stalinist claques, greeted these remarks.
On this, the most important question facing every union in the country, President Fitzgerald said: “We can’t waste (!) the time of the convention with those who want to disrupt the convention.” Further discussion was voted down and the ranks who were concerned with the legitimate business of the union, wages, hours, and working conditions, were gagged.
Working Hours: The convention went on record as in favor of an eight-hour day, 48-hour week, one day’s rest in seven, 30-minute lunch periods.
Organization: Resolutions were passed that a campaign to organize the government arsenals and the business and office machines factories be initiated, but what success that campaign will meet under the Stalinist leadership can be imagined if the wage demands in this low-paid industry come into conflict with “national unity.” Thirteen women organisers were added to the staff to handle the influx of non-unionized women into industry since the war. A resolution that every plant of over 300 workers should have a child welfare bureau to take care of children of working women was passed. Equal pay for equal work regardless of sex was approved.
War Bonds: One hundred per cent participation in buying of 10 per cent of one’s salary every pay day was pledged.
Dies Committee: Motion to investigate and dismiss was passed.
 
Profits Biggest Argument
The convention was a field day for the Stalinists and the work of the local union members becomes thereby increased in order to maintain their gains and attempt to get wages somewhere near commensurate with the rising cost of living.
The one big argument the workers have to get wage increases in the wanton, unrestricted profits the corporations are making out of the blood and murder of this war, while labor is asked to sacrifice and submit to wage freezing, This argument is one that the Stalinist leadership of the UERMWA dare not use. Any breath of suspicion that the bosses are making money out of the war might disturb this “national unity” which they are pledged to uphold. And they are supporting that “unity” against wage increases, against overtime pay, against race discrimination, against all the genuine interests of the workers, even if it means, according to one of the convention delegates, “we work twenty-four hours a day with no pay.”
 




One week after the URWA convention hall rang with denunciation of the War Manpower Commission’s attempt to foist an eight-hour day on Akron rubber workers in the name of a fake “labor shortage,” the six-hour day has been wiped out by the unanimous vote of that commission, including its labor representatives, and an eight-hour day substituted.
The convention originally opposed the authority of the Manpower Commission to decide when and if a labor shortage exists. Then, when it passed the all-out war policy resolution of Dalrymple and the other officials, it nullified its previous stand because that policy called for the Manpower Commission to determine the shortage of labor which would usher in the eight-hour day.
The concurrence of labor representatives in this decision puzzles Labor Action. What, then, was the significance of the fight they put up at the URWA convention to maintain the six-hour day? The representative of the Negro Manpower Commission who appeared at their convention emphasized that there were many members of his race still walking the streets, or employed at menial jobs. This is still true in Akron.
Another question that has not yet been answered is: Will the eight-hour day bring with it a commensurate eight-hour pay, or will the old rates remain? And will the speed-up conditions which characterized the six-hour day still prevail under longer hours?
The union brothers of the URWA on the war fronts wrote that the six-hour day was long enough. They, as well as the men in the war rubber plants, have been let down.
 







The following are excerpts from the report submitted to the Workers Party convention on the international relief work in which the Party, has been engaged since the latter part of 1945. Friends and sympathizers of Labor Action and the Workers Party have assisted in this undertaking by contributions of food and clothing.



*
Europe is literally on rations from the United States. The danger of starvation is so pressing and widespread that warnings have come from the offices of U.S. military leaders in both Germany and Japan that the people of those countries “must be fed or shot.” Generals McNarney and MacArthur demand either “more wheat or more soldiers.” U.S. imperialism is thus confronted with the necessity, in order to do business, to prevent struggles against its occupation and. to maintain some support as against the Russians, to ration the starvation. Labor Action has pointed out in article after article the fact that food is a political weapon for the ruling class.
The sending of food, clothing, medical and other supplies is no less a political weapon for the revolutionary party. Because of their uncompromising revolutionary political line, the comrades of the Fourth International have been the hardest hit – they have been killed, tortured, jailed, starved, hounded and persecuted by the bestial totalitarianism of both fascism and Stalinism. Yet it is upon these slender and triply harassed cadres that the leadership in the struggle for the liberation of the European peoples from the yoke of U.S. and other imperialisms and the struggle for a proletarian revolution depends.
Hence the task of sending relief to our comrades abroad, despite the fact that it is 99 per cent manual, technical and administrative work, is a POLITICAL one of the highest importance. It is not merely a humanitarian or sentimental undertaking, but a SOCIALIST responsibility. Food is a weapon for us, too.
 
Must Do More
It was with this idea in mind that the Workers Party started its modest campaign of sending supplies abroad. We had at first only a few names, acquired mostly by soldiers, since all contacts abroad had been broken by the war. Now our list has expanded to over fifty and includes comrades in France, Belgium, Holland, Germany, Austria, Italy and Greece. The list of comrades who need assistance is growing continually and, given our political and economic estimate of the world today, can only continue to grow. The task of sending relief abroad becomes a PERMANENT one for us.
In addition, despite the favorable review of our work in this field which will follow, we must do more than we have. Our efforts are not nearly enough to meet the needs of these comrades. We are informed via a letter of this month that one of the German comrades in exile to whom we have been sending food and clothing exists even now by eating and by selling potato peelings! A communication from the Comité Internationaliste de Solidarité Ouvrière of May 20, 1946, states:
“Far from slackening, the demands on us for food are likely to increase in the coming months. Even in France a bread crisis is expected just after the elections. But even more serious is the case of Germany, where rations, though not down to the catastrophic Austrian level of 320 calories per day are already below 1,000 and likely to go lower. At present writing, it is not yet permitted to send food packages direct by parcel post from the U.S. to Germany and we are forced to canalize the work here, reshipping into Germany by various devious means. It is suggested that those of your contributors who are particularly anxious to aid German workers should indicate the fact by putting a conspicuous capital ‘D’ on their packages.”
Between October 1945 and April 1946 the Workers Party sent 3,861 pounds of food 3,376 pounds of clothing, and 560 pounds of miscellaneous items, or a total of 7,797 pounds, almost four tons.
Despite the fact that relief work was begun just after the war ended, just as our civilian comrades were undergoing reconversion lay-offs and transfers to lower-paying jobs and before most of our soldiers had returned to augment our forces and increase our income – the party has responded magnificently. Exceptions are only where there has been a drastic lack of personnel. Out of a deep-rooted sense of international solidarity, the comrades have dug down deep to assist their fellow revolutionists. We have received hundreds of letters from recipients of our packages acknowledging the value of our assistance.
 
Sympathizers Can Help
New York, with the greatest resources and manpower, has done an outstanding job. The credit for this must go largely to Ben Walker, who, in addition to organizing the relief work of Local New York, has done most of the purchasing, wrapping and mailing, with the able assistance of Gertrude Randall ...
In Chicago, under the supervision of Mimi Slater, relief director, a highly successful musicale which obtained clothing and food supplies for the relief work, was held ...
The fact that smaller branches can do better than they have done, despite lack of forces, is proved by the work of Hibbing, where the organization and finances have been borne almost wholly by one person in addition to all of the other work of the party.
Seattle, Reading and Louisville, all small branches, have responded generously and Louisville has been specially cited by its “wards” for the excellence of its contributions ...
It is proposed that, in view of the necessity of our expansion and the long-term, perspective on this work, an official committee be set up in New York City, which will draw in sympathizers of the party and enable us to increase the financial and material contributions. After this is done, local branches can form branches of the committee, which will facilitate their own work. The San Francisco branch has already attempted to obtain the cooperation of a local Swiss relief organization. The names of our comrades are also being sent to the Socialist Party relief organization. But none of this is enough, and we must continue to expand our own work.
This is politically necessary as a concrete demonstration of our international solidarity.
 




While the combined votes of the Socialist and Communist Parties of France in the June 1 election still represent the majority of popular sentiment, the increase in a million votes for the primary capitalist party, the Popular Republicans, with only small gains to the Communist Party and a loss to the Socialists, shows the handwriting on the wall to the parties which purport to represent the interests of the working class, and world capitalism breathes easier.
The shift to the right was foreshadowed by the defeat of the referendum on the constitution, around which the contending classes mobilized – the capitalist elements being against, the working class elements being for. The shift was guaranteed by the failure of the parties which claim the support of the working people, the Communists and Socialists, to break their coalition with the capitalist bankrupts, rule in the name of the workers and little people who supported them and embark on a program of nationalization and socialization.
While the Daily Worker touts the election results in France as a victory for the Communists, attested to by their increase of 140,000 votes, it overlooks what immediately strikes every observer except the Stalinist fanatics: the relative DECLINE of working class strength in the entire pool of votes. This decline is caused by the fact that these two parties, while having the allegiance of the workers, represent other interests; in the case of the Socialist Party, subservience to the French ruling class and Anglo-American imperialism; and in the case of the Communist Party, absolute fealty to Stalinism.
 
Battle of Superpowers
France, the most important large neutral nation in Europe, represents a battle ground of the two rival “superpowers.” The pressure of these powers was manifest throughout the period preceding the elections and mirrored in the campaigns of the French parties. Leon Blum, elder statesman of the Socialist Party, was credited with successfully negotiating the United States loan to France, which is vitally necessary for the reconstruction of tottering, war-ravished French economy.
On May Day the Communist Minister of Industrial Production began the election campaign by putting on the market large quantities of shoes and shirts below ceiling prices. The Communists, who opposed strikes and operated on the slogan “Produce!” tried to share credit for the loan by the allegedly favorable impression made on the U.S. through their speed-up and no-strike program. (“The Communist Party is exploiting to the hilt the leather and textile manna fallen from heaven.” – PM) Russian wheat shipments were sent as a counter to Wall Street gold.
The MRP tried to exploit the defeat of the referendum on the constitution as a demonstration of the strength and viability of the conservatives, “We appeal to our beloved children of the Catholic world to launch a crusade in the world against those who deny God,” said Pope Pius XII in a direct election appeal to assist the Catholic MRP in France, as well as the Catholic conservatives in Italy who are faced with similar problems.
 
Foreign Policy Issue
The issue of foreign policy was the great, overriding but silent issue in the elections. The Socialists and the MRP look to the West – to the financial assistance of the United States. The Communists strive to prevent the formation of a “Western bloc” and its inevitable accompaniment of a foreign policy directed against Russia. Harold Callender writes in the New York Times of June 2:
“There is a majority in France for closer ties with the Western world, such as were implied in this American credit. There is also a majority in France for nationalization of key industries, which is not readily reconcilable with the liberal system of foreign trade proclaimed in connection with this credit.
“While France wants a constitution more democratic than the last one, she also wants a large measure of socialization. To the majority of Frenchmen, Western democracy is the only possible system of government, but Western or any other capitalism is suspect in their view and in need of much restraint and limitation.”
Socialization and democracy – these are the immediate desires of the French people. Therefore, the stalemate will continue in France with the continuation of the tri-party coalition. The party which is associated with nationalization, the Communist Party, is the party of totalitarianism. To embark upon a thoroughgoing program of expropriation of- private property, it would have to enlist the aid of the working class against the Two Hundred Families, and like the sorcerer’s apprentice, call upon forces it could not control. Hence, the Communist Party is. limited to a mild program whose primary aim is to prevent France from falling into the toils of an anti-Russian bloc. The Socialist Party, representing the desires of the workers for an extension of democracy, is based upon the gradual reform of capitalism, which means no basic change at all.
Yet the mandate of the majority in France is clear – democracy and radical inroads upon capitalism. The first step toward achieving this is to break the three-party coalition, to form a government of the Socialists and Communists. This is the manner in which the general revolutionary socialist formula of independent class action is translated into life in France today.
True, these slogans are issued to the pro-capitalist Socialist Party and the anti-working class Communist Party. But only if radical slogans which represent the desires of the French workers are urged upon these parties – given their inability to carry out the wishes of the workers – will their supporters become disburdened of their illusions in these parties in a progressive direction and turn to the really revolutionary, working class party represented by the French Trotskyists.
Only by urging these drastic solutions will the workers be able to obtain the support of the middle class, which, as is evidenced by the election, is turning more and more to the parties of reaction.
Otherwise, the workers, too, will become apathetic, and the way will be paved for the restoration of “strong man,” Bonapartist rule.
 




NEW YORK; Dec. 1 – An overflow crowd of 200 people came to hear James T. Farrell, the prominent novelist and critic, discuss Tolstoy’s War and Peace, in the third of a series of Sunday evening forums held by the Labor Action School. Farrell began his lecture by pointing to the increase of interest in War and Peace during the Second World War, indicating why this great writer of the nineteenth century has contemporary appeal. Many were turned away from the hall.
Later, in analyzing this interest, Farrell stated:
“I think it is because we are now on the other side of progress, from which Tolstoy began. We on the other side of progress in America, the closest approach to paradise that capitalism will ever create on earth, feel the significance of public affairs affecting our destiny. I think that is one of the reasons Tolstoy makes us feel he is such a contemporary of ours. War and Peace in the development of Tolstoy is the central work in that it is Tolstoy’s first coming to terms with the Russian past and his own past and his feelings about his class and country ... It is the beginning of his chain of evolution ... It is a great beginning, not the isolated masterpiece many critics think it is.”
Since Tolstoy’s most renowned work is firmly imbedded in the society of his time, a “war panorama of the Czarist feudal nobility,” as Farrell called it, it lends itself particularly well to Farrell’s materialist criticism. Farrell compared the breadth of Tolstoy’s interests and the problems he posed in War and Peace with those posed by Marx and Engels: freedom versus necessity, the class nature of art, class misery, war and peace. Tolstoy believed that the history of any period is the history of the swarm of humanity, but he concluded that history was senseless and that war was the most senseless of all its aspects, whereas Marx uncovered the laws of history.
While Tolstoy in his characterizations of Napoleon and Kutuzoff, the Russian general, seems to favor feudal as against bourgeois society, Farrell contended that Tolstoy really attacked both in the name of the peasants, who had his great sympathy. He cited Lenin’s appraisal of Tolstoy’s later novel, Anna Karenina, that Tolstoy had both a progressive and a reactionary side, and that he was a literary harbinger of the peasant revolution in Russia.
Farrell traced Tolstoy’s evolution from the time War and Peace was written in the 1870’s, when Tolstoy was only forty, happy, secure and recognized as a genius by contemporary giants of literature. His future would seem easy, happy and productive. But War and Peace, written before the emancipation of the serfs in Russia, was the beginning of a change. Anna Karenina, written after the emancipation, which did not accomplish all that was expected, and during the hothouse development of Russian capitalism, continues the themes of the first novel on a somber level. In My Confessions, the next work, Tolstoy develops his theory that life is stupid unless we are intoxicated, and the only intoxication is love. He tries to achieve the love of all humanity.
Tolstoy also attacked the theory that great men make history, but threw out all the elements of causation. Farrell stated that Tolstoy believed that “art should be the servant of man, and not man the servant of art.” Farrell also contended that the failure of Tolstoy as a moralist testifies to the failure of Christianity as a viable social creed.
In response to a question, “Why did Tolstoy become religious?” Farrell pointed out that the period of his conversion to religion corresponded with the reactionary period of the ’80’s in Russia and that he embodied the “guilt-feeling of his class.”
The numerous questions and the comments after the meeting indicated the satisfaction of the audience with the well-rounded discussion of Farrell.
 




This personal account by the liberal journalist of The New Republic and PM (Underground to Palestine, by I.F. Stone. Published by Boni & Gaer) gives the reader a vicarious trip on the Jewish underground railway to Palestine: and that is its main value. I.F. Stone has performed a service in describing how the underground works and illuminating the conditions of European Jews and their overwhelming desire to escape the continuing anti-Semitism and pogroms of Eastern Europe by fleeing to Palestine.
Stone’s first stop is England. Discussions there convince him that the average Englishman has been sold the idea that further concessions to the Jews will “inflame” the Arab world.
Traveling next to an unnamed French city, Stone makes advance arrangements for his passage with an emissary, the Haganah, the Jewish underground. He acquires visas for every Mediterranean country, since it is not known in advance from what port he will eventually leave, and then takes the Orient Express to Germany. There Stone tours the Displaced Persons camps around Nuremburg, run largely by UNRRA and the Joint Distribution Committee. Most are filthy barracks. He is told by one official, “If conditions here were too good, they would stay on. This is only supposed to be a clearance center.”
 
The Reactions of a Polish Jew
Irony describes these fleeing Jews as “the second class mankind”; the bureaucratic language of officialdom calls them “unsuccessful repatriatees.” At a DP camp at Furth near Nuremberg a Polish Jew from Lodz tells Stone how most Jews feel, even about the best of the camps:
“When I look out my window, ES WERT MIR KALT IM HERZEN (my heart grows cold) and when I go with my TEPELE (my little pot) to get my meals, I feel as though I’m still in KA T-ZET (concentration camp).”
When Stone inquires of a local Stalinist official whether the Jews can live in Germany, the reply is, “Es ist sehr schlecht” (it’s very bad).
Stone crosses the treacherous Polish-Czech frontier to Bratislava. This border is most dangerous because Poland is the seat the most virulent anti-Semitism. Lives of DPs are often purchased with cigarette bribes of border police. There are myriad stories Jews caught by the guards on this border who defy their captors with, “You can shoot us but you can’t force us to go back to Poland.”
Since six million Jews were wiped out in the war, the typical conversation with a Jewish DP begins, “There were twenty-five thousand Jews in Sosnowice before the war. There are very few left now ...” Most those who cross the border with Stone bear the tattooed concentration camp number, their badge of honor. Many are remnants families who survived the crematoria Buchenwald, Auschwitz and Bergen-Belsen. In fact, the only whole families are those which originally fled to Russia and have now emigrated.
Stone visits the refugee hospital in Anton, a disguised Czech city. “I got used to bad smells on the trip, but ... never anything to match the first whiff in the hospital at Anton,” he writes. Of the refugees:
“They looked and smelled bad. Most the men were undersized and underfed. The women are either scrawny or unhealthily obese. The eyes the children are the eyes of little people unpleasantly adult before their time. Men, women and children who crowded together in that first reception center, ragged and unclean and tired, looked like the cast-offs of humanity.”
 
Past the Iron Curtain
Boarding a broken-down train on the first lap the flight through the “iron curtain,” Stone rides with eleven others in a darkened compartment designed for eight, shares black bread and salami and gives a young girl the first chocolate she’s tasted in six years. The train goes to the ghost-town Vienna, whose rampant anti-Semitism makes it impossible for the Jews to live there, too.
The next stop is somewhere in Italy, where a ship manned by American seamen awaits to make the trip to Palestine. Waiting at midnight on the beach, Stone becomes involved with the carabinieri and Italian legal red-tape while the ship he intended to take sails with about 1,500 Jews.
He manages to get aboard a second boat, manned by American Jews and amply supplied with canned goods and other needs. The Italian police are liberally fed while 1,000 refugees file into their berths. Two-thirds are men; only 196 are over thirty; all but a few are remnants of families. There are subbotniks, Chassidim, orthodox and non-orthodox, from sixteen different countries. There are a few Aryans.
One Jew states, “I was never a Jew before the war. But now that six million Jews have been killed, I will be a Jew, too.” Stone describes them all as “socialists of one kind or another.”
In mid-sea all passengers are transferred to an ancient Turkish freighter half the length of the other vessel, after having virtually to commandeer the reluctant Turkish captain’s ship. The men are forced to take turns in the airless, stinking holds where they are packed as on an old African slaver. Food and water soon give out. They are ready to give themselves up to the British in exchange for food and assistance to get into port, for the Turkish boat is far from seaworthy, but the British gunboats ignore their SOS calls. Finally they make Haifa where they are sent food by the Jewish colony.
 
Compromising Political Position
After rendering this faithful and moving task reportage, Stone adds an Epilogue, wherein he recites his compromising self-contradictory, typically liberal credo for the solution the Jewish problem. He begins with a truism which the documentary section of his book heavily underlines. “For my comrades, for the Jews waiting in the DP camps of Germany and Austria, Palestine is not a theory.” While many he talked with would prefer life in a settled country like England or the United States, they want to go to Palestine.
He is bitter about the British and says nothing can be expected from the British government. He repeats the quotation from an old Polish Jew which appears on the frontispiece: “The Germans killed us. The British don’t let us live.” And “... I would far rather deal with that Arab statesman and patriot (Assam Bey) on behalf the Jews than with Ernest Bevin.”
Stone tells an expected new British offensive against Jewish settlements and cities. “One British military official told a Jewish leader frankly – I assure the reader this is not just gossip – ‘The world took the killing of six million Jews and if we have to destroy half of Tel Aviv, the world will take that, too.’”
Stone is well aware of the “politics of baksheesh” the British employ in placating the Moslem upper classes in the Middle East to build an alliance against Russia, France and the United States. The $300 million loan that England is asking of the United States, for example, will go to the Arab rulers and not into development of the area.
 
Stone’s Proposed Palestine Solution
Stone’s proposed solution: “a bi-national Arab-Jewish state,” to be a part of a Middle East Semitic Federation, which will be under a ten-year international trusteeship to the Big Four powers, of which Britain is one. The Arab-Jewish state is initially to have consultative bodies and later representative bodies to advise the big powers administering the trusteeship. Stone would substitute for one imperialist four imperialists, all of whom are interested in the oil and the sea-routes in the Middle East and none of whom has displayed any interest whatsoever in the problem of the Jews or Palestinian independence. The latter question, Stone, too, would postpone, in typically imperialist fashion. Of Arab-Jewish unity against British imperialism, Stone says nothing. The implications of his “bi-nationalism” are that the Jewish minority would have parity with an Arab majority.
Stone, from the vantage-point of one imperialist nation, the United States, sees in perspective the characteristics of another, Great Britain. He cannot see the hypocritical attitude of the U.S. government which has not offered a haven by opening its own doors. It is only within the international working class movement that one can get a true perspective on all the contending imperialisms, and propose a solution that starts with the interests of the dispossessed.
It is in this light that the Workers Party has formulated its key demands on the Jewish problem: Open the doors of all nations to the Jews! For the ousting of the British and a free Palestine! For the immediate convention of a democratic constituent assembly in Palestine based upon universal suffrage, the right of all over eighteen to vote!
 




The executive of big business in the White House, after much hocus-pocus and shadow-play to fool the working class, has loyally responded to the bidding of his class by inflicting a “Big Steal” formula on organized labor.
The Trumsn edict on wages and prices is no more than a repetition in peacetime of the wage freeze imposed on labor during the war! But labor was dragooned into acceptance of the “Little Steal” wartime formula by the promises of Roosevelt and its own leaders that the formula would stand only “for the duration.”
Now a “Big Steal” formula marches upon the heels of the “Little Steal” pattern. Just as the wartime pattern had its origin in the settlement of the dispute in the little steel industry, so this new formula has its origin in the dispute in big steel.
The “Big Steal” formula, while freezing wages with 15 to 20 per cent of the 1941 average – which does not permit workers to come up to their wartime earnings – does even more for big business than even the elastic war price ceilings permitted. It gives the green light to price increases! This is best exemplified in the basic agreement in steel, where the price rise of $5.00 a ton exceeded the expectations of even the Wall Street Journal which had expected $4 at most.
As steel goes, so goes the nation. Because of its strategic importance in all industries, higher-priced steel will spread higher costs. Demand for price “relief” will now spread like wildfire throughout all of industry.
Labor won wage increases by its valiant, collective efforts on the picket lines of the country. It forced the companies to grant in- creases ranging from 15 to 20 cents an hour.
But labor is to be made to foot the corporation bill out of its own pockets by price increases.
LABOR’S PICKET LINE GAINS WERE STOLEN IN WASHINGTON BY THE “BIG STEAL” FORMULA!
Labor’s original demands for a 30 per cent wage increase were based on the solidly backed argument of bringing labor’s wage UP TO the war time level, which had sunk radically after V-J Day because of lessened hours, cutback employment, etc.
The Department of Commerce, hardly a labor-biased institution, reported at the time of the GM strike that an increase in wages up to 23 per cent could be granted without price increases.
The most militant section of the organized labor movement backed up their demand for the 30 per cent increase with the demand to open the books and demonstrate for all to see the ability of the big corporations to pay. The corporations have not dared to open those books to reveal the tremendous profits and the hidden reserves.
The demand of labor for holding the price line was in the interests of the entire public. It meant that wage increases should come squarely out of profits – that legalized plunder fund extracted from the sweat and toil of the working people.
Now comes the Truman decree. That “impartial referee,” “labor’s PAC-backed friend in the White House” and inheritor of the mantle of Roosevelt, gives business exactly what it wants: a formula to freeze wages and relax prices. Truman’s support of the Bowles-Porter team as against that of Snyder-Small was merely a see-saw game of big price increases as against bigger price increases.
Labor has done a valiant job on the picket lines. But that is not enough. As soon as the strike banners are furled and the new contracts signed, the struggle begins anew. Labor will be forced to continue the battle against the new assault on its standard of living inflicted by the price increases.
That is why labor must organize ITS OWN CLASS POLITICAL PARTY to assist on the political front its class battles on the economic front. It must free itself from the class parties of the enemy, the parties supported by big business, the Democratic and Republican Parties. Unions which are dominated by the bosses and permit the bosses to enter their meetings are known by all organized labor as COMPANY unions. Similarly with political parties. The Republican Party and Truman’s own PAC-backed party are COMPANY parties.
U.S. labor is husky, mature and undefeated in its economic struggles. Politically it is still in swaddling clothes. The first step toward political maturity is the break with capitalist politics and the formation of an independent Labor Party. That party should be a party of, by and for the working people.
It should open the books of the corporations. If the corporations refuse, or if their books show they cannot operate their business to provide a higher standard of living and plenty for all, then labor must demand the nationalization of big business and its operation under workers’ control!
For labor does not have any profit interests at stake. It has shown in its recent struggles that it wants a decent wage at the expense of profits and not, as the corporations and their Washington representatives desire, at the expense of labor and all consumers. Therefore, all of the little people who have no vested interest in the profit system of capitalism must support the movement toward INDEPENDENT POLITICAL ACTION, toward a LABOR PARTY!
 




Anyone who still clings to a shred of the myth of the impartiality of the government – the belief that President Truman, the senators and representatives are non-partisan mediators sitting in toplofty judgment above the moil and toil of the struggle between capital and labor – needs only to take a sidelong glance at the labor legislation now up before Congress.
The most sensational and drastic bill to curb strikes and weaken the organized labor movement is the Case bill. This bill was sired by the Republicans and the Bourbon wing of the Democrats. Another, less drastic and in a sense more insidious strike-curbing measure, is Truman’s own bill (HR 4908).
Both bills limit the right to strike by enforcing a “cooling off” period while an impartial government board takes charge of the dispute. Truman’s bill makes a hypocritical concession to the open-the-books demand of the United Auto Workers Union by calling for fact-finding boards. But, as Labor Action has reported before, the secrets of profits and production are to be revealed not to labor and the public, but only to the government agents on the fact-finding board.
 
Murray’s Indictment
Philip Murray, CIO president, correctly nailed the anti-labor provisions of the Case bill:
“The bill imposes compulsory arbitration.
“It carries an enforced ‘cooling-off’ period of 35 days before a strike can be legally called.
“It makes any form of assistance to a strike illegal.
“It revives the hated labor injunction, outlawed fourteen years ago by the Norris-LaGuardia Act.
“It robs workers of the protection of the National Labor Relations Act.
“The manner of introduction to the House betrays its real purposes, despite the loud protestations of its sponsors. The bill was not studied in committee. Instead, it was jammed through a packed group in the Rules Committee, which functions only to delay beneficial legislation and to hasten reactionary measures.”
One of the main features of the Case bill is to loosen up the injunctive restrictions of the courts so that they may be used against labor. Of the many injunctions now being used against the struggle of organized labor on the picket lines to secure a living wage, that employed against the Homestead steel strikers illustrates best the use to which this technique is put. The pickets had been massing by hundreds to prevent scabs, foremen and supervisory agents whom the company wants to use as a back-to-work movement, from entering the plant and breaking the solidarity of their strike. The writ, issued by Republican Judge Soffel, who ought, if he isn’t, to be in the pay of the Carnegie-Illinois Steel Co., forbids strikers to bar anyone from the mill and limits the pickets to ten, paced ten feet apart. This use of the courts in strikes is in the classic style.
As the CIO-PAC News Service states, although “the bill purports to deal with violence in labor disputes, it says nothing about the use of tear gas by employers to break strikes, about the resort to terror by employers, about the notorious Mohawk Valley formula, etc.” Or,
“Similarly, the bill exposes labor organizations to the novel sanction of suits in the federal courts for breach of contract, but says nothing about the widespread flouting of War Labor Board directives by employers which today has resulted in the denial to workers of back pay awards of over $20 million.”
 
A Struggle of Classes
The CIO-PAC limits its criticism of the Case bill to calling it “one-sided, punitive, irresponsible.”
But if you accept the basic premises of the CIO’s Political Action Committee, which is the premise of Truman, the Democratic Party and also of the gang of Republicans and Democrats who authored the Case bill, you cannot call this proposed legislation of Truman’s bill “one-sided.” These basic premises are: the capitalist system is the best system ever; the capitalist government is the best form of government; the interests of labor and capital are fundamentally identical – “one nation, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all,” capital and labor alike.
It is on this basis that Congress and Truman propose their legislation for labor and capital. However, this concept, basic to capitalism (although the capitalists and Truman know better) pretends to ignore the classes that exist in society and proceeds to equate unequal things. In every capitalist country there are two nations – the capitalists and the workers, the exploiters and the exploited, those who own the wealth of the country and those who have only their ability to Work. Hence the struggle of the exploited, impoverished workers against the wealthy capitalist exploiters to better their lot. Hence the impossibility of any government which represents the dominant, ruling class in society of passing impartial legislation.
The struggle of the working class, which has as its only economic weapon the right to strike, to withdraw its ability to work, cannot be squeezed in the vise of “impartial” labor legislation. The CIO and AFL instinctively recognize and oppose the threat in this anti-strike legislation to the simple struggle to gain a better living, to get what Reuther of the UAW calls a “down payment” on what is owed labor.
What the CIO and AFL leaderships do not recognize is the fundamental nature of the class struggle and the necessity to replace the capitalist ruling class with a government of the working class, in order to erase exploitation and ultimately to wipe out the class struggle in society by the elimination of classes altogether. Philip Murray, as president of the PAC can oppose Truman’s anti-strike bill; immediately after his declaration, his cohort, Sidney Hillman, chairman of the PAC, can state his approval of Truman’s wage recommendations.
But in order that the gains of the rank and file of organized labor which are won on the picket lines are not defeated in Washington, labor must undertake independent labor political action. The PAC must be detached from the capitalist parties. The Sixty Families who own and control the wealth of the country must be expropriated and their industries, mines, mills and farmlands turned over to democratic committees of the workers. The hands that do the work of the country must manage production and run the government in the interests of all.
This is the only way to guarantee an end to all anti-strike bills, whether of the drastic Case or the mild Truman variety.
 




The housing crisis in the United States, chronic since the virtual cessation of home-building in 1925, acute during the war, now accentuated by the return of millions of veterans, has reached the boiling point.
In New York City alone, a minimum of 211,000 veterans need immediate housing. In addition to the pressing need of veterans, vast numbers of New Yorkers still live in slum buildings that were condemned in 1885! New York only mirrors the national situation, which will find three million families doubling up by the end of this year.
What is the reason for the crisis? In Europe, the chronic housing shortage that exists under capitalism was intensified in the extreme by blockbusters and firebombs. In Hiroshima and Nagasaki it was settled atomically. But in the United States, untouched by the military aspects of the war, the housing crisis lies directly at the door of the chaos and greed of big business.
 
Business Refuses to Build
Low cost housing for human need has never been very profitable, so that even the bloodsuckers of investment capital, hungry for every drop of profit, have neglected this field. As a consequence, the building industry is what is termed by Fortune magazine – “that disorganized and warring group of organisms known euphemistically as the building industry.” It has refused to build low-cost homes because this is not a lucrative field for investment.
However, since a mighty roar has swept the nation from labor and the veterans, some segments of capital have seen a possibility in the new market of low-cost homes. But just as big business would not turn a wheel to start producing the weapons for the “Arsenal of Democracy” in the late war until the government had guaranteed its profits, refunds and post-war insurance, so big capital will not move into the housing field until it has a gilt-edged guarantee from the government.
For this reason, plus the fact that this is an election year. Congress came through with a $400 million veterans’ housing subsidy program. This was originally rejected in the House, was whittled down from the $600 million original figure, and finally passed by the Senate (its eyes glued on the votes it hopes will return it to office) and then the House. The bill calls for the construction of 2.7 million houses by the end of 1947, a figure which won’t even meet the need for replacements. Even this subsidy has been decried by private construction interests as “creeping collectivism” and “socialism.”
In addition, the Wagner-Ellender-Taft Bill, squeezed out of a reactionary, labor-baiting Congress by an angry people, provides $143 million per year and will provide about 500,000 low-cost units a year for a few years. There will be immediately provided some 200,000 reconverted Quonset huts for the veterans who have just left them.
 
Private Industry Will Not Meet Need!
All this is scarcely a dent. At the present pace of construction, for example, the acute crisis in New York City alone will last five years or more!
What’s wrong? Why can’t Congress, which appropriated $417,260,127,310 from 1941 to 1946 for the war, begin to make a dent in a problem where human need is concerned?
Why can’t a country which produced millions of guns, tanks, planes, ships and that $2 billion queen of weapons, the atomic bomb – all for the purpose of destruction – exert itself similarly for the purpose of constructing decent homes for its citizens to live in?
Obviously, housing must be a government job. When the business of mass murder and destruction was involved, the government stepped in, told industry what to produce and what not to produce, how much to produce, how much wages could be paid, etc. Of course, industry in turn had a market guaranteed by the government as well as its profits. Thus was accomplished the miracle of production – for destruction.
 
Labor Action and WP Propose
Labor Action and the Workers Party propose a $250 billion five-year housing program to clear the slums and build new homes and execute other public projects. This sum is not stupendous.
If some $400 billion were spent in six years of death and annihilation, why cannot $250 billion be spent for the peacetime needs of the people?
We do not think that the present government, the presidential and congressional aides of big business, can realize this program. They have shown that. They have done no more than they have because it is not to the interest of the profiteers that they do more.
Therefore, the solution of the housing crisis lies elsewhere. It lies primarily in the action of the organized labor movement, since it is the working people and the majority of their veteran- allies who are hardest hit and most in need of unprofitable, low-cost houses.
The organized labor movement, which has embarked upon “Operation Dixie” to organize the South, should also undertake to champion an “Operation Housing.” It is only labor, which is the organized spearhead of the little people, which can propose and fight for a real solution. For labor is unmoved by considerations of profit, investments and special interests.
In order to push a program of its own, labor must have its own representatives in Washington, supported by labor and the little people, and directly responsible to them. This means that the CIO, instead of conducting a “purge” of the Democratic Party and trying to elect better instead of worse capitalist politicians, should detach itself from all capitalist parties.
Labor must strike out on its own, form an independent Labor Party which will be based upon a real program in the interests of all the working people and will undertake a housing program geared to human needs and not profits.
FOR A $250 BILLION NATIONAL FIVE-YEAR HOUSING PROGRAM!
FOR AN INDEPENDENT PARTY OF LABOR!
 




May Day dawns in 1946 in the first year of peace since the Second World War for democracy began. But no one seriously contemplates a world without war, for the threat of new wars hangs over the meeting of the peace-planners of the New League of Nations, the UNO. The United States proceeds apace with its production of atomic weapons. The pall of a neo-barbarism hangs over hungry Europe and the starving colonial populations. Their wartime sacrifices having netted them nothing, workers in the United States have gone to the mat again with the monopoly corporations and the CIO is starting an “invasion” of the South.
Working men and women, all the little people in whose interests wars are supposedly fought, and who work, sweat, sacrifice and send their husbands, sons and brothers to the slaughter, need a new perspective today as never before. They need the knowledge of their own strength to enable them to construct a better world – a world free from hunger, unemployment, war and destruction.
It is solely by the independent action of working people, those who produce the wealth of society, that monopoly power and privilege can be eliminated and a world of peace and plenty for all be built.
 
Labor’s Voice and Conscience
Labor Action is the voice and the conscience of the working class. It has a new perspective – that of revolutionary socialism. Since its inception six years ago this May Day, it has never veered or tacked from this goal. It has relentlessly championed the cause of labor even throughout all the war years of reaction.
Because the whole world now faces either socialism or atomization, it becomes a political necessity to have an expanded Labor Action. We must have at least eight pages weekly to give us space to analyze all of the complex national and international events which have a direct bearing on labor’s future.
This May Day issue is our second sample eight-pager, containing Labor Action Magazine. The Magazine Section contains on its first page the story of the second “Operation Dixie,” by David Coolidge, labor secretary of the Workers Party. The thrilling, almost unbelievable account of the heroic conduct of the Greek Trotskyists also appears there. Two analytical articles on the revolutionary UAW slogan thrown up in the General Motors strike appear in the magazine. We have space for such articles in eight pages. They would ordinarily be eliminated in the old four-pager.
We are going to have an eight-pager, but we want your assistance, so that its steady publication can be assured.
For that purpose we have set $15,000 as the necessary amount to assure continued publication of the eight-pager.
Fifteen thousand dollars isn’t a lot of money by some standards. Charles E. Wilson, president of General Motors Corporation, makes that amount every month. It’s only 1-133,333rd part of the production costs of the first atomic bomb, or 1-63,000,000th part of the cost of the late war for democracy. An income of that much per year doesn’t qualify a person to be an economic royalist. A Vanderbilt or du Pont debutante could scarcely have a decent “coming out” party on that sum, what with post-war inflation prices.
You, our readers and sympathizers, together with members of the Workers Party, have already subscribed over half the needed amount up to date.
Let’s oversubscribe the quota!
 




What Next for Railroad Labor?
Published by Railroad Workers Joint Action Committee, 506 15th Street, Room 607, Oakland 12, Calif. Ten cents.
Railway labor, despite its early organization in this country and a glorious heritage of struggle against the financial interests which dominate the industry, still lives in the era of horse-and-buggy unionism. While the industrial form of organization as exemplified by the CIO has proved its advantages to every section of organized labor, the railway workers are divided into 21 different brotherhoods.
This antiquated craft structure on the railroads which pits worker against worker and benefits only the railroad bosses and the union bureaucrats, has produced a courageous, progressive group of “rails” who aim to transform the numerous crafts into one big industrial union. Formed in 1943 by a group of rank-and-file workers of several different crafts and unions on four railroads in Oakland, Calif., and now grown to hundreds of members, with organized sections in the West and Northwest, these progressives are known as the Railroad Workers Joint Action Committee.
What Next for Railway Labor? is an eloquent and telling plea for industrial organization on the railroads. It begins with a short history of railroad labor, describing the “Rebellion of 1877” when the railroads, following the Civil War, began to cut wages faster than the decline in the cost of living. Pitched battles between workers and state as well as federal troops resulted when the government threw its entire weight behind the railroad companies. The strike was lost because of lack of organization, but wage cuts were halted because of public sympathy.
All the lessons of the past are adduced to point the needs of the present: a modern type of organization for a modern industry. Job security, wages and hours are the three main problems that confront all workers, regardless of craft, creed, nationality, color or sex. Aside from the unified action which industrial organization would achieve, the 21 national headquarters with their staffs could be cut to one headquarters, thus permitting lowering of union expenses and dues.
The RWJAC does not propose to set up a dual union beside the crafts. It proposes to work within the crafts to achieve amalgamation. What has prevented the crystallization of the large sentiment that exists for industrial organization up to the present, the pamphlet points out, is the lack of organization of the ranks. But the RWJAC does not stop with a plan for industrial organization. It proposes a program for the industrial union.
 
Role of Profit System
In Chapter IV, Struggle Between Capital and Labor, the pamphlet presents the ABC’s of the class struggle, the profit system as a breeder of depression, war and fascism and urges the railway workers to independent political action. Among the 26 demands which the RWJAC advocates for present action are: eight dollars a day minimum wage for any railroad worker; a guaranteed annual wage for all railroaders; a month’s vacation with pay after one year in service; full pay for time lost during disability due to sickness or injury; control by railroad workers of hospital plans for which railroad workers pay the bill.
The RWJAC stands unalterably opposed to the present infamous Railway Labor Act, which prevents a closed shop, hinders industrial organization and ties up grievance settlements in legal red-tape.
The pamphlet ends with the proposal for government ownership of the railroads as public utilities. It does not call, however, for the old- fashioned type of ownership which took place during the last wage movement, when “the government simply rechristened the old officials ‘government managers,’ the bankers and stockholders were assured of their holdings and profits, and nothing changed.” In order to assure that in addition to the obvious advantages of government ownership in the way of greater efficiency, lower passenger and freight rates, the interests of the workers in better wages and working conditions and guaranteed jobs will be upheld, the RWJAC program proposes workers’ control under government ownership.
The program of the RWJAC, it seems to us, is a realistic and realizable one that is designed to meet the needs of all railroad workers. To those who say that the program is “visionary” and “socialistic,” the RWJAC replies that in the past the eight-hour day and vacations with pay were considered equally so. It calls every progressive worker to start fighting now for the program of the RWJAC in his own craft: for industrial unionism, for a program of progressive demands.
 




Readers of the big business dailies are stuffed to the gills with stories about the “iron curtain” in Europe which Russia erects to keep the eastern half of Europe secluded from foreign penetration, so that she can exploit it as her own private preserve. This is Russian imperialism at work.
We are also surfeited with stories of Britain’s “hands off” policy with respect to her colonies, which are bailing over with mass revolts in half a dozen places today. Thus, ample evidence is provided of British imperialism.
And what does the biggest world power, the United States, do in the midst of the sanguine suppression of the European people and the colonial slaves by its rivals? Why, in addition to its diplomacy in Europe, it shows its own “non-imperialist” generosity by giving “freedom” on the anniversary of its own independence, July 4, 1946, to its former colony, the Philippine Islands.
You will have to search hard to find a greater hoax perpetrated in the name of freedom and independence. This hoax isn’t being swallowed by the working population of Luzon in the Philippines, which is bearing the brunt of “independence” and for not unstrange reasons finds it necessary to organize in guerrilla bands to fight against the “freedom” so recently tendered them. But the hoax has been put across more or less successfully in the United States, because the government and press of this country have an “iron curtain” every bit as effective as that of the Russians, drawn through the center of the Pacific Ocean!
While the Philippines are now nominally free politically, i.e., they are formally independent, economically they remain chained to the United States A brief examination of the history of U.S. exploitation of the Philippines and the nature of the recently granted independence will show how farcical is this political freedom based upon economic enslavement.
 
The Early History
In 1898, as a result of the Spanish-American War, the U.S. acquired the Philippines from Spain. But the Filipinos had fought bravely throughout Spanish rule for their independence and had already declared a republic. It took three years of jungle warfare for the U.S. to crush the republic. After many promises, and retractions of promises, of independence, July 4, 1946, was finally set as the date for the actual grant.
In the almost fifty years of American exploitation of the islands, she succeeded in maintaining the old type of Spanish land grants with survivals of feudalist practices. There was practically no development of internal economy, since production was geared to mesh with the export needs of the United States. In 1941, our investments in the Philippines were estimated at over $258 million. In 1946, Paul V. McNutt, High Commissioner of the Philippines, stated: “Ninety-five per cent of ... export trade was with the United States.”
“The net result,” according to Bernard Seeman in the American Mercury, August 1946, “was a social system wherein the bulk of the population were virtual peons, largely illiterate, ill-fed, ill-housed and with few political rights. These people, mainly tenants or sharecroppers on the large semi-feudal estates, were constantly in debt to their landlords, a debt which kept mounting because of usurious interest rates. Their living quarters were generally one-room shacks with only the most primitive toilet facilities. The average peasant wage came to about fifteen cents a day.”
 
The Crowning Achievement
The income of a Filipino family of four averages $75 a year, about $20 of which goes for taxes. As for the accomplishment of our “civilizing” mission, the traditional “white man’s burden,” this is how we fulfilled it: By 1939, almost two-thirds of the people over twenty had received no schooling at all, while two-fifths of the remainder had completed only the fourth grade.
There does exist a tiny upper class of landowners, business men and export-import agents in the islands known as compradores. The opposition to independence came from, this class, mostly Spanish and American. They feared economic independence, for they might be forced to revolutionize their industry, produce for the home market instead of export and risk competition in the world market without the favorable tariff relations they enjoyed with the U.S. In addition, American business men with financial or sugar interests in the Philippines opposed independence. The basis of colonial profits in the islands lay in trade agreements, whereby the United States set duty-free quotas on the major imports – sugar, hemp, copra, etc. This system guaranteed the compradores a profitable market.
Fear of freedom and dependence upon the export trade led the native compradore class to collaborate with the Japanese, knowing that export would be the main basis of their relationship. The new President, Roxas, a representative of this class, was a thorough-going collaborator, although on his recent visit of welcome here this fact was little mentioned in the press. How would this news look next to the reports of the Nuremberg trials and the execution of European quislings? The “iron curtain” had to be drawn, you see.
 
Safeguarding U.S. Interests
The Philippines suffered more than a billion dollars in war losses, which Roosevelt had promised to compensate. Instead, little over half that amount was proffered. The major part of this sum went to business interests which collaborated with Japan and not to the little people who actually fought the invader in guerrilla bands. But before higher than $500 claims can be paid out of this fund, the United States demanded ratification of the Trade Act, which, in fact, nullifies the Independence Act. The Trade Act provides for an eight-year extension of duty-free trade, establishment of quotas on Philippine exports to the U.S. and the postponement of duties on American goods to the year 1974! It gives the Spanish and American “compradore” producers a virtual monopoly on trade. It also ties in Philippine tariffs with American tariffs, preventing the former from being lower than the latter.
An act which buttresses this Trade Act is the Property Bill, which gives “any agency or instrumentality of the United States government” the right to retain any Philippine property which it has or might acquire – for an indefinite period of time!
And so we find in the Philippines the application of an imperialist policy akin to the British against which the State Department has had occasion to protest. In the meantime, the U.S. maintains 115,000 American and native troops on the Islands. The dictatorial measures invoked by the newly elected collaborationist President have provoked a revolt for land reform by the guerrilla forces in Central Luzon. But against them stands a large armed force ready to resist any movement which seeks to upset the present economic stranglehold which American and native capitalists, merchants and landlords hold on the country. This is but a glimpse behind the “iron curtain” after the grant of independence to the Philippines.
What makes American policy SEEM less imperialistic than her rival powers? American wealth, resources and strength, make it possible for her to lay greater emphasis on the dollar rather than the sword. U.S. imperialism prefers economic penetration and control to military assault. But that does not make American foreign policy; any less imperialist if by imperialism we understand not only seizure of foreign lands by force, but also economic domination and exploitation of other peoples. Even so, history has provided ample proof that where U.S. capitalism is unable to, achieve its economic aims by the “peaceful” means of economic penetration, it is quite prepared to employ force, to use its armed services. It did it in the Philippines once before; if necessary, it will do it again.
 




We are indebted to the CIO News of September 4 for dramatizing a UP dispatch on the 43 billion dollar corporations which account for more than one-fourth of the total assets of all industrial concerns, banks and insurance companies in the United States!
These 43 “billion dollar babies,” as the CIO News labels them, have total combined assets of more than 101 billion dollars! Actually, in the field of American corporate wealth, a million-do liar corporation is a babe, while these billion dollar businesses are behemoths. Given tremendous nourishment from war orders, by December 31, 1944, their assets totaled 97 billion dollars. But they didn’t stop growing with the war’s end. One year later they were worth more than 101 billion dollars.
These giants mirror the process of profit accumulation characteristic of all business during and after the war. In 1939, total assets of all industrial concerns, banks and insurance companies were 319 billion. By 1942 they were 371 billion. Government officials estimate today that the total assets of all are about 400 billion dollars. This is after cutbacks and cancellation of military contracts.
 
How the Octopus Looks
Let’s take a look at the giants in the appended table. In 1932, with a paltry 3.8 billion dollars in assets Metropolitan Life, the insurance gouger which heads the list, was even then the largest financial organization in the entire capitalist world.
Six of these corporations were accused by the Senate Subcommittee on Education and Labor of belonging to the “Special Conference Committee” which was set up to coordinate the fight against labor unions. American Tel. and Tel., duPont, General Motors, Irving Trust, Standard Oil and U.S. Steel met in secret with representatives of Bethlehem Steel, General Electric, Goodyear Rubber, Intl. Harvester, U.S. Rubber and Westinghouse Electric to conspire against progressive labor legislation and labor’s fight for higher wages.
Now, some people may argue, “So what? A corporation is not an individual. These aggregates of wealth are shared by the stockholders, who own the corporations.” This is typical big business propaganda. It creates a picture of tens of millions of people owning stock. Yet out of a population of 140,000,000, only nine to ten million own stock. But. even this figure is meaningless for it. does not paint the real picture. Actually, the scale of ownership of stock is graduated in the same disproportionate manner as the size of the corporations. The studies of the Temporary National Economic Committee showed long before the war that a mere ten thousand persons owned one-fourth, and 75 thousand persons owned one-half, of all the corporate stock in the country. Ten thousand persons is a small fraction of one per cent of the total population, and 15 thousand is not much greater.
Counterpose to these figures on corporate wealth those on the income of the “common” people of the United States; Recently the New York Times inconspicuously published the calculations of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics and the Federal Reserve Board that even in this era of full employment ALMOST HALF OF AMERICA’S FAMILIES HAVE INCOMES UNDER $2,000 A YEAR! In this group are included many Negro and poor white families of the South WHO EXIST ON $500 A YEAR!
According to the same figures, in this wealthiest country on the globe, ONLY ONE FAMILY IN EVERY THIRTY-THREE OR THIRTY-FOUR HAS AN INCOME TOTALING MORE THAN $7,500.
 
Polarization of Wealth and Poverty
All of these figures are merely by way of underscoring the tendency to monopoly that exists in capitalist society, polarizing more and more wealth at one end into the hands of fewer and fewer persons, and at the other, misery, oppression, poverty and degradation as the lot of more and more. This tendency of capitalism was discovered long ago by Karl Marx, the founder of scientific socialism, and, however it has been attacked by the apologists for capitalism, it still remains an inescapable fact.
It is these wealthy monopolists, bankers and industrialists who, with their rival counterparts in other countries, had to go to war to protect the wealth they already had and to acquire new sources of revenue. True, the president urged war, the big business press prepared the minds of the people for war and Congress declared it, but all of these agencies acted as the servants of the wealthy ruling class. This class won the war and thereby increased its profits, property, privileges and revenues.
It is the existence of these privately owned corporations which causes the recurrent breakdowns in capitalist society. For under private ownership, production is undertaken to satisfy not the needs of the people as a whole, but to satisfy the lust, for private profit. If profit cannot be obtained, if the working population does not have sufficient purchasing power to buy the products of any concern, production shuts down. Businesses compete against each other, not out of a desire to satisfy the needs of the people for clothing, cars or refrigerators but in order to capture the market and outsell their competitors to make more profits. From time to time the market becomes glutted. A depression ensues. Alternating boom and depression are the only too well known characteristics of capitalist society.
Socialists propose that these monopolies and all big business be taken over and managed in the interests of the people as a whole. Production would then be planned. The sole determining factor in what is to be produced would be the needs of the people. With profits and the profit motive eliminated, production would expand, the standard of living of the masses of wars of plunder would disappear The cycle of prosperity and the people would be immensely increased and the motive for depression would be replaced by an upward spiral of increased production, shorter hours of work and a higher income for all. The concentration of wealth at one pole, and poverty at another, would be eliminated.
 
The Growth of Monopolist Combines



Company


Latest Assets
$


1944
$




Metropolitan Life Ins.


7,561,997,270


6,995,450,471




Bell Telephone System


6,765,557,026


6,548,361,704




Prudential Ins.


6,355,984,306


5,856,880,815




Bank of America, NT & SA


5,554,310,000


4,599,124,13




Chase National Bank


5,403,847,000


5,160,003,956




National City Bank, N.Y.


5,184,476,000


4,469,686,465




Equitable Life Assurance


4,000,1115,000


3,507,983,461




New York Life Ins.


3,813,504,095


3,570,738,941




Guaranty Trust Co., N.Y.


3,489,673,000


3,826,161,882




Standard Oil (N.J.)


2,531,808,387


2,490,309,946




Manufacturers Trust Co.


2,489,525,000


2,100,298,087




Contl. Ill. Natl. Bank


2,371,676,000


2,619,321,040




Pennsylvania Railroad


2,223,731,246


2,304,346,240




First Natl. Bank, Chicago


2,169,056,000


2,217,921,206




Central Hanover Bank


1,902,366,000


1,921,737,110




U.S. Steel


1,890,768,775


2,082,374,183




Northwestern Mutual Life


1,887,664,905


1,757,656,104




John Hancock Mutual Life


1,837,622,237


1,631,326,701




Mutual Life Ins., N.Y.


1,798,385,011


1,717,638,788




Bankers Trust Co.


1,758,506,000


1,907,634,889




Security-First National Bank, L.A.


1,756,521,000


1,415,117,263




New York Central Railroad


1,734,709,321


1,795,248,222




Southern Pacific Co.


1,688,329,649


1,793,511,184




General Motors Corp.


1,642,382,142


2,182,609,504




First Natl. Bank, Boston


1,576,526,000


1,514,356,981




Union Pacific Railroad


1,524,361,793


1,508,261,913




Travelers Insurance Co.


1,512,224,247


1,412,982,760




Chemical Bk. & Tr., E.N.Y.


1,470,213,000


1,500,836,755




Baltimore & Ohio Railroad


1,341,924,257


1,324,976,750




Northwest Bancorporation


1,332,447,934


1,193,006,255




Consolidated Edison


1,323,687,070


1,409,919,908




Natl. Bank of Detroit


1,261,075,000


1,295,926,015




Irving Trust Co.


1,259,475,000


1,262,589,365




Bank of the Manhattan Co.


1,255,330,000


1,170,340,024




Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Ry.


1,246,835,971


1,325,751,290




E.I. du Pont de Nemours


1,245,911,622


1,170,038,642




Commonwealth & Southern Corp.


1,205,243,639


1,192,816,544




Aetna Life Insurance


1,152,901,151


1,040,777,100




Marine Midland Corp.


1,133,511,000


1,037,595,829




Cleveland Trust Co.


1,087,360,000


  955,015,150




Socony-Vacuum Oil


1,043,665,369
  
1,057,969,363




Penn Mutual Life Ins.


1,016,977,550


949,107,010




Mutual Benefit Life Ins.


1,006,427,438


   937,351,272




Total Combined Resources


$101,808,613,411    


$97,731,561,226  




A New Political Strategy Needed
The propagandists of the CIO do not understand the full significance of the figures on monopoly which they quote. Or, better, they do not understand the relationship between big business and its political servants in Congress. An editorial in the CIO News states:
“The extent of big business’ influence in politics was clearly demonstrated by the 79th Congress, which speedily granted its demands for increased prices, profits and privileges, while blocking or defeating all progressive social legislation which big business opposed.... The American people face lower living standards, depression, unemployment and possibly another war unless they curb the power and greed of the big-business monopolists.”
The solution which the CIO leaders propose is “progressive political activity, to which the CIO is trying to arouse all Americans.” But the politics of the CIO continues to be horse-and-buggy politics, choice of the “lesser evil,” the attempt to put in a “good” capitalist politician instead of a “bad” one. But all of these politicians, even the most liberal of them, are pledged to uphold the system of private property, that is, the system which breeds these monopolistic giants which the CIO battles on the picket lines every day.
Organized labor in this country will continue to battle windmills until it rids itself of its illusions in capitalist politics and forms its own political party, independent of capitalist parties, pledged to eliminate private ownership and introduce social ownership of the monopolies. These monsters of monopoly must be challenged politically as they are economically, by the organized might of the working class. The nemesis of big business is the working class itself.
 




RAVENNA, Ohio – Dawn – the lifting of a shroud – revealed the abandoned, mouldering farmlands of Portage County farmers, forcibly evacuated to make way for the multi million dollar government ammunition loading plant. Seventy-five percent of these farmers forced to give up the source of their lives – for death. As the skeleton of the death factory rises, many of them return for a last look at the fields they had to abandon. Those remaining stare in unbelief as cars from as far away as California and Florida drive by in search of the employment office.
“I sold my farm to the government and, then sold my cows and, chickens – everything I had to depend on for a living,” said W.S. Kirkpatrick, 78, a farmer for 31 years. “The Hunkin-Conkey Co. gave me a job as watchman. Just the same it’s a terrible blow to us. My wife is 70 and she’s taking it mighty hard. Every time we look over these fields and think that from now on they’ll grow up in weeds, or have munitions factories on them, it makes us heart sick.”
Meanwhile, “thousands of men”, according to employment officials, are seeking the means of life – from death. Roads are choked with traffic and a pall of dust hangs over the landscape as hundreds of cars of men seeking employment try to reach the headquarters of the Hunkin-Conkey Construction Co. No men are hired. Applicants are told to “see your business agent”, since the company has a closed shop agreement with the AFL.
Whole families come from out of the state, sitting around in cars or spreading blankets on the ground, A man and his· wife and two old English sheepdogs have walked all the way from Springfield, Ill., in the hope of finding work in the plant. They are housed in the fire department before resuming their endless trek for work.
It all means one thing. The clang of riveters speeding construction, the dust, the endless chain of cars, the hundreds of vacant farms, the thousands of men looking for work, all add up to this: That while the farmers and unemployed workers are struggling for the means of life, the government is preparing the means of death.
 




A little-noticed, two-day strike occurred a few weeks’ ago at the plant of the Kelsey-Hayes Wheel Co. in Detroit. It was Inspired by the hiring of women machinists at a lower rate than was paid to the men.
Kelsey-Hayes employs 1,500 men at $1.00 per hour. These employees, members of UAW-CIO, struck when the company hired women at 85c per hour, this rate being recognized as the prevailing one for female machine labor in the region. The union charged that the company hired the women in order to cut down the payroll, and sanctioned the walkout officially. The company countered that it hired the women because a male labor supply was not available.
After a two-day strike, the union men returned to the job, with the issue left in the lap of the National Defense Mediation Board. But it demanded the women be removed from all machine jobs.
 
Why the Women Worked
Now, whether the company was telling the truth about the availability of male labor, or whether it was using the women to save in labor costs, I believe the union engaged in a reactionary strike in asking that the women be fired. Those women got their jobs because they had to make a living and had families to support. The union should have demanded “equal pay for equal work” and put the onus on the company where it belonged.
As the country moves to war, expanding industry will not only take the able-bodied men off the unemployed list – there is almost no unemployment in war-time England – but will also grab those unaccustomed to factory work, the youth, (and the Workers Party) must have an active program of equality for women, as they do in part for youth and Negroes. It is generally true that women are harder to organize into a union than men, are less active when they do join, and less in struggles. It is also generally true that they are discriminated against, even under union contracts, by differential wage schedules – and this is a contributing factor to their social sluggishness.
To meet the threat to their wages caused by underpayment of women workers, the Amalgamated Engineering Union of England, whose members work in the metals and munitions plants, signed an agreement in May 1940 with employers and the government which gave to women employees “equal pay for equal work”. The Vultee contract has the same provision. The CIO unions elsewhere where women are employed should do no less!
Working-class women, from time immemorial, have been accustomed to household drudgery at no wages at all, or, if they work outside the home, to dirty jobs, long hours, low pay. They have been doubly exploited by capitalism, as a part of the working-class and as a sex. They, like all oppressed groups, are often willing to work for scab wages. And the employers will always be on the in order to squeeze more profits out of low pay envelopes and to threaten the higher standards of organized workers. Therefore, let the unions learn the lesson of the Kelsey-Hayes strike.
Women will be a social drag on the progressive gains of the labor movement until they are brought into the unions, treated as equals, and taught to fight shoulder to shoulder with their class brothers for EQUAL PAY FOR EQUAL WORK!
 




Within the last year, a huge multi-million dollar arsenal plant was built at Ravenna, Ohio. A boom town of thousands of arsenal workers mushroomed into being. After months of living in trailers or packing-box shacks, sleeping in cars – their quarters condemned by every agency of health and sanitation – the arsenal workers were graciously presented by the U.S. housing authority the imposingly named Westlawn Homes, a “defense” housing project.
On December 1, 80 of the 99 tenants, all arsenal workers residing in Westlawn Homes, petitioned Roosevelt and Congress against rent increases as high as 75 per cent, ordered by the U.S. Housing Authority!
However, the government was not only increasing the rent reasonably, but it was sloughing off shoddy goods. On homes the government proposed to raise from $20 to $35 a month rent, the workers bitterly protested such conditions as:

No basements in the homes.
Poor drainage, with pools of water forming after rains and lasting for days, often seeping through the floors, causing damage and rot.
Concrete floors, many of them constantly damp and wet, causing considerable illness and damage to furnishings.
No plaster on walls.
No concrete walk from door to sidewalk.
Coal furnaces, many of which have been condemned by the fire department.
Children must walk more than a mile to the nearest grade school and cross an unguarded railroad crossing.
No facilities for laundry; necessary to dry clothes in living room in inclement weather.
No facilities for summoning the fire department in case of fire.

Forty employees recently withdrew applications for dwellings at Westlawn and several families moved out because of “unfavorable conditions.” When a local reporter visited the project the renters threatened to strike against “unlivable conditions.” “How would you like to pay $35 a month and find a pool of water in your parlor every time it rains?” they asked.
The project manager explained that the crux of the problem was that the FWA had experimented with a “Utopian” plan of basing the rents charged on all “defense” housing projects on the income of the renter. “The trouble was,” he explained, “one family would be paying $20 for a three bedroom unit and another would be paying $30 for a one bedroom unit.”
“Not only would the one paying the higher rent feel aggravated, but the plant left the government open to charges of socialism,” says the Akron Beacon Journal reporter. This reporter has only to turn to Labor Action to find out what the socialists would advocate. Instead of billions for imperialist war, we’d spend billions for a program of housing that would make the cheap makeshifts the government constructed look like the shacks they replaced.
Oh, yes, the militant inhabitants of the project have raised such a stink, it looks as though the government, its face red, may repair those floors and walks.
 

