


Dear Comrade,
It is becoming increasingly clear that the leadership of the
Parliamentary Party and a majority on the National Executive
Committee are determined to fight against the decisions of the
Scarborough Conference. The situation calls for a supreme effort on
the part of the rank and file in the Party and Trade Unions to resist
the Leadership on this issue. Unless we ensure that Conference is
accepted as the policy-making body of the Party, and insist that the
National Executive Committee and the Parliamentary Party carry out
this policy, then the whole future of the Party will be in jeopardy.
The Tyneside Committee, which is composed of active rank and file
members of the Party and has the support of prominent Party members
in the area, came into existence to rally support for this struggle.
Appended to this letter is a brief statement of aims. We hope that
you will agree to support the campaign by putting your signature to
the statement of aims and returning it to the address below.



 


Yours sincerely,
H. Bell,
Joint Secretary,
1 High Street East,
Wallsend-on-Tyne



 




Newcastle
Employers all over the country are using the developing recession
as a means of ridding themselves of convenors, shop stewards, and any
militants prepared to defend standards and conditions.
In the years since the war, under boom conditions and subject to
constant working-class pressure through these same militants, the
employers were forced into certain grudging concessions. Now reports
are coming in from all parts of the country – Newcastle, Sheffield,
London, Glasgow – of workers being compelled to take strike action
to defend shop organisation and prevent the victimisation of militants.
At Armstrong-Whitworth (Pneumatic Tools) Limited in North Shields,
the management dismissed the convenor, Bro. Albert Ogle, in
connection with a dispute about “machine-washing.” This is
normally a job done by labourers; but in an attempt to dispense with
unskilled labour, the employers tried to force semi-skilled and even
skilled men to do this work, thereby depriving the labourers of their employment.
The cleaning materials supplied, as the strike bulletin issued by
the workers declares, “consist of a bucket of chemical solution
(proved injurious to the skin) and the usual cotton waste.” A
skilled operator, instructed to do this work, objected and approached
the convenor. When the convenor complained to the management, he was
given a week’s notice.
This was on the Friday. On the following Monday, Bro. Ogle was
forcibly ejected from the shop – that is, before he had worked his
week’s notice. This was, obviously, against all accepted union
procedures and agreements. Incidentally, three convenors have been
dismissed in the past few years.
When the workers saw what was happening, they struck work
immediately and walked out of the factory. The strike was 100 per
cent. The union offered to negotiate on the basis of a return to work
with the convenor under a week’s notice. The management refused.
Meanwhile the management prosecuted the convenor for alleged
trespass. He was bound over for six months for alleged assault (in
trying to get in to the premises)! This despite the fact that, when
given notice, he had not been told that he should not return; this
was only pressed by the management on the Monday. His counter-summons
for assault was dismissed!
 
Workers solid
This has incensed the workers all the more, and they have remained
solid throughout the six weeks of the strike. This although only 140
workers are employed.
Labourers, skilled and semi-skilled are all involved; members of
the AEU, shipwrights, NUGMW, boilermarkers and ETU. After three
weeks, the strike was officially recognised.
A feature of the strike is that 14 women are involved, all out and
all in the union. They have participated in the strike meetings.
There has been unanimous endorsement and full support by the district
committee of the AEU. No pickets were necessary, and the whole
district has declared work at the factory black.
After six weeks, the management climbed down to the extent of
offering to take all the workers back on the basis of the convenor
working a week’s notice while negotiations proceeded. The workers
unanimously rejected this, and the unions have demanded the
unconditional reinstatement of Bro. Ogle and all the other workers.
The AEU is organising a ballot among the 28,000 engineers on
Tyneside on the question of the Armstrong-Whitworth strikers.
 




The employers’ vicious policy of nibbling at the rights of the
workers has caused a strike of workers employed in the fitting shop
of the Shipbuilding Corporation, Walker-on-Tyne. The
management, contrary to the provisions of the E.W.O., on and after
September 3rd locked out all men at 7.45 a.m. for the whole day.
A mass meeting of the workers in the Yard was held immediately
following the lock-out and unanimously it condemned this arbitrary
action of the management. As a result of this strong protest the
management informed the men that they could start at 1 o’clock
mid-day, by first seeking the permission of the foreman. This offer
was rightly rejected; because such a procedure could only be
calculated to victimise militant workers, who already were unpopular
with the foremen.
Brother Tate, Shop Steward in the Fitting Department,
approached the A.E.U. District Organiser asking for assistance to
defend the rights of the workers. He was told by the District
Organiser, that: the strike must remain the responsibility of the
rank and file strikers. The District Committee, pursuing
the same policy as the Organiser, used every method possible to evade
the Strike Committee. Only after persistent efforts had been made did
the men finally succeed in stating their case and presenting their
facts to the D.C. – only to be cross questioned and told to retire ...
The Strike Committee realising the importance of the issue at
stake has issued a Statement and an appeal for moral and financial
support to the Works Convenors and Shop Stewards of all Tyneside
Yards. Certain Convenors and Stewards are trying to break the back of
the strike by withholding the facts and appeals for support from the
men.
The rank and file Fitters are asking: whose side are the union
officials on? They see that their struggle against the attacks of the
employers is also a struggle against the attacks of the employers is
also a struggle against a union leadership[ which refuses to defend
the elementary rights of the workers. The immediate call of the
Strike Committee to all Shop Stewards and sincere trade unionists is:
Call Shop Stewards Meetings on This Question!
Organise Shop Collections!
Support the Strikers
The Strike Committee request that all monies should be sent to:



W. Alexander
126, Clydesdale Road,
Byker, Newcastle-on-Tyne



 




Herbie Bell of Wallsend-on-Tyne died on the morning of July
20th in his 83rd year. After more than 60 years of unstinting and
self-sacrificing work, including some of the stormiest years in
British working class history, Herbie will be long remembered by his
comrades in the labour movement.
Brought up in a Northumberland village, Herbie started his life of
agitating, educating and organising among workers soon after he
volunteered to serve in the 1914–1918 war.
Herbie told many a tale of the victimisation and punishment he was
meted out for spreading disaffection and “mutinous” ideas among
the ranks.
Literally from his very first battles he was an uncompromising
socialist and man of principle. He was not simply a pioneer of the
‘old school’ but drew his strength from a reading and re-reading
of the works of the great teachers – Marx and Engels, Lenin and
then Trotsky.
Herbie was above all an outstanding organiser and builder. In
many areas of the North-East, and particularly in Northumberland,
there are local Labour Parties that owe their very existence to the
work of Herbie Bell. He was a founder member of the ILP in
Blaydon, helped in the foundation of Newbiggin ILP a few years later,
and throughout the inter-war period he was tirelessly engaged in
arranging ILP propaganda meetings all over East Northumberland.
He was agent or sub-agent at Parliamentary elections in Blaydon,
Scarborough and Berwick and was behind local election campaigns in
literally dozens of other instances. At various stages he was himself
elected an Urban District Councillor in Newbiggin, a Borough
Councillor in Wallsend and a Northumberland County Councillor.
Herbie’s activities span the whole length of the Northern Region
– from Scarborough and Whitby in the South (where as agent in 1929
he helped to increase the Labour vote from 800 to 6,700!) to Berwick
upon Tweed in the north.
The work that Herbie put into the Berwick Constituency in 1951 was
itself a monument to his commitment to the labour movement. The
Berwick Constituency was at that time one of the largest divisions in
Great Britain, covering 250 parishes and 15 county electoral areas,
and over 90 polling stations. Herbie often talked in his last years
about the campaign in Berwick – booking village halls for meetings,
arranging meetings, dragging the candidate off to the next village,
signing up new members, booking the next few villages, writing to the
few Labour members there were scattered around, and so on – and
Herbie was 56 even then.
In one year as agent for that constituency, apart from increasing
the Labour vote from 9,000 to 11,000, he signed up over 500 new
members! Even in his early sixties, at the time of the debate,
over disarmament, Herbie’s work-rate was prodigious – he covered
32 constituencies in a campaign urging the Parties to accept
unilateral disarmament.
In 1944, when the ILP had dwindled and the Labour Parties were not
meeting even, Herbie joined the Revolutionary Communist Party. He
remained a member until its dissolution – standing as the RCP
candidate in the Wallsend election in 1945 on an anti-capitalist programme.
When he was not working full time as a party agent or unemployed
(as he was for a harsh 5 years between the wars) Herbie was an active
trade unionist, both as a miner and a sheet metal worker. Not least
of the examples he set to all Marxists was the way he applied himself
to any job. As a sheet metal worker he was revered on the Tyne not
only by his work-mates but, legend has it, by his employers. They
were torn by their desire to see him thrown out and blacklisted as a
militant and their need to keep him on as a key worker in his trade.
Herbie was fond of relating vivid memories of the General Strike
in 1926. As a despatch rider for the Northumberland and Durham
Central Joint Strike Committee he was assigned to run his motorbike
between Newcastle and Glasgow, and to distribute strike bulletins.
But he didn’t get many trips in before he found himself in jail!
He would describe how he turned a corner in one of the villages in
Northumberland and almost ran down a patrol of ‘specials’ –
they promptly arrested him when they found he was carrying the
bulletins. Undeterred, Herbie continued his political agitation as
best he could – in Durham jail!
During the 2nd World War, when strikes were illegal, Herbie gave
energetic assistance to the Tyne apprentices. They were organising
strike action against the “Bevin Ballot” scheme of drafting
youngsters into the pits. Herbie introduced them to the socialist
movement, wrote letters on their behalf etc. – generally organising
measures which were instrumental in acquitting the four leaders who
were tried under the ‘Defence of the Realm Act.’
Over the years many an “apprentice” in the movement was put to
the test by Herbie in relation to selling papers. In this activity
too, his name was a legend.
Those who were laggardly had to beware of Herbie. Part of their
training would be a visit to a pit village with Herbie to sell from
door to door in the Miners’ rows. In certain periods older comrades
remember, 300 sold in a day would be no exaggeration.
 
“I’d do it again!”
Through Herbie’s hands must have passed in their time thousands
of copies of the Northern Star, Socialist Leader, The
Miner, Labour Leader, Socialist Appeal, and, since
its birth in 1964, the Militant. It is worth recording that
even in his last weeks, restricted by age and illness he found hard
to accept, Herbie was selling a regular six copies of the Militant.
He was donating ‘fivers’ to the fighting fund whenever he
possibly could and was ever on the look-out for new reader to pass on
to the “young folk”.
In the North-East, and in Northumberland in particular, there must
be hardly any area that has not seen Herbie Bell’s energy and
activity devoted to it in some way over the years.
But it would be wrong to remember Herbie simple as a ‘work-horse’
for the movement. His Herculean efforts over the years were second to
none – but his approach towards building the party was always political.
The clear perspective he maintained as a guide to action came from
a painstaking study of Marxist theory. He laid great emphasis on
education and was always an enthusiast for the National Council of
Labour Colleges; he himself took courses and lectured widely on many
subjects including Marxist economics.
Looking around the present day Labour Party, Herbie often
complained, and quite correctly, about the demise of the NCLC and the
general lack of political education in the Party. Herbie’s kind
of Labour Party was that which is being fought for today by the
supporters of Militant – he wanted a fighting,
working class party and he made no secret of his Marxist views.
Not surprisingly those views often led to clashes with the right wing
of the Party.
Herbie may have aged and in his 80’s, he may have tired just a
little, but he certainly never mellowed!
Only a year or so ago, the local Wallsend News carried an
article under the headline The Godfather! It was based on a
letter by Herbie about the bureaucratic manoeuvring of some Labour
Party right-wingers in one particular ward. As a direct result, he
was threatened with legal action – something he shrugged off and
even found amusing! But the publicity went a long way towards helping
the constituency as a whole to investigate and reorganise that
particular ward branch.
Another ‘legend’ of his later years stems from a threat to
remove him from the Labour Party for his “Trotskyist” ideas.
Herbie would not do anything by halves, and rumour has it that he was
going to organise a march through Wallsend with a colliery band at
its head, to demand his reinstatement! Herbie Bell’s life work
itself is an uncontestable answer to the smug claims of today’s
right wing interlopers into the workers’ movement that Marxism has
no place in the Labour Party.
Herbie found it impossible to ‘retire’ from politics – he
tried at least twice, in 1965 and in 1972 when he was given the
Labour Party’s Merit Award for long service. From his early
activity during the 1914–18 war up to July 1978 he was a fighter
for the working class.
Only three weeks ago, he was asked by Peter Taaffe, Militant’s
editor and a friend of Herbie’s, what he would do if he had his
life over again. “I’d do it all over again”, was his reply.
The labour movement will mourn the loss of this great man, but the
best possible tribute that anyone could offer for the memory of
Herbie Bell is to emulate the his dedication, his hard work, his 60
years of perseverance.
Above all, he would urge us to fight for the same goal – for
a Labour Party and trade union movement based upon the ideas of
Marxism, striving unstintingly for the interests and needs of the
working class of the whole world.
 

