

Any book written seriously and at length and entitled Is there a future for Marxism? would merit attention in these pages. If it also contains a detailed analysis of contemporary French philosophy and the mutual effect that it and Marxism have had on each other, and, in addition, is written by a Central Committee member of the Socialist Workers Party – then nothing less than a major review of it is in order.
However, writing such a review presents one with a number of crucial initial problems. The most important of these is the sheer difficulty and obscurity of the material that Alex Callinicos is dealing with in this book. To give the reader some idea of its extent I should mention the fact that a good number of leading intellectuals in the SWP have read the book but few claim to have actually understood it. There is little doubt that without a specialist knowledge of current debates in the philosophy of science on the one hand, and structuralist philosophy of language on the other, the central core of the book is well-nigh impossible to assess. And while Alex is to be congratulated on the wide-ranging and erudite manner in which he provides the background for such a discussion, it has to be admitted that the readership of the book is bound to be confined to the narrowest of academic circles in spite of this.
This immediately raises three further problems.
The first is, is it necessary to understand such esoteric philosophy? Does it positively contribute to our understanding of Marxism, of the strategy for socialist revolution and so on? Alex’s answer, as we shall see, is that it does; that at its best – for instance in Althusser s philosophy (and also Lakatos’s) – in spite of being flawed in crucial ways, it poses a number of questions that are both novel and positive, and also sketches a methodology that if followed correctly will vindicate the central principles of revolutionary socialism.
As will become clear, I think Alex is completely mistaken in this belief. However, if he were not, irrespective of how difficult or obscure the material, he would be right to conclude that it should not be ignored. Marxists cannot simply ignore even the more obscure aspects of anything relevant to Marxism on such grounds. Philistinism has no part to play in Marxism.
But it is also true that scholasticism has no part to play in Marxism either. Theories and philosophies that falsely point away from the class struggle, that, as we shall see, on the basis of incoherent and erroneous arguments, exclude proletarian self-emancipation as even a possibility worth considering, are there to be smashed, not to be learnt from. Our contact with them must only be sufficient to ensure our vaccination against them but insufficient to catch the disease itself – let alone to welcome the disease as if it were a contribution to our own health.
The second problem about reviewing the book concerns its form. While the core of the work is about contemporary philosophy this does not by any means exhaust its content. The philosophy is sandwiched between a political introduction and a political conclusion, both of which argue for the politics of the SWP in the kind of way that will be familiar to readers of this journal. To review the book as an entity in its own right would therefore require one to look above all at the connections between the philosophy and the politics, at how successfully they are drawn and so on.
Yet to concentrate attention on these links would draw attention to what I believe to be the weakest part of the book. I do not think it is in the least accidental that those who have read this book and share the politics are at best mystified (and at worst horrified) by the philosophy. Conversely I suspect that there are very few amongst those who feel at home with the philosophy who will feel impelled to the political conclusions that Alex wants to draw in connection with them. In short the book is a sandwich with the political bread quite distinct from the philosophical filling. This is not to suggest that it should be dismissed out of hand for this reason. Rather, it suggests that the successes of the book are more likely to be found in its individual insights than in its overall global purpose.
Finally, there is a real problem involved in Alex’s conception of philosophy in general and Marxist philosophy in particular. He never tells us what it ought to consist of. On the basis of what criterion, therefore, is Althusser to be classified as a ‘Marxist philosopher’? Is it because his politics are Marxist (even if in a distorted Eurocommunist form)? Is it because he is a philosopher as well as having these (distorted) Marxist politics? Or, on the other hand, is he actually a Marxist in his philosophy? i.e. is he centrally concerned to articulate and defend a conception of the proletariat and the world in which the self-emancipation of the working class is both possible and necessary?
If his Marxism derives from the politics then it is to be understood and criticised at the political level too. This will involve the familiar – and non philosophical – arguments against Eurocommunism that we in the SWP have developed elsewhere. To understand it and criticise it we would not then have to venture on to the terrain of philosophy at all.
But if he is actually a Marxist in his philosophy then it is incumbent on Alex to show us how, if at all, his philosophy helps us to articulate a world view in which the proletariat can – and must – collectively emancipate itself.
Yet nowhere at all in the book does Alex comes to terms with this. In so far as he advances a political critique of Althusser here, it is quite peripheral. And in so far as he deals with philosophy, it has to be admitted that it is a philosophy in which the central questions of Marxism in philosophy – the self emancipation of the working class – is striking by its absence, or worse still, its deliberate exclusion.
 
Marxism and the ‘problem’ of language
Alex’s main aim in this book is to explain the rapid decline in the influence of Marxism in the 1970s, above all in France. The background to this so-called ‘crisis in Marxism’ is, according to him, to be found in the philosophy of language. There are material roots too of course; the collapse of the Communist Parties into reformism, the failure of any significant revolutionary milieu to emerge in the working class, and so on. But in spite of these facts some kind of Marxism – in however distorted a form – became an important element, especially in French culture, for roughly the forty years from the mid-1930s to the mid-1970s. This Marxism was both initially strongly influenced, and then later supplanted, by conceptions of language developed out of the theories that were first advanced by Saussure, a French linguist, at the beginning of the century. While also acknowledging the material roots of the ‘crisis in Marxism’ (though, as we shall see later, paying insufficient attention to them), Alex is centrally concerned with examining its ideological roots: why was structuralist linguistics (and structuralism in general) seen as positively contributing to Marxism in the first place, and how did its later development eventually subvert it?
Alex here refers to ‘the intrinsic importance [for Marxism] of contemporary French philosophy and its subversion of traditional notions of consciousness, language, knowledge ...’ (p. 3). This leads to a situation where ‘Language, in much of western philosophy and literature’, he tells us, ‘has broken loose from reality and become an autonomous, self-referential process extending in infinity in all directions’ (p. 25). The consequences of this for Marxism can be set out by looking at the way this conception of language was initiated by Saussure and the ways it was developed by later thinkers.
The traditional view of language was set out in a definite form in the seventeenth century by philosophers like Locke and Descartes. Words were, for them, the ultimate units of meaning, and each significant word was, basically, the label or sign for each of various ideas in our minds. In Locke the crucial ideas were those that were themselves signs of – and copies of – the outside world itself. That is why Locke’s theory of knowledge is ‘realist’: language and perception are seen in such a way that they successfully reveal the reality of the external world.
Saussure’s theory of language presented a different point of view. Linguistic signs are split in two, the ‘signified’ and the ‘signifiers’, which correspond, roughly, to the concepts and sounds that express them. Language itself consists of the two parallel series of the sounds and the concepts; and while the two are interdependent with new meanings created by a variety of difference relationships with existing meanings, what the word refers to outside language no longer affects its meaning. This led to subsequent thinkers claiming that language has become ‘autonomous’. [1]
Meaning, on this latter view, then becomes relational – that is, it does not depend on what the word refers to, but rather on the network of differences between it and all other words. Hence structuralism, for no word can gain meaning in isolation but only through the totality of the relationship of all other words to it.
This itself has far reaching consequences. According to the traditional view words are just the arbitrary signs of our conscious experiences. Language therefore is a product of (and is limited by) these experiences. The self and the self’s experiences therefore come first and language only comes afterwards; ultimately then, the self is the guarantor of meaning. Not so for structuralism. The self becomes displaced. It is no longer needed to guarantee the link between a word and what that word refers to. The individual human subject has, in the jargon of the structuralists, become ‘decentred’.
In the hands of the contemporary structuralists and post-structuralists this position is taken a great deal further. Most of them, for a variety of reasons, reject Saussure’s two series for just one – the series of the signifiers, [2] which is accorded with an ultimate priority over the series of the signified. In Levi-Strauss this is accompanied by the thesis that societies are structured like language too: ‘Like language, the social is an autonomous reality (moreover it is the same reality); the symbols are more real than that which they symbolise, the signifier precedes and determines the signified’. [3] And Lacan, for his part, argues the same thesis for the unconscious. It too is seen as structured in the same way as language. What is more Lacan does much more than just decentre the subject. The intersubjective relations upon which self-consciousness depends are themselves seen as a product of (and therefore dependent on) the symbolic order of language itself. The individual human subject is therefore not just displaced and ‘decentred’, but reduced and dissolved into being a product of a never-ending series of relationships. The effect of all this, claims Alex, ‘is to transform language into an endless play of substitutions and combinations of signifiers in which safe anchorage in a signifier outside this play is never reached’ (p. 40).
On the basis of these developments out of Saussure (and from the even more obscure philosophies of Foucault and Derrida [4]), Alex detects a ‘radical challenge to Marxism’. Its implications for the theory of knowledge ‘seem to compromise materialism, at least in the sense given it by Marx and Lenin’. It also ‘seems to undermine the marxist conception of the social whole’. What he means here is that there is no obvious way that logical distinctions can be drawn between, say, base and superstructure in the context of the never-ending play of signifiers. Nor for that matter, Alex concludes, could Lukacs’s view of revolution make sense either: for Lukacs the proletariat is a mere object within capitalist society; when, by contrast, it succeeds in seeing itself as the productive basis of society, only then can it shake off its fetters and become the subject of history. This too becomes impossible if the ‘subject’ (whether the individual or Lukacs’s proletariat) is ‘decentred’ and reduced to being a mere product of a variety of relationships.
Now all this careful and useful summary by Alex is essentially just setting the stage for the entry of Louis Althusser. He is seen as the Marxist who, while not necessarily giving the right answers, at least asks the right questions and provides the right framework for finding the right answers. His ‘significance lies ... in seeking to construct a version of marxism which avoided [these problems]’ . In doing so, ‘he both drew on, and contributed to, “the revolution of language”. The result is not less distinctive, or exciting, for being ultimately a failure’ (p. 52). Whether what he constructed was indeed a version of Marxism, whether it really did avoid these problems, whether it was ‘distinctive’ or even ‘exciting’ are questions to which we shall shortly turn.
But before we do so one point has to be cleared up. Although he does not actually say so, the implication of Alex’s discussion on the ‘revolution of language’ is that Saussure really was the first to challenge the traditional view of Locke and Descartes. There is also the implication that Marxism makes sense on the basis of the traditional view (because of its ‘realist’ implications) but requires substantive work to be done on it to make it consistent with the neo-Saussurean view. From this one might even conclude that Marx’s own view of language was close to that of Locke. [5] Why else would Marxism stand in need of the ‘distinctive’ theories of Althusser on this question? Presumably because poor old Marx got it wrong himself and stands in need of Louis Althusser’s helping hand.
Nothing could be further than the truth. On many occasions Marx repudiated the empiricist theories of Locke et al, including both their theories of language [6] and their naive realism. [7] In one of his clearest passages he explains language as he explains property. The latter cannot be seen as a natural or a biological or an individual relationship between a person and a thing but something which is essentially historical and social in form. For any individual, Marx argues, ‘His property, i.e. his relationship to the natural prerequisites of his production as his own, is mediated by his natural membership of a community’. In parenthesis Marx immediately adds: ‘... The abstraction of a community whose members have nothing in common but language, etc., and barely even that, is plainly the product of much later historical circumstances’. He concludes:
It is, for instance, evident that the individual is related to his language as his own only as the natural member of a human community. Language as the product of an individual is an absurdity. But so also is property.
And a hundred years before Levi-Strauss he went on to say: ‘Language itself is just as much the product of a community, as in another respect it is the existence of the community: it is, as it were, the communal being speaking for itself. [8]
Now this is not to suggest for one moment that Marx and contemporary French structuralists have the same theories of language – they do not. [9] But what it does show is that the move from the traditional to the structuralist theory is not a move from a friendly to a hostile environment for Marxism – the traditional theory could not have been more hostile than it was. It also shows that to characterise this move as a crisis in Marxism is a serious mistake. Marxism – or, at least, the Marxism of Marx – has nothing in common with Locke or the traditional theory of language at all. [10]
This means that right at the start we have to seriously question Alex’s main premise. The ‘revolution in language’ was no more a challenge to Marxism than the traditional view it replaced. As a consequence it stood in no special need of external help – let alone help from the likes of Louis Althusser.
 
The spectre of Althusser
Alex’s involvement with Althusserianism runs very deep and is rather complex. He himself at the outset of the book makes it clear that his ‘reasons for concentrating on Althusser and his followers are in part personal and parochial. Their writings were of great importance in my own intellectual and political formation’(p. 2); and no one who has read Alex’s 1976 book on the subject, Althusser’s Marxism, will be in any doubt about the truth of this statement. But the book is not intended as a personal and subjective account, and Alex does not present Althusserianism as such. Irrespective of its significance for Alex’s own development, it is its significance for Marxism today that is at issue. What then did Althusser and Althusserianism stand for, and what, in Alex’s view, does it have to contribute to Marxism? Some of these questions I have looked at elsewhere [11] but a brief account of Althusserianism is now needed before we can progress further.
Althusser’s philosophy can be summarised under three headings: (i) his view about society and how it works; (ii) his view about knowledge, science and ideology, and (iii) his view about the human subjects (individuals and classes) who form the parts of society and who contribute to the production of science, knowledge and ideology. In the late 1960s his views underwent important changes, but all of them took place on the basis of the same fundamental framework. We shall look at these headings each in turn.
(i) Society. Society is seen as consisting of distinct levels, among which the ‘economic’, the ‘political’ and the ‘ideological’ are particularly singled out. These different levels are at least partially autonomous. That is to say, none of them is just a simple reflection of any other level or levels. But each contributes to the overall structure, and the overall structure in its turn provides the conditions for the development of the individual levels themselves. How powerful these influences are we shall leave aside for the moment.
Althusser does not tell us whether his list of the various levels is supposed to be exhaustive, or whether all modes of production (or social formations) contain (or possess) the same levels; but one thing does emerge from the above formulation, and that is that as it stands there appear to be no intrinsic differences or built-in hierarchies between these levels. Yet Althusser does want to introduce such a hierarchy. In particular, he wants a structure in which one level is dominant at one time and another at another time. His view of revolutions for instance requires that the ‘political’ level dominates in such periods and also that in non-revolutionary periods one or another of the other levels must be dominant. So to back up the view of different levels which change in dominance, Althusser introduces the notion of ‘determination in the last instant’. According to him, while any of the levels can be the dominant one at any particular time, only the ‘economic’ can be ‘determinant in the last instant’. What might he mean by this?
Well, he might mean that it is the ‘economic’ alone that sets the different levels to work in the way they do; thus the ‘economic’ makes the ‘political’ dominant at one time and, say, the ‘ideological’ dominant at another, but that it is never the case that it is the other way about.
But the trouble with this interpretation – for Althusser at least – is that it takes us straight back to what he calls ‘economic reductionism’ – the view that the various levels have no real autonomy, and that in spite of appearances to the contrary, everything is in reality reducible to the workings of the economy, the other levels being just passive agents that are switched on and off at will by the supervening power of the economy. On this view, whatever might seem to be the case on the surface, the ‘economic’ is always the dominant level.
The other alternative interpretation for Althusser is to see ‘determinant in the last instant’ as referring to the limiting rather than the determining role that the economy is supposed to play. Roughly, the various levels develop and combine in a manner which reveals no special properties for the ‘economic’ as such, it is just one of a number of equivalent levels one of which is dominant at one time and another at another time. But should the various levels by chance happen to combine in a special permutation a ‘ruptural conjuncture’ results; the social integument is broken, a revolution occurs, and the whole social structure is recast anew. According to this view then, the ‘economic’ is ‘determinant in the last instant’ because it alone is to be identified with the overall integument of capitalist society. The ‘economic’ would then, of course, appear in two quite separate ways; firstly as an active agent in the social process (where it would be equivalent to the other levels and where it might occur either at the dominant or at the subordinate level), and secondly as a passive limiting condition which does not intervene in the social process but which instead fixes the limits beyond which the process as a whole suffers a cataclysmic breakdown.
The trouble with this alternative explanation is threefold.
Firstly, it does not solve the problem. We are still left with an unstructured list of the different levels with no means of telling which one will emerge as dominant at one time and which at another. Will the ‘political’ level dominate the ‘ideological’ level or will it be the other way about? If the ‘economic’ as ‘determinant in the last instant’ merely plays the role of a passive limiting condition there is no way it can actively intervene so as to make one level dominant at one particular time and a different level dominant at another. So, far from the ‘economic’ then being ‘determinant in the last instant’, it would not be determinant at any instant at all. In short, if the ‘economic’ is just a passive condition, it cannot determine anything – let alone social formations and their historical development.
Secondly, and as a consequence of this, we are left without any real distinction between base and superstructure. The level which is dominant varies from time to time. There can be no ulterior level which structures these ‘partially autonomous’ levels from without, without the reappearance of the heresy of ‘reductionism’. As a result there is is nothing intrinsically more ‘base’ about the ‘economic’ for instance than there is about the ‘ideological’. Now however seriously or otherwise one takes such views, it is quite clear that they have nothing whatsoever to do with Marxism.
Finally in so far as the ‘economic’ is identified with that which is ‘determinant in the last instant’, we have to ask whether it really is the case that the conditions that limit bourgeois society as a whole are in fact to be characterised as ‘economic’ as Althusser claims. And we have to answer that in the sense given to it by Althusser these limits are by no means purely economic; because for him the ‘economic’ is seen not in terms of the relationship of people to the means of production, but – and here again he follows Stalin – in terms of the quantitative level of production and the level of technology. Both Althusser and Bettelheim (who takes his cue here from Althusser) thus explain the phenomenon of Stalin’s Russia in terms of the ‘autonomy’ of the various levels – for them the ‘economic’ thus advanced in accordance with socialism in the 1930s but, for instance, the ‘ideological’ and the ‘political’ lagged behind it. That this view is completely false is not our present concern [12]; given that this is what Althusser means by ‘economic’, is it, indeed, ‘determinant in the last instant’? The only Marxist answer that can be given is that it is not. The essential framework, the integument of bourgeois society is given by the relations of production. The level of material production is relevant of course, but only in so far as it is a means for perpetuating (or failing to perpetuate) these relations. [13]
We should therefore note several things about Althusser’s whole analysis of society. Firstly it is in no way at all a ‘rediscovery’ of Marx’s own position. Secondly it remains completely entrapped within the very categories of Stalinism – the ‘economic’, the ‘political’ etc. – that it purported to criticise. [14] And thirdly it is, quite simply, incoherent. No sense has been given – or, it seems, could be given-to what ‘determinant in the last instant’ might mean without the analysis collapsing into contradictions. Either, on the one hand, we are left with it playing no role at all (a position that Althusser himself dismisses as a retreat to a ‘theory of factors’ or ‘empiricism’); or, on the other, it plays the very ‘reductionist’ role that Althusser devised his theory to escape from. To say that we have nothing to learn from Althusser’s theory of society would, therefore, be a considerable understatement [15]; yet, as we shall see, this is precisely what Alex denies.
Before passing on it is useful to mention briefly what this is a theory of, and for whom and for what purpose it has been formulated. In so far as it is directed against ‘economic reductionism’ it is expressing a truism, a commonplace known to every intelligent Marxist (and certainly known to Marx, Engels, Lenin, Plekhanov, Trotsky and Gramsci – to name but a few) – but expressing it in a much more self-contradictory and pedantic way. But if he is saying more than this (and there can be few serious doubts that he is) then his position is quite fundamentally anti-Marxist. It is in fact a capitulation to all those bourgeois academic political scientists who insist on abstracting ‘political’ happenings from the underlying class struggles of which they are an expression.
The purpose of this operation is two-fold. Firstly it means that one can quite happily admit to the unsocialist nature of Russia’s ‘political’ regime without it affecting the supposedly socialist nature of its ‘economic’ base – i.e. it leads directly to the Eurocommunist view of the matter. Secondly, in separating the ‘ideological’ from the ‘political’ and the ‘economic’, it is but a short step to identifying and separating a distinct layer in society – the ‘intellectuals’ – as the autonomous purveyors of society’s knowledge; a position which, in Althusser’s hey-day, gave sustenance to scholastics and Cultural-Revolutionary Maoists, but certainly not to Marxists.
We shall now look at the latter consequence in some more detail.
(ii) Knowledge, science and ideology. For Althusser knowledge – that is, genuine scientific knowledge – is ‘autonomous’. By this he means two things principally.
Firstly he denies that it consists simply of a summation of ‘facts’ that are given to us from the external world in a series of, as it were, pre-packaged observations. On the contrary, theory is needed first of all. His model here is physical science which is only able to penetrate surface appearances (the ‘facts’ of everyday life and so on) to the extent that it develops abstract theoretical notions. In his view the particular sciences give rise to knowledge by ‘working on’ the ideology-saturated ‘facts’ of pre-scientific experience. However this only produces the particular sciences; it does not tell us how these particular sciences are to be brought together into a single overall scientific world view – and it is the latter that is needed if we are to get knowledge proper. This is identified with historical materialism; it comes about through a similar process in which the particular sciences themselves are now the raw material out of which the supreme knowledge of historical materialism is constructed. Historical materialism becomes, quite simply, the science of all the sciences. [16]
Secondly, the autonomy of knowledge from the facts of everyday experience is paralleled by its more important autonomy from the class struggle. One gets to historical materialism not through the needs and tasks of workers in struggle, but rather through a purely intellectual transformation of the existing sciences. In a manner that reflects – and perpetuates – the separation of theory and practice that characterised the distortions of the various wings of Second International ‘Marxism’ [17], one gets in Althusser the acceptance of the truths of Marxism as something entirely separated from one’s participation in the class struggle. [18] According to this view then, there should be no inconsistency in a Marxist theoretician supporting the existing status quo in practice. [19]
So knowledge, then, is both theoretical in content and autonomous in form. But this now immediately raises the question of the relationship between this ‘autonomous theory’ and political practice. Althusser has two alternatives here.
Firstly he could say (and indeed the early Althusser did say) that the revolutionary political practice of the working class, if it is to be successful, can only be brought about by the power of a knowledge which has been brought to it from elsewhere, from the institutions that specialise in producing it (universities, research institutes and so on). That is why he was so embarrassed by the 1968 student revolt in France – the students, with their demands for an end to the hierarchies and power structures within the colleges, were threatening the fabric of the very structures that were there to help them, whether they realised it or not and whether they liked it or not! There is a simple and accurate characterisation of this viewpoint -elitism. It has everything in common with Quaker dogoodism, Fabian social reformism and Stalinism; but nothing whatever to do with Marxism, for which the self-emancipation of the working class is paramount. There can be no self-emancipation if the working class acts merely as docile bearer of plans and ideas concocted from without. [20]
Secondly he could argue – and after 1968 did argue [21] – that theory could play no such role. Elitism could be avoided by arguing that although knowledge and theory are autonomous and independent of political practice, so too is political practice itself just as independent of knowledge and theory. [22] Now this view, it is true, certainly avoids elitism, but at a huge cost. For where would that leave knowledge, theory, ‘theoretical practice’, or historical materialism – as it is variously called in Althusser’s works? Where, indeed, would it leave the whole corpus of Althusser’s philosophical works themselves? If such theory is unable to influence the class struggle, if the class struggle is autonomous of it and can manage perfectly adequately without it, could someone please explain to me just what the purpose of ‘theoretical practice’ might then be? What justification might there be for pursuing it if it is politically irrelevant? Worse still, by dressing it up in a ‘political’ terminology (like the occasions when Althusser identifies historical materialism with knowledge), by making intellectuals in the groves of academe believe that simply by doing the job they are paid to do, they are doing something politically relevant, it clearly acts as a distraction from the class struggle. Historical materialism, on this distorted logic, turns out to be not a help to the working class but an actual hindrance. Political elitism is pushed out of the front door – but only to let in apolitical scholasticism through the back door instead.
The autonomy of knowledge from the class struggle is a cornerstone of Althusser’s philosophy. But as we have seen it inevitably leads either to elitism or to scholasticism. What is important here is not the precise way Althusser veers between these polarities but the fact that the whole framework itself is at fault. Within it these problems will always recur in one form or another; it follows that to overcome them it is necessary to break with the Althusserian framework altogether. If Marxism is to mean anything at all then, on the one hand, knowledge has to be able to influence the class struggle, and, on the other hand, it must in its turn be influenced and directed by that very same class struggle itself. None of this is possible without a decisive rejection of Althusser. [23]
The necessity of a total rejection of Althusser becomes clearer when we see the way he relates this theory of knowledge to the question of ideology.
(iii) Ideology and the ‘impossibility’ of self-emancipation. In Althusser we have knowledge or science on the one hand and ideology on the other, the two being mutually exclusive. Since ideology implies a distorted and false view of the world, it follows that any person – or any social class – that is infected by it is incapable of conscious self-emancipation. Yet according to Althusser, all but the elite will permanently be under its influence in any possible society:
Ideology (as a system of mass representations) is indispensable in any society if men are to be formed, transformed and equipped to respond to the demands of their conditions of existence. [24]
Socialism can, therefore, never be the product of workers’ self-emancipation; the most that can be hoped is that the masses will blunder their way blindly into a world controlled by a more humane set of rulers. Workers’ aspirations must inevitably be based on a false view of the world:
In ideology men do indeed express, not the relation between them and their conditions of existence, but the way they live the relation between them and their real conditions of existence. In ideology the real relation is inevitably invested in the imaginary relation, a relation that expresses a will (conservative, reformist or revolutionary), a hope or a nostalgia, rather than describing a reality. [25]
The expression of a will or hope is therefore one thing, while the description of reality is quite a different thing altogether. [26]
Now this specific view about the relationship of individuals or social classes to science and ideology is in fact a logical consequence of a more general view about human history, which Althusser sees as a ‘process without a knowing subject’. To see what he means by this we must refer back to the post-Saussurean linguists, among whom, as we mentioned above, the self gets ‘decentred’ – meaning arises only through the relationship of a word with the totality of the other words in a language, and we the individuals who speak the language are not its source but merely its bearers. Althusser accepts this point and extends it further; it is only the totality of social relationships which is the ultimate source of social change or history, and this structure is something more than the individuals- and even the social classes – that compose it. The working class cannot therefore be the subject of historical change – which it would have to be if self-emancipation is to occur – instead it can at best be the passive bearer of the conditions for a ‘ruptural conjuncture’ in the social integument. In other words it is his general view of history as a process which excludes the ‘knowing subject’ that leads to the anti-Marxist conclusions rather than the specific way this is worked out in detail. [27] Thus there can be no doubting the incompatibility between on the one hand Marxism, which is founded on the possibility – indeed the necessity – of the working class becoming the subject of historical change as workers emancipate themselves, and on the other hand a structuralism which decentres the self and abolishes all subjects – whether individuals or social classes – from the historical process altogether. On this question Althusser is entirely consistent (and anti-Marxist); whether Alex is quite so consistent himself is a matter to which we will return in the next section.
The role of Marxism in philosophy
As a result of all this, it is difficult to see what anyone – let alone a Marxist – could gain from the Althusserian system. Althusser’s theory of society is an incomplete and facile collection of remarks about the nature of social formations which singularly fail to protect this understanding from his own twin accusations of ‘reductionism’ and ‘empiricism’. His view of the relation between knowledge and workers’ struggle necessarily leads either on the one hand to elitism, or on the other to a directly anti-political (and therefore conservative) scholasticism. And his structuralist view of history equally necessarily leads to the self-emancipation of the working class being ruled out altogether even as a remote possibility. Far from being something that we can learn from, Althusser’s system is a direct impediment. It fails to provide a framework for solving the problems and pseudo-problems that it sets itself, and, more importantly, it completely fails even to discuss the central question of Marxism in philosophy – how the self-emancipation of the working class can be shown to be both possible and necessary.
Yet for all his objections to Althusser’s specific political – and sometimes philosophical – conclusions, Alex never seriously questions the above framework that leads to these conclusions. So in spite of the generally critical remarks that he makes about Althusser, one is left with the overall conclusion that they are made to preserve Althusserianism – by ditching Althusser’s own conclusions at various points if need be to do so. [28]
At no point does he question the above three foundations of Althusser’s system even though the grounds for doing so are very strong indeed. On the contrary, if anything he endorses them. Thus, Alex tells us that Althusser’s system ‘is a theoretical system of undoubted power and originality, one that responds to the challenge represented by the “revolution in language” by integrating many of its themes into marxism – above all the decentring of the subject which we have already seen at work in the writings of Lacan.’ (p. 71). Alex is also quite explicit on the conclusion to be drawn from this: ‘Althusser is completely justified in arguing that marxism must criticise and reject the teleological structure of the hegelian dialectic and replace it with that of a “process without a subject’” (p. 141). Since what Alex is here applauding is Althusser’s attack on Lukacs it is worth while mentioning what is at issue in this discussion.
Lukacs’s History and Class Consciousness is, (along with Gramsci’s Prison Notebooks) one of the most significant works of Marxist philosophy since Marx’s Capital appeared in 1867. There are, it must be admitted, large problems connected with it. It is at times dense and obscure and it clearly bears the marks of an author steeped more in the idealist traditions of German classical philosophy than the class struggle. Indeed, one sometimes wonders whether Lukacs isn’t perhaps more interested in proletarian revolution as a means to solving the problems of philosophy rather than as an end in itself. [29] It is also weak on the process through which class-consciousness can be developed, leaving it open on the one hand to ultra-left spontaneity, and on the other to ultra-right Stalinism where consciousness derives not from workers’ activity but the dictates of the top bureaucracy instead. [30] But such weaknesses [31], crucial though they are, do not prevent his central philosophical insights from being important achievements in their own right. They do not count as objections to his brilliant critique of the ‘Marxism’ of the Second International, the essence of which was to show that the working class appears, on that view, merely as a passive object which was affected by – but does not in its turn affect – the supposedly supervening laws of history.
By contrast, Lukacs’s own philosophy – in his History and Class Consciousness, at least – is based on the centrality of freedom, of workers’ self-emancipation, for socialism. On that basis it formulates a solution to the problem of how such freedom could be possible given the determinate and structured nature of the social reality that Marx depicts in Capital. The laws according to which capitalism develops are, ultimately, laws founded upon alienated labour – upon, in other words, the working class as a mere object in the production process. But the existence of the working class as a mere object is not just something given; rather it is the result of a definite process in which the energy and creativity of working people is appropriated from them by a social power – that of capital – which, in the process of appropriating this activity makes it appear as a power of itself at the same time. The working class is therefore only a mere object and not a subject (i.e. a conscious agent) in the social process, as a result of the fact that its subjectivity has been appropriated and converted to a power of capital. Conversely the power of capital is on the one hand total (in terms that is of the immediately present laws of society), and yet on the other is itself entirely dependent on the willingness of the working class to go on acquiescing to its own exploitation. Capital is therefore nothing more than the accumulation of past surplus value that is currently appropriating present surplus value; it is not something that can exist independently of the working class – its existence and the continued exploitation of the proletariat are one and the same thing. From this it follows that in order to free itself from capital it is sufficient that the working class should be unwilling to go on as before. The workers will, of course, have to succeed in seizing the factories, in defeating capital’s military might and so on, but ultimately the social power of capital is nonetheless still based on working people. The working class can thus gain its own freedom without requiring anything external to itself to do so.
Lukacs referred to the above process as one in which the proletariat would become ‘the identical subject/object of history’ [32], and while the terminology is steeped in the traditions of German classical philosophy, it is entirely Marxist in content. In a quite remarkable way Lukacs recreated in 1919–21 something very close to Marx’s own view as developed in his Grundrisse in 1857 [33], but which was unknown to Lukacs at the time. For Lukacs the working class is reduced to being a mere ‘object’ in bourgeois society; it becomes a ‘subject’ when, in the course of the socialist revolution, it takes power. But what is there to take power over? Essentially the activity of the working class itself and the fruits of this activity – the products the workers make and the social relations that surround this production. So the passage from bondage to freedom is not just the passage from the workers as ‘objects’ to the workers as ‘subjects’, but rather the creation of the proletariat as the ‘identical subject/object of history’. Lukacs solves the problem of whether, in the creation of a truly communist society, there would be anything beyond the limits of the power of the proletariat, by demonstrating that everything that needs to be changed depends ultimately on the activity – and therefore also the consciousness – of the working class itself, and thus no such impediments exist. ‘The proletariat as the identical subject/object of history’ is the formulation he uses to encapsulate this insight.
Several things should be noted about this analysis.
Firstly, whether it is right or wrong it is definitely a piece of Marxist philosophy – or, to put it more accurately, an intervention of Marxism into philosophy. It is, quite simply, a defence of the possibility of proletarian self-emancipation against claims to the contrary. If that isn’t the main task of Marxism in philosophy, then we can only reply that the objection must be based on a distorted view of ‘Marxism’, one which does not see as its main task the socialist revolution.
Secondly, leaving to one side Gramsci’s various insights [34], it remains – sixty years and more later – one of the most developed and sustained interventions of Marxism into philosophy to date. There is, quite simply, little that remotely compares with it. Whatever criticisms can be made of what else it fails to do – many of them justified – they cannot detract from this central achievement.
Finally, any Marxist who wants to reject Lukacs while still remaining a Marxist should note very carefully what they will have to do. First of all they will have to replace Lukacs’s theory of how the self-emancipation of the working class is possible with another theory which has the same effect. Only at that point will they be able to explore the ramifications of their own theory in order to show how it succeeds in areas which are undeveloped (or weak) in Lukacs. To reject Lukacs while failing to produce such an alternative, or – even worse – to do what Althusser does: reject Lukacs and actually deny the very possibility of finding such an alternative at all (as for instance in his rejection of the proletariat as a possible subject of the historical process) is to reject the terrain of Marxism altogether.
Yet this is exactly what Alex praises Althusser for doing. [35] Certainly the objection that Althusser himself has to Lukacs on this matter is, given his politics, easy enough to comprehend. For him socialism comes about only when the social process stumbles into a ‘ruptural’ ‘structural’ ‘conjuncture’, one concerning which the working class – blinded by the permanent and all pervasive influence of ideology – is necessarily ignorant and therefore incapable of internalising as its immediate aim and goal. The consistency between Althusser’s anti-Marxist politics and his objections to Lukacs’s philosophy are therefore clear and obvious for all to see. But why, we may ask, does Alex follow him here? The logical end point of Althusser’s philosophy is his anti-Marxist politics; Alex has no inclination at all to follow him there, so why does he start on the same road? Alex’s reply in his book is that it is Althusser himself who is being inconsistent, that if only he had followed through the political implications of his philosophy he would have had to reject his flaccid Eurocommunist politics altogether. From what has been said already I have made it clear that I regard the evidence to the contrary to be overwhelming, so why does Alex take this position?
The first thing to be said is that for such an important argument it gets remarkably little attention from Alex. There is – amazingly – no argument from him to directly defend the position that revolutionary politics actually stands in need of an Althusserian-based philosophy. Much of what there is, is instead centred around the question of Stalinism and the connection between the Stalin phenomenon in Russia in the 1930s and the politics of the French CP today on the one hand, and Althusser’s philosophy on the other. Although these arguments are in the defence of a rather weaker thesis, they are all Alex gives us and therefore all we have to go on.
In denying the claim that Althusserianism was a mere form of scholasticism, Alex insists that its consequences were as much political as they were theoretical (p. 53) (whether that means that it could not have been a species of scholasticism is, however, another matter). [36] Fine. But then another question immediately arises: what were the political consequences? Crucially, were they liberal or revolutionary? For Alex, ‘“... the autonomy of the Communist Party intellectuals against the dominance of the politicians” ... is at the heart of Althusser’s enterprise’ (p. 53). Or again ‘... the politics at stake involved in the first instance a declaration of intellectual independence from the Communist Party’ (p. 59). But before we can go further we need to know what this independence was to be used for. In itself as a general principle the slogan ‘independence from the party for the intellectuals’, involves, of course, petty bourgeois, not Bolshevik politics. That is not to say that it is not to be supported in specific instances, but we can be reasonably explicit about the nature of these instances. It would be justified to advance this slogan for instance, in the case of small cadre of intellectuals who, finding themselves moving rapidly leftwards within a reformist party, and realising that they will have to split it to form a revolutionary party, but who also need sufficient time to be able to split with the largest number of the old party with them. [37]
We need hardly add that such were not the conditions surrounding Althusser’s theoretical and intellectual intervention in the 1960s and 1970s. Indeed at no point did he move outside the terrain of the politics of Stalin. Stalinist politics in the west since the war has had two main components; firstly the establishment of CP-run bureaucratised trade unions, secondly the construction of Popular Front type class-collaborationist electoral alliances. Each component has been needed, but the advance of the one has always undercut the other and therefore there has been some hostility and tension between them. These traditions were already firmly established in the 1930s with the various twists and turns of the Comintern; in the 1970s they took the form of the permanent coexistence of what were called the ‘Stalinist’ and the ‘Eurocommunist’ wings within the CPs (though each could claim with equal force a pedigree going back to Stalin). Althusser was in no way outside this tradition. His critique of Stalinism was essentially liberal in form and his politics were fairly and squarely the politics of Eurocommunism. In fact he is clearly – and rightly – regarded by that movement’s leaders as one of their main theoretical gurus. [38]
There has never been any question of an alternative and revolutionary view of politics coming out of Althusser, a fact which Alex cannot – and does not – deny. In which case we can only conclude that the declaration of intellectual independence which Alex characterised above as Althusser’s first step, is at the same time also his last step. The philosophy embodied in the notion of ‘the autonomy of theory’ or in that of the ‘specificity’ of ‘theoretical practice’, therefore leads in a straight and unbroken line to the liberal platitudes of the Euro-communists. Alex’s view that ‘Althusser has never permitted the logical consequences of his theoretical positions to take him beyond the ranks of French communism’ (sic) (p. 57), is therefore purely and simply false; Althusser is – on this question – entirely consistent, entirely liberal/reformist, and entirely wrong. [39] He removes one error in Marxism: economic reductionism; but only to replace it with another: that of the ‘autonomy of levels’ and ‘practices’, which, via the notion of ‘theoretical practice’ leads directly to liberalism. Althusser gets out of the frying pan of third period Stalinism, but only to end up in the fire of Popular Frontist liberal reformism. Neither at a philosophical level nor at a political level could this be registered as any kind of an advance – notwithstanding Alex to the contrary. In the end then, his attempt to marry Althusser’s philosophy with Leninist politics is reduced to an empty wish.
But how could it have been it have been otherwise? Althusser did not appear out of thin air and his philosophy did not follow from any logic of pure thought – politically he was a product of the French Communist Party. Now the PCF, if it ever was a revolutionary party, had certainly long ceased to be one by the time Althusser joined it in 1948. It became a mass party in the Popular Front period in the 1930s (its membership growing, for instance, from 131,000 in May 1936 to 285,000 in December of the same year), on the basis of arguing for class collaboration with the ‘progressive’ (i.e. anti-fascist) sections of the bourgeoisie. It grew very rapidly again during the period of the resistance. The courage and self-sacrifice of tens of thousands of its comrades (one estimate has it that 60,000 died) earned it great respect, but the new members were won not on the basis of class politics but on crude anti-German chauvinism – the principal slogan of the CP resistance was ‘Chacun son boche!’ (‘Let everyone kill their own Hun!’). After the war the growth in membership continued, but again on the basis of very right wing politics. The PCF emerged as the largest party in the post-war election, but instead of using its popularity to strengthen working class gains, it installed de Gaulle as prime minister, urged workers to increase production, opposed strikes, and generally restored a bourgeois stability that would have been difficult if not impossible to achieve without it. In foreign policy the PCF’s chauvinism took on a particularly vicious form: Algerian supporters of national liberation were denounced as ‘Hitlerite killers’ and in Vietnam the PCF was content to remain part of a government that was slaughtering tens of thousands in order to preserve French colonial rule. [40]
It has to be said that any set of political ideas that could develop or flourish in such an environment without coming into immediate (or very rapid) conflict with the PCF as a whole – and breaking with it – could only be ‘Marxist’ in a most shrivelled and distorted form. Yet this was just the environment in which the Althusserian – version of ‘Marxism’ did flourish. As Marxism, therefore, it was compromised from the beginning and built on the shakiest of class foundations; with the most yawning gap between the practical politics supported and the residual ‘Marxism’ of the rhetoric that accompanied them. [41]
At the same time the question still needs to be answered – why did class collaboration need the rhetoric of (an albeit emasculated form of) Marxism? Why Marxism and not liberalism for instance? To answer this fully would take a volume in itself: all we can do here is to enumerate a few points. Firstly the traditional French bourgeoisie was compromised by its supine (and even collaborationist) stance to the Nazi occupation; it therefore became more difficult for it to present its own class interest as the interest of all classes in the nation. As a consequence, amongst the stratum of intellectuals easy-going liberalism gave way to other alternatives: existentialism, Marxism, etc. [42] Secondly, after the war, French capitalism was re-established in a much more state capitalist form – leading industrial corporations like Renault were set up or nationalised by the state, and private industry increasingly participated in and followed the overall plans for economic development put forward by the state and its micro-economic planners (the process known as ‘dirigisme’). The latter process spawned a whole stratum of state employees from the most senior planner and administrator to the lowest clerk and kindergarten teacher, and – crucially – a network of universities and technical colleges to train them. As in many of the emergent third world countries, a ‘Marxism’ that combined populism, nationalism and above all the state direction of industry, was certain of a degree of popularity amongst these strata. This was especially so in a period of rising working class struggles where some kind of reform perspective seemed necessary if a viable and harmonious society was to be created. At the same time the anno mirabilis of 1968 suddenly offered a a totally different vision to a whole generation, one based on self-emancipation, with workers’ power in the factories and student power in the colleges. But the vision had no enduring organisational form to attach itself to in the absence of a viable revolutionary party. The students of the ’60s became the relatively privileged lecturers of the ’70s. Under the guise of contributing to an ‘autonomous’ ideological struggle – and citing Althusser and Mao in support of this – they were able to dress up their abandonment of the principle of workers self-emancipation in suitably ‘Marxist’ terms. [43]
Such was the soil in which Althusserian ‘Marxism’ grew and flourished, and it has important conclusions for how we explain the ‘crisis in Marxism’ in the 1970s. Socially, politically and theoretically its links with the traditions of genuine Bolshevism were – to say the least – very tenuous indeed. Explaining this crisis must therefore, as a result, take the form less of trying to understand the supposed cogency of the arguments that were developed against it, and much more of stressing how weak and accident-prone were its foundations. By presenting his arguments the way he does, Alex puts it the other way about, making it seem that what needs explaining is not the rise but the crisis of this ‘Marxism’. In doing so he gives a quite undue emphasis to the significance of the structuralist and post-structuralist thinkers, when in reality they were not so much the cause as the occasion for the ‘crisis in Marxism’. Alex here falls into the trap of dwelling excessively on the internal and purely intellectual history of ideas, insufficiently emphasising the material and social forces that, in Gramsci’s words, make various currents of thought ‘sedimented in life’ in various ways.
All the same it is true, that while continuing to accept Althusser’s basic framework, Alex does have substantial criticisms of particular parts of the completed system. The problem here however is not only that the criticisms are generally of the various gaps and silences in Althusser rather than the shaky foundations themselves, but also the very suspect credentials of the things that he sometimes selects to supplement Althusser with. The most important of these concern science and scientific methodology, and it is to this that we now turn.
 
Marxism and scientific method
In Althusser there is problem about science and how it is to be characterised. On the one hand he insists on the autonomy of each of the sciences in the sense that no criteria external to them are said to be needed for them to be validated. But on the other he wants a firm distinction between science and ideology. Alex is quite right to say that there is a conflict between these two principles, that without such criteria any corpus of ideology can put itself forward as a science and get away with it. The problem then arises of where these criteria are to be found.
Althusser is pushed in this direction because one consequence of the ‘revolution of language’, as we saw earlier, is the denial of the ‘complicity of the subject with the object’. The ‘immediate knowledge’ of the traditional or empiricist theories is banished, and therefore the possibility of using immediate experience as an external court of appeal vindicating one or another science is banished along with it. This forces him to agree that there can be no going outside the internal structural unity of each of the given sciences – they need no such external guarantees. And in that case the science/ideology distinction breaks down; since there are no procedures for separating the two, any attempt to do so will be illogical – a conclusion readily embraced by the more consistent of post-Althusserians such as Hindess and Hirst. It will be possible for any system of thought – so long as it is internally coherent – to present itself as ‘science’, even when its content is ideological, mystical, or even simply false. Astrology, phrenology and the like – plus the whole panoply of the world’s mutually contradictory religions – would have an equal status to that of, for instance, modern physics.
If that were the case, Alex concludes, the possibility of objective knowledge would have disappeared, along with the process of ‘evaluating discourses from the standpoint of their relation to the truth rather than merely concentrating on the historical question of the conditions under which they are produced’ (p. 171). This is a conclusion that he wants to resist; science must provide ‘access to reality in a manner which an ideology cannot’ (p. 175). But in that case there is a need for genuinely usable criteria for distinguishing the two apart in practice. Where are they to be found? How is the ‘defence of objective knowledge’ to be accomplished?
It is to be accomplished, he tells us, ‘from the standpoint of materialism’, which he understands as asserting that ‘reality exists independently of discourse’ (p. 175). [44] In particular it is to be cashed in terms of the correspondence that objective knowledge is said to require between discourse and reality. ‘There is, however’, Alex correctly diagnoses, ‘a deeper difficulty with this concept, which springs from the denial of immediate knowledge: what sense is there in calling truth the correspondence of discourse and reality if we have no access to reality except through discourse?’ (p. 176). Is Derrida not right when he claims that this must involve an endless and fruitless ‘search for a “transcendental signified” which will halt the endless “play” of language’ (p. 177)?
Alex’s answer to this problem is as follows. It does not matter that we have no immediate access to objective truth, he tells us. It is sufficient that the notion of it can ‘function as a “regulative principle”, so that discourses [are?] evaluated in terms of the degree to which they approximate to the truth’ (p. 178). And in the absence of immediate access to objective knowledge, ‘their degree of approximation can only be established relative to one another, in contexts, that is, where two or more discourses compete with each other’ (p. 179). Alex does not ‘believe that reality “in itself” is unknowable, merely that our knowledge of it is fallible’ (p. 179).
However this does not solve the problem at issue at all – it merely shifts it elsewhere. For how is this comparison between discourses to be achieved? How are we to find out which discourse is closer to the truth?
It is at this point that Alex invokes the support of the philosophy of science of the school associated with von Hayek and Popper, and in particular its more modern and sophisticated follower, the late Imre Lakatos. [45]
To understand the Popper/Lakatos/Callinicos position, one must first see what it is a reaction against. For Popper the reaction is against inductivism – the view that science develops by first of all seeking out whatever correlations are to be found by observing nature (in and out of the laboratory) and then generalising this by making the assertion that (until proved otherwise) all similar cases will also be assumed to be so correlated. [46] However, philosophers of science from the 18th century to the present day have uncovered a series of related contradictions in this methodology [47], and these profoundly influenced Popper. For him scientific observations cannot therefore prove, confirm or otherwise positively vindicate a scientific hypothesis; but instead they must only be allowed to eliminate or falsify one – or some – of a range of possible candidates for scientific consideration. Science then proceeds not so much by accumulating positive truths as by progressively eliminating those hypotheses that definitely are not true.
Unfortunately for Popper, the observations upon which such falsifications depend are not – and here the structuralists are entirely right – simply given to us. We obtain them, and we do so not in a vacuum but by taking for granted certain things without which they would not count as observations for us at all. Observations require instruments (even if only the rudimentary instruments of the human eye, ear etc.), and for them to count as instruments for us we have to presuppose the truth of certain hypotheses before we can use them. The sensory stimulation that, for instance, we get through the human eye, only counts as providing us with access to the outside world because we accept certain general hypotheses in optics; if these were false then we might have to withdraw the claim that they were observations of the outside world at all. If we have to begin without presupposing the truth of any hypothesis whatever then we shall have to abandon both science and observation altogether.
The consequence of this and other problems [48], is to leave scientific method indeterminate: observations are needed to falsify hypotheses, but so also are hypotheses needed before something can actually be accepted as an observation in the first place. Where can the vicious circle be broken?
Lakatos’s refinement of Popper at first sight might appear to have overcome these problems. For him: (i) it is developing sets of theories or ‘research programmes’ not individual theories that are the things to be appraised and compared; (ii) these research programmes contain a protective belt of ‘auxiliary hypotheses’ which surround a ‘hard core’ and which are themselves periodically replaced when the programme comes up against a ‘refutation’ so as to preserve the core itself; (iii) research programmes are not rejected simply when they find it hard going to replace the protective belt fast enough but only when an alternative research programme performs this task in a superior manner; (iv) research programmes are assessed not simply by how easily they eliminate empirical anomalies but also by how fruitful they are in predicting novel facts; (v) those that perform these twin tasks easily and in abundance are deemed ‘progressive’, those which find the going harder and harder are likewise deemed ‘degenerating’; and finally (vi) since this judgement is essentially a historical one, it is generally only possible to pass it on the basis of previous rather than current debates in the sciences. [49]
While this account is undoubtedly much closer to real science and its history (of which Lakatos was a much more perceptive observer than Popper), it still retains some of the essential confusions of the Popperian methodology. Two of these are worth looking at in particular.
Firstly it is by no means clear how this methodology avoids the logical problems of falsificationism. The latter is only necessary if common-sense inductivism is impossible – Popper, therefore, was quite right to see the so-called paradoxes of induction as the starting point for his own methodology. [50] Yet it has also been quite clearly shown in recent discussions that the conditions which make inductivism impossible are exactly the same conditions that make falsificationism impossible too. [51] From this one can only conclude that either falsificationism is unnecessary (because induction will suffice), or that it is impossible – neither of which is much help to Popper or Lakatos.
Secondly, even if it were conceded that Lakatos had correctly outlined the process of development and change in the sciences, the question still remains of whether this process can only be explained in terms of ‘objective truth’. Following Lakatos, Alex concludes that the criteria of ‘progressiveness’ and ‘degeneration’ for scientific research programmes ‘must be taken as the means through which their degree of approximation to the truth is established’. This is because ‘Without the concept of truth methodology lacks a rationale’ (p. 184).
But does it? There seem to be good reasons for thinking not. Indeed the history of the sciences reveals a very different picture.
Take the science of optics for instance. At the beginning of the 18th century Newton’s theory that light consisted of a stream of particles was challenged by an alternative theory that it consisted instead of waves, which was developed by the Dutch physicist Huygens. The superiority of Huygens’ theory (or research programme if you like) soon became generally recognised due to the much better way it handled the question of the refraction of light. It eliminated empirical anomalies and predicted novel facts in an overwhelmingly better manner. But did this mean that it ‘approximated to the truth’ better than Newton’s theory? At one level it obviously did – if all that is meant by that phrase is that it predicted novel facts and eliminated empirical anomalies better. But in that case claiming that approximated to the truth better seems to be saying or adding nothing more at all about it. If ‘approximating to the truth’ is to be significant, therefore, it must refer to something more substantial than that – saying rather that reality in itself is more appropriately describable in the terms of Huygens’ rather than Newton’s theory, i.e. reality “really is” more wave-like than it is corpuscular. But that is even more unsatisfactory. Physics, after all, simply refused to stop developing even after Huygens, and in the first part of this century it turned full circle and reinstated (via the quantum theory) the corpuscular view of light – and indeed has since then moved further on still. [52]
Such examples (and they are the norm rather than the exception in the history of the sciences) show how wrong it is to identify decisive advances in scientific knowledge with an increasingly closer resemblance to how nature “really is” in itself. For on that account if the move from the corpuscular to the wave notion of light is an advance, then the move back again to the corpuscular notion cannot also be considered an advance too. Yet this is precisely what was the case. To insist otherwise leads to some quite absurd conclusions; for instance, a 20th-century scientist believing in photons and the quantum theory of light would have to conclude that the move away from Newton’s view of discrete packages of light to Huygens’ view of its wave-like form was actually a scientific regression. Yet this scientist will know very well that it was not, and to see how he or she knows this will point us in a more positive direction.
The fact is that on the basis of the wave theory it was possible to construct or perform a whole range of tasks that were not possible without it: microscopes and telescopes could be constructed, for instance, with powers and limitations that could be calculated in advance. In other words what made it an advance was that it acted as a tool through which the human power over nature was – at least potentially – increased. [53] And this increased power was an absolute advance; irrespective of the ultimate fate of the theory that generated it; it bequeathed to us a permanent gain. It did not matter in the least that this theory too, in its turn, was to be replaced with another (and completely opposed) theory that would give us still further gains. In short, if scientific advance is seen in terms of its consequences for increased potential human power, one can gain an immediate insight as to why the sciences are always advancing (so long as previous knowledge is never actually lost). It is nothing whatever to do with the supposed fact that nature “really is” more like the categories of the theory that is doing the advancing rather than those of the theory that it is replacing, for we may well, as we have seen, be forced later to advance science still further by employing yet other theories whose categories will more closely resemble those of the original theory itself. Only by accepting the view that scientific progress is to do with increases in human potential power can one avoid the absurdities of the position that Alex advances, a position which would condemn whole chapters of the history of scientific advance as “regressions”.
This error goes under many names – idealism, theoreticism etc. – but ultimately it derives from an attempt to completely separate theory from practice. In the sciences it consists of a single-minded identification of science with the body of theories that it currently contains, and a consequent down-playing of scientific practice, both in its general form – experimental and laboratory practice – and in the more particular and spectacular technological form it has taken in the epoch of industrial capitalism.
In fact the whole discussion of a theory’s ‘correspondence with nature’ is a complete confusion anyway. What we possess is not nature in a reflected or partially reflected form, but science, an irretrievably human product which cannot be completely separated into its theoretical and practical components. We cannot deal with the adequacy or inadequacy of theory except in a context that is provided by practice – in the widest sense of that word. [54]
Another example from the natural sciences can best illustrate this point. Consider the motion of a body on a plane. According to Aristotle’s physics its motion will only persist in the presence of a continuing force, otherwise it will slow down and stop. For Newton however it is the other way about; the persistence of motion goes along only with an absence of forces acting on it. Now looked at purely from the point of view of which theory appears to reflect reality more accurately, it is obvious that Aristotle wins hands down. In the real world friction-less motion does not exist; or to put it another way, the real world is populated by Aristotelian bodies, not Newtonian bodies. For a body to retain its motion in the real world we must continually supply a force to it. Why then was Aristotle rejected in favour of Newton when this theory so obviously, so immediately and so accurately seemed to reflect physical reality?
The answer is that simply because Aristotle’s theory was nothing more than a reflection of reality, it only categorised it in various ways; it provided us with no means for penetrating and transforming it – either in the laboratory or embodied as technology in society. By contrast Newton’s theory did just that – and spectacularly successfully too. You cannot use Aristotle to solve for example a practical problem in ballistics, but you can use Newton. As a result scientists, for the purposes of science, became prepared to put with the more complicated view of material objects that followed from this choice; seeing them first of all as ideal frictionless entities, but ones whose behaviour is then modified under all circumstances by the effects of friction in the real, concrete world around us.
The primary task of science is to penetrate and transform reality, whether in the cosmos, society or the test-tube. This is the essential rationale behind seeing it as a tool. Of course scientific theories will have to reflect reality too, if they are able to. But to imagine that this is the only, or the primary role of scientific theory, is to confuse description with the search for causal mechanisms. The latter is the essence of science to which the former can sometimes be subordinated.
In short then, to locate the main aim of science in the ‘reflection of reality’ is a major error. Firstly, it leads to the conclusion that some advances in science – like the wave theory of light in the 18th century -were actually regressions. Secondly, if in the past scientists had not been prepared to subordinate considerations of how accurately theories reflected reality to how effective they were in penetrating and transforming that reality instead, then we might today still be stuck with Aristotle’s ponderously accurate – but totally useless – reflections. Science is not nature herself speaking to us in tones that can only be relatively more or relatively less polluted by human thought and language, but a thoroughly human product in which our understanding of the world cannot be completely separated from our penetration and transformation of it.
But even if this were not so, the theory-as-a-tool view would still obtain. For unless a theory or a set of theories reflect(s) the whole of reality – an impossible task – one is still forced to choose which parts, aspects, mechanisms of reality one chooses to reflect in one’s theory. And here what it is one wants to get out of reality is crucial. For if the aims of one class are diametrically opposed to those of another, then it will only rarely and exceptionally be the case that the aspects of reality that dominate the concerns of the one will be the same for the other.
And this immediately brings the discussion back to Marxism again. Opposed classes with opposed interests will not necessarily share an equal interest in all theories and practices. The ruling class magazine The Economist and our own Socialist Review, for instance, while both being in some sense ‘scientific’ and sharing certain common ground, equally obviously differ too. The real world is such an immense complexity of different interrelated strands of things that the question must always arise to to which of these strands – even where they are correctly identified – we should pick out, and this choice, in its turn, will be determined by the opposed practices that are being aimed at.
This does not mean that Marxism and the social sciences of the bourgeoisie are so sealed off from each other that we cannot use the former to refute the claims of the latter. We can for instance show that the interests of the working class can only be solved by socialist revolution, and that it is in the interests of all other strata – with the exception of a section of the bourgeoisie – that this should indeed occur. To see Marxism as a class science is therefore not in any way to diminish its persuasive power, to reduce its claim to universal historical significance, or to remove its power to deflate the similar – and false – claims of bourgeois science in this respect. It is merely to take seriously the irreconcilability of the classes.
Stressing the necessity for the unity of theory and practice is not just an empty slogan, but something essential if Marxism is to avoid the scholasticism and theoreticism of the bourgeois methodologists of science such as Popper and Lakatos. This scholasticism, which forces science to appear in a completely false and contemplative form, not only is incapable of rendering an account of how progress is possible in the sciences, but it also closely reflects the similarly scholastic (and also incoherent) philosophy of Althusser. Alex’s acceptance of the central tenets of both these schools of thought therefore make huge and unnecessary concessions and should be vigorously opposed.
 
For the self-emancipation of the working class
We can conclude this discussion where we began it.
We revolutionaries must learn from whatever sources we can, irrespective of the political credentials of our mentors. There is nothing to be ashamed of in that; Marx used official British government sources in the 1860s, Tony Cliff the Coventry Engineering Employers’ Federation Blue Book in the 1960s. But two cautions are necessary. Firstly one has to take care to remove the ideological chaff from the wheat; secondly one has to take care to ensure that there is some wheat there in the first place. And the problem with philosophy is precisely that it is not concrete, there is little to be gleaned that is not already conditioned in some ideological form or other; we cannot very easily plunder it for ‘facts’ that we can then put to our own advantage. With this in mind we are forced to conclude that we do not have a great deal to gain from contemporary French philosophy of language or Lakatos’s philosophy of science, and nothing at all to gain from Althusser.
Worse than that; in giving a qualified endorsement to the philosophies of Lakatos and Althusser, Alex is giving the green light for the attack on Marxism and the philosophy of the self-emancipation of the working class. Yet this is advanced not on the basis of coherent argument but on the basis of Althusser’s philosophy, which is incoherent and contradictory, and Lakatos’s, which is incapable of solving the very problems of explaining scientific advance that it sets itself to solve.
If this seems dismissive of great thinkers, then I must admit it is intended to be – reading Althusser is of use only in so far as it inoculates the reader and helps she or he refute him. This in no way is to advocate philistinism; the main thrust of my argument here is that there is indeed a role for Marxist philosophy understood as explaining the conditions and circumstances under which the self-emancipation of the working class is both possible and necessary. Yet carrying on a discussion within, for instance, an Althusserian framework, actually precludes this from taking place. This is the real case against Alex; he accepts this framework and as a result not only fails to mention the self-emancipation of the working class but also accepts a philosophy that makes it impossible in the first place.
There is at least one alternative starting point for Marxism in philosophy: for all its faults it is to be found in Lukacs’s History and Class Consciousness. Lukacs at least understood that the role of Marxism in philosophy was to conceptualise and defend the notion of the collective self-emancipation of the working class, even if the way he did it is open to criticism. It would be far far better to revive this than to disinter the rotting corpse of Althusser.

Notes
I would like to thank Ian Birchall, Richard Bradbury, Pete Goodwin, John Molyneux and John Rees who all looked at, and made useful comments on an earlier version of this article; though the responsibility for the draft itself is mine alone. Page references in the text are to Alex Callinicos, Is There a Future for Marxism (Macmillan 1982) price £15 (h/b).
1. Saussure himself, however, must be absolved from any responsibility for these later thinkers’ views. He himself does not argue that language is ‘autonomous’, and in fact explicitly argues for a dimension of language (the ‘diachronic’) which stresses its historical character – the way it changes through time – which is largely ignored by Levi-Strauss and the contemporary school, shunted to one side, or dismissed as something that will eventually be explained by an extra specially deep (and of course unchanging) structure. (See, for instance. C. Levi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology, Harmondsworth 1972, p. 21, for an example of this at work). For a discussion of the differences between Saussure and the post-structuralists cf. S. Timpanaro, Structuralism and its Successors.
2. Levi-Strauss, quoted in Alex Callinicos, op. cit., pp. 34-35.
3. Quoted in ibid., p. 35.
4. Cf. ibid., pp. 46-49.
5. Such a conclusion is implicit in J. Hoffman’s Marxism and the Philosophy of Praxis (London 1975) and D.-H. Ruben’s Marxism and Materialism (London 1978), to name but two recent examples.
6. Marx notes two sorts of error in this respect. Firstly the tendency (most notable, he thought, in Hobbes) to reduce language and thought to being ‘nothing but phantoms of the material world more or less divested of its sensual form’ (The Holy Family, Moscow 1956, p. 173); and secondly the tendency to ignore the irreducibly social component of language: ‘sensuous nature for man is, immediately, human sensuousness ... presented immediately in the form of the other man sensuously present for him ... The element of thought itself- the element of thought’s living expression – language – is of a sensuous nature. The social reality of nature, and human natural science, or the natural science of man, are identical twins’ (Collected Works, vol. 3, London 1975).
7. Most notably in the first of his Theses on Feuerbach.
8. K. Marx, Precapitalist Economic Formations (ed. E.J. Hobsbawm), London 1964, pp. 87–88.
9. Lack of space prevents further discussion of this point here. However two elements of what a Marxist critique of structuralist theories of language would include, and which are referred to below, can be briefly mentioned. Firstly there would be the need to challenge the assumption (most obviously, perhaps, in Foucault), that irreconcilable classes can somehow exist alongside a relatively harmonious language that is shared by all classes. This point will be discussed with respect to Stalinism in note (10) below. Secondly, as will be become clearer toward the end of this article, an adequate conception of science – and of the language in which its theories are expressed – will necessarily have to include reference to elements outside of any given linguistic structure of difference relationships. Above all it will later be argued that any attempt to understand science solely within the linguistic (or for that matter mathematical) form in which its theories are expressed, and in which no reference to the practical results of these theories are made – any such attempts are bound to fail.
10. According to the Stalinist view, however, in which knowledge and ideas are just passive imprintations of the external world on us, it does indeed follow. For Stalin: ‘language registers and fixes in words, and in words combined into sentences, the results of thoughts ... and thus makes possible the exchange of ideas in human society’ (J.V. Stalin, Concerning Marxism in Linguistics, London 1950, p. 16) – a view which closely parallels that of Locke for whom: ‘The comfort and advantage of society not being to be had without communication of thoughts, it was necessary that man should find out some external sensible signs, whereof those invisible ideas, which his thought are made of, might be known to others’ (J. Locke. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Book 3, chapter 2, section 1). According to such a view thought and language are prior to the social relations between people, and naturally enough it falls foul of any theory that denies this to be the case. Both structuralism and Marxism do deny this to be the case and they are both right to do so.
It is worth mentioning here, however, that unlike Locke, Stalin on occasions also argued that language was in fact a product of society. But the latter view got submerged due to his political preoccupations – in his concern to stress the supposed abolition of classes in Russia in the 1930s, it was important to refute those who saw the class struggle in language as real and possible, just in case it had unfortunate consequences so far as contemporary Russia was concerned. The most important of these thinkers was probably V.N. Voloshinov, whose major work, Marxism and the Philosophy of Language (Seminar Press, 1973) argued cogently for the Marxist rather than the Locke/Stalin position – a fact that no doubt helped to seal his – and other co-thinkers’ – fates before Stalin’s death squads in the purges.
The early Lenin, however, also shared Locke’s basic approach. In Materialism and Empirio-Criticism language and thought are seen as passively reflecting a pre-existent reality outside language (though unlike Locke, Lenin did not see this reality as consisting of sensations). But Lenin, however, later decisively rejected the Kautskyite world view of which this book forms a part. It led to ‘tailism’, Menshevism etc., which precluded a section of the working class from consciously separating themselves off into a revolutionary party so as to act as a distinguishable vanguard within the class. This move is reflected in Lenin’s increasing identification of socialism with workers’ power from below as expressed in workers’ councils, Soviets etc., and is registered at a consciously philosophical level in his Philosophical Notebooks of 1914 (Collected Works, vol. 38). (For a fuller discussion of these issues see P. Binns, The Marxist Theory of Truth, Radical Philosophy 4, 1973; A. Carlo, Lenin and the Party, Telos 1974; and J. Molyneux, Marxism and the Party, London 1978, chapter 3).
11. Cf. my The Triviality of Althusser, Radical Philosophy 7, 1974 and Ideology, The Intellectuals and the Working Class: Althusser and Gramsci on Science and the Class Struggle, in D. Bell, Understanding Ideology, London 1982.
12. It has however been adequately refuted by Alex Callinicos himself in his Maoism, Stalinism and the Soviet Union, International Socialism 2:5, 1979.
13. The fact that the integument of society must be seen in terms of ‘the human being itself in its social relations’ rather than the level of material production was expressed by Marx in the Grundrisse (London 1973), p. 712: ‘When we consider bourgeois society in the long view and as a whole, then the final result of the process of social production always appears as the society itself, i.e. the human being itself in its social relations. Everything that has a fixed form, such as the product etc., appears as a moment, a vanishing moment, in this movement. The direct production process itself here appears only as a moment. The conditions and objectifications of the process are themselves equally moments of it, and its only subjects are individuals, but individuals in mutual relationships, which they equally reproduce and produce anew.’
14. The categories – the ‘economic’, the ‘political’, the ‘ideological’ etc. – are less important in themselves than in the separation that is enforced between them. For the fact of the matter is, that the Stalinism of the purges and the first five-year plans on the one hand, and the Stalinism of the Popular Front and Eurocommunist liberalism on the other, both need this separation. For the former it allows them to claim that the ‘economic gains’ of the 1930s outweighed any political or ideological losses. For the latter it permits them today to claim that the balance must now be redressed the other way. Both groups thus work with a crude ‘balance-pan’ model in which terror and economic development are traded-off one against the other. Both groups are thus equally undermined by the Marxist insight that the only base for socialism is the direct appropriation of the means of production by the workers themselves in the context of a genuine workers’ state based on genuine workers’ councils.
15. Not only is the theory confused and empty, but the fact that it is so obscured from immediate view by the barrage of Althusserian jargon, makes it difficult sometimes to see quite how empty it all is. A veritable Althusser-speak has arisen in which a word or phrase often denotes the very opposite of what common sense would usually take it to refer to. We have already seen examples of this at work – ‘determinant in the last instant’ thus seems to mean either ‘determinant at every instant’, or, more probably, straightforwardly ‘indeterminate’. Another example is that of the ‘structure in dominance’ which Althusser claims characterises his system. Yet this system is one in which, as we have seen above, the ‘economic’ is – to all intents and purposes – just as completely autonomous as it is in the empiricist theories that Althusser claims to attack-and in which, as we shall see (notes 18 and 43 below), so too is the ‘ideological’ just as completely autonomous. Here then ‘structure in dominance’ seems to mean ‘non-structure’ and therefore ‘without dominance’.
Finally Althusser has the notion of ‘overdetermination’. He ‘explains’ this notion as follows: ‘Even within the reality of the conditions of existence of each contradiction, it is the manifestation of the structure in dominance that unifies the whole. This reflection of the conditions of existence of the contradiction within itself, this reflection of the structure articulated in dominance that constitutes the unity of the complex whole within each contradiction, this is the most profound characteristic of the Marxist dialectic, the one I have most recently tried to encapsulate in the concept of “overdetermination”’ (For Marx, London 1969, p. 206).
Does this really say anything more than that the ‘levels’ interact, that they only exist as far as they interact, and that the most important ‘level’ changes from time to time? Is this really as ‘profound’ as Althusser gravely announced it to be? More importantly, if the different ‘levels’ have their own (albeit partial) ‘autonomy’, then this can only mean that they are underdetermined by the ‘structure’ of which they are a supposed part. In the end then, if ‘overdetermination’ means anything at all it signifies ‘underdetermination’ instead.
16. Two things should be noted here. Firstly Althusser is, as we shall see below, quite right to believe that ‘facts’ do not constitute a realm which is independent from the theories that sustain them (though here he merely repeats what Bachelard had in his turn learnt from the French tradition in the philosophy of science that springs from Pierre Duhem at the beginning of the century). Secondly, after 1968, Althusser withdraws these claims for historical materialism as the science of all the sciences – but fails to put any clearly worked out alternative conception in its place.
17. Cf. L. Colletti, Bernstein and the Marxism of the Second International in his From Rousseau to Lenin (London 1972).
18. It is important to note that here, as elsewhere, when it comes to ‘autonomy’, it is not partial but total autonomy that Althusser argues for.
19. As Rudolf Hilferding, a leading theoretician of the Second International, put it in the preface to his Finance Capital: ‘It is one thing to recognise a necessity, but quite another to place oneself at the service of that necessity’.
20. Cf. note (29) below for further discussion of this point.
21. Althusser’s change of line is well documented in the latter part of Alex Callinicos, Althusser’s Marxism (London 1976).
22. If one were to take this seriously it would lead to a very crude vision of political practice. While purging the latter of knowledge or theory might still seem to leave for instance, the insurrection of October 1917 intact, one should not forget that there could have been no October without the July days when the Bolsheviks ‘consciously’ argued that insurrection would be premature, or without the events in August when the Bolsheviks ‘consciously’ supported Kerensky – but ‘like a rope supports a hanged man’.
23. The point is argued at greater length in my Althusser and Gramsci ..., op. cit.
24. L. Althusser, For Marx, op. cit., p. 235.
25. Ibid., pp. 233–34.
26. The counterposing of these two leads Althusser – and, as we shall see, Alex too – to accept that science must always exclude the ‘expression of a will’ from the ‘description of reality’. Science is thus conceived of in an exclusively contemplative form. We shall see below in our discussion on Lakatos the contradictions that follow from their attempt to do so.
27. Cf. A. Callinicos, Is There a Future ..., op. cit., pp. 65–67.
28. Ibid., pp. 71–80.
29. In particular in section II of his major essay in History and Class Consciousness, Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat. Marx too, in the period 1842–43 had an ambiguous but basically similar view. He tell us: ‘Clearly the weapon of criticism [by which he means left-Hegelian philosophy] cannot replace the criticism of weapons, and material force must be overthrown by material force. But theory also becomes a material force once it has gripped the masses’. Note that it is left-Hegelian philosophy here that grips the masses- not vice versa. And concerning human emancipation he claimed: ‘The head of this emancipation is philosophy, its heart the proletariat. Philosophy cannot realise itself without the transcendence of the proletariat, and the proletariat cannot transcend itself without the realisation of philosophy’ (Collected Works, vol. 3, pp. 182 & 187). Again we have the proletariat as the means to the end of the realisation of philosophy – and a means that gets transcended in the process.
Thereafter however – and here Marx is much less ambiguous than Lukacs – the self-emancipation of the proletariat becomes an end in itself, a position which is conclusively established along with the first full formulations of historical materialism in 1845.
30. Alex Callinicos, Is There a Future ..., op. cit., pp. 51-52, makes a great deal of this point. It is only fair to point out, however, that the openness of Lukacs to such an interpretation was due to his failure to absorb Bolshevik politics into his theory adequately. It was not due to his ‘historicist’ philosophy as such (a point that we discuss in note 35 below).
31. The most important weakness from our present point of view, concerns Lukacs’ conception of Marxism itself. He identifies it with the pursuit of the Marxist method, which is quite excessively detached from the theoretical and factual content in which it should be grounded. This in turn leads to a Marxist ‘philosophy’ which appears in a free-floating form, able to co-exist with a whole variety of political forms. This, in turn, permits him to develop his various philosophical insights (some, like his ‘methodologism’ above, mistaken; others, as we shall see, important and valuable), while completely ignoring the theory of politics with which this philosophy must be connected. This is the reason at the theoretical level why he was able to zig-zag so rapidly between ultra-left and ultra-bureaucratic politics in the 1923–25 period.
32. Cf. G. Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness (London 1971), pp. 2–3, 40–41, and the essay Reification, op. cit.
33. Marx put it as follows: ‘Through the exchange with the worker, capital has appropriated labour itself; labour has become one of its moments, which now acts as a fructifying vitality upon its merely existent and hence dead objectivity ... It is the process of this differentiation and of its suspension, in which capital itself becomes a process. Labour is the yeast thrown into it, which starts it fermenting ... the mere subjectivity of labour as a mere form has to be suspended, and labour has to be objectified in the material of capital. The relation of capital, in its content, to labour, of objectified to living labour ... – this relation, where capital appears as passive toward labour ... – can, in general, be nothing more than the relation of labour to its objectivity, its material ...’ (Grundrisse, op. cit., p. 298).
34. Cf. A. Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks (London 1971), pp. 321–472.
35. Alex, following Althusser, also dismisses Lukacs on account of his supposed ‘teleology’. The claim is nonsense; teleology – explaining the world by reference not to causes but to intentions and purposes instead – was characteristic of medieval theology in which the happenings on this world were seen as the inevitable result of God’s grand design. No such comparable picture merges in Lukacs’s History and Class Consciousness. The socialist revolution is there seen as a task for the proletariat, not as a preordained inevitability. Certainly Lukacs believed that the revolution was a necessity for the working class, that the workers must make it, and so on. But the necessity derives from the objective inadequacies of bourgeois society and the ‘must’ from the immediate and the ultimate interests of the proletariat, but whether the workers will do what they ought to do is another question altogether. There is no suggestion that this involves an inevitability following from some preconceived schema of world history (Cf. G. Lukacs, op. cit., pp. 38–39). It is easy, however, to see why Lukacs is mistakenly accused of ‘teleologism’ – his failure to go beyond what the proletariat has to do, his total failure to develop a theory of politics which both flows out of the philosophy and connects it with the current day-to-day struggles of workers, is ultimately the culprit here. But this has nothing whatever to do with ‘teleology’.
As a matter of fact a rather stronger case could be made against Marx himself on this score, from one or two of his isolated – and best discounted – remarks, in comparison with whom Lukacs emerges rather well. For instance in the Communist Manifesto there is the notorious passage which claims: ‘The development of Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and appropriates products. What the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces, above all, is its own gravediggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable.’
36. In general, scholasticism is highly political – and political in a distinctly conservative way, of course. To place theories within a scholastic mould is to render them incapable of being used to change things; which is why Scholasticism proper was the preferred ideology of the feudal landowners in the High Middle Ages.
37. Within our own political tradition the most recent example of such a situation was the one surrounding the formation of the Canadian International Socialists out of a left social-democratic current in the mid-1970s.
38. Santiago Carrillo, General Secretary of the Spanish Communist Party and the leading apostle of Eurocommunism, thus, in his major work, Eurocommunism and the State, singles out Althusser for special praise. He justifies the whole strategy of withholding support for workers’ struggles on the basis of the need for a prior ‘ideological struggle’ – i.e. the attempt to convince sections of the clergy, the professoriat and the civil service of the good faith of the CP. And he specifically quotes and uses Althusser’s notion of ‘Ideological State Apparatuses’ to legitimate this process (Cf. S. Carrillo, Eurocommunism and the State, London 1977, p. 45).
39. Alex has a secondary line of argument in favour of Althusser here, and it goes as follows: (i) the French CP ignored what Marx and Engels actually said; (ii) this permitted them to adopt a reformist perspective, whereupon (iii), along came Althusser and insisted on a ‘return to Marx’, and, (iv), since Marx was a revolutionary this can only have been a good thing even if Althusser didn’t do it too well. He quotes Jacques Ranciere, former collaborator of Althusser on Reading Capital in support: ‘Reading Capital presented theses which demanded a political critique of the Party: the rupture with the evolutionist conception of history, the affirmation of the discontinuity of modes of production, the affirmation that the laws of the the dissolution of a structure were not those of its functioning, the radical orginality of the problem of the transition, all that led logically towards a denunciation of the CP’s economism, of the conception of a peaceful road to socialism and of “true democracy”’ (quoted p. 57).
Two very obvious points must must be raised in reply.
Firstly, Althusserianism by no means meant a return to Marx. The system itself – because of its contradictory and empty form – served rather as a barrier of confusion between the leftward moving elements in the CP on the one hand and Marx on the other. Nor is this all. Because Althusser’s system is not Marx’s, he was compelled to reject more and more of Marx’s writings. Beginning with Marx’s early works (with their unfortunate references to alienation and self-emancipation), he ended up by rejecting pretty well everything that Marx ever wrote. In fact in the end the only “work” of Marx he was prepared to endorse were the Marginal Notes to Adolf Wagner’s Textbook on Political Economy. Marx’s Capital was rejected as an excessively “humanist” work, to be replaced by ... a few scribblings in the margins of a rather minor textbook! Is this really being seriously advanced as the much-heralded ‘return to Marx’?
Secondly, we have to ask: why was it that the Carrillo right-wing Euro-communist interpretation of Althusser was so much more influential than the left-wing Ranciere interpretation? The answer isn’t hard to find. The fact that modes of production might be ‘discontinuous’ did not impinge on the daily class struggle in France in the non-revolutionary 1970s – there were no immediate opportunities to smash the state – but the opposition to ‘economism’ most certainly did: it gave the green light time and again for Carrillo’s followers in France to refuse support for workers in struggle. i.e. Althussser’s position did not, concretely, lead the CP to the left “logically”, as Ranciere would have it, but to the right. (Unfortunately we can see at work here the endemic disease of philosophers – rationalism. It consists of forgetting that in real history all ‘logics’ are concrete rather than abstract.)
40. Cf. I. Birchall, Workers Against the Monolith (London 1974), pp. 12, 20–22, 28–29.
41. There was also a more genuine and revolutionary left Marxism that underwent a related crisis at the same time. For a Marxist explanation of this crisis, cf. C. Harman, Crisis of the European Revolutionary Left, International Socialism 2:4, Spring 1979.
42. Perhaps the clearest and most striking picture of this crisis in France is is to be found in Sartre’s trilogy, The Roads to Freedom.
43. Space prevents us looking at the Althusser phenomenon outside France; but in the English-speaking world the puny forces of the various CPs involved have generally ensured that it has been, in the main, an academic phenomenon rather. In and out of France they have been helped by Althussser’s notion of ‘Ideological State Apparatuses’. By making ideology seem as though it must always be to do with the state (even when it is institutionalised through quite other agencies – private, church, municipal etc.), and crucially, by separating it from the class struggle, and finally by asserting the need for a ‘prior ideological struggle’ in these institutions before that class struggle can be effective, it has allowed non-political, or even quite right wing, intellectuals to dress up their writings as ‘political’, ‘progressive’ and so on.
44. Before proceeding further one should note how wide is the definition of ‘materialism’ given here. In fact it is so wide that even that paradigm of classical idealism, Bishop Berkeley, turns out to be a materialist! For he too believed that what makes some ideas objective and others not is that the former are copies of ideas in God’s mind (and are caused in us by God’s will), while the latter are not. In that case it will be true, even for Berkeley, that there is a realm of being which ‘exists independently of discourse’ – or of human thought in general for that matter. Yet if we are to call Berkeley of all people a ‘materialist’, who, one might ask, is not a materialist? One would be hard pressed to find examples of anyone denying ‘materialism’ in this sense. But this only goes to show how trivial the whole enterprise has become. It is a great pity that Alex here follows – and enthusiastically endorses – the empty slogans of the post-Althusserian Anglo-Marxist realist school in general and D.-H. Ruben in particular (For a critique of the latter see P. Binns, Marxism and Materialism, Capital and Class, no. 9, 1979). If ‘materialism’ is now to include such classic idealists as Berkeley, Hegel etc., one can only conclude that proclaiming oneself to be a materialist is an empty incantation, a mantra uttered in ritualistic obeisance to St Marx – but quite empty of real scientific content.
45. Alex’s debt to the latter is considerable and acknowledged as such – Alex’s Althusser’s Marxism was even actually dedicated to him, much to the astonishment of a generation of students at LSE who were perplexed (to put it at its mildest) by such an honour being bestowed on a principal instigator of repression against them in the late 1960s. Popper and von Hayek too have been the philosophical storm troops of the extreme right, being associated with the school in economics most identified with out-and-out laisser-faire capitalism – from von Mises at the beginning of the century to Milton Friedman today. Popper himself only got in to the philosophy of science in the first place because of his hatred for the Marxists and Freudians in Vienna and because he wanted a general methodology for the sciences that would rule Marxism and Freudianism out of court altogether, so that one would never need to pay attention to the content of what Marx and Freud actually said – a conclusion that he clearly followed himself in his illiterate, stupid, and now quite generally discredited works on Marx and Hegel (e.g. The Poverty of Historicism and The Open Society and Its Enemies in particular).
46. Popper’s position was first fully developed in his The Logic of Scientific Discovery, first published in 1934.
47. The process began with Hume’s sceptical analysis of induction, and was taken much further by Hempel, Goodman and others in this century. However, none of these thinkers went so far as Popper in concluding that this required the abandonment of all inductivist methods.
48. The definitive and conclusive refutation of Popper has been given by P.K. Feyerabend, a Californian anarchist philosopher of science, in his Problems of Empiricism (in Colodny (ed.), Beyond the Edge of Certainty), and Problems of Empiricism II (in the Pittsburgh Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 4). However Feyerabend still – to a large extent – shares the same contemplative model of science of Popper (and so too do Lakatos, Althusser and Alex himself for that matter – as we shall see below), and his more positive proposals – for instance in his Against Method (London 1975) – suffer accordingly.
49. Lakatos’s position is set out in his The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes (Cambridge 1978).
50. This is implicit in his The Logic of Scientific Discovery, and is made more explicit in his The Demarcation between Science and Metaphysics, in Conjectures and Refutations (London 1963).
51. See in particular my The Supposed Asymmetry between Falsification and Verification, in Dialectica, vol. 32, No. 1 (1978).
52. In microphysics in more recent years there has been to a certain extent, a re-integration of particular and wave-type theories in the form of quantum-field theory; a move that has accompanied the search for a general field theory in physics in accordance with Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity.
53. To avoid misunderstandings it is worth while pointing out that we are using ‘human power’ in a wide sense here. It covers at one end the more spectacular technological achievements of modern industry, and at the other the results of any novel experiment even when confined to the laboratory – the human powers that we augment in the laboratory are no less powers over nature for being confined to that small part of it we entrap in our test tubes there.
54. This view was expressed (and to a certain extent shared) by Francis Bacon for whom: ‘Human knowledge and human power meet in one ... that which in contemplation is as the cause is in operation as the rule’. Which explains why Marx regarded him so much more favourably than later, more mechanical materialists: ‘The real founder of English materialism and all modern experimental science was Bacon [for whom] ... the first and most important of the inherent qualities of matter is motion, not only mechanical and mathematical movement, but still more impulse, vital life spirit, tension ... The primary forms of matter are the living, individualising forces of being inherent in it ... In Bacon, its first creator, materialism contained latent and still in a naive way the germs of all-round development. Matter smiled at man with poetic sensuous brightness ... In its further development materialism became one-sided. Hobbes was the one who systematized Bacon’s materialism. Sensuousness lost its bloom and became the abstract sensuousnss of the geometrician ... Materialism became hostile to humanity.’ (Holy Family, op. cit., pp. 172–73) The same sentiments were of course expressed in a more condensed form in Marx’s First Thesis on Feuerbach: ‘The chief defect of all hitherto existing materialism (that of Feuerbach included) is that the things, reality, sensuousness, is conceived only in the form of object or of contemplation, but not as human sensuous activity, practice, not subjectively’.
 



Against the Self-Images of the Age
Alasdair MacIntyre
Duckworth, £3.45
‘“How good to grow middle-aged, conservative and self-satisfied like me” — points to the danger: the silting up of the poetry of adolescence into the prose of bourgeois middle age ...’ (from Breaking the Chains of Reason: one of the essays MacIntyre suppresses in this volume). He continues
‘Two images have been with me throughout the writing of this essay ... The one is of J.M. Keynes, the other of Leon Trotsky ... The one the intellectual guardian of the established order ... The other providing throughout his life a defence of human activity, of the powers of conscious rational human effort. I think of them at the end, Keynes with his peerage, Trotsky with an icepick in his skull. They are the twin lives between which intellectual choice in our society lies.’
Eleven years later MacIntyre, weighed down with professorships and a disreputable stint as policeman of students at Essex, acknowledges ‘a particular debt to ... the Ford Foundation’ for financing him; as though it were they and not the Ford workers who created the surplus product at Fords in the first place. This, and his willingness to lend intellectual respectability to CIA financed publications (editorially in Survey, and through contributions to Encounter), makes his own choice all too obvious.
In suppressing the above essay and Notes from the Moral Wilderness MacIntyre leaves us with a distorted image of himself: he was never quite the sterile academic that he tries to portray here. How was it that this situation arose? Partly it can be explained by his choice of a lifestyle and a set of roles which were compatible only with the ‘Keynes’ MacIntyre rather than the ‘Trotsky’ MacIntyre. But this only tells us of his objective need to change his self-image, not the subjective means by which this was achieved, nor the contradictions generated in doing so. But even in the days when the Trotsky image dominated the Keynesian, crucial gaps were left in his marxism, which he was later to fill in in essentially anti-marxist ways. By concentrating his attention on these areas, the ‘intellectual guardian of the established order’ triumphed over the revolutionary trotskyite. MacIntyre never came to grips with the contributions to marxism made by Gramsci, otherwise he might have been sufficiently self-aware to intervene in the process of his own self-degeneration. It is important for us however to understand the nature of this process both for our own sakes and so that we can benefit from the very real contributions to marxism that MacIntyre has made.
The revolutionary marxist correctly places the need for communism in the logical consequences of human self-activity. MacIntyre, like Lukacs before him saw this very clearly, in the late 1950s. But unlike the Lukacs of History and Class Consciousness, his eclecticism prevented him from translating this into a total cultural critique of the reifications of bourgeois thought. Instead lapsing into dualism, he tried to separate man from nature, insisting that self-activity was a premise only for the former. He wrote that, while ‘Physical movements are certainly susceptible of mechanistic explanations’, nonetheless ‘to conceive of ourselves as acting to change society is at once to recognise the inapplicability of the machine model to ourselves’. His failure to appreciate the historical nature of the natural sciences, his insistence on their ‘objective’ and historical properties, was to become the instrument of dominance of Keynes over Trotsky in MacIntyre’s divided self.
In the early 1960s MacIntyre wrote a series of papers (none reprinted here), attempting to come to terms with this dualism. He finally became convinced that the positivism which he saw as so appropriate for the study of nature, must be equally valid for the study of man. Thus we see him finally arguing that what is an appropriate methodology for one is an appropriate methodology for the other (in his essays on psychoanalysis, on the causes of action, and on the idea of a social science), and on this matter his arguments are plausible if not remarkable. But because he has mistakenly taken it on trust that the positivistic analysis of nature is correct, he falsely feels the need for a positivistic sociology rather than a historical physics. The use of these illusions satisfies his need to have done with marxism. Even so the ghost of Trotsky haunts him; for all his significant insights (upon which his academic prestige rests) are surreptitiously borrowed from a marxist perspective, and are inconceivable without it. Genuine marxists thus have much to learn from several essays in this collection : about the dialectical relationship between societies and moralities and their changes through history (chapters 15 and 16), about how the only substantial problem in ethics is whether Marx is right over the existence of class society (chapter 13 on Hume), about the more general methodology of marxism which approaches ideas not in terms of their abstracted ‘validity’ but in terms of the material life of those who hold them; (chapters 2 and 10) and finally about marxism itself (chapters 5-7 on Lenin, Stalin and Deutscher’s view of Trotsky).
For years the CIA-financed Encounter exploited MacIntyre as the intellectual meat in their otherwise turgid cold-war sandwich; so too MacIntyre, adhering in his middle-age to the image of Keynes, continues to take out the trotsykite skeleton from the cupboard of his past whenever genuine intellectual progress is called for. This inner schizophrenia expresses itself externally in several remarkable and necessary contradictions to be found in this book. Thus on p.84, in his essay on Goldmann’s Hidden God, he still retains the marxist insight that understanding is relative to the nature of the way you intend changing the world, and cannot be achieved by contemplative reflection : ‘Both (tragic and dialectical thought) know that one cannot first understand the world and only then act in it, How one understands the world will depend in part on the decision implicit in one’s already taken actions. The wager of action is unavoidable’. But less than a page later he asks of the interpretation of Pascal ‘Is what Goldmann says true? Partly this is an empirical question to be answered by close historians of Jansenism ...’ (p.85), thus ignoring the earlier view that it is only participants in the attempt to change the world rather than those who, like ‘historians’, contemplatively sit on the sidelines, who are capable of such understanding in the first place. His desertion of revolutionary politics occurred at about the same time that he wrote this paper, thus ensuring the domination of the contemplative side of the contradiction, but at no point has MacIntyre been able to completely eliminate the other side, for without it he would be academically castrated. Again his objections to Winch in chapter 19 are based on taking the empirical conclusions of piecemeal bourgeois sociology seriously (Goffmann p.219, Leach p.221, and Goldschmidt p.222) even in the absence of a total theoretical framework in which to embed these fragments, while elsewhere he is perfectly clear that such a methodology is impossible: ‘The individual object or action is identifiable only in the context of the totality; the totality is only identifiable as a set of relationships between individuals.
Hence we must move from parts to whole and back from whole to parts. Goethe, Hegel, and Marx all grasped versions of this truth about the human sciences’ (p.84).
Finally compare the methodology implicit in the essay entitled Ought (chapter 15), with his banal attempt to justify the trivialities of anglo-american linguistic philosophy. The former contains a superb account of the history of the concept ‘ought’, of the historical conditions that gave a changing life to a changing concept, and of those conditions which eventually robbed it of any significance whatsosever, such that ‘... no honest man would want to continue to use “ought”’ (p.156). Such considerations inspired him to call this discussion What was Morality? in his more marxist days. Seven years later it enters the province of moral philosophy itself, dressed up in the innocuous title Ought. But its method is clear: the historical examination of the conditions which make the use of a concept significant within a given society, and it’s lesson is equally clear: it is dishonest to deal in concepts which are ‘dead’. Therefore historical criticism of concepts has to precede doing anything else with them such as ‘analysing’ them. But on p.94 he contradicts this. Crucial problems of ideology ‘... cannot be answered until philosophical problems about meaning have been resolved’. MacIntyre’s work still has any philosophical significance only to the degree that he ignores this.
 



Throughout the 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s, third-worldism was an important current on the left. It was a response to events of enormous significance; more than half of humanity threw off the shackles of colonialism or the remnants of the old pre-capitalist social structure after the Second World War. In many cases new leaders appeared speaking the languages of ‘socialism’ or ‘humanism’; they would harness the toiling masses behind the efforts of the state and state-planned economic growth would take place, eliminating poverty, exploitation, inequality and suffering. Some, like Mao in China, Castro in Cuba and Ho Chi Minh in Vietnam saw themselves as part of the orthodox Communist movement; others – Sukharno in Indonesia, Ben Bella in Algeria, Nkrumah in Ghana, Nasser in Egypt acknowledged a distinct, but closely related ‘socialist’ perspective.
We disagreed with both varieties of ‘socialism’. We argued that socialism is about self-emancipation, not doing things ‘on behalf of the masses; the agency for socialist change can only be the working class and not the existing state apparatus however benevolent (indeed we argued that the workers would have to smash that selfsame state apparatus); and we argued that the end result of third worldism – whether accompanied with or without the rhetoric of ‘socialism’ – would be state-capitalism not socialism.
Third-world socialism was, however, immensely influential in its time. This was hardly surprising; quite unprecedented gains took place in the third world between 1950 and 1970 – life expectancy outside Europe and North America went up to fifty years from a figure that was in the low thirties in 1950, starvation and famine were eliminated for thousands of millions in countries like China and the establishment of important new industries and the elimination of illiteracy seemed to be common trend in a majority of them.
Today however, third-worldist ‘socialism’ has undergone severe shocks and crises. Some of its most pervasive variants such as Maoism have all but disappeared, carrying with them the disappearance of tens, perhaps hundreds of thousands of the western socialists who followed them out of left wing politics altogether. Montreal, Milan and New York were cities which in the early 1970s could each boast of several thousand Maoists involved in active socialist politics at home. Today these activists have completely vanished and their organisations have collapsed along with them.
Certainly it would be wrong to explain the collapse of Maoism and kindred doctrines purely in terms of what has been going on in China or elsewhere. What we in the SWP have referred to as the downturn in working class struggle here at home has, of course, been an important factor in determining these events. All socialists have found the going much tougher since the mid-1970s; no organisation, in these circumstances, could expect massive growth. But while our own much smaller current has managed to sustain itself, and even grow a little, the Maoists and their ilk have fallen flat on their faces. Much of the responsibility for this comparative failure must rest on the fundamentally flawed vision of the road to socialism that these strategies involved.
The collapse of third-worldist socialism has not simply been a product of the economic failing of the third world as a whole, or even parts of it. It is certainly true that many countries that received starry-eyed attention in the 1960s – China, Cuba, Vietnam etc. – have experienced a number of acute economic problems more recently, but this hardly explains their fall from grace since. In the case of China and Cuba, relative to the world market as a whole, their economic performance has in fact improved in the past fifteen years.
Rather, it is what has happened to the latest generation of third world ‘socialist’ states that is in question. While China, Cuba and Vietnam went on to construct state-directed economies after their respective revolutions, the more recent examples – those which have taken place after the return of the world system to crisis in 1974 – seem to have exhibited a completely different pattern of development. In the southern African revolutionary states – Angola, Zimbabwe and Mozambique – and in Nicaragua, revolutionary regimes, often established after a long and bitter guerrilla war, have performed a remarkable about-face and have ended up with a series of very significant accommodations with western capital.
It is not a matter of this country or that failing to live up to the expectations of its followers. If that were all that was involved it might still be possible to retain the general strategy with a number of more minor qualifications (’If only the Gang of Four had won in China ...’, ‘If only Vietnam had not been so devastated by war ...’ and so on). It is more serious than that. The whole third-worldist socialist alternative has been posited on the assumption that whatever mistakes the leaders of these revolutions might have made, they were at least embarking on a course that was distinct from that of the western nations. And it is precisely that which the recent history calls into question.
This article is an attempt to answer the question why it is that countries that underwent revolutions in the latter part of the 1970s – Angola, Mozambique and Nicaragua in particular – have been unable to create an alternative path of economic and social development; why the classic state-capitalist road which in the past was taken by Cuba, China etc. no longer seems open in the way it did when the world economy was still participating in the long post-war boom; why, in spite of original intentions to follow such examples, they have not come to fruition.
 
The post-1974 revolutions:
(i) Nicaragua
The Nicaraguan revolution, which brought the present Sandinista regime to power in 1979, was an event of great significance. For many years previously it had seemed that Latin America as a whole was destined to lurch further and further to the right; extremely repressive military dictatorships had come to power in the southern cone smashing the workers’ movement in their path, first in Brazil, then Uruguay, then Chile and finally Argentina. Elsewhere a mixture of civilian and military regimes continued a depressingly familiar diet of traditional right-wing politics serving the interests of the major landowners and the multinationals, interspersed with the occasional nationalist or populist junta, which, however, was usually just as overtly anti-working class in practice. Not since the 1960s, when the success of the Cuban revolution inspired millions in Latin America had hopes been raised so high as when the Sandinista revolution sharply reversed this trail of defeats for the left.
Furthermore the Nicaraguan revolution was qualitatively different from the Cuban revolution in two crucial respects. It involved an incomparably higher level of struggle; the dictator Somoza’s National Guard did not fall apart in 1979 as did Batista’s army in Cuba in 1958, rather it required a mass insurrection that involved hundreds of thousands of people. Secondly, it was the workers in the cities who were the main protagonists of the Nicaraguan revolution. Until the workers became involved in the insurrectionary struggles the Sandinista guerrillas were both marginalised and containable by Somoza. [1] In Cuba however, while many workers approved of and consented to the new Castro regime in 1959, in no way did it come to power as a result of their struggles. On the contrary, what struggles did take place occurred hundreds of miles from where most workers lived – in the mountains of Oriente, the plains of Camaguey etc. The urban revolution was conducted by guerrillas who were not workers but predominantly de-classed intellectuals and peasants. [2]
As a result of a US-organised blockade which cut off the 80 percent of Cuba’s trade that had hitherto gone to the Americas, Castro was forced within two years of the 1959 revolution to transform Cuba into a state-capitalist country. Banks, industry and commerce were taken over by the state, to be followed by major tracts of land within the next two years. This did not come about as a result of a preconceived plan by Castro; on the contrary, faced with the American blockade there was little choice in the matter. While the Cuban revolutionaries originally conceived of their revolution as ‘neither capitalist nor communist’, but something in between, an ‘olive green’ revolution, the fact remains that the determination of American governments to destroy the regime – by diplomatic isolation, economic blockade and even military invasion – forced Castro to build a militarised state-run economy that survived through bilateral trade and aid deals with the Russian economy. [3]
In spite of certain differences between Cuba and Nicaragua, there was a fairly universally held belief in the early 1980s that this pattern of development could easily be repeated in Nicaragua. It was a belief which Mike Gonzalez also gave expression to in the pages of International Socialism as late as 1982. Concerning the future of the Nicaraguan revolution, he asked:
Who, then will be the beneficiaries? It seems unlikely that the old bourgeoisie will reassert themselves; many have already left the country and for the rest the prospects of recovery in the midst of a world recession that has brought even wealthy Mexico to the brink of disaster seem very remote.
This leaves the Sandinista state. Increasingly it will be forced to take upon itself the task of capital accumulation ... the consolidation of the state capitalist alternative becomes increasingly the likely outcome of the process. [4]
With the benefit of two further years of hindsight, we can now conclude that this judgement was at best premature. Five years after the revolution more than 60 percent of the economy is still in private hands [5], and the regime is doing everything in its power to placate the bourgeoisie. Members of Cosep (the Higher Council for Private Enterprise) previously imprisoned have been released and prosecutions of Cosep members for economic sabotage have been cut right back. [6] The political party (the Christian Democrats) and newspaper (La Prensa) of the bourgeoisie have been defended by the regime, and in spite of the difficult military situation, elections have been brought forward to permit the Christian Democrats to contend for office. [7]
Nicaragua’s ambassador in Washington, Antonio Jarquin, could quite plausibly complain recently that ‘it is very difficult to convince the White House that we are a coalition government with a public sector not very much bigger than the one you have in Britain.’ [8]
Why has this happened? The crisis in which the Sandinista regime found itself and which was seen as pushing Nicaragua further along the road to state capitalism has not gone away these past two years. On the contrary it has got worse. The foreign debt has grown to $3 billion [9] (more than $1,000 per head of the population, worse than that of Brazil) and the American blockade has tightened; the most recent exclusions now include the importation of bananas and landing rights for Nicaraguan airliners. [10] From 1981, largely under pressure from the American government, loans and aid from the major international agencies have also been withdrawn – $30 million from the Inter-American Development Bank in 1981-82, $2.2 million from the IDB in 1983 and $40 million from the World Bank in the same year. [11]
Worst of all have been the damaging effects of the war against the Sandinista regime carried out by the CIA and the ‘contra’ guerrillas. Up to 15,000 contras have been operating within the country, and quite substantial areas in the North, the South and along the Atlantic seaboard have been occupied by them. [12] They have killed more than a thousand people and wreaked many hundreds of millions of dollars worth of damage in sabotage on oil terminals, bridges and government installations over the past year. [13] Production of crucial crops like coffee – a major source of foreign revenue – have been very badly affected too; earlier this year there were reports of the war preventing the harvesting of as much as 50 percent of the crop. [14] On top of that the mining of all of Nicaragua’s ports by the CIA was preventing other export crops from being sold; whether or not that continues the additional insurance costs that shippers will have to pay will go on eating into the value of Nicaraguan produce into the foreseeable future. [15]
Not surprisingly defence currently absorbs fully a quarter of Nicaragua’s GNP and could well grow further. The Sandinista National Supply Commission’s Internal Report predicts that The aggression will continue, probably with greater intensity, damaging production and requiring greater allocations for defence’ and foresees no chance of repairing the damage to production ‘until the end of the decade.’ [16]
The Nicaraguan working class is being made to bear the continuing burden of defence, repairing a ravaged economy and debt repayment. Wages are to be frozen (including even the minimum wage of around £30 per month) while prices of basic commodities are set to rise. The National Supply Commission thus foresees stagnating or falling workers’ living standards for the rest of the 1980s. [17] Naturally enough, genuinely independent trade unions are completely incompatible with this state of affairs and the regime has instead created a monolithic state-run union federation, the CST (Sandinista Workers’ Central) to which no rivals are permitted. When workers have attempted to set up their own independent organisations they have been instantly crushed – last year for instance six dockworkers from the major port, Corinto, were jailed for the ‘crime’ of merely trying to remove their union from the CST. [l8] On the one hand, then the Sandinista regime owes its very existence to the mass workers’ struggles and insurrection that overthrew the Somoza dictatorship, but on the other hand it owes its future viability to the extent to which it can now incorporate and exploit the working class – and crush it when all else fails.
This abrupt change in its relationship with the working class is of central importance to socialists. But it is important to stress that the Sandinista government itself has never, in fact, claimed to be constructing socialism in Nicaragua. From the very beginning it has been quite clear that its goals were rather those of national economic development within the context of the world economy. Only the personal property of the Somoza dynasty was to be socialised and run, so it was seen, for the benefit of the nation as a whole. It was not the first stage of a movement against capitalism and in favour of the workers in general. Quite the opposite in fact; some of the strongest backers of the move to take over the Somoza-owned sector of the economy came from within the rest of the capitalist class itself. It was they who lost out when the Somoza regime just happened to award contracts exclusively with Somoza-owned companies – particularly in the several hundred million dollar bonanza that followed the reconstruction of the capital, Managua, after the 1972 earthquake, when the bourgeoisie actually took to the streets in protest against their own exclusion from the gravy train. [19]
Yet this lengthy tradition of the accommodation of the Sandinistas to the Nicaraguan bourgeoisie and the ease with which they moved against the working class in office is neither surprising nor unique. For parallels we need look no further than Cuba and Castro’s 26 July Movement up to 1960. But in the latter case the alliance with the old bourgeoisie was definitively broken thereafter. The working class remained excluded from power, but were now directly subordinated to the economic needs of the new state bureaucracy instead of the old bourgeoisie. In the case of Nicaragua as well all the preconditions seemed to be present for what Tony Cliff has called ‘deflected permanent revolution’ [20] – the rise to power of a state capitalist ruling class on the back of a popular revolution in which the working class has become subordinated to a layer of petty bourgeois intellectuals. Yet that is not what has happened so far. As we have seen, in spite of the severity of the crisis, both economic and military, that has beset the Nicaraguan revolution, this by now classic trajectory along the path of a ‘deflected permanent revolution’ towards state capitalism has itself been interrupted. It is as though the mass insurrectionary struggles of the Nicaraguan working class in 1978–79 have now been doubly ‘deflected’ – first of all in 1979–82 when the Sandinista regime rather than the workers took power, and once again in the period since then. The second ‘deflection’ has taken the Nicaraguan workers no nearer to gaining power of course; rather it has served to entrench the power of the old Nicaraguan bourgeoisie itself.
 
The post-1974 revolutions:
(ii) Mozambique and Southern Africa
The collapse of the Portuguese dictatorship in 1974 was a direct product of the growing strength of the liberation movements in its African colonies. In Angola, Guinea-Bissau and in Mozambique the military strength – and above all the popular base – of the movements fatally undermined the Portuguese empire. Frelimo’s struggle in Mozambique was of immense significance, not just in the old empire but elsewhere in southern Africa as well. It led on the one hand to the Portuguese revolution of 1974–75 itself, on the other hand to the successful guerrilla struggle of ZANU-PF in Zimbabwe. Mugabe’s bases were all in Mozambique and victory would have been impossible without them. Despite crippling attacks from the air and on land by the white settler Rhodesian forces, the new revolutionary government of Samora Machel in Mozambique kept on aiding the Zimbabwean guerrillas until final victory was achieved.
This level of international solidarity with other liberation movements was incomparably higher than, for instance, that of the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua whose support for the Salvadorian FMLN has rarely been more than tokenistic. [21] Furthermore it did not stop there. After the victory in Zimbabwe Machel went on to provide similar facilities for the South African ANC and in the early 1980s the ANC launched spectacular raids on key economic targets in South Africa like oil storage depots and refineries. For a certain period of time it looked to many commentators as if the liberation tide in Southern Africa was flowing irresistibly against the apartheid regime in Pretoria,and that the only question remaining was not whether the regime would fall, but when it would.
This impression was strengthened by the depth and extent of Frelimo’s revolutionary traditions. For more than seven years now it has officially classified itself as a ‘Marxist-Leninist’ organisation and, since the murder in 1973 of the founder of the PAIGC in Guinea-Bissau, Amilcar Cabral, it has clearly been the most radical of all the African liberation movements.
Frelimo’s radicalism was both ‘socialist’ and ‘internationalist’. The ‘internationalism’ was not however the internationalism of the world proletariat against their exploiters but rather the realisation that the strength of South Africa was too great for liberation to succeed purely within the confines of Mozambique itself. It implied an alliance with the rest of the black southern African states (including some with an already established record of severe repression against their own working class like Zambia [22]) as well as support for the ANC guerrilla struggle in South Africa itself. Frelimo’s ‘socialism’ fitted into this picture. It was to be achieved in two stages; peasant-based guerrillas would drive out the colonial (or settler) power, whereupon the state – now headed by the revolutionaries – would create the material base for ‘socialism’. This ‘socialism’ would be guaranteed by a rapidly developing economic base, controlled from below by ‘collective self-management’ by workers and managers, and from above by the Frelimo regime itself.
The recognition of the power of the apartheid regime was certainly realistic enough. Before Frelimo came to power the Mozambican economy relied heavily on its South African links; half a million tourists used to bring in $15 million each year in foreign revenue, and, much more important, 120,000 Mozambican workers were employed in South African gold mines, the great bulk of their wages being compulsorily remitted back to Mozambique. All but a small fraction of the goods trans-shipped through Maputo – black Africa’s largest port – and the revenues that went with them came from South Africa as well. The fate of Mozambique depended from the beginning, therefore, much more on the conscious actions of the South African state than on any other.
For Frelimo, breaking the power of South Africa implied firstly the attempt by all the black southern African states to co-plan their economies to substitute for the revenues and goods involved. But even in the very best of times this would not have been possible. All the black front line states have major problems of unemployment or underemployment; which amongst them could possibly take the services of 120,000 Mozambican miners, paying the state huge hard currency remittances in the process? Where would the 10 million tons of annual throughput needed to fully occupy Maputo’s port facilities be found amongst these states? The unfortunate fact was that the whole development of Mozambique had been posited on its links with advanced capitalist economies and it could not survive without them.
The fact that South Africa could (and indeed did) break the economic links; bringing economic disaster to Mozambique, meant that the strategy to be followed for liberation within South Africa itself was of critical importance. Unfortunately Frelimo seemed to assume that the same strategy that had worked in Angola, Zimbabwe and Mozambique – rural guerrilla warfare – could work in South Africa itself: hence the support for the ANC guerrillas. But there is a big difference between these countries. Even Zimbabwe, the most advanced of the black southern African countries, is a substantially rural nation. The same strategy could not possibly work in a much more developed and urbanised country like South Africa. Only a strategy that was based on the several million strong black South African working class could hope to succeed. And for that to take place a decisive break would have been needed from the politics of both Frelimo and the ANC; there could be no question of a ‘national liberation’ stage being completed before a ‘socialist’ stage began.
It was on this rock that the Mozambican road to socialism foundered. Guerrilla warfare failed to destroy (or even to seriously worry) the apartheid regime. South Africa counter-attacked economically and militarily. Direct economic sabotage coupled with such measures as re-routing trade away from trans-shipment through Maputo, cutting by two thirds the importation of Mozanibican miners and ending the remittance system for the rest, all had a devastating effect on the economy. The economic chaos created conditions favourable for active military intervention as well; even without the continued series of direct raids on ANC installations in Mozambique, South Africa was able to turn the tables on Frelimo by organising black counter-revolutionary forces into the National Resistance Movement (MNR). South Africa showed that far from being ripe for guerrilla incursions from the neighbouring black states itself, the reverse was the case. The Frelimo regime proved to be much more vulnerable to a reverse flow of the guerrillas. [23]
South Africa’s economic and military pressure coupled with a three-year drought brought the Frelimo regime to its knees. In November 1983 it admitted that already 40,000 had starved to death [24] (more recent estimates put the number at 100,000 [25]) and that the economy was in complete ruin. By March 1984 it surrendered to the apartheid regime at the historic meeting of P.W. Botha and Samora Machel in a railway carriage on the border between the two countries that has become known as the Nkomati accord. It led to the 800 ANC organisers being kicked out of Mozambique and the resumption of certain economic links between Mozambique and South Africa. The most notable of these is the contract to supply South Africa with £11 million of electricity per annum from the Cabora Bassa dam on the Zambesi, but it is also clear that the very economic foundations of the ‘independent’ and ‘socialist’ state that Mozambique was to have become are also being bartered away. South African companies are being invited to form joint companies with Mozambican state farms and even white Transvaal farmers are being asked to rent land in Mozambique. In return South African agreed to call off the MNR but at the time of writing this had not happened. The MNR had in fact increased its operations, threatening to cut off the capital Maputo and extending its activity to the whole country bar one province on the northern Tanzanian border. [26]
What has happened to Mozambique is in no way exceptional. The other major front line states to win independence through guerrilla wars, Angola and Zimbabwe have fared no better, though for quite different reasons.
Zimbabwe is much more developed and better endowed with resources than Mozambique. At first fight this might seem to make it less vulnerable to South African pressure, and in some respects this is indeed the case. The financial resources available to the state and its military regime are greater; so too is the infrastructure of command and communications, and the regime’s ability to co-opt and buy off opposition, while slight in comparison with its apartheid neighbour to the south, still obviously gives it more room to manoeuvre than has been available to Frelimo. But this strength is itself a source of an additional weakness.
The state’s income is dependent on two things; first of all the tiny group of 6,000 overwhelmingly white farmers who produce 77 percent of the agricultural produce on the market, and secondly foreign trade. [27] Expropriating the farmers has proved impossible. It would lead to a dramatic fall in marketable surplus as hungry peasants would grow crops relevant to their own immediate consumption needs rather than cash crops for the world market. As regards trade, the 14 years of illegal white settler rule 1965-79 produced a much increased dependence on South Africa that Mugabe has been unable to eliminate. Only 9 percent of exports went to South Africa in 1965; it rose to 22 percent in 1979, but has only declined to 18 percent in 1982 three years after independence. (Compare that with the mere 11 percent that now goes to the nine black southern African countries even after the most strenuous efforts to increase it). South Africa currently provides Zimbabwe with a quarter of its imports and trans-ships fully one half of all the rest of its trade. The import-substitution industries built up in 1965–79 are no exception to this situation; as finance minister Bernard Chidzero put it: ‘... many of our import-substitution industries ... depend on imported material or intermediate goods’ and are therefore vulnerable to a squeezing of the South African trade routes in exactly the same way as commodities that are produced by Zimbabwe for the world market. [28]
Mugabe’s government has therefore neither moved significantly against the white landowners nor attempted to do anything that might provoke South Africa into cutting Zimbabwe’s life-line to the outside world. In contrast with Mozambique whose very backwardness made such a policy feasible for a few years, the relative economic strength of Zimbabwe and its greater integration into the world market has, paradoxically, been the very feature that prevented such a policy being possible there. So unlike Mozambique, Zimbabwe has never allowed ANC guerrillas to establish bases on its territory.
Mugabe’s refusal to countenance any positive move against South Africa must also have been influenced by events in Angola. There South African troops have been in occupation in Cunene province in the south for several years. They have also provided finance, fuel, weapons and air support for Jonas Savimbi’s 20,000–30,000 strong Unita guerrilla army, which controls about a third of the country and which has succeeded in disrupting economic life in most of the rest of it, in spite of the presence of 20,000 or more Cuban troops providing garrisons in the major towns. [29] How long the South African or Cuban troops will remain is a matter for speculation. They may well depart if a deal over Namibia can be stitched-up. But whether or not that happens in the medium term there are only two real alternatives for the MPLA government in Angola. Unita forces are deeply entrenched in the country, they can continue to paralyse the actions and policies of the MPLA, progressively weakening its basis of support, or they can be included in a deal to construct a coalition government with the MPLA – one of the options that South Africa is thought to favour. Whichever alternative takes place it cannot include the original MPLA dream of state-owned and state-planned economic growth which will further the welfare of all Angolans.
Therefore in all three of the revolutionary governments that came to power on the back of mass popular movements in southern Africa – Frelimo, MPLA, ZANU-PF – the same thing happened. The original intention to follow the initial ‘national liberation’ stage with a ‘socialist’ stage of state-led economic growth fell flat on its face. The new regimes were just not capable of resisting the much greater economic and military power of the environment in which they found themselves. In the same way as the Sandinistas in Nicaragua, the southern African revolutionary regimes have played a double role. To begin with they deflected the spontaneous movements of peasants and workers away from creating their own organs of struggle and power, arguing that the new state apparatus in creating ‘socialism’ from above had rendered this unnecessary. Then, more recently, when faced with the complete failure of this strategy on the one hand and the demoralisation of the workers and peasants on the other hand, they came more and more to abandon this policy in practice, making greater and greater concessions to private capital at home and western business abroad. The revolutions that became deflected on to the state capitalist path to begin with, soon got deflected yet again. The capitalism remained but the ‘state’ part of it withered on the branch.
It is always possible to attempt to explain these events in Nicaragua and southern Africa in terms of exceptional conditions. Thus Nicaragua is peculiarly vulnerable to American pressure because of its proximity to the United States; Angola, Zimbabwe and Mozambique because of their proximity to South Africa coupled with the terrible effects of three years drought. All this is perfectly valid up to a point; there is no doubt that one reason why the CIA seems to have been more active in Nicaragua than in say South Yemen is its geographical location and much the same can be said for South Africa’s much greater involvement in Mozambique compared with further away Tanzania. But none of these factors adequately explain what has been happening.
Take the southern African drought for instance. Certainly it has been a very important factor in the collapse of the Mozambican economy and the consequent surrender to South Africa at the Nkomati accord, but it has had other effects as well. It affected the South African economy deeply too, driving Botha to peace talks just as surely as Machel. South Africa’s agricultural exports collapsed just at the point where new burdens had to be carried by the apartheid state; Botha’s recently approved strategy of buying off potential areas of opposition in the intermediate strata of the mixed-race and Asian communities require huge sums of money to make it work, sums that just cannot be be squared with a continual military presence in black Africa. [30] The Angolan war alone is costing millions of dollars a day; on top of that there is the huge cost of maintaining a 40,000 strong army in Namibia. [31] No wonder the South African treasury talks of ‘horrifying overruns’ on defence expenditure. With the drought, falling world gold prices, double-digit inflation and interest rates exceeding 20 percent it is no exaggeration for finance minister Owen Horwood to talk about it being the most difficult time for South Africa since the great depression. [32]
The drought therefore weakened both South Africa and the black revolutionary states on its northern borders. It can explain why Mozambique and South Africa were pushed into stitching up a deal with each other, but it cannot explain why that went along with the virtual abandonment of Frelimo’s earlier dreams of a state planned and directed economy within Mozambique itself.
The same applies to the arguments about the closeness of these regimes to centres of imperialist power. As the American invasion of Grenada showed, the military option obviously becomes more attractive the shorter the lines of communication. But one still needs to explain why when the relative economic and military strength of America was much greater than today and when the distances were insignificant – as with Cuba in the early 1960s – such pressure led not at all to the abandonment of the state capitalist road there but to precisely the opposite happening. In short, why did such pressure accelerate the move to state capitalism in Cuba in 1960–62 and at the same time de-accelerate it in Nicaragua twenty years later?
To answer this question it is necessary to turn away from the more recent examples of third world revolution and to look instead at the way in which these state capitalist alternatives worked in the past, at how the prevailing environment of the existing and already developed capitalist nation states affected this process, and finally at how the crises of 1974 and 1980 transformed this whole environment. The experience of the Eastern European countries from the 1930s to the 1970s is therefore crucial and it is to this that we now turn.
 
The Stalinist alternative: self sufficiency and import substitution
State capitalism in its classic and original form – Stalin’s Russia in the 1930s and 1940s – was based on the following argument: (i) that to remain viable and to defend its economy from Western capital, the state needed to be able to mount an effective military defence of its territory. This implied (ii) that a modern industrialised economy had to be created to produce the tanks, aeroplanes and skilled personnel involved; and (iii) that this could be achieved, but only if the state, cutting itself off from the rest of the world, marshalled the entire resources of the country and directed them towards the massive accumulation needed to complete this task. Whether any alternative path might have accomplished the same goals is an open question [33], but the fact remains that it did succeed and its success depended on certain key features.
First and foremost was Russia’s massive size and wealth, and its huge surplus agricultural population. Concentrating such resources in a country of hundreds of millions was bound to be more successful
than the comparable attempts that have been made since then in Albania, South Yemen etc. Even China, of the countries that have more recently taken the state capitalist road, was an incomparably poorer country in 1949 than Russia was in 1929.
Of crucial importance also was the relatively crude and unsophisticated nature of production in general in the 1930s. There was a far smaller number of different types of commodities included in the final consumption needs of the different classes at that time. Furthermore, to produce these commodities required, very often, far fewer components and subordinate production processes to manufacture them in the first place. [34]
What that meant was that in order to create a viable modern economy in the conditions of the 1930s, it was sufficient to concentrate on a few key areas – coal, steel, an infrastructure of rail transport, some relatively simple engineering plants and a machine tool sector that still operated on 19th century craft principles – all of them well within the capacity of a huge, resource-rich country that was easily able to feed itself even when tens of millions had been driven off the land and into the factories and mines.
If these factors made the autarchic economic policy of Stalin’s state capitalism possible, there were also other factors that precluded any other alternative development strategy from being put in its place. The 1930s were, after all, an epoch of crisis and slump in which production fell and world trade (particularly in manufactures) fell even more sharply. Industrialisation by means of an export-led development strategy would, in these conditions, have foundered on the rapidly-rising tariff walls and other restrictive trade practices that all the major capitalist powers were falling back into during this period. The older industrialised European powers – France, Belgium and above all, Britain – were able to erect tariff walls at the extremities of their own empires, Imperial Preference cushioning them somewhat from the severity of the slump. The newer industrial powers sought to develop their own internal market (America’s ill-fated Isolationism) or, when such opportunities were missing, were more and more forced to centralise economic and military power in the hands of the state and physically force their way into new markets (Japan in Manchuria, Germany throughout central Europe, Italy – quite unsuccessfully – in Abyssinia).
But for Stalin’s Russia neither alternative was a possibility during the first five year plans. The limits of the internal market when the overwhelming bulk of the population were impoverished peasants, and the threat to the continued rule of the bureaucracy if this should ever cease to be the case, were problems well understood in Moscow. [35] Furthermore, external aggression was completely out of the question. Russia was a vast country surrounded by more economically advanced neighbours, the imperialist alternative offered by the example of the fascist countries was an alternative that could be used against Russia by its neighbours, but not vice versa.
Finally, it is important to remember that international finance was much more rudimentary and suffered far deeper shocks in the 1930s than anything we have seen so far in the 1980s. Bankers had far more reason to hold back on foreign lending in general – let alone to a country like Russia. They were not interested in offering the carrot of foreign money to persuade Russia to participate in the world-wide division of labour; with the world economy heading increasingly towards a set of enclaves, each more and more protected behind tariff walls, and with international banking suffering even more acutely – huge banks going broke and so on – nothing could have seemed more remote than extensive development loans to permit Russia to export to the west.
If Russia was the extreme case, it still remains true that many of the factors that pushed Russia towards state capitalism in the 1930s were quite general ones of the period. They could be seen at work in many of the weaker economies of eastern and southern Europe and in Latin America. In Italy in 1933, for instance, a generalised commercial collapse in 1933 forced the state to step in; Mussolini created a giant state capitalist holding company – IRI – and the state capitalist sector of the economy was thereafter dominant, being responsible for more than half of all capital formation. [36] In parts of eastern Europe the tendency was even more marked. [37]
It is important to stress these points because the development of state capitalism in its classic 1930s Stalinist form was not just a product of the needs and aspirations of the bureaucracy in Russia at the time, but also of the economic and strategic position that they found themselves in within the world economy – conditions moreover that were never to repeat themselves after the initial period of post-war reconstruction ended in the 1950s.
Yet the world economy did not thereafter return to the situation of the 1920s or that prior to the 1914–18 war. Indeed in the post-war world, above ail in the 1950s, 1960s and the early 1970s, the use of the state to centralise capital and to push development forward, leapt ahead as never before – above all in the newly emerging third world nations.
National liberation movements in these years succeeded in freeing literally thousands of millions from the direct political yoke of the older imperialist countries. In south east Asia this happened in the world’s largest countries, China and India, as well as in Indonesia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and other smaller countries. In Africa the whole of the continent to the north of the Zambesi followed suit. In the middle east too, with the important exception of the settler state of Israel, the same thing happened. Overall well over one half of the world’s population successfully ended the direct political rule of the imperialist powers in this period. Colonialism became reduced, with very few exceptions to the odd Puerto Rico, Hong Kong, Ulster etc.: tiny enclaves that remained as outposts of erstwhile colonial empires for unique historical reasons.
The role that the new regimes sought for the state in developing the economy was a very prominent one in virtually all these countries. Most advanced this strategy under the banner of socialism; In Nehru’s India it was secular socialism, in Nkrumah’s Ghana ‘African Socialism’, in Iraq ‘Baathism’ and in China ‘Maoism’. In India for instance, there were five and seven year plans quite consciously modelled on the 1930s Stalinist example, and the creation of large state-owned sectors of the economy – particularly in modern, capital-intensive industry – occurred almost everywhere. By the mid 1970s the state in Bangladesh was holding 85 percent of the assets of what it termed ‘modern industrial enterprise’; in Turkey the state was responsible for 40 percent of value added in industry in 1964; in Algeria the state moved from being the employer of 15 percent of the workers in industry, construction and trade in 1965 to 51 percent in 1972; and in Brazil the state became responsible for more than 60 percent of all investment by the mid 1970s. [38]
In other words the move to statisation was a thoroughgoing one throughout the world economy at the time. Most strongly marked in the newest and weakest economies of the third world, it nonetheless seemed to occur whether or not there had been a revolutionary regime to carry it out and whatever the ideology officially espoused by that regime. In fact it was not just in the third world that these processes were at work independently of the ideas of the governments involved but in the older western capitalist nations as well. As a study published in the mid-1970s concluded: ‘Although the nominally “socialist” nations (Bulgaria, East Germany, Poland, USSR and Yugoslavia) show a greater average degree of public ownership than the nominally “capitalist” nations, the range among nations with the same nominal system is sometimes greater than the difference between the averages for the two systems. Indeed several “capitalist” nations have a higher labor share in the public sector than Yugoslavia ...’ [39] In the third world the same pattern emerged, but the rate of growth of the public sector expanded much more rapidly in the years between the Second World War and the return of the system to crisis in 1974.
Yet these were the years of the post-war boom – the biggest and most sustained leap forward in the whole of capitalism’s history – and this immediately raises a further question. If we need to explain the classic paradigm of state capitalism – Russia in the 1930s – at least in part by referring to the world slump, the massive downturn in international trade, the curtailing of international finance and so on, then quite obviously very different forces must have been at work in creating and developing the state-led economies that were the product of the post-war boom in the third world. In short, if slump led to state capitalism in the 1930s, why then did boom lead to state capitalism in the 1950s and 1960s?
 
State capitalism, import substitution and the post-war boom
Part of the answer can be found in the nature of the boom of the 1950s and 1960s itself; it differed from earlier ones in capitalism’s history – like that of the 1920s for instance – in a number of important ways, above all in the post-war international order that was imposed after 1945. The massive strength of US capital, with more than 50 per cent of world manufacturing and finance at its disposal, was used to create the World Bank, the IMF, Marshall Aid and so on. These were sufficiently powerful inducements to gain general acceptance among the various national ruling classes for the rules of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and other agencies, through which free trade and the free flow of capital were enforced.
The European ruling classes accepted this situation. Their industries were virtually completely destroyed by the ravages of war. Jettisoning their old empires was, by and large, a small price to pay for regenerating these depleted economies; and that, after all, was what was involved – without being able to use their colonies as cushions behind which domestic capital could be protected they were of little further use. [40]
There was another reason that began to appear more clearly during the 1950s and 1960s. The pattern of international investment and trade changed quite dramatically; before the war around 40 percent of world trade was in primary products – agricultural produce, fuel, raw materials – but by the end of the long boom this figure had fallen by a half. International trade became much less a matter of exchange between primary producers on one hand and manufacturers on the other, and much more a question of the mutual exchange of manufactures between relatively industrialised nations or parts of nations. [41]
This meant that international capital flowed increasingly from one industrialised part of the world economy to another; American capital, for instance, found many more opportunities for profitable investment in advanced Europe than in backward Africa. So too did the older European colonial powers, which, as a result, increasingly came to regard the remains of their imperial past as encumbrances to be got rid of.
The sources of investment changed as well. Instead of regenerating the stock market – which had provided the bulk of funds before the 1929 crash – the post-war boom was founded on ‘self-financing’ principles: new investment was provided out of the profits or assets that the corporation was able to get get together from its operations elsewhere. [42] Naturally enough this acted as an important factor in bringing together conglomerates, mergers etc.; the huge size of modern industrial operations and the difficulties of finding risk-free finance elsewhere pushed capital strongly in this direction.
A final factor was the dynamism and growth of the whole world economy. In the 1950s and 1960s virtually every national economy was growing; high fliers like Japan, Russia and Germany were doing so very rapidly with annual real growth rates of up to 10 percent, but even the dawdlers – Britain, Czechoslovakia, etc. – were managing the odd one or two percent as well. Best of all, these growth rates in many cases (Germany, Japan) were largely the result of higher productivity rather than the employment of more people at the existing level of productivity.
This is the economic context within which the various third world revolutions of the long boom – China, Algeria, Vietnam, Cuba, etc. – took place. It is a context that was shared by many other newly-emerging nations at the time; those that gained their independence without very much in the way of a struggle (like Nigeria and much of the rest of British Africa), those that had independence granted after the decisive defeat of a struggle for national liberation (Kenya, Malaya, Burma, etc.), and even those those that were independent to begin with (as in much of Latin America).
The absence of any significant and genuinely revolutionary socialist current on the international scene had fatal consequences for the development of these countries. The working class became trapped within the all-pervasive and mutually-reinforcing ideas of Stalinism and social democracy, in which ‘socialism’ was only conceivable as being introduced from above by a new set of benign and uncorrupt rulers. Disarmed and subordinated to the new strata of nationalist intellectuals, it was the latter and not the workers who thereafter determined the policies pursued by those regimes. The ‘progressive’ intellectuals would bring ‘socialism’ by extending the power – above all the economic power – of the state, and their initial success seemed at first to reinforce this strategy. In reality it was an illusion. Promoting the economic power of the state was not a socialist blow against capitalism, on the contrary it was cutting with the grain of the whole development of post-war capitalism itself, irrespective of the ideology of the leaders of these third world countries.
So in all of them there was, as we mentioned above, the same move toward statisation in this period, whether presided over by governments of the left (as in Algeria or Egypt) or of the right (as in Brazil or Argentina). This fitted in with the world economy in the long boom in a clear and definite way.
For a start international capital was presented with so many opportunities for profitable investment elsewhere that there was not much inducement to modernise backward rural economies in the third world.
At the same time, presented with the problem of investment, and development, the ruling classes in the newly emerging countries were forced in the direction of mergers and ‘self-financing’ to an even greater degree than in Europe and America. The weaker the local capitalist class, the greater was the pressure to merge and centralise their resources under the aegis of the state itself.
There was nothing qualitatively new about this. Already in the 19th century German capital was only able to emerge strong enough to compete with British capital by a massive centralisation of Capital through the banks and the active intervention of the state. In Japan the state has had to play an even more active role in funnelling resources into key developments throughout the 20th century. So when many third world nations tried to do the same thing through the nationalised sectors of their own economies after the Second World War, it was, in many respects, a continuation of a trend rather than a completely new phenomenon. Indeed it was a phenomenon that could be seen at work in Europe too; automobile production began to be undertaken by nationalised Alfa Romeo in Italy, nationalised British Leyland in Britain and nationalised Renault in France during the post-war boom.
The breakdown in the old colonial system – forcibly or otherwise – both permitted and required the new ruling classes in the third world to take on the task of capital accumulation through the state. Their optimism in their capacity to succeed may seem naive with hindsight, but so long as the boom persisted it looked like a viable option. As we have seen the conditions of the long boom were such that they permitted even archaic and inefficient capitalisms like Britain’s and Czechoslovakia’s to expand. Why then, could they not permit something even better for India, China, Brazil or Egypt?
The alternatives seemed clear enough. Development would come through self-finance or not at all, and the former would require, more often than not, the centralisation of capital in the hands of the state. When warned by some economists that such a process could not work because it contained no built-in processes of cost accounting and no built-in pressures towards the efficient use of resources, the reply seemed obvious enough. Better to have economic development than none at all – ‘efficient’ or ‘inefficient’.
But the question still remained about the precise development strategy that such forms of state capitalism were to be directed toward. The Stalinist model was, after all, one based on expansion of the economy through import substitution; indeed in a period like the 1930s in which world trade was contracting even more rapidly than world production, to have had a strategy of export-led expansion instead would certainly have resulted in disaster. But in the 1950s and 1960s the reverse was the case with world trade offering the prospects for more rapid growth than any single domestic market could possibly provide.
As a result a number of varieties of state capitalism appeared geared to export-led growth. In Brazil this occurred through a partnership between multinational companies and a rapidly expanding nationalised sector that squeezed the domestic private sector into comparative insignificance in the 1970s. [43] In Korea, multinational capital was excluded altogether; individual corporations were welded into a co-ordinated block by tight state planning and state-dominated finance. [44] And in between these two there appeared a number of other variants all more or less geared to production for export or the world market in general.
Nonetheless the very real differences in the future success rate of the ‘import substitution’ state-capitalisms and those geared to expansion through exporting to the world market was not at all apparent during the period of the long boom itself. At the time right wing economists in the west equally condemned both varieties for their use of the state. Both types, it was argued, subverted the laws of the market; both were therefore ‘irrational’, and therefore neither could provide a model for genuine economic development.
 
The state capitalist countries and the crisis
Under conditions of more or less continual boom, economic growth – and the increased wages and jobs that go with it – can be preserved relatively simply. So long as a mechanism exists to make sure that profits are ploughed back into investment that expands production, the rest is more or less guaranteed. In the boom virtually all units of capital are profitable; keeping them all in operation will therefore serve to expand the capital stock as a whole. In such conditions the sorts of state capitalism that were created in Russia in the 1930s and in Eastern Europe in the 1950s can work quite well. In fact they possess two distinct advantages. Firstly, in the pure Stalinist model, expanded investment is more or less guaranteed; the state administrators decide in advance how much of the economy to devote to the consumption needs of the working class and how much they are able to devote to the expansion of capital. Short of the explosions of working class discontent that have periodically rocked the Eastern European ruling classes in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Poland, the planned limitations on workers’ living standards can be maintained. Secondly, and more importantly, expanded production and economic growth are also more or less guaranteed as profits are directed towards machinery, factories etc. rather than on land speculation, operations on the finance market and so on. Thus the sort of boomlet that took place in America in 1977 – in which virtually all investment went not on expanding the productive base of the economy but rather on property speculation and fast-food ventures [45] – can be avoided.
However under conditions of economic crisis this situation changes. The general rate of profit is slashed right back and many enterprises become loss earners; the greater the level of investment in them the greater is the overall decline in the national economy involved. So in the case of the Eastern European state capitalist economies, in which high levels of growth in the 1950s were only achieved on the basis of much higher levels of investment than was typically the case in the west [46], the effects have been particularly serious. Without having to compete in a properly developed capital market hitherto and being able to count on the investment continuing to flow in more or less irrespective of how effectively it has been used the Eastern European economies have in recent years found it exceptionally difficult to compete on the world market.
In Poland the Gierek regime was pushed on to the world market in the 1970s, for two major reasons. Firstly there was Poland’s chronically low productivity of labour and the widening technology gap compared with West Germany, Japan etc. – the efficiencies implicit in a world division of labour were becoming more and more compelling after 1970. Secondly there was the unwillingness of Polish workers to accept cuts in their living standards; in 1956, 1970–71 and again in 1976 workers’ protests forced the regime to back-track on price rises. Throughout the 1970s Polish workers were able to secure for themselves increases in consumption that were greater than the growth rate for the country as a whole. [47] The government was left with no option; access to Western capital – and the indebtedness that would follow – was now the only way to secure further investment while maintaining social peace. It was to be paid for out of the expected outflow of exports that the newly invested capital would create.
In other words the ruling class were, throughout the 1970s, more and more tying in the Polish economy to the world market and counting upon the continuation of the boom. As is well known, the gamble went disastrously wrong, the crisis of the early 1980s striking Poland particularly hard with production falling by 15 percent and more in 1981, coupled with massive $20 billion plus debts that cost Poland fully 92 percent of its export earnings just to service them. [48] An important point here is that Poland was not just a victim of the crisis of the early 1980s, but an important contributor to it as well. For, in conjunction with a number of other countries (Brazil, Philippines, Mexico, Hungary etc.), its attempts to spend its way out of the 1974 crisis massively increased international indebtedness, forcing up world interest rates, and thereby prolonging, extending, deepening and generalising the world crisis in the early 1980s. In other words the crisis not only hit certain countries like Poland, but was caused by them as well.
If Poland represents an extreme case, the same tendency has been apparent in all the state capitalist countries to a greater or lesser degree. It has important consequences not only for the effect of the state capitalist countries on the world economy, but also – and more crucially – for the effect of the world economy on the state capitalist regimes themselves. The pull of the world economy toward the incorporation of all national economies within a single world division of labour has proved increasingly hard to resist whatever the official ideologies of the governments involved and this has had important repercussions for the ways in which these regimes have operated.
The Polish ruling class, facing disaster, was forced to draw back from the world market; the bill for the massive costs involved being picked up by the Kremlin. But this has not stopped some other East European state capitalist countries continuing along the same road. Hungary’s debts to the Western banks per head of the population have been about the same as those of Poland, but there has been no reversal in its economic policies. Progressive decentralisation of the economy and greater and greater encouragement for small private farmers to produce for the market have both accompanied a continuing drive to promote exports. While state-owned capital predominates, the form of state ownership has significantly changed; the state now acts much more like a large holding company which carefully monitors the performance of its constituent companies, rewarding the best with new investment, rather than subjecting them all to a single overall national plan.
There is nothing wholly novel in this. As we have seen already, the dominant state-capitalist sector of the Italian economy operated in a similar manner after the general economic collapse in 1933, when a massive state holding company, IRI, was created to prop up crucial sections of industry. In Hungary’s case it shows that the ruling class currently feels it has more to gain from an increasing integration into the world market. The small size of the Hungarian economy, the relative efficiency of its agricultural sector, its proximity to European markets and Russia’s unwillingness or inability to continue to subsidise the oil it exports to Hungary in return for central Comecon planning – all these have pushed the Hungarian ruling class into making these moves. Once started, new opportunities and pressures begin to occur for Hungary’s rulers. If their success is now to be measured not in terms of the physical quantities that their own direct planning leads to, but rather in financial terms of profit and loss, then their connection with their own domestic economy becomes much looser. If it seems, for instance, that they can make a faster buck by speculation they will be much more inclined to do so. Hence, rather than investing all their hard currency at home, they have more recently chosen to set up joint ventures with Western companies in the third world where near starvation wages gave better prospects for profits in textiles and footwear. They have also invested hundreds of millions of dollars in off-shore banking; some of these funds getting transformed into venture capital, the bulk however probably ending up funding real estate deals in the United States and elsewhere. [49]
The Hungarian solution to the crisis of the Eastern European state capitalist countries has attractions for other countries as well, particularly East Germany where relatively high productivity, proximity to Western markets and above all billions of dollars from West Germany all act as powerful inducements to continue to tie in the East German economy with its neighbours in the EEC still further.
But for other Eastern European countries the same pressures have produced very different results. The more backward economy of Bulgaria was insufficiently developed in the 1970s to seriously contemplate breaking into the Western markets in the sort of way attempted by Hungary and Poland. As a result it has not had to gear its economy in the 1980s to paying off massive debts to the banks. Central planning has been retained – and in some ways strengthened. [50] In Bulgaria’s case it has been the very sharpening of competition on the world market itself that has perpetuated this trend.
Russia itself has also moved in this direction to an even greater degree. The very crisis, therefore, that has pulled Hungary closer in to Western Europe, has at the same time also pushed Russia farther away from it. It too, in spite of being an industrial power of the first order, is, like Bulgaria, incapable of manufacturing many commodities to world market standards. The huge burden that armaments place on its economy will ensure for the foreseeable future that this situation continues; indeed the gap between international and domestic standards seems likely to increase. At the same time the huge size of the domestic economy and the great wealth of its natural resources continue to make centralised planning feasible. More than that, even within the limits of what is possible with the present centrally administered economy, there is clearly room for significant economic gains. In 1983 official Russian statistics showed industrial output growing by 4 percent – and much more important – productivity increasing by 3½ percent. [51] It seems likely that even on the basis of quite minor adjustments to the organisation of production a growth rate of 2–3 percent could easily be maintained until the 1990s – more than enough to prevent the Kremlin having to drastically reorganise the direction of the economy.
Outside of Europe two countries in particular have followed the Russian path closely – Vietnam and Cuba. Each have received billions of dollars a year from the Kremlin; in Cuba’s case this aid alone has increased the per-capita income by more than the entire income of some countries in central Africa and elsewhere. Neither country would be remotely capable of meeting its import needs without this aid and the fact that much of it comes in the form of – by world market standards – inferior Russian goods, is a cost that they presently find acceptable given the alternatives open to them.
In Vietnam the continuous series of wars following 1945 – against France and the United States until the early 1970s, and against Kampuchea and China thereafter – have devastated the economy.
Since 1975 the economy has not grown at all in real terms while population has increased at 2.4 percent annually, a direct result of the huge size of the military, which absorbs 30 percent of the national income (even according to official figures which understate the true position). Allowing for wear and tear on machinery there has probably been a net disinvestment in the Vietnamese economy since the mid-1970s, a situation which has more or less totally prevented its entry into the world market. Russia provides 80 percent of its imports, in return for which it gets military bases plus the pressure of Vietnam’s one and a quarter million strong army on China’s southern flank (China, having to respond, is thus forced to remove some of its own pressure on Russia’s eastern flank; since a third of the Russian armed forces are situated there, this is a considerable help to them). [52]
The crisis has forced the Vietnamese ruling class to respond in a more complex way than their counterparts either in Russia or in Hungary. On the one hand it has made them rely much more heavily on the Russian connection, which has required greater state direction of the industries receiving and producing the commodities transacted and less reliance on autonomous and localised decision making. But on the other hand the crisis has impoverished the state to such a degree that there is very little in the way of resources for the state actually to be able to direct. This paradoxical situation has produced an acceleration of the centralisation of the resources that are currently there (in Ho Chi Minh City in the South, for instance, the 25 competing firms in the export trade have now been reduced to one), at the same time as giving an added filip to richer sections of the peasantry at the expense of the collectivised sector of agriculture. This is particularly true in the most productive and intensively-farmed areas such as the Mekong delta where 60 percent of the land is privately owned, and where the shelving of earlier collectivisation schemes coupled with incentive schemes for the richer farmers have proved to be the only ways of keeping the cities fed. [53]
In Cuba the continuing need for Russian aid has been a product of the almost total dependence of the economy on one export crop: sugar. Catastrophic falls in the world market price (from around 50 cents a pound at one time to 7 cents at the beginning of this year) – a result of the crisis, of subsidies for EEC producers and the inability of the regime to diversify the economy – has led to Russian support which has been estimated at the incredible sum of $4 billion in 1983. (This amounts to $250 per head per annum; compare this with the $189 total per-capita income of Vietnam in 1982). Even in Cuba however, private production in agriculture has been given qualified encouragement recently, and quite important foreign policy differences with the Russians have emerged too. Strong pressure is bound to mount in the Kremlin at some point in the future either for a better deal for its money or for a significant cut-back in this aid to Cuba. [54]
More money for Cuba means less for East Germany; less for East Germany from the Kremlin means more money and trade from West German banks and industry to take its place. At the end of the day, the prevention of the rise of a unified and Westward-oriented German nation – should that look even remotely possible – is a much more important priority for the Russian bureaucracy than hanging on to Cuba.
The problem for the bloc of state capitalist countries in the present crisis as a whole are exemplified by this. Two central features stand out for them; on the one hand rapidly sharpening international competition in the world market, on the other hand the escalation of the drive toward militarisation and war. The latter has forced them to divert resources towards armaments; by exactly how much it is difficult to assess, but according to most estimates 13 percent of the national product is now the minimum going on armaments in Russia. [55] This prevents the Kremlin subsidising the other state capitalist countries to anything like the same extent that it would otherwise be able to. Faced with insufficient inducements to co-participate in supra-national Comecon central planning as a result, the other state capitalist countries are thus pulled closer to the world market. Gaining access to capital goods and consumption goods of increasing quality and declining cost is enormously attractive to them. But it requires in return the export of equivalently high quality produce also produced to world market standards – and that is something that not all of them are able to achieve. That is why, in response to this, the state capitalist bloc has been riven with contradictions with different countries going in different directions. In theory it might look as though the state capitalist bloc could avoid – or could have avoided – such problems altogether by simply not participating in the world market in the first place. The reality however is the other way about, they would have been in a much worse position. Access to high quality imports from the West is, in fact, quite crucial to the Russian economy. Without them the wealth that purchases Vietnamese troops on China’s southern flank and Cuban troops in Africa would be much diminished. So too would be the ability to devote 13 percent and more of the Russian economy to the armed forces. In a period of heightened military tension therefore, this economic link with the West is needed more than ever – even if at the same time it implies considerable dangers from economic dependence and loss of centralised control.
The folly of trying to ignore this has been revealed on several occasions but nowhere more clearly than in Cambodia in the late 1970s. Between 1975 and 1979 the Khmer Rouge government under Pol Pot set about to create as pure a form of self-sufficient state capitalism as was possible. The country’s borders were sealed, money was abolished and all areas of local autonomy were replaced by the central and total direction of the society by the Communist party. The horrors that followed are well known. The economy collapsed into a less-than-subsistence pre-market society. The 2 million inhabitants of the capital Phnom Penh were turned out into the countryside to feed themselves as best they could. Four years later a sample of 100 families revealed a death rate of 42 percent among them, mainly from starvation, but also as a result of vile atrocities and pogroms inflicted by the army. The rural population too was broken up and shifted around into different encampments. Children were taken from their parents at age 6 and by 10 they were being forced to work a full adult working day – the latter having been increased to 12–16 hours (or even longer). Failure to obey such orders led to a cutting-off of the meagre rations for the first offence and the death penalty for the second. Any display of compassion for the victims of this terrible regime was itself punishable – sometimes by the death penalty itself. National and religious minorities were persecuted; two thirds of both the Vietnamese and the Thai communities were slaughtered along with 90 percent of the country’s 700,000 moslems. Nearly all the country’s priests and other religious leaders were killed and their churches, mosques and temples blown up. All books were burnt, education was abolished and most teachers and other intellectuals were slaughtered (only 207 out of 2,300 secondary teachers survived; the comparable figures for doctors were 60 out of 643 and for university teachers 50 out of 725). Production on the land fell drastically, both in terms of falling productivity and in terms of the area cultivated (which fell from 2.5m hectares to 1.6m hectares). In the country as a whole the 1975 population of 8 million had fallen in four short years to 6 million. A quarter of the country had been massacred or starved to death by the regime before the Vietnamese invasion of April 1979 brought the whole ramshackle structure down. [56]
It is important to understand that these well-documented horror stories were not just the irrational consequences of the demented ravings of a genocidal maniac. While Pol Pot was undoubtedly all these things, what he did fitted in, by and large, with what was rationally required to build as fully an autonomous form of state capitalism as could be achieved in Cambodia. The use of extreme terror was therefore in this sense ‘rational’ – how else could people be persuaded to work for 16 hours a day for no material rewards? The slaughter of a quarter of the country was ‘rational’ too – how else could the rest be fed (indeed the slaughter nowhere nearly kept up with the even more catastrophic falls in production). Withdrawing 100,000 hectares of agricultural production along the Vietnamese border was ‘rational’ as well; it sealed-off the peasantry from the contamination of outside influences (hence too the need to root out the cultural, intellectual and religious influences which connected Kampuchea with the world outside).
But all this only goes to show how impossible was the task that Pol Pot had set himself. The pathetically weakened economy that resulted was quite unable to support an armed force sufficient to defend the regime. Pol Pot was forced to engage in international trade to buy arms, but with the collapse of the economy taking place, all that remained to be traded were the meagre supplies of rice being produced. And even though the starvation of the Cambodian masses was a price that the Khmer Rouge were quite willing to pay, it brought precious little in the way of guns – quite insufficient to stop the quarter of a million well-armed Vietnamese troops who poured across the frontier in April 1979.
In short, the price of attempting to seal-off a country from economic links with the rest of the world, is to render it still more vulnerable to the military and strategic arms of the very countries it is trying to defend itself from. The essential first task for the state in the modern capitalist world economy is therefore to be able to defend its control of its own little patch of territory, and that, in its turn, implies participation in the economies implicit in the world market to a degree that is at least sufficient to make this possible.
 
Where now for third worldism?
The problems that the older established state capitalist countries have faced in reacting to the crisis in the world economy illustrate the limitations facing the newer third world revolutionaries who have tried to follow in their path over the past ten years or so. The circumstances which so strongly favoured the Stalinist path to state capitalism from the 1930s until the beginning of the 1970s have now changed in quite fundamental ways. It is no longer the case that this path represents a possible road (let alone the best possible road) to real economic growth on the basis of which poverty, backwardness and exploitation can be eliminated.
The third worldist ‘socialist’ vision of utilising the state against capital and the multinationals is, therefore, not only a hopeless dream, but has been made dramatically more so by the sharpening competition and increasing internationalisation of the world capitalist system itself. The economic development of a backward nation can only be achieved, therefore, along one of two possible paths.
The first is the path outlined by Trotsky, the path of Permanent Revolution – of workers’ struggle against the bourgeoisie; the path of the international socialist revolution in which the alliance is between workers in one country and workers in another, in which therefore, the state apparatus and its various hangers-on in the intellectual petty-bourgeoisie are clearly seen as deadly enemies to be mercilessly exposed and defeated. The second and, tragically, the overwhelmingly dominant path however, is to abandon the socialist aspirations altogether, to forget about the poverty, exploitation and suffering of the masses in return for development on behalf of the privileged few. The state, having been built up on the assumption that it can bring socialism from above, instead becomes the vehicle for pulling the economy deeper into the world market.
All the third world ‘socialist’ revolutions that we have looked at in this article – in particular those in Nicaragua, Mozambique and Angola – fall into this latter category. But that does not mean that all of them (or other third world countries in similar situations) will immediately move their own assets to the Cayman Islands and invite in the United Fruit Company, Anglo American, Lonrho etc. to run all the important bits of their economies at home. The situation is much more complex than that.
As we have seen in the case of the Eastern European countries, the very strength of the world economy, and the high standards it sets for making progress within it, can create a formidable barrier to new entrants. While a number of countries have demonstrated spectacular results from successfully overcoming these difficulties, the very success of Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore etc., has itself made it that much harder for any other countries to follow suit. The countries that have succeeded, have, in doing so, automatically raised the threshold in terms of quality and low costs for all the others. The price of the success of South Korea in entering the world economy is the failure of a country like Bangladesh to do likewise.
Under the circumstances prevailing in the world today, failure does not automatically mean abandoning the erstwhile role of the state and calling back the Lonrhos and the United Fruit companies to do the job instead. While this alternative would indeed be attractive to some third world regimes, today the problem is rather to induce those companies to be attracted to come in the first place. This can mean that even those third world countries that have obviously failed in their attempt to use state capitalist methods to develop the economy, find no encouragement at all in abandoning them. The developing power of the world economy, having failed to suck them in, now appears as an insurmountable hurdle and reinforces the pressures towards state capitalism within them. Such is the case in a country like Tanzania.
The implications of this are that while there is no longer any purely state capitalist road, outside the world economy, to economic development, there certainly does still remain such a road to economic stagnation. It is a road fraught with great dangers however; the failure to develop the economy makes it open to dissent from within (hence the spectacular success of South African-backed guerrillas in Angola and Mozambique) and vulnerable to military force from without (as with Cambodia). Since the return of the world capitalist economy to the deep crisis that has afflicted it over the past 10 years the situation,
therefore, facing these countries has been a complex one. On the one hand the slide into a torpor of ‘import substitution’ state capitalist non-development with all the economic and military dangers of permitting this to happen are increased; on the other, only a country of Russia’s size and wealth can preserve sufficient economic and military power today without dismantling the bureaucracy’s centralised control of the society.
For revolutionary socialists the consequences are also clear. It will become less and less possible to dress up the politics of third worldism – even revolutionary third worldism – in the language of socialism. Never has the time been more appropriate to stress that socialism is about the workers of the world emancipating themselves from the chains of capital – North or South – and not about acting as cheerleaders for any one of the third world’s ruling classes – however ‘progressive’ their rhetoric has hitherto been.

Notes
1. Cf. M. Gonzalez, The Nicaraguan revolution: classes, masses and the Sandinista state, International Socialism 2:17, Autumn 1982, pp. 56–58, 85–86.
2. Cf. P. Binns & M. Gonzalez, Cuba, Castro and socialism, International Socialism 2:8, Spring 1980, pp. 23–30.
3. Ibid., pp. 6–11.
4. Gonzalez, op. cit., p. 86.
5. International Viewpoint, 31 October 1983, p. 15.
6. Keesings Contemporary Archives 1983, p. 32303, Latin American Regional Report 20 January 1984, p. 11.
7. Cf. S. Landau, Inside Nicaragua’s Class War, Socialist Review (the San Francisco publication – not to be confused with our own publication of the same name), No. 71, Sept./Oct. 1973. This reformist publication defends the Sandinista attack on the Nicaraguan working class in the following terms: ‘To declare Nicaragua a one-party socialist state would lead to the exodus of that part of the educated middle class that still remains to run the routine bureaucratic functions of state and industry’ (p. 6). Landau describes in some detail – and celebrates – the freedom of the bourgeoisie to organise against the Nicaraguan working class in ibid., p. 22.
8. Quoted in City Limits, 27 July 1984, p. 8.
9. Keesings Contemporary Archives 1983, p. 32304.
10. International Herald Tribune, 22 April 1984, p. 21.
11. Keesings Contemporary Archives 1983, p. 32304.
12. Economist, 21–27 April 1984.
13. Daily Telegraph, 22 April 1984.
14. Economist, 21–27 April 1984.
15. US News and World Report, 23 April 1984.
16. Daily Telegraph, op. cit.
17. Ibid.
18. Keesings Contemporary Archives 1983, p. 32304.
19. Gonzalez, op. cit., p. 50.
20. Cf. the article of the same name published in International Socialism (first series) 12, Spring 1963, subsequently republished as a pamphlet. See also A. Callinicos, “Permanent Revolution” and the third world today, International Socialism 2:16, Autumn 1982.
21. Cf. Latin American Regional Report, op. cit., p. 11 for details of the kicking out of the Salvadorian FDR/FMLN representatives in Nicaragua at the end of 1983.
22. Cf. A. Callinicos & J. Rogers, Southern Africa after Soweto, London 1977, pp 120–22.
23. Economist, 2 June 1984, p. 35; South, April 1984, p. 26.
24. Economist, 1 January 1984, p. 40.
25. Economist, 11 February 1984, p. 76.
26. Economist, 2 June 1984, p. 35.
27. Socialist Review, June 1984, p. 19.
28. Economist Zimbabwe Survey, 21 April 1984, pp. 13–14.
29. Economist, 26 November 1983, p. 60.
30. South, April 1984, p. 23.
31. Economist, 4 February 1984, p. 50.
32. In purely quantitative terms South Africa suffered worse in some ways than its black neighbours; maize production, for instance, fell from 9.6 million tons in 1981 to 4.9 million tons in 1983; compare this with the fall in the same period for total cereal production in the surrounding black states, which declined from 4.7 million tons to 3.3 million tons.
33. For an article that cites evidence to this effect (drawing Eurocommunist conclusions in the process), Cf. M. Harrison, The Soviet Economy in the 1920s and 1930s, Capital and Class 5, Summer 1978.
34. Cf. M. Kidron, International Capitalism, International Socialism (first series) 20, Spring 1965, pp. 18–20. While some of this article is obviously dated, much – including the material quoted here – still repays a careful reading today.
35. Cf. M. Lewin, Political Undercurrents in Soviet Economic Debates (London 1975), part 1 passim.
36. G. Gualerni, Industria e Fascismo (Milan 1976), p. 255.
37. Cf. J. Sheahan in W. Shepherd (ed.), Public Enterprise (Lexington 1976).
38. P. Binns & M. Haynes, New theories of Eastern European class societies, International Socialism 2:7, Winter 1979/80, p. 34.
39. F.L. Pryor in Shepherd (ed.), op. cit., p. 5.
40. Cf. P. Binns, Understanding the New Cold War, International Socialism 2:19, Spring 1983, pp. 16–22.
41. Cf. N. Harris, Of Bread and Guns (London 1983), chapter 2.
42. B. Tew, Self-Financing, in Tew and Henderson, Studies in Company Finance (London 1959), p. 44.
43. R. Munck, State and Capital in dependent Social Formations: the Brazilian case, Capital and Class 8, Summer 1979.
44. N. Harris, The Asian boom economies and the “impossibility” of national economic development, International Socialism 2:3, Winter 78–79, pp. 5–7.
45. Business Week Special Report, The slow investment economy, 17 October 1977.
46. Cf. Schroder, Problems of Communism, July 1971, p. 36 and Khatchaturov, Voprosy Ekonomiki 3, 1973. See also the general discussion in the Russian press on this question: ABSEES 1974, No. 2, p. 24 and No. 3, p. 24.
47. G. Blazyca, An assessment of Polish economic development in the 1970s, European Economic Review 14, 1980, p. 105.
48. C. Barker & K. Weber, Solidarnosc: from Gdansk to military dictatorship, International Socialism 2:15, Winter 1982, p. 137.
49. B. Caplan, Hungary tests the market, The Banker, June 1979.
50. 75% of Bulgaria’s trade is still with Comecon countries. In spite of that it managed a 4% growth rate in 1983 (Cf. Keesings Contemporary Archives 1984, p. 32755).
51. Economist, 28 April 1984, p. 79.
52. Economist, 14 July 1984, pp. 45–46. This figure is an understatement of the true costs of the Vietnamese army. No funds are allocated by the regime for food (the army grows its own provisions on land allocated to it).
53. Ibid.
54. Cf. Economist, 14 January 1984 (p. 48), 14 July 1984 (p. 45) and Socialist Review, June 1984 (pp. 29–30).
55. Economist, 28 April 1984, p. 79.
56. Keesings Contemporary Archives 1981, pp. 30669–73 and 30676–77.
 



From Rousseau to Lenin
Lucio Colletti
(New Left Books, £3.75)
These essays contain some of the most brilliant insights of contemporary Marxist theory, the most important in the first two essays: Marxism as a Sociology and Bernstein and the Marxism of the Second International. The former demonstrates the unique role played by consciousness within the social relations of production of capitalism – how production is production of ideas as much as material use-values, and how the specific underlying reality of capitalism is social rather than mental or material. Colletti shows very well in his discussion of commodity fetishism how the shift from production of use-values to generalised commodity production, involves at the same time a change from the naturalistic reality of pre-capitalist societies to the uniquely social reality of capitalism. The consequences of this are clear. No conception of contemporary society will be adequate if it dissolves this social unity into mental (moral) or material (scientistic) parts, or if it fails to recognise that this social unity is itself a specific product of the historically limited epoch of capitalism. The former failure Colletti shows to be indelibly inscribed in the politics of the Second International, in the mirror ‘opposites’ of Bernstein’s voluntarism and Kautsky’s determinism. The latter error he unerringly pins on Weber and the left-Hegelianism of Marcuse, Adorno, etc who, instead of opposing the specific reality of capitalism, object to ‘the oppressive power of “facts” as such.’ However, Colletti somewhat overplays Rousseau’s and underplays Hegel’s contribution to Marxism. If there is a reason for this emphasis it certainly never emerges. On Lenin he is dull – typical of the Il Manifesto group he can show what is wrong with the Italian Communist Party’s Kautskyite politics alright, but offer no convincing alternative strategy for the proletariat.
He makes one important error, ‘assuming that an equal organic composition of capital in all branches of production ... is, of course, the condition for the validity of the labour theory of value ...’ (p.10). Marx says quite explicitly (Capital, vol.III, p.143) that ‘this proportion differs greatly in different spheres of production, and frequently even in different branches of one and the same industry’. But the overall value of this book is nonetheless quite outstanding. Make sure your library gets a copy if you cannot afford to buy it.
 



In the last twenty years a remarkable change has occurred in the debate on the nature of the so-called ‘socialist world’. In the first place, whereas the western communist parties had systematically vilified anyone who suggested that these societies were anything less than pure; now, in their Eurocommunist phase, they are rushing to distance themselves from them. To do this they now need an explanation of what went wrong and this has led them directly to their former bête noire, Leon Trotsky. Whether it be in the elegant prose of Carrillo’s Eurocommunism and the State or in its less sophisticated imitations it is undoubtedly The Revolution Betrayed which informs the analysis. But just at the moment when orthodox Trotskyists have tentatively begun to welcome their new found friends so this aspect of Trotskyism has lost its dominance amongst the marxist left. Instead we are now faced with the growing popularity of arguments which insist that these are entirely new forms of class societies. Moreover this view has gained strength not only in the west but also in eastern Europe where the beginnings of a small self-conscious marxist tradition has added a vital new element to the debate.
The widening of the debate to include ‘dissidents’ in eastern Europe itself is something all marxists will welcome. The genuine marxist tradition there is still very weak and in conditions of isolation the position of individuals is by no means stable. Nevertheless it is characterised by a surprising unanimity of view. Most of these eastern European marxists reject any argument that these societies are socialist. Equally they also reject the Trotskyist argument that these societies are in some way transitional between capitalism and socialism. Their critique attempts to build a new analysis on new foundations. [1] In this way they arrive at conclusions closely related to the efforts of various western marxists who have equally decisively broken with the Trotskyist analysis. In particular the argument that these are qualitatively new forms of class society which correspond neither to capitalism nor to socialism nor to any unstable combination of the two has been developed in Britain by the journal Critique, guided by Hillel Ticktin, and also by Fantham & Machover; in the United States by contributors to Telos; in Italy by Carlo and Melotti. [2] In each case there are important differences in the argument but we shall try to show that they are united not only by the similarity of their conclusions but above all by the way they reach them.
That Eurocommunists can apparently live quite happily with their own washed and pre-shrunk version of Trotsky on Russia should not occasion too much surprise. The fundamental weaknesses and ambiguities of the concept of a ‘degenerate workers state’ thesis have long been apparent. More surprising is that an alternative to this approach should be found in the developments of strands of various ‘new class society’ theories that flowered briefly in one form or another in the 1940’s. In part the explanation lies in simple ignorance of what we would argue is the only viable analysis – the theory of state capitalism elaborated by Tony Cliff (State Capitalism in Russia, Pluto, 1974), but there is clearly much more to it than this. In particular we ourselves have failed to insist on the central issue – namely that state capitalism is not an analysis of eastern Europe but an analysis of capitalism in general of which these societies are a part. To the extent that state capitalism has been presented as a theory of eastern Europe it has contributed to the more general growth of theories based on ‘exceptionalism’ which hive off parts of the world and try to explain them in ‘their own terms’. It is this conception which lies at the basis of these new theories whether it be in the more limited forms of ‘eastern European exceptionalism’ in the works of Ticktin, Rakovski, Carlo etc. or a more general ‘second world exceptionalism’ in Bahro and Fantham & Machover. Thus the time is clearly overdue to confront this issue directly. In the first part of this article we shall attempt to do this by examining these new theories, in the second part we shall present a restatement of the state capitalist analysis.
 
What the ‘exceptionalist’ theories state
To understand how these theories have developed it is important to begin by examining their critique of the Trotskyist concept of the ‘degenerate workers state’ and the ‘transitional society’. In the first place, for Rakovski,
“A society is transitional when the institutions are grouped round antagonistic power centres and when relationships between them are not yet regulated by legitimate and universally recognised mechanisms but by more or less open struggle”
While such a description fits the 1920’s it is hardly adequate to explain the nature of the society which arose out of the period of the first five year plan and which has now spread to encompass one third of the world’s population over the past fifty years. As Bahro insists the practice of this type of society cannot be explained in terms of some unstable combination of laws, “‘actually existing socialism’ has arisen on the basis of completely different foundations to those originally conceived”. [3]
Secondly, there is a complete fetishisation of ‘nationalisation’ and ‘planning’. In spite of the fact that “it is plain that in the Soviet Union, the working class has absolutely no control over the state”, in spite of the fact that the state is clearly used against the working class, planning and nationalisation are assumed to be in the interests of the working class:
“Trotskyists incorrectly assume that the existence of planning and nationalised property must be in the interests of the working class, regardless of who makes the plans and who controls the nationalised property ...” [4]
Nor is it any argument to suggest that because capitalism has existed with a number of different political forms the same can be true of socialism. This can only be maintained if one ceases to see socialism as working class power which is, of course, exactly what does happen.
But if the theory is inadequate in the above senses it also fails to relate in any meaningful way to the needs of the opposition in these countries. It provides no explanation of the emerging crisis because it is paralysed by fear of the danger of ‘restorationist tendencies’. As a result “the theory of ‘transitional society’ constantly swings between misplaced criticism and superficial excuses”. In fact, according to Bahro the only serious restorationist tendencies are to be found in the approach itself:
“When Trotsky assumed that at some point the functionaries in charge would seek to appropriate the factories privately, he only provided proof of the anachronistic character of the model with which he sought to grasp the Stalin period.”
The practical consequence of this can be seen in respect of the reform movement:
“... the tendencies identified by the Marxist (i.e. Trotskyist – PB/MH) critique as restorationist are precisely those tendencies such as the decentralisation of the power structure, the re-establishment of so-called bourgeois freedoms and of horizontal mechanisms of economic regulation, which in soviet societies themselves are upheld by progressive critics against neo-Stalinism.” [5]
It is this recognition of the theoretical and practical cul-de-sac that the concept of a degenerate workers state leads to – (“... it is high time for revolutionary Marxists to abandon all theories of ‘deformation’” (Bahro)) – which makes these new theories so attractive.
But it is at this point that we must part company with these new class theories for they argue, to quote Rakovski: “If Marxism is possible at all in Eastern Europe, it has to stand on a completely new theoretical foundation.” [6] Instead we shall argue that these ‘exceptionalist’ approaches both prevent an understanding of these societies and in doing so also prejudice our understanding of the west.
The claims that are made of these theories vary from Bahro and Fantham & Machover who see themselves as presenting a general theory (with some important differences) of “non-capitalist industrialisation”, an alternative road for the development of backward pre-capitalist economies, to writers like Ticktin who see the Soviet Union as a particular social formation but repudiate the idea that it is a mode of production in its own right. The difference, however, often becomes a little vague when e.g. Fantham & Machover attempt to incorporate both Ticktin and Carlo into their more general analysis. We shall first of all deal with the argument about a new mode of production/social formation in relation to capitalism. For Bahro:
“It is clear enough ... that the new organisation cannot be a transition period between capitalism and communism, even though in the ideal case it actually does bypass capitalism. Its place in history is determined by the way that, just like capitalism, it brings the productive forces to the threshold of socialist restructuring, but in a completely different manner so far as the social formation is concerned.”
For Fantham & Mahover there has similarly been a “bifurcation of modes of production” and these societies now develop “in parallel to capitalism”. Much the same point is made by Rakovski who suggests that in eastern Europe there is “a class society sui generis, a different kind of class society existing alongside capitalism”. All of them argue against what Rakovski calls “he traditional structure of historical materialism (where) there is no place for a modern social system which has an evolutionary trajectory other than capitalism and which is not simply an earlier or later stage along the same route”. [7]
The first problem here is what is, understood by the phrase “the traditional structure of historical materialism”. Essentially it is a conception which developed in the Second International and was parodied under Stalin in the eastern bloc. Social development was seen in the crudest possible terms as linear development through a set of stages, from feudalism to capitalism to socialism and so on to communism. This process was a national one. Economies developed on parallel lines, distinguished only by how far they were up or down the track from the station of socialism. This notion has little serious support in the west today but it still remains important in the eastern bloc. What is peculiar is the way in which these writers try to break with it for they do not reject it for the world as a whole but only for certain parts of it! Their aim is to establish a series of ‘branch lines’ which will bring some parts of the world to the same destination but by a different route. To do this they must maintain the simplistic and narrow conception of capitalism as a mode of production that is characteristic of the linear approach they reject. One must immediately contrast this with the other attempt to break free of this type of ‘stages’ thinking; namely the approach of Luxemburg, Trotsky, Bukharin and Lenin. Rather than create ‘new branches’ they solved the problem by recognising that capitalism can only exist in an uneven but combined form. But this is in no way meant that there were new modes of production or even qualitatively distinct social formations.
The problems here become even more apparent when we look at the way in which these new forms are supposed to co-exist with capitalism as a dynamic system. Whilst on the one hand it appears that they are distinct from capitalism, it often also seems that it is capitalism which provides them with a dynamic. Thus Bahro writes that”... it is the pressure of the industrial productive forces created by capitalism that gives this process its decisive impulse”. Not all of them go this far but they all leave this crucial area ambiguous. With the exception of Carlo, to whom we shall return later, there is no attempt to analyse the specific forms that the pressure of world capitalism has and the ramifications that exist for the internal working of these economies. What we have instead are assertions about the ‘internal nature’ of their dynamic. [8]
But most serious of all is not the problems that this line of thought creates for the analysis of eastern Europe but the way in which it backfires on any understanding of western capitalism. The theoretical consequences of these ‘exceptionalist’ theories does not stop at the frontiers of a part of the world. This can be seen if we look at the way in which they reject the analysis of these societies as capitalist.
 
Why they believe that the East is not capitalist
At the root of the problem is the identification which is made between capitalism and commodity production. Having shown that commodity production does not exist within the Soviet economy considered purely on its own, they then conclude that it is not capitalist. It is decisive that “goods produced in the Soviet Union do not function as commodities. Labour power is not a commodity”, that, as Ticktin puts it, the commodity is not “the immediately perceivable all-pervading aspect” of the system. [9]
This identification of capitalism and the commodity is increased as the analysis develops. Thus Fantham & Machover attempt to avoid the problem of relations with the world economy through a significant analogy. Thus they write of the “slave societies in the southern USA, Latin America and the Caribbean until the late nineteenth century” as being “social formations dominated by the slave mode of production which nevertheless completely integrated into rising world capitalism”. We will leave aside here both the fact that Marx does not speak of a ‘slave mode of production’ and the fact that this use of the term appears to link societies separated by thousands of years. The key point is the equation between capitalism and the commodity makes their argument quite logical but in flat contradiction to Marx on top of from his comments in Capital states quite explicitly in the Grundrisse that “not only (do we) call the plantation owners in America capitalists, but ... they are capitalists”. Even more importantly (since our argument is not based upon textual exegesis) their argument runs in flat contradiction to the work of marxist historians of these societies whose work starts from the argument that they did represent particular forms of capitalism. [10]
Having identified capitalism in this way way and proceeded to distinguish it from the social formations existing in these types of societies, the new class theorists then attempt to consolidate their analysis by drawing a series of comparisons. But this is not marxism, it is crude empiricist sociology and in the case of Rakovski it has been recommended as such. [11] This slippage from marxism into sociology is most apparent in the various contributors to Telos. There Marx regularly gives way to Weber and obscure, vague sociologese. In this way Castoriadis can conclude that:
“The Russian regime is part of the socio-historical universe of capitalism because the magma of social imaginary significations that animate its institutions and are realised through it is the very thing that is brought about in history by capitalism. The core of this magma can be described as the unlimited expansion of a ‘rational’ mastery.” [12]
Similarly Ticktin when he writes that “the law of value... means profit, competition and the market” almost directly paraphrases (no doubt unconsciously) Hilferding writing forty years ago. Hilferding too concluded that the USSR was neither capitalist nor socialist but unlike Ticktin he was sufficiently perspicacious to see that on the same definition neither could the west be capitalist. [13] It is therefore no coincidence that Bahro who has flashes of real insight also is led to attempt to revise crucial aspects of the marxist analysis of capitalism. Indeed one wonders more generally what role marxism has if these are new social formations which are neither capitalist nor socialist. Marx was explicitly writing a critique of capitalism, not providing a grand historical theory. How then can his analysis be applied to societies in which the law of value is said not to operate, in which in some instances there is even said to be no working class? Of necessity minus its most fundamental ingredients marxism can only be maintained as a supra-historical theory embodying a number of familiar but ultimately empty categories.
 
Methodology
It should not be surprising that these writers come to very similar conclusions because, in spite of other differences, they all have a very similar methodology in examining the relationship of these societies to capitalism. Indeed it is noticeable that they make no attempt to develop a general theory – their concern is with particular units, social formations whose relationship to the rest of the world is taken for granted in the first instance. Capitalism is what exists and it appears to present no problems. This has been put most clearly by Ticktin – “If the USSR is either capitalist or hybrid capitalist-socialist then all its laws are already known.”
This is reflected in their rejection of and misunderstanding of the argument about state capitalism. In rejecting this they dismiss what Ticktin calls ‘facile comparisons’. Bahro sees important ‘analogues’ but nothing more. For Rakovski there is merely a certain ‘parallelism’ and for Carlo the USSR cannot be capitalist “because there is no category of surplus value”. In each case the key is in the comparison. Capitalism is taken as given – as an ideal type which needs no analysis. A limited number of features are drawn out and then compared to another set of features drawn from eastern Europe. Some comparisons, analogues, parallels are found but the differences are too great for the beasts to be of the same kind.
This is very different to Marx’s own method. He was not in the least interested in answering questions on how things should be classified isolated from the process of learning about how they are moving so as to be able to change them. Merely attaching labels to things does not help us to understand them properly. Unless the categories directly help us to show how they change, they can only obscure rather than clarify what is going on.
This, unfortunately, is what all these theorists of eastern European exceptionalism do to a greater or lesser extent. In this way the view that “goods produced in the Soviet Union do not function as commodities” is taken to prove conclusively that the USSR cannot be part of capitalism. The assumption here is obviously the view that capitalism can be confined and tied-down by a set of timeless categories – the “free market”, the “commodity” and so on – and that their supposed absence prevents the USSR being a species of capitalism. In other words capitalist production is seen as a species of commodity production, and the latter is seen not as a historical (and therefore a changing) phenomenon, but as an abstract category that we ourselves, bring to history so as to periodise it in one way or another.
Such a method – and such conclusions – stand in the sharpest contrast to Marx’s. Marx refers to the Capitalist, the Feudal, the Ancient modes of production (and sometimes to the Oriental, the Celtic, the Slavonic &c &c) but never to the “Commodity mode of production”. Yet if capitalism is just a species of commodity production he would certainly have had to.
This was no oversight on Marx’s part because he had the very best reasons for not doing this. He knew that commodities have always been subordinate to the dominant mode of production, hence there is the Ancient commodity form, the Feudal commodity form and the Capitalist commodity form. In each epoch the form, the content and the extent of commodity production has been altered and limited by each of these modes of production in various ways.
So why then does Marx begin his analysis of the Capitalist mode of production, in volume 1 of Capital, with the commodity? For two main reasons.
Firstly because historically capitalist commodity production grew out of simple commodity production. The artisans, the outworkers, and the craftsmen of the immediately pre-capitalist society that was transitional from Feudalism, were the immediate precursors of the small capitalist producers who were to follow them. In the pre-capitalist society they produced simple commodities, governed by simple commodity exchange. Based on rudimentary instruments of production, this ensured – overall and as a whole – that exchange took place on the basis of values that directly reflected the socially necessary labour time that went into making them.
The second (and the more important) reason why Marx begins with the commodity, is because it forms the logical starting point for understanding capital. It is not just that capitalist production (historically) arises out of simple commodity production, but also because the only possible way of understanding capital is to begin with it as a particular commodity alongside other equivalent commodities.
Yet while it arises as a commodity that exchanges equivalently with all the others, it is fundamentally and essentially very different from them. They are all of them values, but only capital – in its various forms – is self-expanding value. This unique property is of crucial significance, for wherever it gains a hold it completely undermines the simple commodity values on the basis of which capital was formed in the first place.
In Capital Marx charts this logical progression from simple commodity production in several stages. In volume 1, he moves from particular to generalised commodity production, showing how when labour power itself becomes a commodity, surplus value appears for the first time. Here he abstracts from the competitive relationship between various units of capital to focus on the global relation between the working class and the capitalist class. He therefore assumes that commodities exchange at their social or market values, i.e. on the basis of the labour time, both surplus and socially necessary needed to produce them. This assumption is then rejected in volume 3 where he shows that where the purpose of production is the self-expansion of value, i.e. in capitalist society, capital will flow to the areas of highest profit until the various rates of profit are equalised. The assumption that total prices are the same as the total of necessary and surplus labour time remains but the connection is broken for the individual commodities themselves. Instead of exchanging at simple commodity values, they now exchange at what we can describe as capitalist values. Capitalist values, therefore, although they are developments from simple commodity values, are actually antagonistic to them. The capitalist value form has thus abolished simple commodity value forms everywhere they have met. To argue then that the presence of capitalism can be detected by the existence of the pure commodity form, as do the theorists of eastern European exceptionalism, is thus wholly inconsistent with Marx’s analysis. The capitalist value form can only exist to the extent that the simple commodity form does not exist, and vice versa.
What these theorists have done is to conflate the historical order in which capitalism arose and the logical order in which it must be understood, with the real order of what dominates what within capitalist society. While the category ‘capital’ is a product of the category ‘commodity’, and while real capitals historically arose out of real commodities; today production as it is, is governed by profit, by capitalist rather than simple commodity values. Failing to follow this approach can only lead to the substitution of a theory for understanding the world by an empty and sterile labelling process.
 
Their views on the dynamic of the eastern European societies
If we turn now to the problem of the dynamic of the eastern European societies, to their ‘political economy’ we can see how these contradictions work out in practice. It is important to note firstly that a number of these writers do not have a ‘political economy’ at all. This is particularly true of the eastern Europeans themselves. Zimin, Rakovski and Bahro all present us with a political-philosophical critique in which the essence seems to be alienation. Bahro is the most developed in this respect. “Exploitation” is not used in his work in respect of these societies. Instead he attempts to avoid this question altogether by relating the social and political forms directly to the division of labour. Thus he can write that “The problem of subalternity is the cornerstone of my alternative conception”. [14] In so far as economic issues arise at all it is in the form of global resource crises etc. Now it may well be that in time they will develop an analysis of the dynamic of these societies but it seems more likely that the very concepts they use will prevent this. This is certainly the case with some of the contributors to Telos. Castoriadis, for example, argues that bureaucratisation has destroyed the basis of capitalism’s earlier economic laws and that social structure now dominates the economy. Weber and the psychology of the bureaucrats replaces Marx and the economic function of the proletariat – a conclusion that echoes Hilferding’s forty years ago. [15]
Fortunately we are saved from arguing the need for a ‘political economy’ of these societies (if an argument is indeed needed). In particular Ticktin and Carlo have done this job for us but is their alternative any better? In the case of Ticktin the answer is certainly not. What he has produced is “a descriptive political economy” based around the idea that the all pervading feature of these societies is ‘waste’: “the central economic feature of the USSR today is its enormous wastefulness”. Now it is unquestionably true that the USSR is very wasteful. But how could this ever be its “central economic feature”? The question that immediately arises is wasteful in the production of what – in the production of exchange values and profit?, in the production of use values?, in the production of feudal dues? Capitalism too is very wasteful – but of use values in the ruthless pursuit of surplus value. Its central characteristic is its pursuit of the latter, and this explains why it is so wasteful of use values. But the one thing you cannot do is to begin with the abstraction ‘waste” and expect to reach any worthwhile concrete conclusions. Waste may clog up the machinery once it gets going, but it can hardly be what moves the machinery in the first place. The mode of production has to be defined first of all. Hence Ticktin and those like Fantham & Machover who follow him have got the logical cart before the horse.
In view of the fact that they give us no satisfactory law of motion for these societies it is no surprise that these accounts should also be completely ahistorical. Bahro for example devotes in a 450 page book almost no space at all to developments in the Soviet Union in the late 1920s and the 1930s. Rakovski does not go beyond a description of the historical ‘detours’ of eastern European marxism. Zimin provides only a series of contrasts between what he sees as the central features of Stalinism and the earlier bolshevik tradition. Ticktin gives us only a few isolated historical comments and the same is true of Fantham & Machover.
So far we have made few comments about the work of Antonio Carlo. This is because his is an infinitely more sophisticated version of the Bureaucratic Collectivist argument. Indeed Carlo is right about so many features of the USSR, including the whole dynamic of its development that what sometimes appears to be at issue is simply a question of names, what he calls state/bureaucratic collectivist we call state capitalist. But the difference does remain important because Carlo himself flagrantly disregards his own analysis when it comes to China and this feeds directly back into his understanding of the USSR.
Let us begin first with what we can agree on if only to illustrate what separates Carlo from the other writers we have discussed. According to Carlo the ownership of the means of production “belongs to the bureaucracy considered collectively as a class”. This exploitative class society
“is explained by the requirement for broadened reproduction, posed by the need to conquer backwardness and by the antagonisms with capitalist countries which force the Soviet Union to reinvest the greater part of the surplus. The same is true for Europe and the USA where the consumption of luxuries by the capitalists, although significant, absorbs only a minor part of the surplus. Most of it is reinvested to feed broadened capitalist reproduction.”
Furthermore Carlo locates the creation of Russian class society out of the ruins of the 1917 workers’ state, in exactly the right place at the right time. Internally with the growth of the NEP men and bureaucrats in the 1920s and externally due to the pressures of hostile imperialism – a factor which he considers has been greatly “underemphasised”. Thus for these reasons forced industrialisation became a “necessity”. [16]
Moreover unlike those who think that simply to give a definition of capitalism is to understand it and in particular that we can equate capitalism with commodity production, Carlo is well aware that capitalism has undergone great changes since its apogee in the mid nineteenth century. He understands that capitalism has derived surplus value from productive bases as varied as slavery in the USA and serfdom in Russia. He also knows that with the advent of monopoly competition it has changed considerably; being more ferocious and less price-based, leading to wars and coups. He also understands that in general Russian-type societies
“can only come about under the conditions of a weak local bourgeoisie, incapable of controlling the state apparatus that tends to become autonomous, and a weak exploited class, incapable of presenting a socialist alternative taking power and thus forestalling the bureaucracy.” [17]
All the elements exist then for an understanding of the USSR as a bureaucratic state capitalist regime; and yet this is precisely what Carlo denies to be the case. Why? There would seem to be four reasons, two are trivial and two more serious.
Firstly he argues that labour power cannot be a commodity in the USSR because with only one company (USSR Ltd) purchasing it there cannot be a genuine labour market there. With this (considered purely on its own) we have no quarrel. But he implies that to establish this is to show that capitalism does not exist in the USSR. In this he is entirely mistaken. But fortunately we do not have to argue against this because Carlo has already demolished his own argument. In the first part of his article he argues at length that “wage labour is not necessary for capital”, giving a wealth of references to Marx on American slavery and Lenin on Russian serfdom. And there is no doubt that he is right here. Considered purely on its own the non-existence of a pure wage market in the USSR no more prevents it from being capitalist than it did the plantation owners.
Secondly, Carlo advances the view that the USSR cannot be capitalist because there are no crises of overproduction. “All this is lacking in Russia because there is no category of surplus value”. It is difficult to take this argument at all seriously for in a similar vein we might venture to suggest that the permanent existence of butter mountains, wine lakes etc. in Europe, clearly proves that the Treaty of Rome has succeeded in abolishing capitalist agriculture throughout western Europe too. Fortunately we are again spared developing these points by Carlo himself, for he soon makes clear that although overproduction of goods does not lead to bankruptcy it does lead to massive disproportions between the capital goods and the consumer goods sectors of the economy. And he then concludes “if machines to produce consumer goods are built, sooner or later, they will have to be used to produce those goods, otherwise they will represent a real waste”. In other words, so far from crises of overproduction being absent in Russia, they are actually permanent states of affairs there. Any further comment is redundant here.
What then of the two more serious objections? The first is the question of whether or not surplus value is produced in the USSR. Since this is an important question in its own right we shall deal with it separately below. His other objection brings us directly to Carlo’s illusions over China. According to him, writing in the early 1970s, China has not yet had its equivalent of the 1928 counter-revolution. The subordination of the consumption needs of the masses to the accumulation needs of the bureaucracy has therefore not yet occurred. Now since China is indisputably in a weaker position than the Soviet Union in 1928 (which for all its backwardness was the world’s fifth industrial power) Carlo can only maintain this position by backtracking on his analysis of the Russian situation and arguing that after 1928 what was created was a highly unstable society and that today there are “ponderous forces pushing towards the restoration of capitalism”, i.e. that it is a transitional but class society.
So it now appears that the forces of capitalist encirclement were insufficient by themselves to enforce a capitalist dynamic. This makes nonsense of all his earlier remarks about how ageing capitalism relies more on coups, wars and other non-market forms of competition, and how external pressures on the USSR have been “underemphasised”. He thus abandons his earlier understanding of the important changes that have taken place in capitalism this century. To be consistent he would have to abandon his Maoism, for China in the 1970’s and 80’s is so much weaker than the USSR that the creation of a “bureaucratic collectivist” class society would be inevitable there.
In the end therefore he abandons his marxism to fellow travel with the gang of four. Ascribing the USSR as non-capitalist thus serves as a smokescreen behind which the opportunist tactics of the Chinese leadership are dressed up in a socialist guise. [18] He knows that to characterise the USSR as a transitional society, as a workers state is not even remotely plausible any longer given the palpably exploitative nature of that society. But equally the understanding that it is a state capitalist society, because it locates the source of its dynamic in the world capitalist economy, leads inevitably to the conclusion that China must be even more a victim of these same forces. There is no third road for Carlo to find between the apologetics of the “workers statists” and the revolutionary internationalism of the theory of state capitalism.
 
The politics of eastern European exceptionalism
The issue of Carlo’s politics raises the more general problem of the political conclusions drawn by “exceptionalists”. In this respect the arguments of those like Bahro and Fantham & Machover are especially dangerous. In their work not only are these societies presented as non-capitalist roads to industrialisation but a progressive significance is attached to this. In the case of Bahro this leads him to fatalistically accept the necessity of Stalinism and the historical role of the bureaucracy and reject the concept of permanent revolution. Fantham & Machover are more complex in that they recognise the problems this kind of apologetics raises. Thus they argue that on a world scale Trotsky and the Bolsheviks may well have been right about the necessity for international revolution but for individual countries:
“To the extent that state collectivism enables these societies to climb out of the pit of underdevelopment in which world capitalism has trapped them, to the extent that it offers them a way to industrialise, raise the productivity of labour and along with it the standard of living, culture, education and medicine – to this extent it is initially truly progressive. But in the course of its development it – like other modes of production, and indeed like capitalism, – becomes a shackle on society.” [19]
The unresolved contradiction here is obvious and Fantham & Machover pull back from drawing Bahro’s conclusions for they then go on to argue that these “progressive” regimes may still pursue highly reactionary policies. This confusion over what is and what is not progressive in writers like this is far more dangerous than the analysis of Ticktin and Rakovski etc. because it widens the whole problem of exceptionalism to the ‘third world’ and again is made palatable with a mishmash of comments on China. It is also tied to a denial that these regimes can be properly imperialist though why this should flow from their argument is never clear.
In fact what we have is a regression in marxism towards a new form of the stages theory of development – a fact not unconnected, as we have seen, with the peculiar way in which the ‘linear model’ is rejected. It is moreover a theory which could be used to justify all minor imperialisms past and present. Even if we ignore China’s praise for NATO, Pinochet, de Gaulle et al; there is Castro’s support for the butcher Mengistu, Brezhnev’s for the Shah and so on. Against this the record of Kaiser Wilhelm in the 1914-18 war stands up very well, with his support of revolutionaries in Ireland and India – not to mention of course a certain sealed train to the Finland Station ... In the light of the evidence why do we need a new ‘mode of production’ a new ‘social formation’ to explain these societies? And if they are really some new type then how does one explain the fact that these states behave in exactly the same way as every subordinate imperialism has done since the beginning of the century?
The danger of this hazy concept of ‘necessity’ and ‘progressiveness’ is equally apparent when we look at the internal policies of these regimes. Leaving aside the further perpetuation of myths about China, what exactly is meant? The concept does not lead them to support them against relatively “less progressive” regimes and they are clearly not “progressive’ in the degenerate workers state sense. So the label does not seem to mean much at all. Indeed the only way it can be made remotely plausible is to conflate the concept with that of the development of the productive forces. But this is hardly of any use to socialists for it would make British capitalism under Atlee and MacMillan “progressive” and Mussolini’s Italy in the 1930’s very “progressive”.
Furthermore we do not only get confusion from following this line of thought, but it also lays the basis for something very much more reactionary. For the crucial question is “progressive” in respect to what? For revolutionary socialists the answer is clearly in respect to an international socialist revolution. Yet by their own admission such regimes are as much a barrier to socialism as are capitalist regimes. So if they are (even if only “initially”) “progressive” then writers like Bahro and Fantham & Machover must be using criteria derived from gradualists and other head-in-the-sand believers in socialism in one country. Thus their theoretical confusions do not just muddy things up but as with Bahro they lead straight to his support for Eurocommunism. Fantham & Machover are certainly revolutionary socialists in contrast to Bahro, but in this way they too are also paving the way for the wretched right wing distortions of marxism that have been peddled by communist parties for decades.
 
Ageing capitalism and the production of values
Methodology and politics aside, the substantial question remains of how and in what way are the eastern economies to be assessed as regards the production of values? This is turn forces us to look at how these questions are to be answered for ageing capitalism in the west.
We have already seen that while in pre-capitalist economies commodities can exchange at their market-values, under capitalism itself they do not and can not. This does not mean, however, that value is not the dominant category that distinguishes capitalism from pre- and post-capitalist societies. In pre-capitalist societies labour may have been embodied in commodities in a ‘purer’ form – they may have exchanged at closer to their market-values – but value itself, whether in a pure or in a modified form was not the thing that dominated the development of these societies. It was instead the relationship between the master and the slave, the lord and the serf etc. – which were not themselves dependent on value – on which these societies were based.
Thus the essence of capitalism is that value remains the foundation of its laws and has real enough consequences for its development even though it assumes ‘impure’ forms. This means that we cannot simply deduce value from exchange. The individual capitalist’s profits are not at all the same as the surplus value he extracts from his work force. It is at the aggregate level that the total of all profits (and therefore the average rate of profit) is determined by the total of surplus value in the economy as a whole. Thus value has to be related to the dynamic of capitalism as a system, to accumulation, a rising organic composition of capital and a falling rate of profit. We can only determine the connections between surplus value and profit for the entire economy, that is the world economy.
This then is the first consequence of the transition from simple commodity production to capitalist production. But as capitalism ages these impurities in market values are further magnified by the centralisation of capital which itself is intimately connected to the self-expansion of value. As monopolisation increases so markets are carved out and fixed by administered corporate decisions. The increased role for the ‘visible hand’ of management means that prices are increasingly internal to the firm both nationally and internationally. For example, fully one half of all US foreign trade is between different subsidiaries of the same corporation. [20] Here ‘value’ is determined by the need to jump tariff walls, transfer pricing, concealment of the movement of capital and so on. Nor is it just the commodity market that ageing capitalism subverts in this way, but the capital market too. The collapse of the capital market in the 1929 crash fed directly into the crisis of the 1930s because of the volume of capital raised there. Today the situation is quite different. Already by the 1950s less than a third of capital was raised there and today the figure is considerably lower due to the increasing role of the state and banking in carrying out funding. [21] Moreover, if one were to look closely at the dominant corporations the extent of internal funding would be even greater.
Thus the focus on the market and the commodity becomes even more absurd under ageing capitalism. The problem is manageable only so long as we deal with it from the point of view of the theory of capitalist development and crisis. Ageing capitalism’s urge to accumulate and the extent to which it does so, the rise in the organic composition of capital, the decline in the rate of profit and the explanation of crisis: all these are instead inexorably linked to the proportions of living to dead surplus value in the system as a whole.
 
Two further features of capitalism’s ageing process
The thing which links the early mercantilist stage of capitalist development with later stages like those of 19th century private capitalism and 20th century state monopoly capitalism is the nature of the accumulation process. Marx characterises capitalism in the Communist Manifesto as where “... the labourer lives merely to increase capital, and is allowed to live only in so far as the interest of the ruling class requires it. In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to increase accumulated labour”.
In Capital he stressed that the motive force of this process is not the consumption of the capitalist, but the fact that in order to fulfil his role as a capitalist he has to accumulate. It is competition which drives the capitalist to do this and it does so by threatening him with extinction by rival capitalists if he doesn’t. Without this competition each capitalist could freely decide whether to consume the surplus product, accumulate it, or even to return it to the workers who created it. In this way “competition makes the immanent laws of capitalist production to be felt by each individual capitalist, as external coercive laws”.
But because competition necessarily subverts the autonomy of the market on which it was originally based, it must assume forms other than price competition between commodities produced by private capital for an anonymous market. This has two consequences. The first is that ‘peaceful competition’ becomes transformed more and more into military competition and ultimately war. It takes the form of the physical seizure of raw materials, exclusion of rival capitalists by the erection of tariff walls etc. Price competition is forced to give way to new forms of competitive coercion and this gives us an insight into one of the crucial results of the ageing of capitalism, one that Lenin examined in depth in his Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism.
The second related consequence is the inescapable trend towards an increasing role, direct and indirect, of the state as a producer; fulfilling the same role as that performed previously by purely private enterprise.
The results have been remarkable. Already by the 1960s in Italy the state was responsible for the majority of fixed capital formation; in Bangladesh it holds 85% of the assets of what it termed ‘modern industrial enterprise’; in Algeria it moved from being the employer of 15% of the workers in industry, construction and trade in 1965 to 51% in 1972; in Turkey it was responsible for 40% of value added in industry in 1964; in Brazil for over 60% of all investment by the mid 1970s; and in Britain for 45% of fixed capital formation even before the nationalisations of Rolls Royce and Leyland. The figures would be higher still if municipalised property, quasi-public cooperatives and minority state holding in private firms were included. [22]
Even in those countries where the tendency was less strongly marked to begin with, most are moving rapidly in the same direction. In the non-subsistence sector of the Tanzanian economy the state expanded its share of the GDP from 5% in 1966 to 11% only four years later. In Mexico the state’s 15% of gross investment in 1952 rose to 22% in 1962, and has risen much faster since then. Even in the industrialised giants – USA, Germany and Japan – the same tendency, though less marked, is clearly apparent. [23]
In the 1950s and 1960s faced with modernising economies ravaged by years of imperialism and underdevelopment, nearly all of the emergent third world countries opted, at least initially, for the use of the state to marshal the scant resources for key development projects. Direct public ownership played the dominant role here, most strikingly in Nasser’s Egypt and other ‘Arab socialist’ countries, Nkhrumah’s Ghana and the similar ‘African socialist’ states and so on. [24]
But the movement was not confined to Africa and the mid-East. India’s first few 5-year plans bore remarkable similarities to those of Russia in the 30s, and its neighbours Burma, Singapore and even Iran (at the time of Mossadeq) similarly equated their nationalism with public ownership of industry. Even in Latin America regarded in the USA as its own private domain for 50 years – the process was clearly marked: most obviously in Venezuela, Bolivia and Brazil, but also in Peru and Mexico. Even in Chile the right wing conservative government of Frei opted for nationalising copper production. [25]
This tendency has also been present in all countries in the industrialised west in the 1970s. But it has been most strongly marked in those with the weakest industrial base such as Italy, Austria and Britain. In Britain, and above all in Italy (with the exception of Fiat) it has spread to many diverse branches of industry. At its most extreme – for instance in Italy – it has reached the point where the state is already the dominant agency for capital formation, exceeding the combined efforts of all the private capitals. The reason for this development is a simple one. Units of capital are so large and so interwoven – in terms of both production and finance – that the ‘natural’ function of the capitalist crisis – to bankrupt the weakest capitals and thereby strengthen the rest - cannot now be allowed to take place. If they were to, the viability of the whole national economy would be in jeopardy, and with it the legitimation of its rulers. The western capitalist ruling class have thus increasingly resorted to the state not merely to underwrite the general conditions of production (as in Marx’s day), not merely to strengthen the monopoly power of crucial cartels and trusts (as in Lenin’s day), but actually to become, increasingly, the most important agencies for the accumulation of capital themselves. [26]
Viewed then in these terms, in the context of the coercive dynamic of an increasingly ageing world capitalism rather than an idealised market the situation of the eastern economies appears far from unique and it is to this that we now turn.
 
State capitalism in the East as part of capitalism’s ageing process
For many years the revolutionary left – including Trotsky himself were mesmerised by the wholly unique feature of the Russian social formation: it was the product of a society that had had a successful workers’ revolution. Trotsky of course, was only too aware of the Stalinist reaction, but he failed to draw the conclusion that under Stalin there was an actual counter-revolution even when it became apparent that the bureaucracy was consolidating its rule in the 1930s. His thoughts were based on two premises. Firstly that state ownership of industry could only be provided by a workers’ revolution, and the failure to eliminate it in Russia showed that the state had not completely degenerated. Secondly he accounted for the failure of the workers to throw off the bureaucratic “caste” in terms of the temporary threat to the state’s existence by Nazi invasion.
Unfortunately Trotsky was no economist. Unlike Lenin, Bukharin and Luxemburg he did not understand or even see the processes of the statisation of capital taking place in the western economies. All the same, had he not been murdered by Stalin, he would have seen the foundations for his own view crumble. After the war the bureaucracy emerged not weaker, but stronger than ever: the workers did not cast them aside. And much more important, new regimes emerged in eastern Europe – in Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Romania, East Germany and Bulgaria – which were set up not by workers’ revolution but by the Russian army itself; in many cases (e.g. in Hungary) using fascist collaborators from the old regime. These societies rapidly acquired a structure that was identical with that of Russia even though they were not preceded by a workers’ revolution.
It soon became apparent that what was unique about the USSR was not the structure or the dynamic of its society, but the quite exceptional way it came about as the degeneration of a successful workers’ revolution. With hindsight we can now see that the much more general case is that of a weak compromised bourgeoisie, perhaps sitting on top of a peasant rebellion, with a petty bourgeoisie desperate for national development and organised in a Stalinist or nationalist party as the prospective recipient of the collective national capital.
By contrast in the Russian revolution of 1917, the exercise of power by a new class – the proletariat – required a totally new form of state. Not only was the old state smashed, but a new one was created – the soviet state – which was based on recallable delegates from councils of direct workers’ power in the factories and barracks. The new state therefore presupposed both the existence of factories and of workers. The tragedy of course, was that this basis of the state was itself destroyed by the failure of the international revolution. As a result the workers’ state found itself blockaded and invaded by 16 imperialist nations. The vanguard of the class left the factories for the Red Army, and the factories were unable to function because of the blockade. Production declined to one fifth of its 1913 level and the remaining workers deserted the factories for the villages because they were starving.
Without workers and without production, the new state had lost its social base. For a time the Bolshevik party substituted itself for the class, basing itself on the perspective of helping the international revolution. But from 1924 on Stalin changed all that. Not only did he seal the fate of the revolution by calling for the building of ‘socialism’ in one country, but he also destroyed the proletarian basis of the party, swelling its numbers with ex-Tsarist officers, factory managers and so on, so that the party that in 1923 was more than 70% proletarian in composition was by 1927 only 30% proletarianised – and completely bureaucratised too.
The state was thus cut loose from its original social base. Having become heavily bureaucratised it moved decisively to take upon itself the role of massive capital accumulation in the first 5 year plan 1928–33. It did so because of the increasing pressure from world imperialism. As Stalin put it in 1931:
“No comrades ... the pace must not be slackened! ... On the contrary we must quicken it as much as is within our powers and possibilities ... To slacken the pace would be to lag behind; and those who lag behind are beaten ... We are fifty or a hundred years behind the advanced countries. We must make good this lag in ten years. Either we do it or they crush us.” [27]
The essence of this process was the forced accumulation drive to ‘catch up and compete’. Acting as the agent for the accumulation of capital, the bureaucracy emerged as the collective capitalist at the same pace as the economy itself took on the same features of the giant corporations in the nations of the west that Russia was competing against. Accumulation was dominated in the 1930s to the 1950s by strategic and military competition to an extent which it seems some earlier studies have underestimated. This entailed the most extreme subordination of consumption to the needs of production that has ever been known. The drive to accumulate not only necessitated the political expropriation of the working class but also a massive rise in the rate of exploitation. [28]
We are arguing therefore that in an epoch of ageing, militarised and statised capitals, the Russian segment of the world system fits in merely as one of its more extreme examples. Its uniqueness does not consist in its institutional structure (which is different in degree rather than kind) but in the tragedy of its formation on the ashes of the 1917 revolution.
 
Crises and state capitalism
The return of the world capitalist system to crisis in the 1970s has not left the eastern state capitalist economies untouched. The evidence here is irrefutable. It can be seen in (1) declining growth rates, (2) falling rates of profit, (3) marked cyclical tendencies, (4) an increasing technology gap, (5) huge balance of payments deficits which have required vast borrowing on the international finance market. As we shall see the effects of this crisis on the eastern bloc economies has been very serious indeed. In the USSR it would be even more serious were it not for its large deposits of oil and gold. Any analysis of these societies must be able to explain the dynamic and form that the crisis has taken there. We will argue that this cannot be done without a concept of state capitalism.
The essential point in this respect is that the planners lack not simply control of the internal institutions of these economies but that they lack of any control of the total dynamic of the system, as does the private capitalist, and this feeds through into the anarchic internal structure. It is this that lies behind the boom and slump mechanism and the well-known gap between plan and achievement. [29] The constraints that the planners operate under extend far beyond ‘internal social processes’, a point better recognised in some Soviet literature than in that of the ‘exceptionalists’. [30]
This decline can be seen in the way in which cyclical fluctuations combine with a secular decline in the rate of growth. At the root of both of these related phenomena is the lack of control that the planners have over investment and the rate of exploitation. Moreover as these economies have begun to link more directly to the world economy so that rhythm of fluctuations has come to more closely follow that of the world economy. There is now an extensive literature on these fluctuations which, with the exception of Rakovski, has been almost totally ignored by marxists looking at these economies. [31] It is not hard to see why this should be so since, although these fluctuations are not simply reproductions of the classical trade cycle they are a function of the dynamic of these societies mediated through the various institutional structures. Their analysis therefore demands some clarity over the nature of the dynamic which as we have seen is precisely what is missing in these accounts. So far as we are aware the only attempt to begin to develop an analysis of fluctuations on the left is the one made by Chris Harman some years ago in this journal. [32]
These cyclical tendencies, while significant, are not so important as the overall growth rate itself. Exact figures for growth are however quite difficult to assess. Russian statistics are very obscure and certainly overstate the economy’s achievements. In addition there are important differences in the various western attempts to quantify what is going on. However, whichever statistics are used, they all point in the same direction: towards a marked and continuous decline in growth rates for most of these economies.



Rates of Growth





 


1950–55


 


1955–60


 


1960–65


 


1965–70




USSR


11.30%


9.2%


6.3%


4.0%




Czechoslovakia


  8.00%


7.1%


1.8%


3.4%




Poland


  8.60%


6.6%


5.9%


6.7%




Bulgaria


12.20%


9.7%


6.5%


4.5%




(Sources: C. Harman, Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe, London 1974, p. 255,
A. Grossman, Problems of Communism, March 1976, A. Zauberman, The Eastern European
Economies, in Problems of Communism, March–April 1978, p. 56)



With the possible exception of Poland (which as we shall see has been able to sustain its growth only through its integration into western finance), the picture is one of steady decline.
This decline is a symptom of something much more fundamental: the decline in the rate of profit. For it has taken place in circumstances of increasing investment. Between 1950 and 1955, 70% of USSR production was devoted to producer goods. By 1970–75, this had increased to 75% – i.e. the percentage of the economy devoted to consumption had declined by 1/6 from 30% to 25%. Equivalent figures for Poland are 55% and 65%, and for Czechoslovakia 55% and 61%. In the present period (1976–80) investment in Russia is planned to rise such that the incredible figure of 80% of production would be devoted to consumer goods. [33]
Until recently the USSR still had a surplus rural population, and hence from 1950–70 it was able to expand the urban labour force by around 4% per year. Even with stagnant labour productivity it was therefore guaranteed a minimum growth rate of 4%. Now however the urban labour force is growing at less than 1% per year and it has therefore become crucial to expand productivity. [34]
Just how urgent this is, is revealed by the fact that today the eastern European economies have growth rates that are broadly similar those those of the western countries (i.e. somewhat better than Britain and somewhat worse than Japan), but that they are only able to achieve this on the basis of twice the level of investment. [35] This would suggest then, a rough-and-ready figure for the rate of profit at about 50% of that prevailing in the West.
The Russians themselves have published figures showing how rapidly the rate of profit has been falling in the 12 years 1960–72. They have assessed it according to two indicators as follows:



USSR: Decline in the Rate of Profit 1960–1972




 


1960


1964


1968


1972




Indicator I


83.20%


71.30%


67.20%


62.90%




Indicator II


60.40%


52.10%


49.40%


46.60%




Indicator I – National income as a percentage of fixed productive capital at the beginning of the year.
Indicator II – National income as a percentage of total fixed and working productive capitals at the
beginning of the year.
(Source: T. Khachaturov, translated in Problems of Economics, XVI. 5, 1973, p. 9)



The eastern economies have no option but to improve labour productivity if they are to compete with the western economies. Indeed their leaders are, quite understandably, obsessed by the question. Yet all the indicators suggest that in spite of huge efforts they are failing on the productivity front – and failing quite badly. In spite of the quite stupendous sums devoted to investment, and in spite of having a highly educated workforce the gap between western and eastern levels of productivity is actually growing. Twenty five years ago Khruschev boasted to American capitalism that “we will bury you” as a result of economic development. American capitalism has indeed declined since then, but the beneficiaries are to be found in Frankfurt and Tokyo, not in Moscow.
The eastern country with by far the best labour productivity is East Germany. It also started out with a good industrial base, and it was concentrated in growth areas like precision engineering. On top of that it has shown just about the best growth in productivity due to science and technology as opposed to sheer capital size in the east. Yet a comparison of this eastern leader with an equivalent western leader like West Germany reveals the underlying weakness. The industrial output per worker in East compared with West Germany in 1967 was 72%. Yet by 1976 this had declined to 65%. In agriculture the situation was much worse, with equivalent figures of 92% in 1967 falling to 61% in 1976. During this period the agricultural work force fell from 14% to 10% of the total East German labour force – i.e. the yield per hectare compared with West Germany must have fallen even faster. [36]
The widening technology gap between west and east has forced all the eastern European countries (and also China for that matter) to depend much more heavily on imported western technology, and this certainly has been the economic basis of the détente period of the middle-1970s. Even in the case of the USSR, which was more willing and able to resist this due to its size, there was a 7-fold increase from 1970–75 in its imports – mainly of high-technology precision engineering equipment – from West Germany. Yet it has still been unable to solve its chronic problem of low profitability.
Nor for that matter have the other eastern European countries. They however have be been forced to integrate themselves into the rest of the world market to a much greater extent than the USSR, and they have therefore suffered accordingly as the world market slumped in 1974–75. (There is also no doubt that the 1979–80 slump will have an effect at least as serious.) Take Poland for instance, which, as we have seen, has had one of the best eastern growth records. Its leaders were forced by the strikes and uprisings of 1970–71 to increase living standards. They paid for this and increased their growth by a massive increase in trade with the west, which was itself undergoing a short but very rapid boom from 1971–73. Imports from the west tripled from 1970 to 1973, and by 1975 only 45% of Poland’s trade was with all the other eastern countries put together. Then came the slump. Poland’s exports plummeted, and the cost of the imports needed to maintain growth soared. Having participated in the world boom, the Polish bureaucracy was hit by the inflationary pressures it created. By 1975 eastern Europe’s net borrowing from the west rocketed to $20 billion, of which Poland’s share was an incredible $7 billion. [37] Servicing this debt took a quarter of all its foreign earnings.
Then there is the case of Hungary which has perhaps gone furthest in this direction. Foreign trade now accounts for fully 50% of its GNP, and half of this is with the west. The government has dismantled all controls other than fiscal and credit over enterprises, and is now eliminating all import subsidies. As a result, inflation, which stood at 4% in the late ‘70s is expected to be running at 10% in 1980. To reduce costs and increase flexibility the government is encouraging mass sackings: the creation of a reserve army of the unemployed. The National Bank has declared itself in support of the convertibility of the forint, and there is a good 50% chance that Hungary will join the IMF. On top of this Hungary has moved into the world of finance capital in a big way. It permits majority foreign participation in financial and service ventures, and it has itself, in conjunction with US Tungsram established factories in the USA. It has also set up joint ventures in Brazil, India, Greece and Algeria; making use of starvation wages in textiles and footwear. Finally it is currently negotiating with Creditenstalt Bankverein and Manufacturers Hanover Trust for the creation of a speculative off-shore hard currency institution. Its $1 billion deficit in 1978 – financed by the west – means that it is now no longer able to reverse this integration into the world’s finance market. Not surprisingly the US Congress has granted Hungary “Most Favored Nation” status! [38]
In the light of these facts, the view that in the east it is impossible that “capitalism be restored without a full scale revolution” [39] looks ill-informed at best. The rhythm of boom and crisis, the long-term stagnation with low productivity, the necessity to export to pay for the advanced technology without which productivity cannot be improved – all these have effectively prevented the eastern nations becoming isolated islands within a capitalist world economy; a system which as we have seen is becoming increasingly dominated by partial or complete state capitals.
 
The general and the particular crisis of state capitalism
Nonetheless there are quite specific features of the crisis in state capitalist countries which should not be ignored. They can be distinguished into two main types: the general crisis of state capitalism and the particular crisis of USSR-type ‘autarchic’ state capitals. The former occurs also in the state capitals of the west (irrespective of how ‘partial’ they are), while the latter is of much more limited significance there.
The general crisis of state capitalism can only be understood in relation to the world economy. In its turn the world economy only has the features it does have as a result of the fact that state capitals have helped to create it. The significance of this can be seen by contrasting the current crisis to the classical crisis of laissez-faire capitalism. In both cases the long term decline in the rate of profit provides the underlying cause. However, as a result of this under laissez-faire demand declines, overproduction begins, investment ceases and then capital values collapse. Out of the crisis the weakest units of capital become bankrupt and are absorbed at bargain prices by the stronger units of capital. This restructures capital and makes it possible for it to function again. With rivals bankrupt and capital values much lower, the rate of profit temporarily recovers and the cycle begins anew.
Under state capitalism the situation is different. While it may be ‘rational’ for the world system as a whole for one or another state capital to become bankrupted it certainly is not for for the state in question. Indeed the modern capitalist state is increasingly forced to bale out private corporations whose collapse would seriously jeopardise the national economy. And in an increasingly statised world economy there therefore ceases to be a purely automatic mechanism connecting overproduction to the restructuring of capital. The greater the degree of statisation, the greater will be the problem.
In the case of the USSR the scale of the problem should now become clear. There is no automatic mechanism to restructure capital. Because investment decisions are centrally administered their implementation is necessarily bureaucratic and capable of being resisted by those units that are to be restructured. Far from being crisis free the result is that the economy is in a state of permanent crisis. The economy is driven to accumulate but it fails to expand the sum total of use values. The full impact of this was delayed in Russia because until the 1950s underutilised labour was so freely available that primitive accumulation could proceed and absorb new investment profitably. Until then Russia could continue to devote its principle accumulation resources to expanding the means of production. But because all means of production must, after an initial lag, contribute to the means of consumption, this merely delayed the crisis. It could not stop permanent stagnation occurring but only ward it off for a time which has now passed.
But on top of this general crisis there is also the particular crisis of autarchic state capitals: those like the USSR that have attempted to “go it alone”. To understand the crisis of autarchy it is important to remember that Marx saw two important tendencies inherent in capitalist development: (a) the increase in the size of capitals as a result of the concentration and centralisation of capital, and (b) the increasing division of labour on a world scale, this resulting from the increasing complexity of production plus the reducing costs due to returns to scale, long production runs etc. State capitalism solves the first problem by fusing all the nation’s capital resources into one unit. But if it does so by the autarchic method – removing the home economy from exchange with the rest of the world – then it has to replicate the machinery to make all the vast number of components that a modern economy needs entirely from its own resources, thus incurring enormous costs because of the tiny production runs that are needed.
Considerations such as these were also important in the formation of the EEC. Its proponents in the 1950s argued that without a market and a division of labour that went beyond that of the individual nations, Europe would never be able to compete with the USA. Their arguments were based on a number of studies that explained the differences between British and American productivity almost entirely on that basis. [40] And there is no doubt that they apply with equal weight to the Russian economy today, for even if the eastern Europeans were to pool all their resources, they would still be able to command less than 20% of world production. Because of its historic relation to the world division of labour production is much more ruthlessly integrated in the remaining 80% of the world and this gives to the west an insuperable lead in productivity. Superimposed on this is the rapid centralisation – inside and also outside the state – in the west. Western capital, therefore, increasingly combines both the advantages of capital size and those of integrated markets and production.
The return of slump to the world system therefore doubly sharpens the pressure on the eastern nations, weighed down as they are by their past history of autarchic development. Those which have made a break from autarchy like Poland, Romania and Hungary, while suffering in the same way as every other capitalist nation in the current crisis, have certainly done better than had they remained outside the division of labour.
The USSR itself, while also subject to the same pressures, has moved much less in this direction. The fact that it has a much larger and more diversified industrial base than the others, coupled with its vast natural resources and the boom in commodity prices has seen to this. But this has not helped it to avoid the crisis. As we have seen its growth rate for the last few years has been less than those of its less well-endowed neighbours. The price of the losing battle to retain autarchy has been starkly revealed in the declining percentage of production that is now devoted to consumption (20%), and in the fact that in spite of unprecedented sums being devoted to accumulation, the capital stock was planned to rise in the 1976–80 period by only half as much as in the 1971–75 plan. In other words so far from being helping the USSR avoid the crisis, the retention of so much of its old autarchic form has actually compounded it.
 
Conclusion
An immediate conclusion that we can draw is that no remotely plausible conclusions about the dynamic of the eastern societies can be drawn except on the basis of the theory of state capitalism; least of all from the empty empiricist sociology of the theorists of eastern European exceptionalism.
But the argument is not really about eastern Europe at all. For the mistakes made by these latter-day theorists of bureaucratic collectivism would be much less significant in that case. Many of these theorists are in the forefront of the struggle to support workers in struggle against the system there. Their theories have clearly not stood in the way. Nor for that matter have they followed their mentor Shachtman who used just such theories to support American Imperialism. [41] Why then devote so much space to showing why they are wrong?
Because of the implications for our understanding and strategy in the West. For if the latter-day Shachtmans are allowed to go unchallenged, there will very soon arise some latter-day Hilferdings who will be able, with impeccable logic, to show that the West is also non-capitalist by the same reasoning. Once that happens the whole perspective of the necessity of proletarian revolution disappears.
Nor is this imaginary. Indeed it has begun to happen already. One example is the academic “Marxism” of Hindess and Hirst that Alex Callinicos reviewed in Intenational Socialism 2:2. Another is that of Geoff Hodgson who in this issue of the journal argues against the revolutionary road to socialism and who elsewhere argues, along with Hilferding, that Marx’s theories of crisis are mistaken. In short the argument is ultimately the argument against reformism in the west.

Appendix: two notes on values and the laws of capitalism
In this section we shall argue that (1) surplus-value itself can be produced even if the labour that creates it is not a commodity – i.e. is not wage-labour, (2) that as a result surplus-value can be, and is, produced in complete state-capitalisms such as the USSR.
(1) Wage-labour is a phenomenon that combines two elements that are conceptually quite distinct: the production of surpluses and the valorisation of these surpluses in the form of surplus-value. The former is the physical or technical basis upon which all class societies are based, and has nothing directly to do with a specifically capitalist form of class society. Labour-power, as variable capital, is only able to be variable in virtue of its technical capacity to survive and reproduce itself on the basis of a consumption of commodities which require less necessary labour time to produce than that which can be extracted for the worker her/himself.
This is the material form of wage-labour, the essence of its capacity as capital to be variable. But there is also the value form, and this is due to the fact that wage-labour can be hired as a commodity on the market. When the two go together – i.e. when the capitalist buys his commodity, labour-power, and then sets it to work for him – the surplus content appears in a value form: as surplus-value.
Yet the production and the valorisation processes do not have to go together in order for surplus-value to be produced. They are separable not only in logic but also in time and space. Several examples immediately spring to mind in this respect. Two we have mentioned already: 19th-century American slavery and 18th-century Russian serfdom, neither of which Marx doubted to be (partially or wholly) capitalist and surplus-value producing. The fact that the cotton and the wheat were destined for sale in capitalist England, meant that the slave owners and the feudal landowners contributed to the pool of surplus products at the command of those with the money to purchase them. Through this exchange they became valorised with respect to all other commodities: the surplus products became surplus-values, and their owners became capitalists. But the workers who produced them did not thereby become wage-labourers.
The above conclusions are not just ours, but also Marx’s. Why then does Marx not distinguish these separate elements in wage labour in a rigorous analytical form in Capital? For two reasons. Firstly because he thought – correctly – that slave and serf labour would prove an impractical and inefficient source of surplus-value, and would therefore shortly be consigned to the dustbin of history.
Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, because Marx was never unravelled all the elements (“determinations” in the language of the Grundrisse) that were built into the phenomena he was studying, only those that were relevant for revolutionary theory and politics. And when he does so, he does it in a specific order. For instance Capital vol. 1 is concerned only with capitalist production, and this only as a general form. In doing so questions that concern distribution and exchange between many capitals are ignored; to be taken up only in vols. 2 and 3. For the sake of convenience Marx lets the assumption ride that production is valorisation in vol. 1. Yet in vol. 3, as we have seen in our section on methodology above, he shows that they are sharply separated and that while the production of surplus-value is directly related to the hours worked for a capitalist, it is valorised in the form of profits which are directly related to the mass of his capital instead.
It should be clear now why Marx treats wage-labour in the way he does. In volume 1 of Capital he is concerned with wage-labour (or capital for that matter) from the point of view of production only, and it is as the productive source of surplus-value that it has significance. And when we come on to vol. 3, although there can be sources of surplus-value other than wage-labour, they do not introduce new principles for the distribution of surplus-value. In this respect they do not have the effect that the introduction of ‘many capitals’ has. They therefore do not merit separate treatment along with the conceptual development that that would involve.
(2) For all intents and purposes there is only one employer in the USSR: the state. The purchase and sale of labour-power there does not therefore, by doing so turn it into a commodity. It is therefore not as a result wage-labour in Marx’s sense of the word. In the same way as with southern slaves in the USA, the surpluses that Russian workers create do not appear immediately in the form of surplus values. They only become such as a result of an external valorisation process, and this is different from the classic case of private laissez-faire capitalism where the external world – the market – is needed not to create but only to realise the values that are already there as a result of the fact that labour power and the means of production have been previously purchased by the capitalist in a competitive market.
As with Marx’s capitalist plantation slavery, latter-day state capitalism stands in need of an external process of valorisation to make it a form of capitalism; and a failure to realise this, e.g. in Bettelheim and other’s theories of capitalist restoration in the USSR, only results in an impoverished understanding of what capitalism is all about.
In the case of capitalist slavery, the form of this external valorisation process was quite simply the market. The cotton was destined for the market in Lancashire and New England. And this converted the slave-produced surpluses into values.
But in the case of the USSR and other complete or nearly complete state capitalisms, the world commodity market absorbs only a small part of their produce. How then is the surplus valorised?
To begin with it is important to be clear about what ‘valorisation’ actually means. It is the process in which the various qualitatively different labouring activities are reduced to different quantities of their common substance: labour time. We then have a common measure – Marx referred to it as abstract general labour – for assessing values. But this is not just an accounting device, it is a real process through which the products of labour socialise their producers in definite ways. It occurs through competition, the confrontation of the products of labour with one another. For it to exist it therefore has to be the case that the various products of labour are piled up against each other.
In price competition, the precise results of this process vary according to whether the market is a pre-capitalist commodity market, laissez-faire or monopoly. Valorisation in these latter two cases takes place, as we have seen already, such that price is not equal to market value. What is preserved however, is that domination of the system ultimately by its ability to extract living surplus-value and by the limitations imposed by its very success at extracting surplus-value in the past.
For valorisation to take place in USSR Ltd., it has to be the case therefore that Russian products of labour are piled up against those of its competitors. Without this its labour would remain concrete and specific, not abstract and general.
But for this valorisation to be specifically capitalist, it also has to be the case that the economy is ultimately dominated by the surplus-values – living and dead – to which it gives rise.
Both these conditions exist in Russia today as we have made clear in the main text. The form of competition is mainly strategic and military, the products of human labour that are piled up against each other are basically armaments; and the entire economy is subordinated to this sector. It is this subordination to the military sector that enforces the rule of the category of surplus-value throughout the system, and which has brought about the incontrovertible signs of crisis that we drew attention to above.

Notes
1. The main examples of this in eastern Europe are from Hungary: M. Rakovski (1977), Marxism and Soviet Societies, Capital and Class, no. 1, and (1978), Towards an East European Marxism (Alison & Busby); (Rakovski is a pseudonym for two writers); from East Germany: R. Bahro (1977), The Alternative in Eastern Europe, New Left Review, no. 106, and (1978), The Alternative in Eastern Europe (New Left Books); from Russia: A. Zimin (1976–77) O sotsializme i neostalinizme (as yet untranslated), and (1977), On the Question of the Place in History of the Social Structure of the Soviet Union, in R. Medvedev (ed.), Samizdat Register 1, (Merlin).
2. See in particular: H. Ticktin (1973), Towards a Political Economy of the USSR, Critique, no. 1, (1976), The Contradictions of Soviet Society and Professor Bettelheim, Critique, no. 6; J. Fantham & M. Machover (1979), The Century of the Unexpected, Big Flame; A. Carlo (1974), The Socio-Economic Nature of the Soviet Union, Telos, no. 21; U. Melotti (1978), Marx and the Third World (Macmillan); C. Castoriadis (1978–79), The Social Regime in Russia, Telos, 1978.
3. Rakovski (1978), p. 13; Bahro (1977), p. 6.
4. Fantham & Machover (1979), p. 7.
5. Rakovski (1978), pp. 13,12; Bahro (1977), p. 6.
6. Rakovski (1978), p. 15.
7. Bahro (1977), p. 10; Fanthan & Machover, (1979), pp. 4, 11; Rakovski (1978), p. 15.
8. Bahro (1977), p. 9. Ticktin (1973), for instance, recognises external pressure but makes no serious attempt to relate it to his analysis, except at an empirical level. See also Fantham & Machover (1979), pp. 9–10.
9. Fantham & Machover (1979), Ticktin (1976), p. 32.
10. Fantham & Machover,(1979), p. 9; K. Marx, Grundrisse, 1977, p. 513. Patterson, Slavery in Human History, New Left Review, no. 117, 1979, admirably refutes both the idea of a ‘slave mode of production’ and the notion that the American slave South was not capitalist, drawing attention to the considerable marxist work on this question.
11. See the journal Comparative Studies in History and Society, 1978, vol. 20, no. 2 which reprints chapter 4 of Rakovski (1978) with a warm introduction from Alain Touraine.
12. Castoriadis (1978), p. 46.
13. Ticktin (1973), p. 23. For Hilferding see his State Capitalism or Totalitarian State Economy, reprinted in R. Daniels (ed.), The Stalin Revolution, 1965.
14. Bahro (1977). Even when these writers admit exploitation, its extent and limits remain unclear, because the dynamic of these societies remain indeterminate or “contradictory” (sic).
15. A point recognised by Castoriadis when he writes that “Up to a point modern bureaucracy can be comprehended within the Marxian frame of reference. Beyond that point, however, it explodes it.” (1978), p. 40.
16. Carlo (1974), pp. 7; 51–52.
17. Ibid., pp. 12–13, 71.
18. On these illusions see Tim Potter, China – Revisionism in Power – Reply, International Socialism, 2:3. Carlo’s ‘fellow-travelling’ even extends to his use of sources quoting such authoritative commentators on China as Joan Robinson, Paul Sweezy and Leo Huberman!
19. Fantham & Machover (1979), p. 4.
20. United Nations, Transnational Corporations in World Development: a reexamination, p. 43.
21. Public Sector Enterprise, The Economist, Dec. 30, 1978.
22. Sources: Ragioneria dello stato, Il Bilancio dello Stato dal 1862 al 1967, vol. 4, (allegati statistici. Le spese, Roma 1969); Workshop on Research Needs on the Management of Public Enterprise in Asia, International Development Research Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Country Papers, March 1974; Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Finance and Planning, Algiers, La situation, de l’emploi de la durée du travail et des salaires en 1972; Cf. R. Medina, Desnacionalizacto: Crime contra o Brasil? (Rio de Janiero 1970); and R. Munck, State and Capital in dependent Social Formations: the Brazilian Case, Capital and Class 8, Summer 1979; W. Shepherd (ed.), Public Enterprise (Lexington 1976), p. 214; HMSO, Cmnd4578.
23. W. Shepherd, op. cit., p. 214; C. Reynolds, The Mexican Economy (Yale 1970), pp. 270, 284–85; F. Pryor, Property and Industrial Organisation Communist and Capitalist Nations, (Indiana UP, 1973), pp. 46–47.
24. C. Issani, Egypt in Revolution (London 1963), pp. 46–75; I. Birmingham et al., A Study of Contemporary Ghana, vol. 1 (London 1966), pp. 411–16.
25. N. Harris, Economic growth in India and China, International Socialism 1:60; C. Onslow (ed.), Asian Economic Development (London 1965), p. 10; R. Freeman, Socialism and Private Enterprise in Equatorial Asia (Stanford 1968), pp. 36–40; A. Meyer, Middle Eastern Capitalism (Harvard 1959), pp. 99–100; M. Hassan, Orecimento Economico y Problemas de Empleo en Venezuela (Caracas 1973), pp. 133–168; Plan Nacional de Desarrollo Economico y Social, 1962–1971, Resumen, Junta Nacional de Planimiento (La Paz 1962); R. Munck, op. cit., pp. 44–48; R. Thorp, G. Bertram, Peru 1890–1977 (London 1978), p. 303; J. Ross, The Economic Structure of Mexico (Stanford 1971), pp. 43–59; J. Behrman, Chile (New York 1976), pp. 108–109.
26. By “dominant” we mean here that, irrespective of the size of one sector of the economy compared with the rest, it tends to set the pattern of accumulation, rate of exploitation, rate of profit &c. for the rest of the economy.
27. I. Deutscher, Stalin (London 1966), p. 232
28. T. Cliff, State Capitalism in Russia, 1974, apart from its theoretical significance is still a valuable discussion of these developments. More recent historical work is discussed in M. Haynes, The Resurrection of Bukharin, International Socialism, 2:2, Autumn 1978.
29. See, for example, K. Fitzlyon, Plan and Prediction, Soviet Studies, 1970, vol. 21 no. 2.
30. See V.P. Shredov’s Economika ipravo, 1967 and the discussion of it in M. Lewin, Political Undercurrents in Soviet Economic Debates (Pluto), 1975, chap. 8.
31. See for example R. Hutchings, Periodic Fluctuations in Soviet Industrial Growth Rates, Soviet Studies, vol. XX, Jan. 1969, and his Fluctuations and Interactions in Estimates of Soviet Budget Expenditure, Ost Europa Wirtschaft, 1973, no. 1. Both pieces contain references to the other literature on this topic.
32. C. Harman, Poland the Crisis of State Capitalism, International Socialism, 1st series, 1976, no. 93. We say begin because we do not want to suggest a definitive solution has been offered.
33. For further details cf. A. Zauberman, The Eastern European Economies, Problems of Communism, March/April 1978.
34. Cf. Grossman, Problems of Communism, March 1976.
35. C. Harman, Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe, p. 256.
36. A. Zauberman, op. cit., pp. 57–61.
37. Cf. C. Harman, Poland, op. cit.; A. Zauberman, op. cit., p. 68.
38. B. Caplan, Hungary tests the market, Banker, June 1979.
39. Fantham & Machover, (1979), p. 9.
40. For instance, L. Rostas, Comparative Productivity in British and American Industry, 1948.
41. For a thorough exposition, and exposure of Shachtmanism, cf. T. Cliff, A Critique of the Theory of Bureaucratic Collectivism, International Socialism 1:32.
 



Essays on Marx’s Theory of Value
I.I. Rubin
Black and Red. £1.60
Rubin wrote these essays for a very different audience when they first appeared in 1928. The people he was speaking to either regarded Marxism as the positive science of the capitalist economy – stressing the purely quantitative side of Marx’s Capital and treating the social critique as incidental and detachable. Or they saw Marxism as based upon non-scientific and moral premises. Rubin sees his task as reintroducing what he calls the qualitative side of Marx’s Capital. According to him, the quantitative approach is purely one sided: Without examining the aspect which shows how the quantities depend upon a continuously recreated social relationship between capital and labour, one can only end up with a purely mechanical view. By stressing the qualitative side of Capital, Rubin saw himself as restoring the politics to political economy.
Rubin does this very well. The central point of his argument is that the labour theory of value is not an absolute starting point for the examination of any economy. On the contrary it is itself derived from highly historically specific social relations of production.
‘Labour does not, in itself, give value to the product, but only that labour which is organised in a determined social form.’ (p.68)
‘“Value” does not characterise things, but human relations in which things are produced.’ (p.69)
Now while it is true that Marx also has a more absolute labour theory for examining all economies (not just commodity or capitalist economies), Rubin is correct to stress the more socially relative form. For the former only leads to an understanding of economies in a material or technical sense – i.e. as aggregates of concrete labours; whereas the only economic category out of which the quantitative laws can be generated is that of abstract labour. And this category only appears after the different concrete labours have been mutually equallised through exchange. For Rubin this ‘can only be realised through the process of market exchange, through the value of commodities’. (p.85)
But in his attempt to stress this, Rubin has left us an account that is both hopelessly one-sided as an overall view of the capitalist economy, and one which today (unlike 1928) does not serve to counteract prevailing misconceptions about capitalism – but on the contrary to accentuate them. His central error is to see capitalism as a form of the commodity economy and not vice versa. For him
‘the production relations of capitalist society, expressed in the concepts capital, wages, profit, interest, rent etc, appear in the form of relations among independent commodity producers, relations which are expressed through the concept of value. Capital is a variety of value because the production relation between the capitalist and the workers take the form of a relation between equal commodity producers.’ (pp.91-2)
His sole reason for believing this is that:
‘The theory of value, which takes as its starting point the equalisation of exchanged commodities, because production relations between capitalists and workers take the form of relations between formally equal, independent commodity producers.’ (p.94)
Of course to understand capitalism it is good to begin with the commodity, but is this the same as saying that capitalism is merely a species of the commodity economy? Certainly not. For Marx this would be ‘merely the way in which thought appropriates the concrete, reproduces it as the concrete in the mind’ (Grundrisse). For Marx there are Capitalist, Feudal, Oriental, Ancient modes of production but no commodity mode of production. Why not? The commodity appears in each of them, but in each case it is dominated by, and made subservient to something else. In modern capitalism the commodity is an inert tool for the self-expansion of capital. The forces of production in capitalist society do indeed have to take on a social form in addition to their technical or material form. But they do so not as commodities but as capital – as variable capital (labour) and as constant capital (machines etc.). They may (or may not) also be commodities, but that is a separate question.
Today with the vastly increased role of the capitalist state in the economy, the growth of monopoly, administered or controlled pricing etc, Rubin’s picture is positively antideluvian. Actually it is his approach rather than his conclusions themselves which is wrong. For he does admit:
‘labour-value (or commodity) is a historical prius in relation to production price (or capital). It existed in rudimentary form before capitalism, and only the development of the commodity economy prepared the basis for the emergence of the capitalist economy. But labour-value in its developed form exists only in capitalism.’ (p.256)
If he had taken this seriously he would have written a different book. It is our loss that he has not done so. Stressing the qualitative against the quantitative sides of Marx’s Capital had its uses 50 years ago. Today it is a serious impediment. It prevents us seeing how capitalism is developing and according to what principles it does so.
 



Collected Works, Vols.3 and 4
K. Marx and F. Engels
Lawrence and Wishart, £3 each.
These volumes cover the period March 1843 to November 1845. They reveal the most astonishing advances that Marx and Engels made at this time – at first each on their own, and then, after August 1844, collectively. We can list them briefly as follows:


The destruction of Hegel’s politics on the basis of Feuerbach’s materialism,
The first acquaintance with the industrial proletariat – trade unions, strikes, unemployment, impoverishment,
The development of a scrupulous scientific method involving detailed empirical observation,
The first appreciations and criticisms of the works of the great classical economists – particularly Smith and Ricardo,
The realisation that all civil society and politics is based upon specific modes of production, and finally
The understanding that the industrial proletariat is the key agency for the liberation of all oppressed classes, and that the society that it must create in doing so can be none other than communism.


There has been a lot of talk recently about the differences between Marx and Engels, usually by people who want to praise Marx and condemn Engels. Yet in these volumes it is Engels and not Marx who makes the running. In all of the six main areas of advance listed above Engels is first in the field. Marx does indeed make enormous strides, but every time it is on Engels shoulders. Twenty five years later Marx considered his own writing in this period as immature and at the same time he praised Engels’ Condition of the Working Class in England because Engels ‘completely understood the nature of the capitalist mode of production’. Engels had an eye for detail, a remarkable ability to assimilate and discover facts from both bourgeois and proletarian sources, and above all the direct experience of the British industrial proletariat.
Marx on the other hand had to learn all this from scratch. He was hampered by a brilliant literary/philosophical style which was at its best when employing metaphor and allegory against philosophical opponents, but not so good when coming to terms with the untidy world of reality. The fascination of these volumes lies in the way they show how Marx gradually assimilated Engels’ more innate form of ‘marxism’. They show how in many cases historical-materialist views replaced the earlier ‘philosophical’ one, how in other cases they uneasily co-existed alongside them for a time, and how in a few cases Marx puts Engels’ insights into a more Hegelianised framework.
But the dominant impression we get of Marx is of someone who is so consciously trying to live down his Hegelian past that he ‘bends the stick’ very much the other way – endorsing Feuerbach’s undialectical materialism just because it provides a good (but temporary) stick to beat Hegel with. But it is undoubtedly true that Marx had illusions not only in Feuerbach but also in finding a philosophical base for socialism. He writes to Feuerbach in 1844:
In these writings you have provided – I don’t know whether intentionally – a philosophical basis for socialism and the Communists have immediately understood them in this way. (Vol.3, p.354)
He was looking for a form of humanism based on Feuerbach’s philosophy, and he continued to do. so even in The Holy Family (1845), where he has already seen that the class struggle of the workers is central to the fight for socialism:
There is no need for any great penetration to see ... how necessarily materialism is connected with communism and socialism. If man draws all his knowledge, sensation, etc., from the world of the senses and the experience gained in it, then what has to be done is to arrange the empirical world in such a way that man experiences and becomes accustomed to what is truly human in it and that he becomes aware of himself as a man. (Vol.4, p.130)
But if class antagonisms are irreconcilable these universal and supra-class rationalisations are quite empty, and must ultimately lead us away from the task of helping the fight of the oppressed. That is why from this point on Marx ceases to look for a philosophical base for proletarian struggle. On the contrary it is proletarian struggle itself which will and must provide the real and practical basis for the solution of the problems of ethics and philosophy. What makes The Holy Family so interesting is that it provides us with an answer which is an inconsistent mixture of both the humanist and the class-struggle answer.
The contradiction was removed with Marx’s next work, The German Ideology, in which no traces of the earlier humanism are to be found. But the fascination of these two volumes is that in The Holy Family, as well as with most of the other works here, one can actually see historical materialism being born. It is as well to remind ourselves that marxism is not the holy grail in which the Word descends from the Divine Master, but was made in specific circumstances for specific purposes. We cannot avoid the task of continually remaking it in the same manner.
 



Marx and Engels, Collected Works
Lawrence and Wishart, 1975, £3 per volume
Vol.1: Karl Marx 1835-43
Vol 2: Frederick Engels 1838-42
Karl Marx: Early Writings
Penguin Books, 1975, £1.
THE ‘EARLY Marx’ has come in for a lot of attention since the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts were first published in 1932. What kind of an animal was he? And was the ‘Early Engels’ of the same or of a different species? Why a special category anyway – no one talks about the ‘Early Lenin’? Is this difference justifiable?
Now for the first time the English-speaking reader can judge for himself. These works reveal in full detail the development of Marx and Engels from their late teens to their mid-twenties. And in neither case do they reveal sudden blinding revelations of the truth of revolutionary scientific socialism. On the contrary it happened slowly and unevenly. Engels, the self-taught intellectual and aesthete, was sent to England by his father – a conservative industrialist, who feared the radical company that young Frederick was keeping at home. England, it was hoped, would bring him out of the clouds and back to earth again. It awakened him instead to the English proletariat.
For Engels direct acquaintance with the proletariat overtook his involvement with literature, religion and above all philosophy. For Marx it was the other way about. His involvements with religion, Hegel’s idealism and Feuerbach’s materialism were ended before he became a revolutionary socialist. Intellectually he had already settled accounts with them in a series of savage critiques. He never needed to re-open these questions again, unlike Engels who devoted later works of dubious merit like Anti-Dühring and Dialectics of Nature to them.
So inevitably it is the early works of Marx which reveal most clearly the changes in the attempt to understand the world as a whole. And from the first volume of the Collected Works we can already see how early is his rejection of Hegel’s metaphysics. His Doctoral Dissertation, written in 1840-41, shows for instance unequivocal support for the Greek philosopher Epicurus‘ version of materialism. It also shows that already his differences with Hegel were not with one or another part of his system, (as they were for the ‘left’ Hegelians who criticised Hegel’s accommodation to the Prussian state, but who praised his method) but with the system as a whole. ‘In relation to Hegel,’ Marx argues, ‘it is mere ignorance on the part of his pupils, when they explain one or the other determination of his system by his desire for accommodation and the like... this apparent accommodation has its deepest roots in an inadequacy or an inadequate formulation of his principle itself (Collected Works, Vol.1, p. 84).
By 1841 Marx had already developed a highly sophisticated form of materialism, basing himself, as we have mentioned, on Epicurus. Yet it was that it was just a form. It was not concretised in any substantial way. Crucially it lacked any social or historical dimension. All this he was to provide in good measure in time, but before that happened Marx devoted himself to an all-out attack on Hegelianism. During 1842 and 1843 everything was subordinated to this task. The fruits appeared in the Critique of Hegel’s Doctrine of the State, On the Jewish Question, and the Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Law.
For Hegel the material world is produced by an all-pervading spiritual force, and the point of Marx’s polemics is not just to show that this is false, but also to demonstrate that it is the other way about. Hegel has got things the wrong way round. Before we can proceed they must be ‘turned right side up again’ (as Marx put it later in Capital). But he does not leave things here. That Hegel sees things upside down is due to the fact that the world he is reflecting is itself topsy turvy:
‘Hegel should not be blamed for describing the essence of the state as it is, but for identifying what is with the essence of the State.’ (Early Writings, p.149, Marx’s emphasis).
So the solution to the problems of German philosophy can only be found outside that philosophy:
‘the criticism of the speculative philosophy of law finds its progression not only within itself but in tasks which can only be solved in one way – through practice’ (Ibid., p.251, Marx’s emphasis).
It was this which led Marx to the proletariat:
‘So where is the positive possibility of German emancipation? This is our answer. In the formation of a class with radical claims, a class which cannot emancipate itself without emancipating itself from – and thereby emancipating – all other spheres of society. This dissolution of society as a particular class is the proletariat.’ (Ibid., p.256, Marx’s emphasis).
In these works one can see many of Marx’s ideas in embryo. His materialism, his revolutionary approach to existing society, his understanding of the class nature of the state, his attachment to the proletariat as the only agent for bringing socialism, all these and many more. Enriched with the economic and historical dimensions that his later studies gave him, these insights became crucial elements of his mature thought.
Obviously some of these views became amended, but none of them very seriously. Perhaps the most important is that in Marx’s polemics against Hegel he sometimes ‘turns Hegel on his head’ too much. In later years he insisted on distinguishing between the real material pre-conditions for capitalist society, and the intrinsic logic of its development. (See for instance the remarks on the method of Political Economy in the Introduction to the Grundrisse). In these early works these are not separated but are collapsed into one. It is a pity that Colletti, the commentator of the Penguin edition, gives the impression that this is a good thing (see page 32).
 



Russia Today: A Workers’ State?
IN RUSSIA today workers exercise control neither over industry nor over the state. The last remnants of workers’ control over production, the Troika, was abolished in 1929. In its place stepped the manager whose orders were now to be ‘unconditionally binding on his subordinate administrative staff and on all workers’. [1] Trade unions were stripped of all functions, and particularly, the negotiation of wages at the same time. An internal passport system was introduced, and in 1930 all industrial enterprises were forbidden to employ workers who left their former jobs without permission. [2] Forced or slave labour was introduced on a massive scale as Stalin’s terror campaign against the working class gathered momentum in the 1930s. As the Russian authorities themselves cynically put it:
‘With the entry of the USSR into the period of socialism, the possibility of using coercive measures by corrective labour have immeasurably increased.’ [3]
In Russia the state owns the means of production, but who owns the means of production, but who owns the state? Certainly not the workers! The Russian state was supposed to be a union of Soviets in which delegates were elected from the workplace. In fact all efforts to start any independent workers’ initiatives, let alone workers’ councils, are now suppressed and are standardly rewarded with extreme forms of repression. As Kirov, Stalin’s henchman accurately prophesised: ‘We shall be pitiless [to] those lacking in firmness in the factory and the villages and who fail to carry out the plan.’ [4] Thousands of managers were imprisoned for not repressing their workers enough. In this situation it takes little imagination to understand the fate of workers who actually went as far as demanding some measure of workers’ power! For instance, hundreds of slave labourers were shot down in 1953 for striking over the failure of the authorities to carry out their promises of an amnesty. [5] The viciousness of the response is typical, and has been repeated many times before and since, but it gives us a good idea what happens to workers who actually demand something more than this.
Even in bourgeois parliamentary terms the ‘Soviet’ regime is a complete fraud: elections are a sham and even the ‘Supreme Soviet’ has formal and not real powers. For instance none of the five and seven year plans, and none of the sharp turns in foreign policy were discussed by this supposedly supreme organ of state until after they had already been implemented! ‘Elections’ for this body take place in constituencies where there is never more than one candidate standing (nominated from above), and where he never gets less than 93 per cent of the poll, but sometimes (like Stalin in 1947) is known to ‘receive’ as much as 100 per cent! [6] So while the state owns the means of production, it would obviously be complete nonsense to believe that the workers own the state.
 
Capitalism: A Process Continually Transforming Itself
WHAT KIND of society is it then in Russia? Certainly it is not socialist, and certainly it contains no private owners of capital competing with each other as is normally the case in the west.
First of all let us see what capitalism is. We encounter some difficulties when we attempt to define it. These arise because capitalism is a real process, continually in motion, not a fixed thing.
Capitalism in the middle of the last century was largely based on a free market and production by wage-labourers within independent enterprises. But this was not always the case. In fact capitalism began in England in the 17th and 18th centuries with slave-labour and looting in the colonies as part of its base. It also began with trade, but trade based on the vigorous intervention of the state and the denial of the free market (the so-called mercantile system).
In discussing the dawn of capitalism Marx stresses not only the growth of the wages system but
‘The discovery of gold and silver in America, the extirpation, enslavement and entombment in mines of the aboriginal population, the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East Indies, the turning of Africa into the warren for the commercial hunting of black skins, signalised the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist production ... Great fortunes sprang up like mushrooms in a day: primitive accumulation went on without the advance of a shilling.’ [7]
And instead of the ‘invisible hand’ of the laws of supply and demand, in Britain there was ‘a systematic combination, embracing the colonies, the national debt, the modern mode of taxation, and the protectionist system. These methods depend in part on brute force, eg. the colonial system. But they all employ the power of the state ...’ [8]
That is why Marx warns us:
‘If, then, the specific form of capital is abstracted away, and only the content is emphasised ... Capital is conceived as a thing, not as a relation ... (but) capital is not a simple relation, but a process, in whose various moments it is always capital.’ [9]
Because it is a process, and one which contains contradictions, it is always changing itself as it develops. We need to understand its dynamic – the underlying principle according to which it changes and develops. Capitalism remains capitalism throughout its various changes because its central dynamic, its internal motor, remains unchanged, and it is to this that we now turn.
 
Accumulation: The Key to Capitalism’s Development
THE THING which links the early stage of capitalist development based on monopoly, looting and slavery, with later stages like those of 19th century private capitalism and 20th century state monopoly capitalism, is the nature of the accumulation process.
Marx thus characterises capitalism in the Communist Manifesto as where
‘... the labourer lives merely to increase capital, and is allowed to live only in so far as the interest of the ruling class requires it. In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to increase accumulated labour. In Communist society, accumulated labour is but a means to enrich, to widen, to promote the existence of the labourer. In bourgeois society, therefore, the past dominates the present; in Communist society the present dominates the past.’ [10]
In Capital Marx stresses that the motive force of capitalism is not the consumption of the capitalist, but the fact that in order to fulfill his role as a capitalist he has to accumulate:
‘[The capitalists] own private consumption is a robbery perpetrated on accumulation ... Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets! ... Therefore, save, save, ie. reconvert the greatest possible portion of surplus value, or surplus product into capital! Accumulation for accumulation’s sake, production for production’s sake ...’ [11]
The drive for accumulation as a means to still greater accumulation, which is the essence of capitalism, is due to two main factors.

Workers are separated from the means of production. If they controlled production as a whole, it would be subordinated to use, to consumption. In so far as they decided to accumulate it would only be as a means for the further end of consumption.
There is competition between the capitalists. Without it each capitalist could decide freely whether to consume the surplus product, to accumulate it, or even to return it to the workers who created it. It is competition which makes him accumulate and it does so by threatening him with extinction by rival capitalists if he doesn’t. That is why ‘competition makes the immanent laws of capitalist production to be felt by each individual capitalist, as external coercive laws’. [12]
 

Competition: The Mainspring of Capitalism
BUT COMPETITION, which Marx saw as ‘nothing other than the inner nature of capital, appearing in and realised as the reciprocal interaction of many capitals with one another ...’ [13], is actually continually subverted by the accumulation process which it creates. For this increases the size of the capitals which confront each other, not only by ploughing back the maximum surplus, but also by reducing the number of independent owners of capital. Competition thus leads both to concentration and also centralisation of capital. Monopolies and trusts appear whose mutual competition for markets and funds is much reduced, and the more effective the monopoly the more it subverts the ‘inner nature of capital’. Marx remarked:
‘Today, therefore, the force of attraction, drawing together individual capitals, and the tendency to centralisation are stronger than ever before ... In any given branch of industry centralisation would reach its extreme limit if all the individual capitals invested in it were fused into a single capital. In a given society the limit would be reached only when the entire social capital was united in the hands of either a single capitalist or a single capitalist company.’ [14]
In Marx’s own life time the dominant means for the centralisation of capital was not the monopolistic merger, but the conversion of an individual’s capital into his part ownership of a joint-stock company. Of this process Marx said:
‘This is the abolition of the capitalist mode of production within the capitalist mode of production itself, and hence a self-dissolving contradiction, which prima facie represents a mere phase of transition to a new form of production. It manifests itself as such a contradiction in its effects. It establishes a monopoly in certain spheres and thereby requires state interference. It reproduces a new financial aristocracy, a new variety of parasites in the shape of promoters, speculators and simply nominal directors; a whole system of swindling and cheating by means of corporation promotion, stock insurance, and stock speculation. It is private production without the control of private property.’ [15]
Updating this passage to the 1890s, Engels commented:
‘Since Marx wrote the above, new forms of industrial enterprise have developed ... the old boasted freedom of competition has reached the end of its tether and must itself announce its obvious, scandalous bankruptcy ... in some branches ... competition has been replaced by monopoly.’ [16]
Yet in spite of these clear and obvious points, apologists for Russia’s present economic and social structure have taken an opposite view. They have taken one stage in the development of capitalism where there was individual ownership of capital and price competition, and then argued that since no such things exist in Russia today, no new social revolution is needed there. For instance Mandel justifies this conclusion by saying that planning is
‘a specific set of relations of production resulting from the suppression of the private property of the means of production and the beginning of the withering away of commodity production, through which the labour performed in collectively owned factories is recognised as immediately social labour.’ [17]
Taking the logic of this view seriously we would have to conclude that capitalism had ceased by the end of the 19th century, for as Engels commented against those who wanted to argue similarly in the Erfurt Programme:
‘I know of capitalist production as a social form, as an economic stage: and of capitalist private production as a phenomenon occurring one way or another within that stage. What does capitalist private production mean then? Production by a single entrepreneur, and that is of course becoming more and more an exception. Capitalist production through limited companies is already no longer private production, but production for the combined account of many people. And when we move on to the Trusts, which control and monopolise whole branches, then that means an end not only to the private production, but also to the planlessness.’ [18]
The message is clear. Not only are such apologies for Stalinism quite mistaken, but they are also exactly the same as the arguments mounted by extreme right-wing social democrats like Anthony Crosland to support the non-existence of western capitalism, which after all has also passed beyond the privatised and planless stage.
The real position is rather different. Planlessness and private production is but one stage in the development of capitalism, and yet for all that competition is capitalism’s ‘inner essence’. Obviously competition must be able to take on other forms than price competition between commodities produced by private capital for an anonymous market.
Such considerations as these formed the starting point for the most fruitful developments of marxist economic theory in this century, in particular Lenin and Bukharin’s theories of monopoly and imperialism. Based upon these premises they argued that ‘peaceful’ competition more and more turned into war, taking the form of physical seizure of raw materials, exclusion of rival capitalists by the erection of tarif walls etc.
It is quite impossible to understand the fantastic expansion in the role played by the capitalist state in the 20th century unless one also understands that it serves to create competitive coercion.
 
Russia Considered in Isolation from the Rest of the World
HOW THEN does the Russian economy and state appear in this context? Two features, as we saw earlier, were necessary for the specifically capitalist tendency of accumulation for the sake of accumulation: 1. Separation of the workers from the means of production, and 2. Competition between the capitalists.
Obviously the first of these exists in an extreme form in Russia. It is more developed than in the west due to the increased powers of repression of a totalitarian police state.
But what about the second feature? Overwhelmingly it is the case that within the Russian economy there is centralised administration of production. Individual productive units have rarely been autonomous or in competition with each other. In western capitalism we are used to the attempt to plan and cooperate within any given enterprise, coupled with competition outside it. Russia, considered purely on its own, lacks the mechanisms for introducing this competitive element. As Cliff puts it:
‘The division of labour within Russian society is in essence a species of the division of labour within a single workshop.’ [19]
If any one capitalist enterprise, General Motors or IBM say, had successfully managed to take over the whole of the world economy, capitalism would have ceased to exist. Competition between capitals would end, and therefore so too would accumulation for the sake of accumulation and production for the sake of accumulation. This would not be socialism of course but a new class society – one which Bukharin characterised as an industrial ‘slave-owning economy where the slave market is absent’. [20]
This gives us an accurate picture of what Russia might have been like had it been possible to remain in isolation from the rest of the world – just like this but on a smaller scale.
What this means is that if Russia were unaffected by the world around it, it could no longer be a society explainable by the laws of capitalism. Enterprises in Russia would not be forced by mutual competition to accumulate or increase the organic composition of capital. The purpose of production would be the creation of use values rather than the revenue obtained from selling them. Russia would have become a gigantic corporation in which the state had become the repository for all the means of production. In these two respects, ie. 1. state ownership of the means of production, and 2. use values as the purpose of production, and in these respects alone, it would resemble a workers’ state. It would also resemble Egypt of the Pharoehs and the ancient civilisations of Assyria and the Indus Valley, not just in these two respects, but also by being a hierarchical class society in which the producers themselves did not control production.
 
The Beginning of State Capitalism in Russia
BUT OF course Russia never could have been isolated from the rest of the world. Lenin was an internationalist not just because he wanted world socialism, but because he knew that the only way to get socialism anywhere including Russia, was for the working class to seize power in the dominant industrial capitalist countries:
‘We always staked our play upon an international revolution and this was unconditionally right ... We always emphasised ... the fact that in one country it is impossible to accomplish such a work as a socialist revolution.’ [21]
Or again in March 1919, Lenin repeated:
‘We do not live merely in a state but in a system of states and the existence of the Soviet Republic side by side with imperialist states for any length of time is inconceivable. In the end one or the other must triumph.’ [22]
Lenin made it clear that the source of the incompatibility was not just the military intervention of the imperialist powers, but Russia’s economic dependence upon the surrounding capitalist states; for he refers to the ‘... international market to which we are subordinated, with which we are connected and from which we cannot escape’. [23]
The extreme backwardness of Russia in an age of imperialism forced it to industrialise rapidly. If the revolutions in Germany and elsewhere had succeeded, plenty of means of production and skilled labour could have flowed into Russia to accomplish this task. But when the perspective changed from stressing the need to spread the revolution internationally to stressing the building of ‘socialism’ in a single country, as proposed by Stalin in 1924, the situation was completely reversed. If industrialisation was to take place in Russia in isolation it could only be by extracting huge surpluses from the peasantry, and by forcing many of these peasants off the land into the mines and the steel mills.
The bureaucracy could only retain power in so far as it could succeed in this task. It required a vast terror apparatus to subordinate the consumption of the masses to the accumulation needs of the Russian state. For a time Stalin tried to avoid this logic. He allied with the right wing in the Bolshevik party which spoke of ‘proceeding towards socialism at a snail’s pace’ without attacks on the peasantry. But this meant that what accumulation there was in the years 1923-8 went into the social services, education, agriculture and food, rather than heavy industry. Very little progress was made in these years towards catching up with the west.
An increase in international tension in 1927 showed the danger of the policy: without a more rapid rate of accumulation there was no way (other than international revolution, already ruled out by Stalin) of defending Russia. Stalin was forced to break with Bukharin a year later and follow a policy which went for all-out accumulation, regardless of the interests of Russian workers or, for that matter, individual bureaucrats.
The last vestiges of workers’ control were eliminated from the factories. Real wages were slashed and a general speed-up was introduced. Peasants were forcibly driven off the land to become factory fodder in the cities. The bureaucracy thus began a massive, primitive accumulation of capital. The results were immediate. Investment in industry expanded six times its 1923-8 level in the years 1928-33, and thereafter doubled in each of the succeeding five year periods. [24]
 
Capitalist Relations of Production Imposed Through Primitive Accumulation and the Arms Race
IN RUSSIA, the subordination of consumption to the needs of accumulation took on an extreme form. From the beginning of the first 5-year plan capital accumulation absorbed more than 20 per cent of the National Income, and it increased in subsequent plans. [25] This was higher than any of the developed capitalist countries outside Russia (but about the same as the USA and Japan in their equivalent periods of development), and shows clearly that this most characteristic symptom of capitalism – the domination of society by capital accumulation was fully developed in Russia.
Accumulation and not consumption thus became the goal of production in Russia. Acting as the agent for the accumulation of capital, the bureaucracy emerged as the collective capitalist at the same pace as the economy itself took on the same features of the giant corporations in the nations of the west that Russia was competing against.
The bureaucracy’s monopoly of foreign trade enabled it to seal off Russia from price competition. But strategic and military competition completely dominated the process of capital formation in Russia from the moment accumulation became the bureaucracy’s central concern in 1928.
From the beginning of the 5-year plans armaments dominated the accumulation process. For instance in machine-building plants, which are probably the best gauge of the development of accumulation, already by 1932 munitions plants accounted for as much as 46 per cent of total iron and steel consumed. By 1938 this figure had risen to the staggering sum of 94 per cent [26], and virtually all other machinery plant construction had ceased!
Accumulation in the pre-war period was dominated by strategic and military competition with the western nations. This was even more true for Russia after the war. Between 1950 and 1965 approximately twice as large a percentage of the national income was spent on armaments as in the 1930s, even though the proportion of total income accumulated throughout the economy remained largely unchanged. [27] The effect this had was for armaments to be directly responsible for around two thirds of all capital accumulated in this period. [28] Since 1928 therefore, not only has consumption been subordinated to accumulation, but in addition we can find the reasons for this in the competitive, coercive structure of world capitalism which accounts for the vast bulk of Russia’s tendency for accumulation for the sake of accumulation. It is not their own desires therefore, but the logic of world capitalism which forces the bureaucracy to accumulate.
 
The Dynamic of Russian Society Determined by the World Around It
BASICALLY RUSSIA is like one big factory, and although if it had existed in a vacuum the laws of capitalist development would cease to apply to it, that is obviously not the present case. Its actual behaviour is therefore based upon the same laws which govern the actions of other corporations. Of course we know that when corporations get very big and monopolise markets etc, we have to modify these laws. But the modifications are always on the basis of the original laws, and because of this they always preserve the basic tendencies and contradictions even if in a distorted form.
All this is another way of saying what we remarked upon at the beginning – capitalism is a process in continuous movement, not an unchanging thing. We identify it by its inherent tendencies, by its dynamic. That is why we look to Russia’s accumulation for accumulation’s sake based upon competition with western capitalism as the key to explaining changes in its internal structure rather than the other way about.
In just the same way Marx explained the southern states of the USA, whose economy was not based upon wage-labour, but on slavery, in terms of the capitalist social relations in the surrounding states. ‘Negro slavery’, he tells us, ‘presupposes wage labour, and if other, free states with wage labour did not exist alongside it, if, instead, the Negro states were isolated, then all social conditions there would immediately turn into pre-civilised forms.’ [29]
So in spite of the fact that there was no free wage labour for the slave in the southern USA in the 19th century, for Marx there was never any question of looking for a completely separate set of laws to explain its economy. In exactly the same way we can only begin to explain the dynamic of Russia today by relating it to the structure prevailing in the surrounding capitalist world economy.
 
Use Values and Exchange Values in Russia and the West
IT IS often argued that Russia cannot be capitalist because the internal organisation of the economy is not based upon competition of goods on the market. Firms produce according to instructions laid down by a central authority. It is said that therefore by definition they cannot be turning out commodities and Russia cannot be capitalist.
Marx says that the production of goods which are not exchanged with other goods on the market is the production of use-values not exchange-values: ‘To become a commodity a product must be transferred to another, to whom it will serve as a use-value, by means of an exchange.’ [30] Therefore Russia cannot be capitalist.
If this argument were correct much of production in the west would not be capitalist production either. Competition between the monopoly corporations in the west has increasingly been not so much over prices. The capitalist state has played an ever increasing role in the economy.
If Russia cannot be capitalist because production is organised by the state, very much under the influence of military considerations, then huge chunks of the western economy cannot be capitalist either, since they also produce for the state according to prearranged ‘plans’ without facing real competition. Furthermore many countries in the west have a substantial state sector to the economy. In Italy today the state owns or controls nearly half the economy. [32]
Finally, the non-state sector in the west is increasingly dominated by massive monopolies: in Britain today a hundred firms, dominated by interlocking directorships, control half the private sector production.
Within both the state sector and the monopolies, the individual productive units do not in the main produce for the market, but for other sections of the same enterprise, according to instructions laid down in advance. A single plant may well produce goods not for exchange, but for use by other plants inside the same combine.
Yet in the long run, all the different stages of production within the factory tend to obey the laws of capitalism. The individual capitalist is under pressure to impose the laws of capitalism within his own factory, even though there is planning within the factory, to maximise his profit. Although workers in one part of the factory are producing use values for workers in other parts of the factory - not exchange values - their production is regulated by similar considerations as if they were producing commodities for the market. The external relations of the factory to the rest of the economy transform the different stages of production within the factory into stages of capitalist production.
The same considerations apply when we look at the operation of the giant monopolies. Although vast areas of their operations are planned and very remote from the market, in the last analysis their competition with other monopolies ensures that capitalist laws prevail.
Production for the military needs of the state is not qualitatively different from monopoly production. Although the goods involved are never going to be exchanged on a competitive market (in Britain only 10 per cent of arms are sold to anyone but the British government), those who plan production are still compelled to impose the laws of capitalism on it.
Normally they do this by using various devices to compare the performance, costing and so on in the arms sector with other sectors. On the basis of such measurements, the state agrees to the arms barons receiving a certain level of remuneration. So although the arms companies rarely compete for markets with anyone, they have to behave as if they do. Capitalism continues to exist – even though the state bureaucracy acts as a substitute for the market.
In each case the mechanisms that are employed internally are similar. Labour has to be exploited as efficiently as by the rival, productivity has continually to be jacked up. Although the individual firm or country may plan its operations, the content of this ‘plan’ depends on its relationship to its rival: if it cannot match its rival’s increases in the rate of exploitation or advances in technology, then it will be in danger. What determines the internal organisation of each country, as of each firm, is its relationship to a total system outside itself.
That is why the huge arms sector of the US economy today is a capitalist sector: it has to compare its productivity, its level of technology and its labour costs with those of the rest of the western countries and with the Russian economy because of economic competition with Europe and Japan and in military competition with Russia.
Similarly for the Russian economy as a whole. If it is dominated by arms production (as we have shown above) then it is dominated by its relationship with production outside Russia. What matters to the rulers of Russia is not how many use values they pile up in the abstract, but how these use values compare with the use values piled up by the American arms economy.
But when two piles of use values are measured up against one another, they cease to be merely use values. They begin to behave like exchange values: their value no longer depends upon their intrinsic qualities, but upon their relationship to production throughout the world system.
The very things which the rulers of Russia worry about show how they are dominated in all their calculations by such considerations just as much as any western monopolist is. When they talk about rates of growth, it is rates of growth compared with the west. They are not worried about the outputs of labour as such, but labour productivity compared with the west. They are obsessed with their low rate of innovation, again, compared with the west.
The key areas of economic decision making which affect workers are made according to the same sorts of calculations that apply in the west: how can the profitability of different sectors be improved? How can workers be persuaded to accept a cut in the labour force and increased output in return for more pay? What level of wages is needed to ensure that workers produce at the greatest possible speed? The consequences of the competitive relationship with the west are inescapable.
Marx moves from an analysis of individual commodity production at the beginning of volume 1 of Capital to the dynamic of capitalism, accumulation, towards the end. We begin by showing that in Russia, as in the west, everything is subordinated to accumulation. Now we can see that accumulation is in turn the result of the competitive relationship between the Russian ruling class and its rivals, which transforms the output of Russian industry as a whole into production dominated by the essentially capitalist criterion of exchange value.
 
The Contradictions of State Capitalism
IF RUSSIA is economically speaking just like one huge corporation, then the familiar contradictions of capitalism must appear there too. That means that sooner or later the rate of profit must decline.
In the west this has in the past signalled the beginning of a slump. Investment ceases, demand declines, overproduction begins, and then capital values collapse. Out of the crisis the weakest units of capital become bankrupt and are absorbed at bargain prices by the stronger units of capital. This restructures capital and makes it possible for it to function again. With rivals bankrupt and capital values much lower, the rate of profit temporarily recovers and the cycle begins anew.
But in Russia there is no such mechanism connecting overproduction with the restructuring of capital. Major investment decisions are centrally administered, and there is no means whereby the bureaucrat who makes the decisions will change them automatically. For the factory manager too, it is a matter of indifference whether his goods get consumed or remain untouched in a warehouse, or whether his new factory premises are completed or left unfinished. This is hardly a sign that the Russian economy is crisis free – exactly the opposite is the case; it is a clear indication that the economy is in a state of permanent crisis. Western capitalism has mechanisms of a greater or a lesser efficiency for restructuring capital in crisis, but Russia has no such internal means of doing so. So further accumulation at this point actually does continue, but it fails to expand the sum total of use values in the economy. It has reached a state of permanent stagnation.
Only comparatively recently has this become of crucial importance. Until the 1950s underutilised labour was so freely available that primitive accumulation could proceed and absorb new investment profitably. Until then Russia could continue to devote its principle accumulation resources to expanding the means of production. But because all means of production must, after an initial lag, contribute to the means of consumption, this merely delayed the crisis. It cannot stop the state of permanent stagnation occuring, but only delay the time when it appears.
The arms economy, apart from being the main source of competition with the west, also delays the appearance of the crisis of state capitalism. Armaments are paid for out of the proportion of the national economy remaining after wages and wear and tear of fixed machinery have been deducted. So they compete with accumulation for funds, the more arms the less there is for accumulation. Armaments therefore reduce the amount accumulated, and thus slow down the rise in the organic composition of capital. This leads to the rate of profit declining more slowly than otherwise, and causing the crisis to be delayed further.
Both of these temporary ‘solutions’ to the contradictions of Russian state capitalism have now largely outlived their usefulness, and this has become increasingly clear even to the ruling strata in the bureaucracy itself. In recent years they have therefore made desperate attempts to incorporate the missing features of western capitalism, and to graft them on to the structure of state capitalism itself. Their attempt to do so is no more and no less contradictory than the ‘conversion’ of upholders of the western capitalist state to the principles of national planning and incomes policy.
In both cases they are attempting to resolve the contradictions of the world capitalist system without abolishing capitalism itself. In both cases they are attempting the impossible.
 



For more than 30 years the Socialist Workers Party has argued that armaments and military competition have been an essential part of post-war capitalism both west and east. For most of the time most bourgeois analysts and most fellow socialists disagreed with us. Now, however, things are different. The past five years have seen the tearing up of the SALT-2 treaty, a rearmament programme unprecedented since 1951 in both NATO and Warsaw Pact countries, and the creation of a new generation of weapons of mass destruction which are qualitatively more dangerous and destabilising than any hitherto. Furthermore the extensive trade, finance, and capital links between east and west that developed so rapidly in the 1970s, have been even more rapidly curtailed in the 1980s. All these events have been so palpable, so visible and so worrying that it has now become a commonplace that we are living in the age of what has been called the New Cold War.
The purpose of this article is to examine this period, to look at the theories that have been advanced to explain it (including our own past theory) to see how well they have performed in the light of the evidence of post-war history, and to draw some conclusions about how to fight back against the dangers of the nuclear holocaust that the present period threatens.
The most popular theory of the New Cold War in the west is, not surprisingly, that of Thatcher and Reagan. They argue that an increasingly aggressive Russia has initiated a series of military escalations and aggressions (the deployment of SS-20s in Europe, the Afghan invasion, the military role of Cuban troops in Angola and so on), which has ‘forced’ the west to respond so as to avoid a tragic repeat of the policy of ‘appeasing dictators’ which they diagnose as being the underlying cause of World War II. This theory will not be discussed directly further in this article; the historical detail refutes it at every point, and sufficient of this detail is included here to make this abundantly obvious without further separate treatment.
To be taken more seriously are two other sets of theories. Firstly there are those that present the Thatcher/Reagan line in reverse. The new Cold War is explained in terms of the inherently aggressive nature of just one side, but that side is the west rather than the east. This view is based on the assumption that (i) capitalism is, by its very nature, imperialist and militarist, (ii) the west is capitalist but the east is not; and this leads them to conclude that (iii) the ‘offensive’ imperialism of the west has caused the New Cold War, and with it the essentially ‘defensive’ reaction of the west’s victims in the east. Against this ‘socialist’ view there are the anti-socialist theories of the dominant current in the peace movements at the present time, the bourgeois pacifists. Mostly clearly articulated in Edward Thompson’s writings, they share the assumption that the west is capitalist and the east is not, but go on to assert that the cold war between the two has now superimposed on east and west a common structure represented by their military-industrial complexes (one which implies, in Thompson’s words, that both societies are now dominated by what he calls ‘exterminism’).
Against such views we shall advance a Marxist alternative in the pages that follow. (Though a more explicit analysis and critique of views can be found elsewhere in our publications. [1]) The New Cold War, we shall argue, can only be seen as a product of ageing capitalism in crisis. Essential to this view is the understanding that as capitalism ages, military competition between national or state capitals becomes more and more central, and that, for instance, the state capitalisms of the east are not mere helpless victims of this process, but, on the contrary actually contribute to it themselves. Only on this basis, it will be argued, can one both explain the broadly symmetrical militarism of east and west, and at the same time apply a class analysis – and therefore also a class solution – to it.
 
Capitalism and war
War is endemic in all class societies without exception. But this is not true for pre-class societies. In particular it is not true for those societies that Marxists have referred to as ‘primitive communist’. In such societies private property has not yet arisen. Hunting and gathering define the means of production, and this is characteristically associated with a nomadic existence as the tribe moves on to fresh areas. The social hierarchy is generally fluid, with an elective and changing leadership which arises only when it is specifically felt to be needed by the tribe as a whole. Given an availability of food which is adequate for the growth in the population, as the experience of pre-Columbian America shows, wars will not take place between neighbouring tribes. [2] There is no readily available wealth for plunder because the gap between ‘production’ (hunting, gathering) and consumption is too close. There is no possibility of the victorious tribe gaining any significant surplus from the other tribe and therefore war cannot be seen by it as an alternative means of gaining access to the means to live.
This of course changes markedly once class society – and private property along with it – arises. For there then emerges a fundamental chasm within society. For the first time a class of people arises whose very mode of existence rests upon the exploitation of other people’s work. Crucially this implies also the creation of permanent coercive armed apparatuses to ensure the transfer of surplus produce from the direct producers to those who rule but do not themselves work, without which the serf, the bondsman and the slave would soon throw over the yoke of their own exploitation. War has now, from this point on (and until the abolition of class society), become an endemic and intrinsic part of the social structure itself. It has done so in two ways. First of all class society has created the means of war, the relatively permanent armed apparatuses. Secondly, and much more importantly, it has created the social mechanisms which have institutionalised (and legitimated) the seizure of the fruit of the labouring activity of the direct producers themselves. Since societies are now based upon internal plunder and coercive armed apparatuses, war, for the first time, appears as a purely rational and logical implication of this ‘natural’ state of affairs carried into the outside world. Or, to put it in reverse, if there was no means for holding and retaining the surplus produce appropriated from the direct producers within (i.e. if internal plunder were impossible), then external plunder would be impossible too. The consequences of this is, of course, that to abolish war we must first of all abolish class society altogether.
Yet this is a consequence that is strongly resisted by many – including some who think of themselves as Marxists. For them, even though capitalism is a form of class society, it is thought of as being one specifically based upon ‘peaceful’ forms of competition rather than upon direct coercion. Discipline is provided not by the manacles of the slave but by voluntary entry into the market.
If this were really the Marxist position, there would have to be something quite seriously wrong with Marxism itself. For, even if we leave out of account for the moment the present century with its quite unprecedented mass slaughters in 1914–18 and 1939–45, it is clear that from its very origins capitalism has been involved in a continuous series of wars. In the 17th century British mercantile capitalism fought a series of wars in order to limit and push back Dutch colonialism and trade. In the 18th century Britain’s burgeoning industrial capitalism inflicted a similar series of defeats on the French state. And even Britain’s ‘mature’ capitalism of the 1850s was involved in war against feudal Russia and in the Indian colonies.
Under feudalism war was limited by the weakness of the state, and even the ancient empires went through periods of hundreds of years at a time when wars were restricted to border skirmishings with peripheral tribespeople. But capitalism is of its essence a dynamic and competitive system. The military power of the capitalist state has been crucial to its success. It has been needed first of all to carry out the large scale international plunder without which what Marx called ‘primitive capital accumulation’ could not have taken place. [3] Secondly it has been needed to forcibly remove the direct producers from access to any means of subsistence other than through being employed by capital – usually through enclosures and other means of restricting access to the land. [4] Finally since, as Marx put it, world trade is already implicit in the first act of capitalist production, the military power of the capitalist state has been needed to protect this trade and the colonial system which opened it up from rival powers. [5] These three areas of capitalist militarism led to three distinct types of war during the epoch of the rise of capitalism: colonial wars, civil wars and trading wars.
Those people who want to abstract these various forms of war from their ‘Marxist’ explanations of capitalist society are therefore doing something quite alien both to Marx’s own analysis and also to the very dynamism of capitalism itself, which, in accelerating the pace of its own development as a world system, from the very beginning precipitated, at an accelerating pace, a whole series of wars.
 
Marxist explanations of the 1914–18 war
None the less, the 1914–18 war produced a profound shock amongst Marxists at the time. It precipitated a major crisis in the international socialist movement – the Second International – as most of the major parties sided not with the proletariat but rather with their own national bourgeoisies. It also forced upon them a re-examination of the capitalism of their day in order to explain how the carnage could have taken place at all.
The centre of the debate concerned the nature of imperialism. Virtually everyone in the Second International understood that the ‘liberal’ laissez-faire capitalism of the middle of the 19th century had somehow grown over into a more monopolised imperialism, but the question remained of how this ‘imperialism’ was to be characterised. At a theoretical level, the debate between the internationalists and those who Lenin and Luxemburg characterised as the ‘opportunists’, centred on how the world economy was to be understood. Was capitalism to be seen first of all as a world system which conditioned the behaviour of the national states within it, or was it rather to be seen as an aggregate of the various national capitalisms that composed it?
The tradition associated with Hilferding and Kautsky and the majority of the German Social Democratic party stressed the latter. For Hilferding the phenomenon of imperialism was thus explained by reference to the purely external operations of the various national capitals interacting with each other at the point where they spill out from their own purely internal developments. [6] In Kautsky’s case, in his theory of ‘Ultra-Imperialism’ (published a few weeks before the outbreak of hostilities in 1914), he saw no reason why the different national capitalisms might not come together to form ‘a holy alliance of the imperialists’ and impose an imperialist peace through ‘a federation of the strongest who renounce their arms race’. In the same way that mutually hostile private capitals had been brought together in the cartelisation of industry, why, he asked, should the various competing nations not come together to construct an equivalent international ‘cartelisation of foreign policy’? [7]
The problem that such theories faced was to explain the total war that this imperialism unleashed. If Hilferding had been right the combatants should have withdrawn from the battle long before the costs began to heavily outweigh the profits from investment overseas. How the war could have persisted beyond 1915, on that theory, becomes a complete mystery. The same is true of Kautsky’s theory. One would have to conclude that the behaviour of the capitalists and the politicians had become completely irrational. In that case again one could not use Marxism to explain what was going on. Marx argues that ‘it is only as personified capital that a capitalist has a right to exist’, and the foundation of Marx’s system is based on the assumption that enough capitalists are rational people for the system to operate so as to maximise profits. If they were all lemmings one would need a psychologist rather than an economist to explain the workings of the system instead. On Kautsky’s theory one has to I make precisely this latter assumption in order to explain how the 1914–18 war could have taken place.
But Hilferding and Kautsky do not represent the only interpretations of the total wars of the twentieth century from a Marxist point of view. There is another tradition too. It derives from Trotsky, from Rosa Luxemburg, from Lenin and from Bukharin, and it was the orthodoxy of the Communist International and the Bolshevik party before the dominance of Stalin and his ‘socialism in one country’ theory. [8] In each case these theorists began not with a series of national economies which were only externally conjoined, but rather with the world economy as their starting point. This was a crucial move. If the various national economies have only the same sort of freedom in the world economy as private corporations had previously within the national economy then several conclusions immediately follow. Firstly the necessity to exploit the working class, to extract surplus value, to set it to work to drive forward the accumulation of capital – all this will follow from the mutual competition of all the national capitals with each other. Competition will therefore determine the form and the extent of production within the national economy. Secondly this production will in its turn bring forward new and changed forms of competition between the competing national economies and the states that preside over them. It was, crucially, in the analysis of these latter changes that these theorists made the most significant contributions to a Marxist understanding of imperialism and the politics of total war.
It is in Lenin, and above all Bukharin, that we get the fullest development of an understanding of these changes. For both of them the ageing of capitalism gives rise to military competition complementing – and in some circumstances replacing – price competition. This is due to two main factors. Firstly within each country economic power becomes concentrated and centralised into the hands of fewer and fewer giant corporations. Secondly, in order to exploit the efficiencies implicit in a world division of labour each capital becomes impelled to extend its tentacles beyond its own national borders. The first tendency implies a greater and greater integration of the corporation with the state; the second implies an extension of its operations overseas. The combination of the two necessarily leads to the national state bursting through its purely geographical borders; and in the long run to the collision of one state’s external tentacles with those of another. But there is a difference between this and the situation where one purely private capital confronts another. When one state or state-backed corporation collides with another, this implies that weaponry, armies, navies etc. will be needed to defend and safeguard sources of raw materials, markets, factories and so on against rivals. Military competition will then supplement (or even replace) price competition. The more this happens the more the corporations will take the form of what Bukharin called ‘state capitalist trusts’. According to Bukharin:
When competition has finally reached its highest stage, when it has become competition between state capitalist trusts, then the use of state power, and the possibilities connected with it, begin to play a very large part. [9]
This means that:
Competition is reduced to a minimum within the boundaries of ‘national’ economies, only to flare up in colossal proportions, such as would not have been possible in any of the preceding historic epochs. [10]
In fact, Bukharin argues,
even if free competition were entirely eliminated within the boundaries of ‘national economies’, crises would still continue, as there would remain the anarchic structure of world economy. [11]
Bukharin tells us that ‘This anarchic structure of world capitalism is expressed in two facts: world industrial crises on the one hand, wars on the other’. [12]
And this led Bukharin to conclude that:
The struggle between state capitalist trusts is decided in the first place by the relation between their military forces, for the military power of the country is the last resort of the struggling ‘national’ groups of capitalists. [13]
It follows from this analysis that two tendencies are simultaneously and mutually implicit in ageing capitalism: the first is the growing together of capital and the state, and the second is the tendency for war between the various statised capitals. The two are not at all separate, the one mutually implies the other.
It is important to stress this point, for there have been all too many people, particularly on the left, who have been attracted to the idea that ageing capitalism implies war, but who have refused to spell out the corollary that this involves – and must involve – the increasing statisation of capital, and that the more any national capital or group of capitals is statised the more its mutual competition with other capitals will take the form of direct military competition.
There are several questions that this analysis immediately raises. To what extent does it genuinely follow from Marx’s own analysis? Is it still valid today? And does it illuminate our understanding of the New Cold War?
Certainly it is very easy to relate the two crucial theses of Bukharin concerning the statisation of capital and the militarisation of the state to Marx’s own analysis in Capital. They seem to follow as entirely logical consequences from Marx’s theory of crisis forcing capital to become more and more centralised and concentrated. [14] Furthermore Marx was well aware that competition between capitalists could take on many other forms than the pure price form that is assumed in the first volume of Capital. [15]
When we come on to look at the way Bukharin’s analysis fitted the reality of 1914, the matter is more complex. He was certainly right to stress the importance of the world economy as opposed to the national economy as the starting point for his analysis. As he himself points out in his Imperialism and the World Economy world trade was expanding fast before 1914. In fact it grew by 50% in the eight years 1903–11 [16], faster than the growth in world output. And with hindsight we can now see that the countries that appeared to be important exceptions to this rule – Germany and the United States-soon ceased to be so in the years that followed. [17] Looking at the situation today, we can amply confirm the correctness of Bukharin’s observations. Since 1840, for instance, the output per worker has, as a world average, increased seven fold; but in the same period the level of exports per worker has increased no less than twenty eight fold.
World trade, however, was, in Bukharin’s view, a quite inadequate measure of the internationalisation of capital. Unlike commodities, which have to physically change hands (and which require ships and railways to transport them), capital can ‘flow’ wherever there is a postal or telegraphic link between accredited centres of capital. The main thrust of Bukharin’s account is directed to explaining why French and British capital in particular had, by 1914, already emerged as fully international in form. He does so by showing how foreign securities had become at least equal alternatives to home investment, making truly international comparisons of the rate of profit to be earned in different countries a prerequisite for future successful investment. [18] British foreign investment expanded very rapidly; in the six years 1883–89 foreign capital stock increased from £95 million to £393 million [19], and in the years leading up to the 1914 war foreign investment was absorbing fully 50% of all savings. [20]
Bukharin was also quite correct to tie in this process with, on the one hand, the increasing centralisation of capital, and, on the other, its increasing militarisation and statisation. In the 1880s and 1890s the former tendency was most strongly marked in America and Germany, where, after the crises of 1873 and 1884, there followed a series of bankruptcies and mergers which led to the formation of giant trusts and cartels. In America this was the epoch of the rise of Carnegie, Morgan and Rockefeller; in Germany that of Krupp and Siemens. In both cases the concentration and centralisation of capital proceeded very fast indeed. [21] In Britain during this period it was the latter tendency that was most strongly marked. Millions of square miles of Africa were conquered, and under the protection of the British state new areas of investment were opened up. Imperialism obviated – for a time – the immediate need for British capitalism to pursue the course of systematic economic concentration. [22]
Yet by the early years of the new century these separate tendencies had become thoroughly intertwined. In Britain the opportunities for further easy investment in the Empire and elsewhere declined, and in the first decade of the century the inflow of profits from overseas came to exceed the outflow of new investments. In Germany and America the opportunities for further mergers of capital had been more or less exhausted at the same time. America and Germany turned toward the British solution (with the USA replacing Spain as the colonial power in the Caribbean and Germany turning toward East Africa, Turkey and the Balkans), and Britain turned toward the Germany solution (with an extremely rapid centralisation of banking capital in particular).
Bukharin’s analysis therefore, certainly fits the facts very well. But this is not the full story. Marx himself was able to demonstrate how the crisis was able, through the process which gave rise to the restructuring and centralisation of capital, to restore (even if only temporarily) the general rate of profit, and hence also to regenerate the system for new (though successively shorter and shallower) upswings. [23] To do so his analysis was firmly based on an analysis of the rate of profit, and above all on the way in which that rate tends to rise or fall in accordance with the ratios of work hours the system needs (or living labour) to the sum total of capital stock (or dead labour) within it. [24]
There is no doubt at all that Bukharin was aware of these aspects of Marx’s theory of capitalist crisis. But at no point does he attempt to show the way in which militarism or war perform the same function as capitalist crisis by restructuring capital and restoring the general rate of profit. [25] So, for Bukharin, while war is a product of capitalism, it does not necessarily produce consequences for the number of capitals that confront each other or for the rate of profit at which they must continue to operate.
Bukharin’s analysis is therefore incomplete. Later on in this article we will try and fill this gap.
 
American and Russian imperialism in the Second World War
If Lenin and Bukharin provided the broad framework for understanding the economic forces at work during the total capitalist wars of the twentieth century, the question then remains of how these forces were mediated through the perceptions and politics of the rival ruling classes involved. In particular, we need to begin with the events that brought about the current alignment of the dominant world powers – the Second World War.
That war produced two qualitative changes in the alignment of dominant world powers. Firstly it led to the military defeat of two important rivals to the United States. The defeat of Japan opened up the remainder of the Pacific to US influence and the defeat of Germany left no question that the United States would now be the dominant world power industrially and technologically. Secondly the war so weakened the industrial and financial base of America’s allies that all the old European imperial powers – France, Belgium, the Netherlands and, above all, Britain – were forced to accept at best a subordinate status and, at worst, the status of American surrogate in international affairs.
But the defeat of Germany and Japan had been in little doubt from at least the end of 1942 when it had become apparent that Russia could absorb the entire military might of the German army and survive. [26] It was then only a matter of time before the overwhelming economic power of the Allies would crush the Axis powers. [27] From the very start, therefore, each Allied ruling class was concerned – indeed obsessed – with the question of power in the post war world. As the war progressed this question came to occupy a larger and larger proportion of their attention. At the height of the Allied war effort in 1944 for instance, Churchill was so concerned to include Greece in the post-war British sphere of interest, that his diaries and communications show references to this matter significantly outnumbering those concerning the military conduct of the war against Germany itself. [28]
How did the ruling classes of what were to become the two superpowers fight out this battle between allies? We will begin with America. The American ruling class’s retreat into isolationism after the First World War behind large tariff walls and other measures of economic protectionism helped to cause the very slump of which it was to be one of the most major victims in the 1930s. While Britain (through trade with the Empire) and Germany (though a state-led rearmament programme) were able to mitigate some of the worst effects of the slump – at least by the latter years of the 1930s – America’s economy continued to stagnate ‘until the war boom of 1940 began’. [29] Roosevelt and his closest policy makers and advisors, above all Hull and Stimson, were determined that this should not happen again. To prevent it they evolved policies which broke completely from the isolationism of the 1930s. Central to their aims was the dismantlement of the British Empire and its opening up to American capital as part of general move toward ‘free trade’ through which, it was assumed, the overwhelming predominance of the US domestic economy would ensure the complete hegemony of US capital throughout the world. [30]
To begin with they, perfectly correctly, saw the British ruling class as the major barrier standing in their way. But the urgency of the British need for finance and materials to fight the war made the American strategy an entirely feasible one. The war with Germany had become a total war; nothing less than the very survival of British state capital itself was at stake. Its survival, even if only in a severely curtailed and subordinate form, could only be ensured through the alliance with America. Hull, Stimson and Roosevelt knew that at the end of the day the British ruling class had no real alternative. Even before America entered the war as a belligerent power Britain was already fairly tightly bound to American apron strings through the finance and war materials that the US had provided Britain through the Lend-Lease scheme. [31]
By 1943, and after much violent debate between the two allied ruling classes, a common war strategy had been concluded that enabled there to be a fairly common front against their Russian rivals in the remaining two war years. [32] The Americans agreed to make Europe the major priority, but successfully insisted that Churchill’s militarily irrelevant plans for a major thrust in areas of past and present British influence in the Mediterranean be dropped in favour of the invasion of northern Europe (allying with Stalin in doing so). [33]
But getting the British to toe the line on the form that the post-war world would take proved much more difficult. Churchill himself was devious, cunning and utterly unprincipled. His obsession with the defence of British ruling class interests meant that on many occasions he supported the supposedly enemy fascists if that meant resisting the advances of the supposedly friendly Americans in areas where there was a degree of British influence. In Italy for instance, it initially meant accommodating to, rather than getting rid of Mussolini himself [34], and in Greece it meant an actual preference for continued German Nazi occupation to help prevent the consolidation of EAM, the national liberation movement. [35] The American leaders themselves were, of course, not the least bit more principled themselves. In their turn they supported the neo-fascist allies of Hitler in Vichy France and their counterparts in the Darlan/Giraud regimes in North Africa as a counter to the protegé that Churchill was nurturing in emigré London – de Gaulle. [36]
Yet there was an important difference between the British (along with the Russian) ruling class on the one side and the American on the other. Churchill and Stalin were much clearer about the game that all three were playing; the game was the strategy of power politics and the rules, derived from the traditions of Machiavelli and von Clausewitz, were familiar to the European powers. The American ruling class were playing the same game but confused themselves with their own rhetoric and propaganda. To be sure both Churchill and Stalin dressed-up their own naked plunder of those parts of the world under their own control in suitably high-minded verbiage about ‘free speech’, ‘free trade’, and ‘democracy’ on the one hand and ‘equality’, ‘socialism’ and ‘peace’ on the other, but never for one moment do such matters appear as the actual determinants of policy for them. Each accepted that notwithstanding the aspirations of the indigenous populations in reconquered Europe they were to be forcibly included in one or another sphere of influence, with the nature of the regime that presided over them being determined by whichever great power they had been consigned to. The overwhelming support of the Greek population for EAM was therefore seen as a problem by the British ruling class which would have to be overcome by massive oppression including a full scale war against ELAS (EAM’s military wing), the incarceration of 20,000 Greek anti-Nazi troops in prisoner of war cages, the banning of the Communist Party and so on. [37] In doing this Churchill received support and help from Stalin which he duly appreciated. [38] In return Stalin expected – and received – Churchill’s help and support over Stalin’s similarly unpopular occupation of Rumania. [39] The American leaders however, while still playing the same game, played it in a much more confused manner – particularly at the beginning of the war period. This was due to several reasons.
Firstly, looking at US official documents one cannot avoid the sheer blundering incompetence of the US officials compared with their much more astute Russian – and above all British – counterparts. [40] The classic example was the extraordinary short-sightedness of the American rulers over the implications of the solution they imposed on Italy. Against the wishes of British and Russian allies (and the bulk of the indigenous post-Mussolini forces), they, on the basis of the power conferred by their military occupation, removed Badoglio from the new Cabinet, replacing him with someone much more compliant to American interests, and then backed the latter regime with the then vast sum of 100m dollars credit to ensure its viability. [41] By doing this they set a precedent. Italy was the first Axis or Axis-occupied power to be overrun, and the US government had refused out of hand any form of co-determination of Italy’s future in conjunction with the other two Allied governments. The US military occupation was simply used to block Russian participation in any occupation commission for Italy. What seemed to be beyond the comprehension of the US authorities was (i) that their sheer financial power would inevitably have led to a pro-US post-war regime in Italy anyway, even with a regime formed on the basis of mutual co-determination between the Allies [42]; and (ii) the logical implication of this position was that Stalin should be permitted an equally free reign in the much more extensive terrain that would shortly fall to his troops in eastern Europe – in Poland, Eastern Germany, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria – and whose fate, until that point, Stalin had assumed would also be settled not unilaterally but by some form of co-determination.
Secondly, to this incompetence – which was in part a product of the limited experience of the American leaders at the time – was added the considerable confusion that they felt as to their aims. We have mentioned already the difficulty they experienced in separating the ideology of free trade from the reality of power politics, yet there can be little doubt that their real aims were, quite simply, the maximisation of American power, influence and profit: the evidence on this matter is quite overwhelming. At every point where that power conflicted with the principles of free trade it was those principles that was unceremoniously sacrificed. In China the US prevented other trading nations getting a foothold, and the small print on the Lend-Lease agreement with Britain forced Britain to (i) deliver over to the Americans the most important areas of its export trade (above all in Latin America – producing the biggest ever qualitative leap in US domination of that continent), and (ii) to purchase large quantities of American wheat at prices well in excess of those on the world market. [43] All these were quite clear curtailments of the principles of free trading. Yet it remained possible for the US to go on thinking in this way for the simple reason that in nine cases out of ten ‘free trade’ was synonymous with trade with the USA during the war period.
All the same the ideological fog that it had produced prevented the US ruling class from pursuing its power interests effectively in eastern Europe in particular, and this was of crucial importance in determining the form that the developing conflict with Russian state capital would take. For their part, as we shall see below, the Russian bureaucracy were not at all inclined initially to set up mini Russian look-alikes in eastern Europe. For them the crucial aim was the creation of regimes which, whatever their social system and whatever their trade and capital links with the West, would under no circumstances follow a foreign policy hostile to Russia. [44]
By going for broke, by insisting on the exclusion of Britain and Russia from areas where America was strongest, the American ruling class was to lose far more than it gained. Its refusal to publicly countenance any real discussion with its allies on spheres of influence in the post-war world came about because on the one hand its real aims – the inclusion of the entire world outside Britain and Russia in the American sphere of influence – were impossibly large, yet, on the other hand, they were at the same time partially unconscious ones for the American policy makers, hidden as they were behind a fog of half-believed rhetoric about ‘free trade’.
This had two crucial consequences for the form that the first Cold War would subsequently take. Firstly the American rulers felt, correctly, that post war Europe insufficiently reflected their own interests – particularly when their own considerable power was taken into account. They felt cheated by their allies. In France, the most important occupied country by far, they had been outsmarted by the British and had to accept the ‘anti-American’ regime of de Gaulle; and their disastrous policy in eastern Europe had lost them the entire region to the Russians. Secondly, this frustration continued to be refracted through the ideology of ‘free trade’; American capitalism’s interests were seen not as the plundering, rapacious, exploitative and self-interested things that they were, but rather as the universal and benign interests of humanity as a whole, the defence of which automatically implied a veritable moral crusade. [45]
So far then, we have presented the background to the First Cold War in terms of the American rulers’ motives. What about the Russians? What role did Stalin play in its development? It is important to be very clear about this, because the very backwardness and devastation of the east implied a somewhat different course of action for the defenders of the interests of the ruling class in Moscow. To understand this best one should compare it with the different reactions of the ruling class in the USA after the First and the Second World Wars. In 1918 the dominant sections of US capital looked inwards towards America itself. On the one hand they felt insufficiently strong to challenge British capital in most of its traditional markets and investment areas outside the United States (even in what were later thought of as America’s ‘natural’ markets in the Pacific and Latin America), and on the other hand they saw great opportunities for growth within continental America itself. [46] In 1945 the situation was very different. In terms of the level of industrial production and productivity and in terms of its financial reserves and capacities America had now become incomparably the most powerful country in the world. [47] Furthermore what was then holding back the US was the devastated and backward nature of the rest of the world; if American capital wanted trade and opportunities for new investment, then the only way of creating it was by using some of its own vast resources to finance reconstruction outside America. [48] In 1945 the position of Russia’s ruling class was rather closer to that of the USA not in 1945, but in 1918 – at least with respect to its external policy. The infrastructure of Russian industry was completely shattered by the war and it could not hope to be able to compete with the Americans (or even the British for that matter) in the international capital and aid market. [49] It therefore adopted a policy of virtual indifference to the internal structure of the states that surrounded it, given only that they did not develop a hostile foreign policy towards the Russian state.
A whole series of examples bear this analysis out. For instance Russia did not invade Finland (although it would have been very easy for it to have done so), but instead the Russian bureaucracy simply accepted a commitment to neutrality on Finland’s part, guaranteed by the erstwhile Allies. In China Russia backed US protegé Chiang Kai-shek (bringing all its influence to bear on Mao to accept the Chiang regime). In Czechoslovakia Russia was the first of the Allied powers to recognise the fairly conservative Benes emigré government in exile in London. [50]
But whatever the intentions of Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill during the ‘heroic’ period of the Alliance, 1942–44, reality turned out differently. From late 1943 onwards Europe began to be de facto divided into eastern and western spheres of influence. A number of factors contributed to this situation, some of which we have mentioned already, for example the Italian example which was soon followed by the western Allies being forced to accept equivalent rights for the Russians in Rumania. Then there was the western rejection of the Russian proposals for a European Advisory Commission to administer the whole of occupied Europe. [51] On top of that events moved very fast in 1944–45. Without prior agreements as to how the newly re-conquered areas were to be ruled, the Russian bureaucracy was faced with the de-facto supremacy of the west in France, the rest of Western Europe and the Far East, and the west was faced with Russian supremacy in eastern Europe.
This, roughly, was the situation that faced the Allied powers at the Potsdam conference in July 1945. They had already, at the Yalta conference in the previous year, agreed on the carve-up of the re-occupied nations between them [52], but what exactly did that mean? Take, for example, Poland. According to Yalta, Poland had to be ‘friendly’ to Russia, but ‘reorganised’ so as to include some western-orientated leaders, to have a ‘democratic character’ based on ‘broad representation’, and so on. But who was to interpret what exactly was meant by that?
Roosevelt died in April 1945, to be replaced by Truman. At the same time two new factors of crucial significance entered the situation: the rapid collapse of Japanese military power, and most important of all, the new secret weapon: the atom bomb. The collapse of the Japanese removed the last plank on which the wartime alliance had been built, because instead of needing a Russian attack from Siberia to help secure America’s defeat of Japan, it now became the paramount US concern to eliminate the Japanese before the Russians joined battle just so as to be able to exclude the Russians from the final eastern settlement. [53] The wanton slaughter of hundreds of thousands at Hiroshima and Nagasaki – Truman’s ultimate war crime – was the centrepiece of this strategy. It ensured that the American ruling class alone would determine Japan’s fate, and at the same time was a warning to the Russian leadership that henceforth the American government would insist on running everything its own way. According to one commentator this led to a rejection of Yalta by Truman that was categorical, deliberate and immediate. [54] And, while not publicly disowning Yalta, he made it quite clear that the only ‘interpretation’ of Yalta that he would countenance was one that would involve the complete scrapping of most of what the Russians had been doing in Eastern Europe. For their part the Russian bureaucracy, who seem to have tried to live up to the spirit of ‘equality in plunder’ of Yalta, initially tried to compromise and concede, but to no avail. Truman simply issued his orders and left it at that. [55]
The conflict between the Russian and American ruling class was now on in earnest. Once started the process seemed to be unstoppable, with each escalation by one side leading to an equivalent escalation by the other. Each response by one of the combatants was in its turn used as an excuse by the other for its own further escalation in the tempo of the Cold War. [56]
 
Understanding the first Cold War 1945–1956
There is some debate about when the first Cold War began. From Potsdam and Hiroshima in July/August 1945, onwards the leaders of both Russia and America were defining the other quite unambiguously as enemy number one, but the exact form that this competition would take was not clarified in practice. In 1947, however, the Communist Parties were thrown out of the government coalitions in France and Italy and the eastern European countries threw out the non-CP politicians, created one-party states, and proceeded to construct state capitalist regimes in the image of Russia itself. [57] 1948 saw the Berlin blockade and airlift, the first direct (but ‘cold’ – not a shot was fired) confrontation between Russia and America out of which the rival military pacts were formed.
Yet the need to keep the conflict cold was not yet apparent. On the American rulers’ side an attitude of extreme beligerence expressed itself in their willingness to use nuclear weapons against Russia to get their way. [58] On the Russian rulers’ side there was the threat that any nuclear attack on Russian cities could be countered by a Russian military occupation of all of continental Europe. [59] It was only the events of 1949–50 that changed all that. America received two traumatic blows in 1949 – the quite unexpected acquisition by Russia of nuclear weapons and the Chinese revolution, shortly to be followed by the Korean war. From then on America began a rearmament programme unprecedented in peacetime, and matched – as far as it was possible in a more backward economy – weapon for weapon by Russia.
The most characteristic features of the first Cold War were clearest in the years that followed these events – the early 1950s. They are correctly thought of as the high water mark of the First Cold War. In those years the immense power of American capital was used to construct a world order which provided the framework for the perpetuation of the wartime boom into the post-war period. It was – until the 1970s at least – very successful. It consisted of several interconnected and mutually supporting elements; crucially it depended on American capitalism being dominant in three areas: finance, production and the military.
In 1945 America was producing about one half of total world commodities. In addition it was by far the most important trading nation. [60] During the war it had succeeded in expanding its economy quite phenomenally. As one study of the period put it: ‘As pre-war business went, 1940 was a record year, with a national production of $97 billion ... Yet ... by the end of 1943 the gross product had increased to between $185 billion and $190 billion. On top of the $90 billion war programme, consumer expenditure in 1943 – even when measured in 1940 prices – exceeded those of earlier years, rationing, war priorities and war saving notwithstanding.’ [61] This remarkable doubling of the size of America’s GNP in three years was due to two main factors: (i) the large amount of under-utilised resources, a legacy of the 1930s slump; and (ii) the taking over of fully 90% of all investment by state owned and controlled capital. [62]
The American ruling class were obsessed with the problem of how to prevent a slump when the war ended – fully half of the economy was devoted to the war, and a staggering 28 million people were in the armed forces or engaged in war production. Clearly these workers had to be switched to peacetime production, but how? Who would buy the things that they might make? The internal American market could only be significantly extended by a general increase in wages and that would imply such inroads into profit as to make it quite unacceptable to American capitalism. The alternative was a massive export drive – but who then would be in a position to purchase American goods? The world’s major markets had been so devastated by the war – with many countries reduced to semi-subsistence economies – that that was out of the question too. Besides, America was already saturating the world market with its exports.
Luckily for American capitalism its productive power was matched by its world financial dominance too. The British empire and the Sterling area had been broken into and laid open by the debts and obligations that the British state was forced to obtain in order to fight the war. [63] To begin with the skeleton of the new financial order was laid in the wartime provisions of the system of Lend-Lease that America extended to its Allies. Determined that there should be no return to the pre-war situation where from 40–50% of world trade had been subject to control or cartelisation, Roosevelt manage to pressurise Churchill into making the necessary concessions on this matter. [64]
After the war there followed a whole series of measures through which American capital took a complete grasp on world finance. Firstly there was Marshall Aid through which very large sums of money were channelled to the western European economies to aid recovery from the devastation caused by war [65], and which ensured a high level of demand for the American goods that recovery entailed. Then there were the international banking institutions that were set up at the Bretton Woods conference of July 1944 – the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD). Both were set up to encourage the ‘open door’ policy – the complete freeing of private capital to engage in unrestricted foreign trade and investment. The IMF established fixed and unrestricted exchange rates and dedicated itself to the ‘harmonisation of national policies’ (i.e. the insistence of the maintenance of laissez-faire principles) to achieve this. And since voting in the IMF was proportional to the capital contributed, American capital (in conjunction with some of the Latin American countries it dominated) was in a position to decide just what it was that constituted a ‘harmonious’ domestic economic policy on the part of the recipients of IMF aid. The IBRD was even more directly a tool of American international economic policy. Again control was proportional to the national capital that had been invested – thus ensuring US domination – and its function was quite openly ‘to promote private foreign investment by means of guarantees or participations in loans and other investments made by private investors’.
For the American capitalists this control over international financial institutions was to be used to ensure that their own funds would be used to finance American trade, and it was only on this basis that Congress authorised the release of funds- loans would be available, but only to finance trade with the donor country. As one of the leading theorists of Bretton Woods, Herbert Feis put it: ‘The United States could not passively sanction the employment of capital raised within the United States for ends contrary to our major policies or interest ... capital is a form of power.’ [66]
The other limb of American power was military. It is true that in 1945–46 the US economy underwent a massive conversion back to a peacetime economy, but this was no ordinary peacetime economy by pre-war standards. Even at its low point in 1948 a total of 9.8% of the US economy was directly or indirectly involved in armaments production. (This compared with less than 1% before the 1939–45 war.) And the proportion very rapidly increased in the years that followed. Having created a world order that ensured (for the time being) continuing dominance of American capital, it became of crucial importance to have the military might to defend it (under the appropriate guise of the defence of free trade or the defence of the free movement of capital). The Chinese revolution in 1949 and the Korean war of the following year exposed the scale of the task that America had taken on in being the world’s policeman, and immediately led to the ‘permanent arms economy’ – the continuous devotion of sums of money to armaments unparalleled in peacetime. By 1951 as much as 21.1% of the American economy was allocated to the military, and thereafter American military expenditure played a central role in the perpetuation of the prolonged post-war boom.
This umbrella of American military power was seen as an essential part of their infrastructure by US companies investing overseas. Reflecting many years later, and in the aftermath of America’s military defeat in Vietnam, the editors of Business Week sadly concluded that ‘the international economic structure, under which US companies have flourished since the end of World War II, is in jeopardy’. This was because ‘fuelled initially by the dollars of the Marshall Plan, American business prospered and expanded on overseas orders despite the cold war, the end of colonialism, and the creation of militant and often anti-capitalistic new countries. No matter how negative a development, there was always the umbrella of American power to contain it.’ This provided the military and political framework of which ‘the rise of the multinational corporation was the economic expression’. With the defeat in Vietnam the editors feared that ‘this stable world order for business operations is falling apart’. [67]
Yet it would be a mistake to believe that the American state was here acting simply as an instrument that was being wielded by American private capital in defence of their profits; as Chris Harman has recently pointed out, the sums spent on arms exceeded by far both the total amount being invested overseas and the profits realised on these investments during this period. [68] In short, much more of the profits of American capital were taken away in taxes for arms than were given back in profits from overseas investments. Although one can argue that the effect of the arms economy was to prolong the boom, expand production and extend the opportunities for profitable investment, since no one knew this when rearmament started, it cannot have been the motivation behind the rearmament programme itself.
Rather, having created a western bloc of capital in which American capital was by far and away the dominant element, the American state was faced with the reality of an eastern block from which it was excluded (or rather, perhaps, from which it had already excluded itself by its cut-off in aid to Russia in 1945). The Cold War rearmament programme was therefore not about the profitability of one or another group of private capitals, but rather the viability of the American national block of capital in military and strategic terms vis-à-vis Russian state capital. This was clearly revealed in NSC 68, the secret policy document adopted by the US National Security Council in April 1950 (note, before the Korean war which was later used as the rationalisation for the US rearmament programme). The document called for a big militarisation of the economy, a ‘rapid and sustained build-up of the political, economic, and military strength of the free world’. This is necessary because it has to be realised ‘by this Government, the American people, and all free peoples, that the cold war is in fact a real war in which the survival of the free world is at stake’. NSC 68, in fact, envisaged a ‘rollback’ strategy ‘to hasten the decay of the Soviet system’ and to ‘foster the seeds of (its) destruction’. America ‘should take dynamic steps to reduce the power and influence of the Kremlin inside the Soviet Union and other areas under its control’. [69]
That it was the military and strategic viability of US versus Russian state capital that motivated American behaviour (rather than the rate of profit of American corporations) was also made clear by a US spokesman at the time of the Korean war itself. He claimed:
‘Were either of the two critical areas on the borders of the Communist world to be overrun – western Europe or Asia – the rest of the free world would be immensely weakened... in the economic and military strength required to resist further aggression ... If western Europe fell, the Soviet Union would gain control of about 300 million people, including the largest pool of skilled manpower in the world. Its steel production would be increased by 55m tons a year to 94m, a total most equal to our own ... Its coal production would leap to 950m tons compared to our 550m. Electric energy in the area of Soviet domination would be increased from 130 to 350bn KW hours, or almost up to our 400bn.’ [70]
In order to understand this highly aggressive ‘rollback’ strategy, it is important to bear in mind several factors if the first Cold War is to be made sense of.
Firstly (and most importantly), the cold war was not so much the first act in a new post-war situation, but rather the last episode in the clash of the imperialist powers of World War II over who would gain from its spoils. From the American rulers’ side their exclusion from eastern Europe (and then from China) was not something that they had fought a war for. From the Russian side too, the re-emergence of an anti-Russian alliance of America, western Europe, and, worst of all a reinvigorated and rearmed west Germany, was something that their whole wartime politics had been devised to prevent. Neither side felt that their minimum conditions had been met, and for both of them the rearmament programmes of the 1950s followed quite directly from this. It was only some eleven years later, in 1956, that (as we shall see) both sides had more or less accepted the post-war status quo.
The second feature to bear in mind is the sheer dominance of the USA among the western powers and Russia among the eastern powers. America could afford to spend 15–20% of its GNP on armaments and still be the biggest producer and most extensive investor in the west. Russia could afford to put aside a quarter of its economy for armaments and still preserve its economic dominance throughout the Communist world. In the early 1950s the United States did not yet have to glance nervously sideways at the growing power of a Japan or a West Germany; Russia was not yet faced with a belligerent China or a westwards-orienting Hungary. Both ruling classes had the time and the space to indulge themselves in the fight for the spoils of World War II.
Thirdly, although the question of the post-World War II settlement was a crucial one, new areas of danger and uncertainty occurred – particularly in many of the newly emergent third world countries – which threatened to erode American capital’s financial and military preponderance. For the Americans there was the danger that the Chinese example might be followed in the whole of South East Asia, with, at one time or another, Malaya, Indonesia, Indo-China, and Burma being thought of as dominoes to be knocked down in a chain beginning in Peking but masterminded in Moscow. Then there was the Middle East, where Egypt, the most powerful and influential country in the region had, under Nasser’s military nationalism, switched foreign policy allegiances from America to Russia. It was feared that preoccupations with economic development in the Third World would lead to nationalisations, protectionism, autarchy and an orientation on Russia rather than America. By hitting at Russia, the American ruling class hoped that it would be dealing with what it saw as the source and inspiration of these policies.
Finally there was the feeling among America’s policy makers that time was running out; that the epoch of American capital’s dominance over Russian state capitalism was limited. For Russia’s economy was developing very fast in this period. Throughout the 1950s its growth rate was much higher than America’s (though slightly less than that of Japan), and Russian publications written at the end of this period were extrapolating the statistics and boasting about ‘overtaking’ the USA by the year 1970 in per capita income, and even claiming that ‘by 1980 the Soviet Union would then exceed the American level [of industrial production] twice over’. [71]
 
The ‘Socialist Review’ group and the first Cold War
After the Second World War there were several problems that Marxists had to face up to. In particular, they needed to ask why post war stabilisation took the previously unprecedented form of the Cold War. For the small number of Marxists who still adhered to the revolutionary traditions of Marx, Lenin and Trotsky, it was a crucial test. Unfortunately most failed it. Some turned their Marxism into an empty dogma by denying that these things were happening, others accepted the reality but only by dismantling the foundations of Marxism in doing so. [72] The crucial problem that Marxism faced was this: could an account be given that both explained the militarised stabilisation of the system in the post-war boom, and at the same time showed how it would, in the long run, lead to a reassertion of the central features of Marx’s theory of capitalist crisis?
The American Marxist economist W.T. Oakes (who also wrote under the name of T.N. Vance) was the first to attempt to do this. Writing in 1944 he concluded that a new era of capitalist development was opening up, that of the ‘Permanent War Economy’, which could temporarily stabilise the system. [73] He repeated this thesis during the period of the Cold War rearmament programme of the early 1950s. But certain crucial problems remained. During a world war one has a life-and-death struggle between rival national blocs of capital. Therefore it becomes quite possible for each capitalist to voluntarily subordinate his own individual interests to those of the state. A permanent war economy under those circumstances is an entirely different matter to one in peace time. The capitalists permit their own separate interests to be subordinated to those of state capitalism as a purely military phenomenon, but also so as to re-emerge with newer and better opportunities for profit thereafter.
If they were to continue to do so in peace time this could only imply an extreme weakness on their part, a lack of confidence in their own ability to make it alone in the post-war world market that is so great that they are actually willing to stop being individual capitalists and are willing instead to convert themselves into being bondholders of the state. On occasions this has certainly happened; post-revolutionary China provides one example. [74] But as a theory that is applied to the United States in 1945 it makes no sense at all. We have already shown how the whole of US war aims were single-mindedly directed at creating a post war world in which American capital would be both private and free. The war, so far from weakening American private capital, made it vastly stronger than before. Why then did US capitalists continue to consent to the huge arms programme of the 1950s? Why did they permit the permanent war economy to continue as the peacetime permanent arms economy?
Obviously there had to be something qualitatively different about the world in 1945 compared with 1918. For in 1918 the military state capitalisms that Bukharin analysed so succinctly were largely dismantled: in 1945 they were not. The Oakes/Vance thesis simply repeated in the early 1950s what it had first asserted of the war years of the early 1940s, and it was therefore open to the objection that if the various ruling classes were able to dismantle their military machines in 1918, why were they not able to do likewise in 1945?
Looked at from the point of view of the western economies considered purely on their own there was simply no answer to this question. The theoretical log-jam could only be broken once an adequate characterisation of socio-economic relations within Stalinist Russia had been given, and above all, of the way this affected the world economy. This, and with it the first theoretically sound analysis of the permanent arms economy, was provided by Tony Cliff in the late 1940s in his State Capitalism in Russia. It is important to stress this point, for many people, including some who ought to have known better, have seen that work as one restricted to a mere classification of Russian society as a species of capitalism, and ignored its dynamic implications for the world economy considered as a whole. Above all they have falsely assumed that the theory of permanent arms economy emerged without our own political tradition as an explanation first of all for the western part of the world economy, when in fact it arose in the explanation of Russia itself. [75]
For Cliff the role of the arms economy in the ageing capitalist system is to ensure that ‘a large proportion of the products is not exchanged, that is, not produced as values, but as use values’. [76] The state merely amasses military hardware which is neither consumed by workers not by capital. Hence armaments neither increase wages (and therefore the rate of exploitation of the working class remains high), nor do they add to capital accumulation (and therefore the organic composition of capital grows less fast and the rate of profit declines more slowly).
Cliff explains why:
A unique feature of the consumption of the capitalists, according to Marx, is that it does not constitute part of the process of reproduction. The ‘consumption’ of means of production (depreciation of machinery, etc.) leads to the creation of new means of production or new means of consumption, the consumption of the workers results in the reproduction of labour power, but the products consumed by the capitalists do not contribute at all to the new production cycle. There is, however, one form of consumption which, although possessing this characteristic, is nevertheless a means to acquire new capital and new possibilities of accumulation, to conquer the world of social wealth, to increase the mass of human beings exploited. This is war production.
And in an extreme capitalist crisis the arms economy can lead into an all-out war and ‘stoppage of accumulation and a destruction of capital on such a scale that accumulation becomes possible anew’. [77]
The Russian and American ruling classes did not ‘chose’ to create an arms economy because of its positive consequences in creating the longest boom in capitalism’s history. No choice at all was involved in the matter; rather, it followed from the specific features of the world in which they found themselves. American capital’s ability and willingness to compete commercially and financially in the world market was quite unmatched by that of Russia. On the other hand both countries had considerable military power. As Cliff put it 35 years ago: ‘the commercial struggle has so far been of less importance than the military’, and this leads to a situation where ‘the armament industry occupies a decisive place in Russia’s economic system’. This is because the decisions of Russia’s bureaucracy ‘are based on factors outside of its control, namely the world economy, world competition’, and because this ‘international competition takes mainly a military form’. [78]
The military state capitalisms of Britain, France, Germany and America in the First World War were thus dismantled after 1918 because within each country the capitalists – rightly or wrongly – felt strong enough to compete on their own (or, in the case of Germany, were not free to opt for a state capitalist alternative). [79] But in 1945 the situation was different. In Russia the counter-revolution of the bureaucracy in the 1920s had led to the consolidation of its rule in the 1930s as a collective presiding over a monolithic state capitalism. The continuation of its rule as a class depended on a continuation of (i) centralised administration as opposed to the price mechanism as the regulator of production, and (ii) its monopoly of the forces of terror and coercion which ensure that these central diktats were followed in practice. For the Russian ruling class, military power was all they possessed to defend themselves against western capital. For the American ruling class this fact, in its turn, implied the need to supplement their financial and productive power with a military power that was equivalently overwhelming.
With this in mind it now becomes much easier to explain the first Cold War. First of all there is the general historical background that we have discussed above. This reveals how the essential war aims of both Russia and America were thwarted by the other and explains why it is useful to see the first Cold War as the final act of World War II rather than the first act in the build-up to World War III. Secondly there is the existence of the world economy, which forces the Russian ruling class to compete with the ruling classes of the west. Thirdly there is the internal structure of Russian state capitalism – the fact that it is centrally administered, that the means of production are owned by the bureaucracy (but owned collectively, as a class, not individually), that it is technologically much more backward than the west – all of which force it to compete at a military level first of all. These considerations suffice to explain the unique phenomenon of a militarisation that takes place both in peacetime and in conditions of a huge economic upswing rather than a capitalist crisis.
The difference between Cliff’s and Bukharin’s theories needs to be stressed. Bukharin’s theory starts from the world economy in crisis and proceeds to explain imperialism and, with it, state capitalism, on the one hand, and world war on the other. Cliff’s theory, by contrast, while tracing the origins of state capitalism in Russia to the historically exceptional circumstances of a successful counter-revolution by the bureaucracy, and its consolidation to the world crisis of the 1930s, nevertheless explains its post-war form in terms of military competition within the world economy during a quite unprecedented period of upswing. In short while Bukharin was able to show how crisis and state capitalism gives us the arms economy, Cliff, in his turn, was able to show how economic upswing and state capitalism gives us an arms economy too.
When – and only when – this has been accepted, does the first Cold War become explicable. From this point on one can begin to explain the effects of the permanent arms economy on prolonging and extending the post-war boom, the function that it had in this process. But from the function alone one cannot infer the reasons why the ruling classes either took that course to begin with, or, for that matter, why they persisted with it. Without the theory of state capitalism, then, the theory of the permanent arms economy cannot stand up properly.
In the 1950s and 1960s the theorists from our own tradition – particularly Cliff and Kidron – began to develop some of the consequences of this understanding of the world economy (and the role of Russia within it) for the western economies too. [80] They concluded that the arms economy contributed to the boom in the following ways:

It ensured that surplus value that might otherwise have contributed nothing to the expansion of production (as happened in the 1930s) was actually put to work. In so doing it prevented any sudden reversion to a crisis of under-consumption.
 
But at the same time it ensured that that state-induced armaments investment did not eat into future possibilities for capital earning adequate rates of profit. It neither increased workers’ real wages, nor did it add to the size of the capital stock in the non-arms sector of the economy (and therefore did not force down the rate of profit through forcing the same quantity of surplus value to be divided among a larger quantity of capital stock).
 
Although paid for out of the surplus value that would otherwise have ended up in the capitalists’ pockets, it enforced similar costs on a significant number of the major eastern and western capitalist countries and thus ensured – to a degree and for a time – that the participants did not lose out commercially from the costs of the arms economy.
 
Because much of the money that went on the arms economy went into research, a technological spin-off occurred which enabled the rate of exploitation to increase even while workers were experiencing real wage rises. Even when workers’ living standards were rising, therefore, their productivity was rising faster still and this meant a larger proportion of the working day went into producing surplus value for the capitalists. The rate of exploitation went up, partly or wholly compensating the capitalists for the costs of the arms economy.

The theorists of the permanent arms economy made a number of predictions on the basis of this theory. They argued that it could lead to a boom of unprecedented length and one which would expand the forces of production on a world-wide scale to an unprecedented level. They were quite right. Even in the already industrialised Atlantic economies there was considerable expansion in the GNP in the years 1940–74. The most sluggish of the lot, Britain, doubled its output; and the others expanded to between three and five times their previous output. Elsewhere the results were even more dramatic. Russia’s output went up seven times, and in Japan and the newly industrialised parts of Asia and Latin America it went up ten or twenty times.
The permanent arms economy theorists also argued that under these circumstances the organic composition of capital would rise only very slowly, and therefore the rate of profit would also only fall very slowly too. Here again they were quite right. Until the latter part of the 1960s – by which time, as we shall see below, armaments were occupying a significantly smaller proportion of the national economies of the major protagonists than before – both the organic composition of capital and the rate of profit remained within quite narrow limits. [81]
Finally they argued that the arms economy could only temporarily stabilise world capitalism; that the pressures on the rate of profit to fall were being offset only temporarily and only partially. Furthermore they argued that the arms economy would make the crisis when it came, that much more intractable. It would have worked against the restructuring of capital within the boom period, thereby making the task a more serious one once the boom faltered. The prospects for crisis, once it came, were therefore for deep and extended crises. Under these circumstances, on the one hand a cutback in the armaments sector would precipitate a serious crisis of overproduction; on the other hand its extension would at that point merely eat further into falling profit rates.
Although the theory was too often presented in an ad hoc manner which obscured its roots in both the Marxist theory of crisis and the theory of state capitalism [82], and although it missed some of the more concrete consequences that would follow from the arms economy [83], its overall explanatory power cannot seriously be doubted. [84] Certainly no other alternative came near to providing a Marxist understanding of the economic background to the whole of this period.
 
From the Hungarian revolution to the Cuban missiles
At an economic level the years of the 1950s and early 1960s were thus ones of continuity rather than of sharp change. But at apolitical level the complex set of circumstances that gave rise to the first Cold War gradually began to change.
If the six years from 1950 to 1956 were the high point of the first Cold War, the next six, 1956 to 1962 considerably modified it. Although imperialist rivalry and military competition between the rulers of Russia and America has been a permanent feature of the post war world, it became clear during this period that each superpower in fact accepted the existence of other other, and each came to accept, however grudgingly, its own share of the carve up of the world that followed World War II.
This was expressed most clearly when the Hungarian revolution in 1956 was crushed by Russian tanks and half a million troops. In spite of the intentions of NSC 68, no move was made by America to rollback’ the Russians, to apply military pressure elsewhere, to curtail trade or financial connections. There was no long-term increase in armaments expenditure by America, no increased escalation in the building of new weapons systems, no expansion in the number of the CIA sabotage teams who had been parachuted in to ferment trouble among Russia’s national minorities since the late 1940s. On the contrary, the trade and finance links (small though they were) went on increasing slightly after 1956, the number of sabotage agents seemed to decline somewhat, and, crucially, arms spending went on falling throughout this period, with only the slightest hiccup of a temporary increase in 1957 before resuming its downward path again. [85] The difference between this reaction and the response 23 years later to the Afghanistan invasion is an obvious and immediate one. [86]
Even the event that seemed to bring the superpowers nearer to the brink of a ‘hot’ war than any other event since 1945 – the Cuban missiles crisis of October 1962 – ultimately proved the same point. For it led to a recognition by the Russian ruling class that it could not get away with establishing the same sort of nuclear base in America’s backyard that the American ruling class had itself been maintaining for years in Russia’s own backyard (in Germany, Turkey, Iran etc.). And it led in its turn to the American rulers conceding that they would not continue to use overt military intervention to destroy the Castro regime.
The result of all these events was to establish a comparatively stable and mutually accepted division of the world into spheres of influence. If the process through which this stability was created was a terrifying one, with the threat of nuclear destruction ever present, and if the reckless indifference of the Kennedys and the Khrushchevs to the fate of the hundreds of millions of lives they were using as pawns in their game was a moral outrage, the fact remained that in the aftermath of their games of nuclear chicken there was an unmistakable trend in world politics towards an accommodation between the superpowers, towards a mutual acceptance of the rights of the other power to rule.
For the rulers in Moscow and Washington, and the class they represented, this made a lot of sense at the time. The world economy was expanding fast, and within it there were plenty of opportunities for all capitals – state or private – to grow without needing to plunder other capitals. Each capital could expand through the rapid increase in the size of the workforce or in its productivity, and the major world powers ensured that both took place.
Russian state capitalism was growing at roughly 7% per annum in this period, but more than 4% of this growth was provided by the expansion of the workforce as it took in those unemployed (or underemployed) within the rural economy. [87] The rest of its industrial base was very backward and undercapitalised, and it was easy to expand productivity by simply increasing the extent of its mechanisation during those years. [88] For American capital too the prospects for growth were good. The domestic workforce was still growing quite fast (an appreciable proportion of it coming from immigration) and abroad American multinational capital was beginning to earn large profits from its overseas operations. [89] Starting from much higher levels of productivity initially, less of its growth came from this direction, but this did not impede its overall performance. Furthermore even the weakest economies, like Britain’s, still managed a real growth figure of at least a couple of percent per year in this period.
In such periods of generalised capital growth, the existence of any one national block of capital is not generally threatened by another. There is no need for a life-and-death struggle with a rival national block of capital in order to survive. The military forces of the state might be used to threaten and cajole, to secure marginal advantages here and there, but it will not be worthwhile for them to be used when the risks of a real hot war are high – particularly if that war were to take on nuclear proportions.
It is in this light that the Cuban missile crisis has to be understood. It was not that Kennedy believed that the installation of the missiles would sound the death knell of American capital, nor that Khrushchev believed that without them the same would be true for Russia. Rather, each took up a position that it was well able to retreat from. The danger came from the highly accident-prone nature of the game they were playing, not from the necessity to use military force to inflict a decisive defeat on the other.
 
The emergence of ‘detente’
The Cuba crisis ended with the installation of the ‘hot line’ between Washington and Moscow; and from then until the end of the 1960s what later became known as ‘detente’ gradually emerged to define the public face of the relations between the two. The period of that transition to detente during the middle 1960s consisted of several main features.
Firstly the recognition of the other superpower’s sphere of influence took on a more overt form. For the Chinese rulers at the time this implied an actual collusion of the two in ‘superpower hegemonism’. While this claim was exaggerated, it certainly is true that even while engaged in a permanent series of conflicts for power and influence around the world, the American and Russian ruling class at that time were very careful to localise the conflicts and to prevent them interfering with the slowly developing trade and financial links between Russia and the west.
Secondly none of these conflicts was allowed to alter the general trend towards decreasing armaments expenditure. Even though a permanent arms economy still existed with armaments occupying a percentage of the economy that was five or ten times greater than before the war, the overall tendency was for a slight decline in the arms sector. (With the advent of the Vietnam war – which involved more than half a million US troops – the trend was temporarily reversed in America, but it reverted again shortly after.) This downward trend characterised not just the two major superpowers, but all their allies in NATO and the Warsaw Pact as well. [90]
Thirdly, under the umbrella of the post-war arms-induced boom, there arose new challenges to both Russia and America as the links between them and the other members of their own camps began to weaken. Japan and Europe emerged as important trading competitors to the USA, cutting into its balance of payments figures and thereby weakening the dollar, which, in its turn, had provided the whole basis of the post-war western financial system. This process took place most rapidly in the vast outpouring of dollars that occurred during the Vietnam war in the late 1960s and early 1970s. In fact it reached such catastrophic proportions then that many sections of the American ruling class turned against the war by the late 1960s, arguing that ‘Washington could save the people of South Vietnam and Cambodia from communism only at a cost that made a mockery of the word “save”.’ [91]
In Russia the growth rate began to falter in the 1960s and produced some severe headaches for the ruling bureaucracy. By then the avenue of more extensive growth, gained by the productive employment of under-employed labour resources, had begun to dry up: a labour force that was being expanded at 4% per year in 1960 was expanding at not much more than 1% ten years later. More worrying still, there arose a chronic problem of flagging productivity: the increasing amounts of capital that were being built up per capita were not being reflected in increasing production. More and more capital was being pushed into the system, but less and less was coming out in expanded production. [92]
Several possible answers emerged or were implicit in the debate in the Russian economic press that took place in the 1960s [93]: (i) central administration of the economy could be relaxed to encourage local initiative, with greater flexibility in prices and for the payment of bonuses (the so-called ‘market socialist’ solution); (ii) greater emphasis could be placed on foreign trade, in particular to gain access to more efficient and technically advanced capital goods and machinery; and (iii) resources could be diverted from the arms sector to production and consumption. All of these answers however implied a loosening of ties between the central bureaucracy in the Kremlin and Russia’s satellites in eastern Europe and they all implied a degree of relative accommodation with the west.
In both Russia and America therefore, the need for a certain loosening of the structures inherited from the first Cold War of the early 1950s began to appear as the 1960s wore on. Militarily too, the overwhelming advantage in strategic nuclear weapons that America had enjoyed at the time of the Cuba crisis (and which had strengthened its determination to play nuclear chicken with the Russians) had more or less disappeared by the end of the decade, by which time each side possessed the means to deliver thousands of nuclear warheads on to each others doorstep. Each side, therefore, had a real motivation for at least regularising the military posture that they assumed against the other.
From the late 1960s until the middle of the 1970s – the high water of ‘detente’ – the atmosphere surrounding the competition between Russia and America became very different from that which pervaded the first Cold War period.
First of all there was an acceleration of the tendencies mentioned above. Progressively smaller proportions of the economies of Russia and America were devoted to armaments until the latter part of the 1970s. Trade links between the blocs developed extremely rapidly, especially between western Europe and the east (exports to Russia from West Germany thus expanded more than five times in 1970–75). And there was a massive expansion of western credit to the eastern European countries (though much less to Russia itself). From insignificant sums this credit grew to such an extent that in the later part of the 1970s countries like Rumania, Hungary – and above all Poland – were owing western banks many billions of dollars. [94]
And for the first time these growing ‘peaceful’ links acquired international public political recognition in a whole series of summit meetings and arms control treaties. The latter were particularly significant, for none at all were agreed to from 1945 until the signing of the Partial Test Ban Treaty in 1963. But from 1967 to 1974 arms control treaties followed thick and fast: the 1967 Outer Space Treaty (to keep outer space free from nuclear weapons), the 1967/68 Treaty of Tlatelolco (prohibiting nuclear weapons in Latin America), the 1968 Non Proliferation Treaty, the 1971 Sea-bed Arms Control Treaty (forbidding all weapons of mass destruction on the sea-bed), the 1972 Biological Warfare Convention (prohibiting the manufacture of biological weapons and entailing the destruction of existing stocks), the 1974 Threshold Agreement (prohibiting nuclear tests of more than 150 kilotons even when underground), and, most important of all, SALT-1, the 1972 interim agreement to fix a common ceiling on the numbers of anti-ballistic missile systems and inter-continental strategic missiles.
It is certainly possible to argue that these measures were largely cosmetic and that underneath the arms race continued as before. There is some truth in this view; after all each one of these measures did not threaten (and if anything enhanced) the military profile of the superpowers. Most of the test ban treaties were, after all, directed against newcomers muscling in on the preserve of the superpowers (as indeed were those agreements that prohibited weapons in certain new zones in the world). SALT-1 too, contained a large cosmetic element. This agreement limited the number of intercontinental rockets that Russia and! America could possess but still allowed for massive increases in the number of independently targetable warheads that could be carried on each missile. Indeed the period that followed the collapse of detente, the late 1970s, saw by far the greatest increase in the strategic warheads possessed by Russia and America that there has ever been – but all within the limitations of SALT-1.
Yet even if one concedes that this view is partly true one still needs to ask why there was a need to make things seem different. Why did Nixon sign SALT-1, and why did the US legislature ratify it? Certainly it diverted attention from Watergate and from the decline in the dollar, but one still needs to explain why was there a political mileage to be gained from peace when, only a few years later, Reagan’s election showed that at that later date there was an equivalently great mileage to be made from war.
The answer can only be that, while wanting to cover themselves with sufficient military power to guard against things going wrong, the rulers of both Russia and America felt it to be in their interests to reach some kind of an accommodation with the other side – to peacefully carve up the world’s riches between their respective ruling classes, rather than go to war over them. Certainly both ruling classes were becoming obsessed with the way in which their huge arms burdens were damaging productivity in comparison with the rapid strides being made elsewhere (particularly in Japan), and both were looking for a formula that would permit some of the resources that were then being squandered on arms to be used to jack up ailing levels of productivity. In America the balance of trade went into the red for the first time since the war in 1971, and in the next 3 years – faced with rapidly rising oil import bills – it went very heavily into the red. Nixon was faced with the need to devalue the dollar (thus threatening the financial stability enshrined in the 1944 Bretton Woods agreement) and to cut back on arms. The latter provided the background to America’s move in the direction of detente. [95]
 
The New Cold War
The problem that the Russian and American ruling classes faced was that ‘detente’ did not produce the required results. The late 1970s saw America being overtaken by Japan as the largest exporter of manufactured goods. American productivity also continued to lag still further behind its competitors in western Europe and the Far East, and even when profits did temporarily rise during the 1977-79 boomlet it did not lead to increased investment in American industry, but rather, via the increased activity of the international banks, into speculation or productive investment elsewhere. [96]
The Russian ruling class faced comparable problems – though they became apparent only somewhat later. Any solution to the problems of the Russian block countries would have required, as we have already noted above, an increasing participation in the world division of labour. Only this would have permitted the eastern ruling class to acquire the advanced technology that they needed to modernise their industry and agriculture. But the ruling class in the Russian block countries tried this avenue with disastrous results from 1975–81. In an attempt to create export-oriented industrial plant during the years of easy credit in the late 1970s, they borrowed heavily on the international finance market to purchase the capital goods required, hoping to benefit from the exports that would follow. Instead their heavy borrowing itself contributed to rising interest rates, and thereby to the slump of the 1980s. They were left with massively increased foreign debts and a collapse in the international market for their goods. Like every other unit of capital during an international crisis, the eastern state capitals found themselves to be simultaneously both cause and victim of the crisis. [97]
For both the American and the Russian block ruling classes then, detente had gone badly wrong. The hoped for gains in the domestic economy were just not taking place, and there seemed no prospect of this improving given the downturn in the world economy. To have altered this situation would have required Far Eastern wage levels and property values in America, and ceding control of large chunks of the Russian block state capitalist economies to international finance in the east. In both cases such a strategy would seriously have threatened the stable relations upon which each ruling class depends in order for it to rule, and was therefore out of the question.
In both America and the Russian bloc countries, the state overestimated its ability to control events. In the latter case for all its coercive power and for all its managerial power within its own confines, it was powerless to control the movements of capital and trade within the much larger entity of the world economy. In America’s case it was the internationalisation of US capital that made increased investment and productivity within America slip through its grasp. The 1960s and 1970s had multinationalised too much of America’s domestic industry and too many of its banks. Investment leaked out like a sieve to wherever it could earn highest profits, and only in certain sectors of the economy was that id America itself. [98] To have repeated the triumph of Japanese state capitalism, in which state agencies like MITI have been able to direct and channel both state and private funds to consciously worked out projects, would, at the very least, have required the dismantlement of much of this structure of US multinational capital – hardly a serious solution since world trade and capital flows could hardly function without it.
This state of affairs forced both the Russians and the American ruling classes to reassess their situation. The early post-war period in which each had been the predominant industrial power in the eastern and western worlds respectively was fast disappearing. Yet there remained in their hands certain strengths that they began to utilise in increasing quantities. Central to this reassessment was their own military power, which as yet remained unchallenged by any third party.
When Carter in the late 1970s reversed the downward trend in the US arms budget (followed in a more extreme way by Reagan) and began to adopt a much more aggressive posture towards Russia, this had several consequences.
It killed off much of east-west trade in a few short years-German] exports in particular, where machine tool manufacturers were particularly badly hit. Even where there were no formal bans, the threat of them was sufficient to kill off trade. [99] And although Reagan’s blunderings on the issue of the Siberian gas pipeline showed the limitations on the power of the American state, too much should not be read into his failure to stop the project. He has certainly succeeded in creating an atmosphere in which the earlier plans to build more pipelines (not to mention numerous other engineering projects) will now be cancelled. [100]
This policy, due to the low level of US-Russian trade in capital goods, has therefore largely been aimed against America’s European rivals – France, Germany etc. There is no doubt either that this policy will be reinforced. Reagan’s government has been pressings for the strengthening of Cocom – the western powers’ military) economic committee that monitors and controls ‘strategic’ trade with the east – a policy that is certain to be approved in one form or another by the west Europeans, and which will almost certainly lead to further losses for European capital engaged in engineering. [101] What will not suffer, however, is the export of American wheat to Russia – a testimony to the much greater weight that the American ruling class is able to throw around compared with its allies at the military/strategic level.
America’s much greater military than industrial strength (which contrasts sharply with the situation in the 1940s and 1950s) has several sources. For a start while price competition in the world market depends on cost efficiency, military competition depends largely on the absolute size of the armed power on each side. So while South Korean capital can effectively compete with US capital in shipbuilding, and Japanese and German capital compete with it in motor vehicles and precision engineering respectively; none of them has a large enough economy to match the armed power that the USA is able to put into the field – even if they were to gear up their economies to military production. America and Russia’s rulers might well be procuring their military forces in economically inefficient ways, but the absolute size of their economies ensures their preponderance in this field. It is this military preponderance which ensures that it is the American state that calls the shots within NATO, that American interests and personnel are the most influential in committees like Cocom etc., and therefore that the economic interests of American capital are furthered – as far as it is possible to do so – within them.
Furthermore, while America’s large increases in arms expenditures every year from 1977 are certainly important, they are only one part of a major change in military policy that has taken place since then giving the American ruling class a much more offensive posture and revealing the aim of being able to initiate and win a nuclear confrontation with their Russian rivals. The Rapid Deployment Force, the new generation of ‘first strike’ missiles (Cruise, Trident, Pershing II etc.), and the new targeting policy embodied in Presidential Directive 59 (implying a first strike by US missiles on the Russian missiles before they have left the ground) all point unmistakably in this same direction.
In the 1950s, the 1960s and the early 1970s, the burden of the arms economy was largely carried in the west by the United States (with Britain, then France and Germany carrying a somewhat lesser burden in comparison with their GNPs). And in the ‘detente’ period in particular few other countries could be induced to invest in military resources for the western alliance. The much more sharpened offensive profile of the USA in the latter part of the 1970s and the 1980s was designed to change all that too. The 1978 NATO meeting thus ended up with all its members committing themselves a minimum of 3% per year real increases in armaments. And more recently the Reagan government has been bringing enormous pressure to bear on the new Japanese prime minister to increase Japan’s military forces and to take greater responsibility for the defence of the whole north west Pacific zone. [102]
Very important things are at stake here. The nationalism of Japan’s state capitalism is well known in the commercial sphere, but Japan’s ruling class is well aware also of the significance of the military power that has under-laid the world economy upon which their export-led growth had depended. As the temperature of the military posturing of east and west hots up, it will be more and more difficult for the Japanese ruling class (which currently devotes only about 1–1.5% of its GNP to armaments) to resist the pressure to participate more fully in this process of militarisation. If they do participate it could bring about some significant developments that the American ruling class is seeking: (i) it would reduce the quits phenomenal percentages of the GNP that Japan has hitherto set aside for accumulation and which has been the most important; single factor underlying the growth of the Japanese economy; (ii) it might open up new markets for US military hardware: at the moment US productivity in the most important part of this area: (warplanes and missiles) is at least twice as high as Japan’s, so US; arms producers have hopes of sales in this, the one area where US technology still has a clear lead; (iii) it might provide dramatically cheaper sources for some of the inputs that the US defence industry needs now, or will shortly be needing – carbon fibre, fibre-optics and associated photon-operated microchips (crucial for missiles seeking to overcome the electro-magnetic pulses that would best encountered in a nuclear war), ferrite paint (crucial for the new radar-invisible ‘stealth’ technology) – in all these areas Japan is the leading producer.
How far these measures will enforce a greater sharing of the west’s arms bills, and how successful they will be in furthering the interests of American capital once that has been accomplished, is as yet difficult to assess [103], but it is certainly as plausible a strategy as any other one currently available for American capital.
While the lead in this return to militarism has been taken by the United States, the consequences it has had have affected both NATO and Russian block countries in a similar manner. The cut off in trade – and above all finance – from the west to the eastern European countries, has thrown the eastern European countries more fully back into the arms of the Kremlin. The process has been an uneven one however, with important exceptions; East Germany for instance has been able to maintain industrial exports, Bulgaria western tourism and Hungary agricultural exports and offshore financial operations – none of these three has therefore been drawn closer to the Russian ruling class since the slump of the 1980s began. But in the case of Poland, Czechoslovakia and Rumania the dependence has sharply increased. At the end of 1981 Russia was baling out Czechoslovakia and Rumania to the tune of $344 million and $460 million per annum respectively, in hard currency subsidies. Poland seemed likely to join the big league of Russian dependencies with no less than $1,900 million (alongside Cuba’s $1,860 million and Vietnam’s $1,040 million) in hard currency subsidies. [104]
The costs of maintaining this empire are therefore considerable. Nonetheless they confer considerable benefits on the Russian ruling class at a moderate price. In the case of Vietnam and Cuba this has been immediately cashable in military terms. For the cost of a ‘mere’ $1,000 million dollars the Russian ruling class has access to the 1-million strong armed forces of Vietnam for use in south east Asia. From the Russian point of view, the border war between Vietnam and China has been particularly important, for it has forced the Chinese ruling class to split its armed forces between the northern front (where they confront Russia) and the southern front (where they confront Vietnam), thus relieving Russian forces on the other side of the Chinese border. Given that total Russian armament expenditure is, very roughly, in the region of $150,000–300,000 million per annum, and that between a quarter and a third of this is earmarked for the far eastern front, this represents very good value. For less than a half of one percent of Russia’s arms bill, Russia has purchased a million-strong army that has halved the pressure on its eastern flank. In Cuba, an analysis of costs and benefits also reveals similar – if not such great – benefits. For 1% of its total arms bill it has purchased an effective army of 200,000 that has carried out military campaigns in Angola and Ethiopia, for instance, which, whatever else may be said of them, are of considerable value to Russian foreign policy.
In this light the subsidy that has been going to Poland is not a very large sum either, particularly in view of the alternative open to the Russian ruling class. Clearly the provision of money was part of a deal worked out with Jaruzelski during the preparations for his coup in December 1981, in which Russia agreed to fill in where necessary for the shortfall in western finance that might follow from the military coup. Had a Russian invasion been mounted instead, the costs would have been much greater. If it took armies of half a million to quell Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968, it would have taken a force of at least twice that size in Poland in 1981. Not only is Poland’s population bigger than Czechoslovakia’s and Hungary’s combined, but the Polish workers’ movement was much bigger and much more deeply entrenched. By using the financial carrot the Russian ruling class incurred costs equivalent to less than 1% of its arms bill, but if instead it had used the military stick, would have absorbed fully 25% of its armed forces.
At the same time there was a considerable build-up of Russian military strength during the latter part of the 1970s. From a position where they had fewer than 50% of the American total of deliverable strategic nuclear warheads in the mid-1970s, they moved to near parity in the early 1980s (thus opening up for them too the opportunity to base their military strategies around ‘first strike’ policies). Similar increases appeared also in aircraft and helicopters, submarines and mobile land forces.
In the case of both Russia and America therefore, the New Cold War has presented their respective ruling classes with additional burdens, but, at the same time, it has also given them both on the one hand new opportunities to consolidate their relationships with their own allies, and, on the other hand, to dictate to a greater extent their allies’ military and commercial policies.
 
The New Cold War and the first Cold War
Looking at a blow-by-blow account of the 1970s therefore, it is a relatively easy thing to see why detente did not serve the interests of II the American and Russian ruling classes, and therefore why the reversion to a greater state of armed belligerence between them took place during this period. What this does not tell us, however, is how permanent a change is implied by this process (might it revert to a new period of detente as quickly as the New Cold War began?), or how far this belligerency might go (is it strictly shadow boxing or are we in the lead in to World War III?). To answer these questions we need to go beyond the immediate decisions and perceptions of the ruling classes involved to an analysis of the real world itself, and, above all, to an analysis of the present world crisis. The reasons for doing so should be obvious once we recall the fact that we have two models of capitalist rearmament in the 20th century – that of Lenin and Bukharin which is tied in to the theory of total war, and that of the permanent arms economy which is tied in to the opposite phenomenon of the first Cold War, capitalist restabilisation and peace.
If the New Cold War fits the latter model, if the present situation is just a reversion to the structures of the first Cold War, then two very important consequences follow. Firstly, although the sabre-rattling might unleash an accidental nuclear war, we can at least rest assured that, since it is not in the interests of either eastern or western ruling classes for these dangers to persist, they will be likely in the not too distant future to reach a new accommodation between themselves. Secondly, there will be no need to mobilise the working class to get rid of the risk of nuclear war – the natural functioning and expansion of the world system will do that for us instead.
But if the New Cold War’s rearmament pattern follows rather that portrayed by Lenin and Bukharin, the opposite will follow. The crisis will drive the rival ruling classes further and further along the path of headlong collision, and the only force capable of stopping them will be the only force capable of ending the system that drives them along this path – the working class itself.
The problem that we face, however, in assessing which of these theories is more appropriate to the world today, is the relative incompleteness of their formulation in the first place. As we noted earlier on, although Bukharin’s and Lenin’s theories presuppose a capitalist crisis brought on by a rising organic composition of capital and a falling rate of profit, neither of them explicitly bring this in to their actual analysis of the war itself. We would need to do this to fill in their account; only then could we compare the period before the 1914–18 war to that of the early 1950s, and then to the current period of the 1980s.
Fortunately this has been done already in this journal. In a series of articles which root the theory of the permanent arms economy much more satisfactorily within the theory of state capitalism, Chris Harman has recently both completed Bukharin’s analysis (by showing how the crisis of 1914 was brought about by the falling rate of profit), and at the same time he was able to show how the permanent arms economy succeeded in preventing such a fall in the 1950s and 1960s. The figures show, for instance, constant, or even rising rates of profit for American capitalism from 1950 to the mid-1960s, during which time the organic composition of capital remained low; followed by a rapid rise in the organic composition in the early 1970s, and as a result of this, a consequent rapid fall in the rate of profit. [105]
In other words, in its essential details the current period of rearmament resembles not the early 1950s, but rather the years preceding the 1914–18 war. We can therefore expect the continued crisis to push the ruling classes of the two superpowers (and their hangers on in the NATO and Warsaw Pact alliances) further along the road of all-out confrontation. In an important sense, therefore, it is inexact to refer to this period as that of the New Cold War. There is nothing intrinsically ‘cold’ about the nature of the confrontation that we are currently witnessing, quite the opposite is the case; we are seeing, rather, the accelerating war drive of ageing, militarised state capitalisms in crisis. The first Cold War was concerned with how the spoils of a war which had already been fought, and which had already restored the conditions for a renewed expansion of the system, were to be divided out. The Russian and the American ruling classes were not at that time driven into opting for a military solution, because there was, simply, no crisis to drive them in that direction. They could each go on expanding without having to plunder the other’s resources to do so. But the New Cold War is above all about the superpowers’ ruling classes feeling the need to do just that. That is why, if we are to understand the current period and formulate strategies within it, we have to understand the differences between the first Cold War and the New Cold War, and see above all that the latter is essentially about the crisis driving the rival ruling classes towards all-out war.
Yet it might be objected, how could it be rational for the ruling classes in Russia and America to go to war, when an all-out war would obliterate both of them? Surely they will hold back from pressing that fateful button? And isn’t this particularly true in the epoch of nuclear weapons? If so is it not disingenuous to bring in comparisons with 1914 (or even 1939)?
To assess these objections we need to remember several important facts about the world we live in.
The first is that what may be rational for all ruling classes as a whole, is by no means rational for any one of them on their own. In fact there is no such thing as ‘all ruling classes as a whole’, especially not in a world crisis which sharpens still further the competition between them, forcing them apart in a particularly extreme manner. Perhaps it was, in some supra-national logic, ‘irrational’ for the British ruling class to go to war in 1914; certainly the result of it all was their definitive losing out to the American ruling class in world power. But what was the alternative for them? Had they failed to go to war they would certainly have lost out to the German ruling class, a prospect that they relished even less. They had to choose between two options: (i) to permit German imperialism to gain world dominance through a drive to the Balkans, Turkey and the middle east, and to do so without a fight; (ii) to go to war, with the prospect of there being some chances at least of emerging strengthened (if for; instance Germany had backed off quickly). Under these circumstances they chose option (ii). However unlikely they were to win through it, at least the chances were better than the certain defeat that they faced through the former option.
The events that could trigger World War III might not be so very different. Should either the Russian or the American ruling class feel that their essential interests are being threatened by the other, then they might also be prepared to take a chance of a major show of force to intimidate their rival. Just as with Britain in 1914, the American or Russian ruling class might have to balance the certainty of them losing to the other if they do not fight, against the possibility of not losing if they do. The fact that the former option would leave the world intact while the latter might not, might well make ‘far sighted’ and ‘humanitarian’ members of the ruling class argue for the former. But for how long could they continue to persuade their more militaristic colleagues to agree? There is no simple answer to this question. All we can say is that the more severe the world crisis the shorter the time it would be before the balance tipped in the direction of the war mongers. No doubt the fact that a holocaust would result if the gamble went wrong would make the ruling class more circumspect than in 1914, but since their existence as a class depends on their success in their struggle against the ruling class of the other side, at some point or other they would be forced to take the gamble.
The situation is in many ways comparable to the question of safety in potentially dangerous industrial processes. In a period of capitalist upswing the ‘humanitarians’ on the board of directors, who prefer at least minimally adequate safety precautions, are more likely to get their way – if not for humanitarian reasons, then for the sound commercial reason that it is better to reduce present profits somewhat if this makes long term production (and therefore long term profits) more secure. But in a crisis profits are squeezed to the point where, for the weaker sections of capital, a different equation rears its head: either one continues adequate safety provision or it is cut back. If the former, then one faces the certainty of maintenance costs wiping out profits, and hence bankruptcy. If the latter, then, it is true, there is the chance of a major accident destroying the plant, but equally there is a chance of that not happening and the plant remaining commercially viable. In spite of the fact that cutting back on safety makes the plant more accident prone, it now becomes ‘rational’ for the management to choose this course of action – if their whole investment gets blown sky high as a result, well, that is just a chance that has to be taken. At chemical plants in Flixborough and Manchester in recent years we have seen the result of just this logic in operation.
The ruling classes of the superpowers will be forced to think more and more in a comparable manner the deeper the crisis becomes. The more their own economies become threatened at the commercial level, the more they will feel the needed to gain access to resources, markets and capital (and also prevent other ruling classes gaining access to them at the same time) by whatever other means there are at their disposal – including military means, as with the chemical plant manager, they will no doubt initially opt for safety; so long that is, as their viability is not threatened. But as soon as it is – and that after all is what is implied in periods of deepening crisis – they will be forced to take risks: to threaten and cajole, to engage in low key military operations to get their way first of all, but being prepared to escalate as the crisis makes the situation more and more desperate. In this reckless game, to win is to force the rival ruling class to step back, to lose is either to step back oneself or for neither to step back – and bring about the nuclear holocaust. As the crisis deepens it is inevitable that the dangers of the latter happening will very rapidly increase. So long as the capitalist system itself persists, ultimately, since crisis is endemic to it, this must eventually bring about a nuclear war if not now, then at some point in the future.
This is particularly the case now that the barrier between nuclear and non-nuclear weapons has become so diffuse. So long as nuclear weapons were essentially strategic weapons of last resort (as in the 1960s, for instance, when both the Russian and the American ruling classes possessed only a ‘second-strike’ capability), and at a tactical or a battlefield level the forces were basically non-nuclear, it was still possible to believe that the stocks of nuclear weapons would be used as little in the next war as mustard gas was in the last. But now the situation is quite different. The acquisition of first-strike capacities (and the implementation of first-strike military strategies through the new targeting policies of America – and presumably Russia too), the development of vast numbers of ‘battlefield’ and ‘tactical’ nuclear weapons (America had over 20,000 of these at the last count) – and their complete integration into ‘conventional’ weaponry – all these have abolished forever the days when nuclear weapons were simply weapons of ‘last resort’. Indeed it is now overt NATO policy not to attempt to match any purely conventional Russian thrust into Europe with conventional weapons alone, but immediately to escalate to the nuclear level. Any future total war between the superpowers would therefore certainly be a nuclear war.
 
The class struggle and the struggle against nuclear weapons
Those who argue that the Bomb is a human issue and therefore not a class issue have therefore got it seriously wrong. Of course nuclear weapons do put all humanity at risk (apart, that is, from the really tiny numbers of the ruling class who will survive the holocaust in their deep bunkers) and the moral case against our ruling classes’ headlong dash along the road to nuclear destruction is a real one that has to be made. But having made (and constantly repeated) this moral case, we will then have to assess – in the coolest and most scientific manner possible – the best strategy for stopping this drive toward world war. To confine oneself to the world of morality, to what ‘ought’ to be the case, to ignore completely the question of how to win – is to indulge in the worst form of sentimentalism. If you really are convinced by the overwhelming strength of the moral argument against nuclear weapons, then the very least you will do is try and find out how to stop them, and then follow this up in practice.
As we have argued in this article, this means recognising that the roots of war lie in class society, and that the source of the current war drive lies in the crisis in the world capitalist economy. It also means recognising that the only plausible strategy for ending this war drive is to eliminate the system that gives rise to it. This system consists of ageing national or state blocks of capital which compete with each other – with whatever weapons there are to hand – for the share out of the surplus value that has been created out of the exploitation of the world’s working class. Take away the process in which this surplus value is pumped out of the working class, and you take away also both the possibility of the exploiting classes and also the competition between them – including the military competition that produces total wars.
The only plausible strategy for fighting against the war drive is one, therefore, which contributes to the struggle of the world’s workers against capital. The moral outrage against the bomb must be harnessed behind this struggle if it is not to be frittered away uselessly, leaving our nuclear-armed ruling class intact.
Yet this is a particularly hard message to get across in the present period. On the one hand we have had the spectacle of millions of people in Europe mobilised on the streets in moral outrage against our rulers’ drive toward world war. But on the other hand there has been a massive downturn in the only process through which these rulers can be ultimately threatened – workers’ struggles. There appears, therefore, to be no ‘natural’ connection between these two: those who become involved in the fight against nuclear weapons will by no means spontaneously gravitate toward the struggle of workers in other arenas – in places of work and so on.
If the links will not occur spontaneously then they can only be made inside people’s heads by carefully explaining where and how they exist. An understanding of capitalism as a total, world system will be an absolute prerequisite for success in doing this. This does not imply any specialised knowledge of military science or economics, but it does mean that one has to be able to see through the nonsense that the media (and also, unfortunately, some on the left too) push about capitalism being about ‘peaceful’ commerce, or about Russia being ‘socialist’, or at least intrinsically different from the capitalist west. Since Russia is, similarly, a contributor to the arms race, unless it is seen for what it is – a state capitalist society – it will be impossible to explain war as a product of capitalism, an impossible to present socialism as the answer not only to capitalism but to the threat of nuclear war too.
Convincing even a sizeable minority of those who have been mobilised by the threat of nuclear weapons that they can win only a generalised attack on the capitalist system that needs the weapons and only by directing this attack on its roots at the point production – all this will certainly be a major task for revolutionaries in the coming period. If it seems more modest and less spectacular than including a reference to rejecting Cruise and Trident in Labour’s election manifesto, then we can only reply that it is better to make small steps and stay on your feet than big steps which land you flat on your face.

Notes
1. See in particular C. Harman, Marxism and the Missiles, in Socialist Review, October/November 1980 and P Binns, review of Exterminism and Cold War, in Socialist Review, February 1983.
2. B. Malinowski refers to the general consensus among anthropologists on this point in his A Scientific Theory of Culture (New York 1960), pp. 215–16.
3. Cf. K. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, chapter 26.
4. Ibid., chapter 27.
5. Marx refers to ‘competition on the world market’ as ‘being the basis and the vital element of capitalist production’, Capital, vol. 3, Moscow 1962, p. 109.
6. R. Hilferding, Finance Capital.
7. Karl Kautsky’s position was spelt out in out in a number of articles in Neue Zeit in 1914–15.
8. Perhaps Trotsky’s most important contribution to Marxism was his theory of permanent revolution, a theory which crucially depends on the world economy as its starting point (Cf. Alex Callinicos’s article on it in International Socialism 2 : 16, Spring 1982). Rosa Luxemburg’s theories are also based on the same assumption (Cf. her The Accumulation of Capital, London 1963, chapters 3–9) as is Lenin’s Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism. It is, however, more clearly articulated by Bukharin in his World Economy and Imperialism and his Economics of the Transformation Period, New York 1971. (The former work appears in English with, as Mike Haynes points out in a forthcoming book on Bukharin, the mistranslated title of Imperialism and World Economy, London 1972).
9. N. Bukharin, Imperialism, op. cit., pp. 123–24.
10. Ibid., p. 119.
11. Ibid., pp. 53–54.
12. Ibid., p. 53.
13. Ibid., p. 125.
14. Cf. in particular K. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, Moscow 1961, pp. 626–27.
15. Cf. K. Marx, Capital, vol. 3 (op. cit.), p. 429, and Engels’ comments on this point on pp. 428–29.
16. N. Bukharin, op. cit., p. 37.
17. This induced a number of German and American theorists at the time to believe that economic development would imply much more autarchic and ‘nationalist’ economic policies (in the case of Walter Sombart in Germany, for instance, this turned his ‘socialism’ into extreme pro-imperialism in the 1914–18 war). The purely temporary nature of this phenomenon is well explained in C. Harman, The crisis last time, International Socialism 2 : 13, Summer 1981, in particular pp. 4–5.
18. N. Bukharin, Imperialism, op. cit., pp. 41–44.
19. Figures quoted in C. Harman, The crisis ..., op. cit., pp. 3–4.
20. Figures quoted in M. Kidron, Imperialism the Highest Stage but One, International Socialism (first series) No. 9, 1961, p. 18.
21. Cf. S.H. Holbrook, The Age of the Moguls, London 1954, pp. 61–130.
22. Cf. E. Hobsbawm, Industry and Empire, London 1969, p. 129.
23. For the most complete exposition of Marx on this point cf. C. Harman, Marx’s Theory of Crisis and its critics, International Socialism 2 : 11, Winter 1981.
24. Henceforth this ratio will be referred to by its Marxist name – the organic composition of capital.
25. This point is developed at some length in M Haynes’ forthcoming book on Bukharin mentioned above.
26. From the fall of France in 1940 to its re-invasion in 1944, a total of only eight German divisions were employed in active service on the entire western front (including North Africa, Greece, Italy and the whole of northern Europe) in comparison with the one hundred and ninety two that were hurled at Russia during this period. But even at the most successful points in the German military advance (in the Summers of 1941 and 1942) when large parts of the Russian army had been smashed, the Russian armed forces were still more numerous, with more tanks and aeroplanes than their German counterparts.
27. By the end of 1943, for instance, the American shipbuilding industry was turning out more Liberty ships than the number of torpedoes and submarines that Germany was able to turn out against them.
28. Cf. L. Woodward, British Foreign Policy in the Second World War, London 1962, p. 241.
29. Cf. C. Harman, The crisis last time, op. cit., pp. 13–21.
30. The most thorough and best documented account of the policies and strategies of the American ruling class is to be found in G. Kolko’s The Politics of War (London 1969).
31. Ibid., pp. 280–286.
32. Ibid., p. 23.
33. Woodward, op. cit., p. 241.
34. W. Churchill, The Second World War, vol. 5, Closing the Ring, London 1952, pp. 44–45.
35. Ibid., pp. 458–60.
36. Kolko, op. cit., pp.64–69.
37. Churchill, op. cit., pp. 463, 465–67.
38. Churchill, op. cit., vol. 6, Triumph and Tragedy, London 1954, p. 610.
39. Kolko, op. cit., p. 141.
40. Cf. ibid. on France (p. 65), China (p. 268) and the United Nations (p. 277).
41. Woodward op. cit., pp. 402–03.
42. The willingness of the Italian Communist Party to collaborate with such a policy – irrespective of the wishes of Russia – is stressed by Kolko (ibid., pp. 57, 62–63).
43. Cf. ibid., p. 284.
44. Cf. the discussion that follows below on Poland in the latter 1940s.
45. Most members of the American ruling class at the time were well aware, of course, that the ‘open door’ policy was one designed to help their interests and therefore also to hinder those of other ruling classes throughout the world. Cf. in particular the way in which Stettinius, Truman’s secretary of state, formulated the matter, which is quoted in Kolko, op. cit., p. 167.
46. Cf. H.U. Faulker, American Economic History, 1960, pp. 603–609
47. Ibid., pp. 725–728.
48. So long, of course, as that aid was tied to the purchase of US produce (cf. Kolko, op. cit., pp. 255–56).
49. A. Nove, An Economic History of the USSR, London 1969, pp. 287–293, 313–315.
50. Kolko, op. cit., p. 124.
51. Ibid., p. 141.
52. A. Rapoport, The Big Two, Indianapolis 1971, p. 89.
53. Ibid., p. 90.
54. G. Alperovitz, quoted in ibid., pp. 88–89.
55. Molotov’s shocked reaction to this is recorded in ibid., p. 91.
56. Cf. in particular J.W. Spanier, American Foreign Policy since World War II, New York 1962.
57. Cf. Y. Gluckstein, Stalin’s Satellites in Europe, London 1952.
58. Rapoport, op. cit., pp. 88, 148–49.
59. Ibid., p. 103.
60. It is important to remember however, that the conditions of Lend-Lease restricted British exports quite considerably at this time.
61. A.D.H. Kaplan in The Liquidation of War Production, quoted in C. Harman, The crisis last time, op. cit., p. 25.
62. Ibid., p. 25.
63. The British war effort was paid for out of Lend-Lease and out of huge loans which were forced upon the sterling area countries. The pound sterling was therefore not convertible, requiring Britain to keep dollar reserves, the size of which was controlled from Washington.
64. Cf. R.M. Gardner, Sterling/Dollar Diplomacy: Anglo-American Collaboration in the Reconstruction of Multilateral Trade, Oxford 1956, pp. 41–42.
65. Cf ibid., passim.
66. H. Feis in Sinews of Peace, pp. 137–38, quoted in Kolko, op. cit., p. 258.
67. Business Week, April 7th 1975, quoted in N. Chomsky, Towards a New Cold War, London 1982, p. 106.
68. C. Harman, State capitalism, armaments and the general form of the current crisis, International Socialism 2 : 16, Spring 1982, p. 49.
69. First made public in the Naval War College Review, May/June 1975, it is quoted in Chomsky, op. cit., pp. 21–22.
70. Quoted in Harman State capitalism ..., op. cit., p. 50.
71. Y. Polatyev & Y. Joffe, Peaceful Competition USSR/USA, published by Soviet Weekly as Soviet Booklet No. 102, January 1963, pp. 27–28.
72. A concise summary of this period is contained in D. Hallas, Building the leadership, International Socialism (first series), No. 40.
73. Cf. H. Draper’s reprint of this material in his A Permanent Arms Economy, Berkeley 1970. [Note by ETOL: This material can be found in the T.N. Vance Archive.]
74. In China ‘The government was particularly eager that the capitalists convert themselves into professional managers in the employment of the state. They could then not only continue to rule their enterprises, receiving a generous salary as employees of the state, they could also continue to receive interest and dividends on the capital invested in their former enterprise. By 1960, there were still some 300,000 merchants receiving interest on trading organisations, and an even larger number of capitalists in the same position.’ (N. Harris, China and World Revolution, International Socialism (first series), No. 78, p. 18)
75. We have M. Kidron in mind here. Having made important contributions to the development of the theory itself, he later on rejected the theory in a manner which made one wonder how deeply it was understood in the first place. His positive contributions are contained in his articles International Capitalism and A Permanent Arms Economy in International Socialism (first series), nos. 21 and 28, and his later rejection in Two Insights Don’t Make a Theory (ibid., no. 100). Kidron’s position, and in particular his misunderstanding of the source of the theory of state capitalism, is discussed in some detail in an unpublished paper by P. Binns in 1977 entitled The Arms Economy and the Rise of State Capitalism.
76. T. Cliff, State Capitalism in Russia, London 1974, p. 232. One does not have to share Cliff’s view that armaments are not produced as values in order to accept the essence of Cliff’s argument. As we shall see below, whether or not they are produced as values, they fail to play a role in the reproduction either of labour power or of capital, and therefore the same consequences follow as if they were produced as use-values only.
77. Ibid., p. 231.
78. Ibid., pp. 209–13; T. Cliff, Rosa Luxemburg, London 1959, pp. 81–85.
79. At the time of course, they were still looking very nervously over their shoulder at revolutionary Russia. But here the threat was from what their own working classes might do having been inspired by Russia; it did not come from any commercial threat that Russia was able to pose at the time to European and American industry. In fact Russia’s industry – starting off to begin with from a much lower baseline than the western capitalist countries before 1914 – was in any case quite literally decimated by the war and the western blockade.
80. Cf. the Kidron articles mentioned in note 75 above, and also T. Cliff, A Permanent Arms Economy (1957), reprinted in A Socialist Review, London 1965.
81. Cf. C. Harman, State Capitalism ..., op. cit., p. 42.
82. Particularly in the Cliff (1957) article mentioned in note 80 above.
83. For instance none of the theorists of the 1960s fully appreciated the extent to which the rising organic compositions of capital would be accompanied by structural change within the system. Perhaps they should have seen the way in which some of the newer economies, relatively unencumbered by arms burdens themselves (particularly in the Far East), could increasingly emerge as the focus for capitalist production on a world-wide scale – but the fact remains that these implications of the theory of the permanent arms economy were never fully drawn out at the time.
84. Cf. the discussion in C. Harman, State capitalism ..., op. cit. However, in that article, Chris Harman fails to mention the massive impact that the rise in productivity had in cheapening the costs of labour – and therefore increasing the rate of exploitation of the working class – thus offsetting the tendency for the rate of profit to fall in the 1950s and 1960s. Instead he refers to the ‘von Bortkiewitz’ effect as the explanation for this. But the latter (which Chris Harman does not attempt to quantify) is far too slight to bear the weight that is here being thrust upon it. We shall not attempt to explain how exactly it functions here (but it is well explained in C. Harman, op. cit., and in his Marx’s theory of crisis and its critics, International Socialism (2 : 11)). However it relies upon relative price changes that are brought about by differences in the organic composition of capital in the arms and non-arms sectors of the economy respectively. But nowhere (not even in America) in the west are arms procurements more than 4% of the GNP. Even if the organic composition in that sector were twice as high as in the rest of the economy, it would still only have a negligible effect on average prices. At a generous estimate it would contribute to a once-and-for-all reduction in the price of the factors of production of around 2% – a figure that is smaller by a factor of ten or hundred than that contributed by productivity rises after 1950 – even in the most sluggish of the post war economies like those of Britain and America.
85. Cf. E. Mandel, Late Capitalism, London 1975, p. 276 for the statistics.
86. Perhaps to refer to American rearmament as a ‘response’ to Russian move into Afghanistan is a little inexact. As Chomsky (op. cit.) points out, the Russian invasion was used rather as an ex post facto justification for moves that the American ruling class were already engaged on.
87. According to Russian official figures, the growth rate was around 9% in this period. But different western sources (cf. Grossman in Problems of Communism, March 1976) give figures varying between 5% and 8%.
88. The full figures are given by the Russian economist and planner Khachaturov in Voprosy Ekonomiki 1973 : 3 (reproduced in Problems of Communism, XVI.5, 1973, p. 9).
89. Cf. R. Gilpin, US Power and the Multinational Corporation, New York 1975, p. 16.
90. Cf. E. Mandel, op. cit., p. 276.
91. Quoted in Chomsky, op. cit.
92. Khachaturov, op. cit., pp. 9–12; A. Zauberman, The Eastern European Economies, Problems of Communism, March–April 1978, p. 56.
93. Cf. W. Brus, The East European Reforms: What happened to them?, Soviet Studies, April 1979.
94. For the definitive account of Poland see part II of C. Barker & K. Weber, Solidarnosc: From Gdansk to Military Dictatorship (International Socialism 2 : 15, Winter 1981–2).
95. Cf. J. Steindl, Stagnation Theory and Policy, Cambridge Journal of Economics, March 1979.
96. Cf. Special Report: The Slow Investment Economy, in Business Week, 17th October 1977.
97. Barker & Weber, op. cit.; Russia itself, however, was more immune to these pressures on account of its size, and its hard currency-producing oil and gold extracting industries.
98. This point is developed in detail in N. Harris, Of Bread and Guns, London 1983.
99. Cf. the discussion in The Economist special report East-West trade: an end to business as usual (May 22nd 1982).
100. Cf. Ibid.
101. Cf. The Economist, 20th November 1982, pp. 25–26.
102. Ibid., 18 December 1982, pp. 11–12, 75–78.
103. The Economist, for instance, believes that the Japanese ruling class will prefer to build much of the military equipment themselves, even if initially at higher cost, so as to emerge eventually as a world leader in this area too. (cf. ibid., 6th December 1982, p. 66)
104. Ibid., 6th February 1982. But (ibid., 12th February 1983) the Russian subsidy actually delivered may have been considerably less.
105. Cf. C. Harman, International Socialism 2 : 13, op. cit., pp. 5–6 and International Socialism 2 : 16, op. cit., pp. 40–43, 62–64.
 



MARX’S PUBLISHED works on theory can be divided into two groups-the early period in which he wrote the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts, The German Ideology, The Communist Manifesto, etc., and the later period of Capital and Theories of Surplus Value. But there is a gap of more than 15 years between these periods with little published record of Marx’s theoretical development in it And yet we know that in those years he made fantastic progress in discovering the scientific roots and structure of bourgeois society. By the time volume 1 of Capital was published in 1867, Marx already knew about capitalism’s inherent tendencies to create crises of overproduction, monetary collapse and the destruction of capital, and he already knew that the motor force for these crises arose from the internal or defining characteristics of capitalism itself.
THE GRUNDRISSE was written by Marx in 1857/8, right in the middle of the gap which separates the early works with their emphasis on the inhumanity of capitalism, and the later works which demonstrate the scientific reasons why capitalism must create such abominations. It is a huge and rambling collection of seven notebooks, frequently repetitious and obscure, replete with thoughts that are unformed or erroneous; so it is not at all surprising that Marx never considered publishing it. Those parts which were eventually published by Marx (Contribution to a Critique of Political Economy and Capital, vol.1) underwent considerable transformations so that their method of presentation would be intelligible to at least a significant number of advanced workers. While this was useful in making Capital, for instance, more intelligible, it suffered the defect of cutting off Marx’s conclusions from the real historical Marx and especially from his method of approaching a theoretical problem as opposed to his way of presenting conclusions already worked out.
After Marx’s death, socialists were left only with his finished works. Most found it impossible to recreate for themselves the method by which he worked up his material. As capitalism developed into imperialism and monopoly capitalism at the turn of the century the problem became an urgent one: giant monopoly trusts and the growth of the capitalist state had effectively undermined the ‘free market’. Was this still capitalism? Some, like Bernstein, argued that these developments freed ‘capitalism’ from the laws of the market – that we could now reform it as we like. Others, like Kautsky, stuck their heads in the sand and refused even to recognise these developments adequately – in effect making Capital holy writ.
Only those who recreated the theoretical method of Marx for themselves, like Luxemburg, Lenin and (to a more limited extent) Trotsky, steered a path away from these errors. Even as late as 1915, upon discovering this method in embryo in Hegel, Lenin exclaimed that no-one (and that included himself hitherto) had understood Capital in the 50 years following its publication because ‘it is completely impossible to understand Marx’s Capital without having thoroughly studied the whole of Hegel’s Logic’. What a damning criticism of the collapse of the Social Democratic movement under the impact of imperialism! Living Marxist theory was so absent from the practice of the Second International, that the only way of preserving the spirit of Marxism and its dialectical method was to read Hegel – replete with all his pompous, mystifying and reactionary characteristics!
If for no other reason, we can at least be thankful now to have the Grundrisse, for in it Marx demonstrates his dialectical method better than anywhere else. In Lenin’s time the Grundrisse was unknown; if it had been he would surely have stressed its importance as against Hegel.
 
Abstractions or Revolutionary Theory
IN BOTH the Grundrisse and Capital, Marx devotes much attention to the classical economists. These people, Smith, Ricardo etc, while being ideologists for the rising bourgeoisie, nevertheless at the same time, developed economic science in certain fundamentally correct directions. Unlike later apologists for the capitalist status quo it was in their interests to fight prejudice, confusion and inertia rather than to augment them. For it was not until Smith and Ricardo were dead that the industrial bourgeoisie which they represented actually won political power and used it to institute free trade and to end aristocratic privilege. They needed cogent reasons to motivate the masses to bring their class to power unlike later apologists for the bourgeoisie whose only interest it was to confuse and dissipate the masses. In particular they needed to show that wealth derived from all forms of productive activity, rather than being, say, merely a ‘natural’ property of the land – only in this way could they legitimise their own activities as capitalists and at the same time deny such rights to the mere owners of landed property.
Hence the classical economists began to develop the view (even if in a half-hearted way), that value comes from labour. Not this labour or that labour, but labour in general. It was this insight which Marx seized hold of, and which he pressed to its logical conclusion. In so far as the capitalist simply appropriates the unpaid labour of others, he too is as much an unnecessary burden around the neck of the labouring classes as is the idle landlord. Naturally this conclusion was one that Smith and Ricardo were unwilling and unable to draw, and this distorts much of their theory. Where they go wrong is through assuming that ‘capital’ is like labour – a permanent factor in the process of production. But in fact only in bourgeois society is this predominantly the case. It is not so in ancient, oriental or feudal society, and it will not be true under socialism. Where these economists went wrong, therefore, was in mistaking the present surface appearance of things for something which must permanently underlie all societies.
Marx gives two kinds of reasons as to why this is mistaken. Firstly because the underlying forces in society may be such as to systematically distort or even invert their appearances (as with the fetishism of commodities which Marx deals with in chapter 4 of Capital, where the social relation between capitalists and workers appears as a thing, capital, rather than a mere relationship). Secondly the underlying forces may contain elements which tend to disrupt and totally transform what appears on the surface to be a ‘normal’ or tranquil society. Indeed this is predominantly the case in human history, and so to confine ourselves to the way society appears to be to those within it is to make a purely temporary historical phenomenon like capitalism seem eternal. That is why Marx says we must begin a scientific analysis of society not with what is apparently there, but with a set of abstractions which only then render the real world intelligible to us:
‘It seems to be correct to begin with the real and the concrete ... However, on closer examination this proves false. (Genuine economic science on the other hand) ... ascended from the simple relations, such as labour, division of labour, need, exchange value, to the level of the state, exchange between nations and the world market. (This) ... is obviously the scientifically correct method.’ (pp.100-101)
Marx stresses the complete incompatibility of vulgar pseudo-science which accepts without question the surface appearance of things, with genuinely revolutionary theory which the working-class can use to blow apart capitalist social relationships. For if revolution is possible existing social relationships must contain contradictions, and this is something which it is impossible to see if we merely look at what is before our eyes. We need to understand the currents beneath the surface, to see how and why the fruit is ripe – and to formulate the way we are going to pick it. To assume that existing social relationships are already independently fixed rather than being the actual expression of antagonistic forces is thus to be a bad theorist and political reactionary at one and the same time.
But Marx deliberately suppressed these methodological remarks when he eventually published the Contribution to a Critique of Political Economy. His reasons were that the conclusions were too general. As a criticism of vulgar science the points stood, but they could not provide the basis of a universal method. A clue as to why Marx believed this can be found later on in the Grundrisse:
‘It will be necessary later, before this question is dropped, to correct the idealist manner of the presentation, which makes it seem as if it were merely a matter of conceptual determinations and of the dialectic of these concepts ...’ (p.151)
While vulgar science is in the wrong for failing to abstract where it ought to, this does not mean that an adequate beginning can be found merely through the process of abstraction. Exploitation in capitalist society is hidden in the process of the equal exchange of commodities at their values in the free market. You will not find it in the market place, but you will at the point of production, and especially in historically real class struggles. Henceforth Marx took these very concrete and palpable things as his real starting point.
 
The Revolutionary View of Society
PROBABLY the main reason why Marx played down abstraction and emphasised history, especially the history of working class struggles, is to be found in the view he had of society. For Marx revolutionary politics was not an optional extra gratuitously added on to a ‘neutral’ scientific analysis of capitalism, but an inseparable part of it. This meant that his conception of capitalist society was fundamentally different from those apologists who wanted capitalism to seem ‘natural or ‘necessary’. It is the dialectic, derived from Hegel, but with only its rational kernel extracted for use, that indicates the divide between Marxism and capitalist apologetics:
‘In (the dialectic’s) rational form it is a scandal and an abomination to bourgeoisdom and affirmative recognition of the existing state of things at the same time also, the recognition of the negation of that state, of its inevitable breaking up; because it regards every historical developed social form as in fluid movement, and therefore takes into account its transient nature not less than its momentary existence; because it lets nothing impose upon it, and in its essence critical and revolutionary.’ (Capital, vol.1, Moscow 1961, p.20)
But the problem with Capital, as Lenin remarked, is that its dialectical structure is hidden from view most of the time, and it is here that the Grundrisse has most to contribute. The worker, says Marx, has to be understood both as an object and as a subject in the capitalist reproduction process. He is an object because capitalism changes, develops and grows in spite of his efforts, aims and purposes – it obeys economic laws not rational, conscious human needs. On the other hand, these laws only operate through the continued toil of workers at the point of production. In mass strikes, factory occupations, etc, they begin to break down. So the working class is not simply an object, a mere cog in a machine. It is both a cog and the motor, or to put it in Marx’s terms, both the objective product and the subjective source of capitalism. These are not two distinct things but just two aspects of one process – the development of capitalist society:
‘Separation of property from labour appears as the necessary law of this exchange between capital and labour ... Labour not as an object, but as activity ... labour is absolute poverty as object, on one side, and is, on the other side, the general possibility of wealth as subject and as activity ...’ (pp.295-6)
The workers’ productive activity only exists as a possible activity until it is set to work by and for capital. Capital is not so much a thing, therefore, as a social relationship between workers, their product and the means of production. Where capitalism has triumphed workers can only obtain their means of existence by working for capital. The production process produces commodities, but it also produces the surplus without which capitalism could not survive, and which is converted into still more capital. The workers’ productive activity thus builds up capital, the very social power that enslaves and exploits them in the first place. Thus capital is not a force that can exist in any form whatsoever without workers to provide its active motor force:
‘Labour is not only the use value which confronts capital, but, rather, it is the use value of capital itself ... when it is made into a real activity through contact with capital-it cannot do this by itself, since it is without object – then it becomes a really value-positing, productive activity’ (pp.297-8).
The workers’ activity thus provides the vital (or ‘subjective’) force animating the capitalist production process. But in doing so it transforms itself into capital, transferring its own vital powers to the impersonal agency of the laws of capitalist development. The agency for the development of capitalism is thus not the activity of the working class, but the needs and ends of capital itself. While the productive activity of the working class is the ultimate source of capitalism’s development, the agency of economic laws interposes itself between the process’s origin and conclusion.
‘Through the exchange with the worker, capital has appropriated labour itself, labour has become one of its moments, which now acts as a fructifying vitality upon its merely existent and hence dead objectivity ... capital itself becomes a process. Labour is the yeast thrown into it, which starts it fermenting ...’ (pp.197-8).
The dialectic has two features which make it necessary for revolutionary theory. Firstly it probes beneath the surface appearance of social phenomena, refuses to accept them as given, but instead indicates how they generate contradictions or self-destructive forces. Marx develops these in the Grundrisse when he discusses the absolute barriers to the capitalist production process and they are developed better and more fully in Capital and Theories of Surplus Value.
Secondly, (and this is what comes across so brilliantly and uniquely in the Grundrisse) the dialectic sees capitalism as a system, as an interconnected process. Bourgeois theorists on the other hand usually see bourgeois society as a collection of more or less autonomous parts. But Marx refuses to break up the development of capitalism into a set of independent parts, because it is the process as a whole which dominates and transforms the parts rather than vice-versa. Labour has no fixed qualities, it begins as the creative source and agent of production. But at the same time it can only become active through transforming itself into capital which takes over these activating and creative capacities. These are then used to dominate and enslave the worker. Capital, an alien and impersonal force which is fed by the continual sweat of the working class, appropriates the workers’ vitality and uses it to dominate every aspect of society and its history. So the process as a whole continually transforms one part into the other. While labour starts out as ‘fructifying vitality’ and capital as ‘merely existent and hence dead objectivity’, as the process continues this becomes reversed.
So it is incorrect to separate off the parts played by ‘fructifying vitality’ and ‘dead objectivity’ from the process as a whole. Anyone who fails to appreciate this is led to ask which of the two, the ‘vitalising’ or the ‘objective’, is the more important contributor to the development of history? Whichever way this is answered there’s not much room left for genuine revolutionary practice. If it is the objective conditions that count we may as well sit around and let them get on with it without bothering to struggle independently ourselves (This argument was used by ‘left wing’ Mensheviks in 1917). Alternatively if the objective conditions do not have a stranglehold on the development of history, the laws of capitalism cannot prevent us reforming existing society in any direction we choose, Why bother to build a revolutionary party based upon a real struggle against capitalist relations of production in the factory, if 350 philanthropists can do it much more comfortably from their parliamentary seats? Marx shows that the very question is false.
This message comes across more clearly in the Grundrisse than elsewhere in Marx’s writing. It forms the link between the early works which stress the impersonal, alien and inhuman characteristics of capitalism, with the later works Capital which stresses the laws of the development of capitalist society.
All this can be obtained equally from Capital, but only if one searches for it beneath the surface.
 
The Grundrisse as Master Plan
THE GRUNDRISSE is the original set of notes for what was intended to be a complete study of bourgeois society as a whole. Marx changed his ideas as to how this should be done several times, but the only work he actually completed was volume 1 of Capital – a quarter of a study that was originally conceived of as one sixth of the whole. He thus completed only one twenty-fourth of the master plan.
So we find some brilliant insights in the Grundrisse that are either not repeated in later works or which are incompletely developed – the chapter on money is a marvellous example of this. But as one would expect from a set of early and rough notes for Capital, there are a vast number of errors, gaps and obscurities too. Marx is unclear, for instance, about the distinction between the surplus product extracted from living labour power, and the appearance of this surplus in the form of profit He confuses the two on the question of productive and unproductive labour (pp.272-3), and again later on (pp.821-822) where he assumes that the behaviour of the individual capitalist is governed by his ability to extract a surplus rather than to make profits. Marx formulates all this rather better at the end of volume 1 of Theories of Surplus Value, but it is not until the end of the 1860s that he prepares the ground adequately for solving the question properly, in his very clear exposition of the equalization of the rate of profit in different branches of industry (Capital, vol.3). There he is forced to distinguish profit and surplus product rigourously. No doubt if he had had time to go over these passages they would have been amended accordingly.
Errors and obscurities like this in the Grundrisse were largely made good in Marx’s later writings, but there are enough of them to make the Grundrisse a slippery text at the best of times. Those looking for stimulation will find it in abundance in these difficult but fascinating pages. Those looking for enlightment ought to look to Capital and Theories of Surplus Value first.



The Lichauco Paper
Alejandro Lichauco
Monthly Review Press, £2.70
WE OFTEN think of Latin America as the land of the banana republic, of the place where American imperialism exists in its most blatant and exploitative form. But in fact nowhere is the exploitation greater than in Asia, and nowhere in Asia is there a better example of US-enforced rural underdevelopment than in the Philippines.
Thus for every dollar invested or given in ‘aid’ in Asia, American capitalists extracted four dollars of net capital outflow from Asia during the 1960s – much worse than their already bad record in Latin America. Yet in the Philippines the situation was worse – even by Asian standards, for there American capitalists were able to loot seven dollars in net capital outflow from the country for every one they invested, and all the signs are of this ratio increasing still further.
How was this superimperialism possible? Looking at the sources for these profits reveals that they came in the main from subsidiaries of US-based international corporations. However these American firms got only 16 per cent of their finance for capital investment from outside the Philippines, the rest came from Filipino banks, insurance companies and state credit institutions. In other words, American imperialism did not even finance more than a sixth of their own exploitative operations. Filipinos were thus not only cruelly exploited by imperialism, but were even the major contributors to the finance of these exploitative operations.
Such an abject surrender to the interests of imperialism is only explainable by the fact that the Philippine bourgeoisie is merely a client class for foreign imperialist interests. The vast majority of politicians, businessmen and bankers depend for their existence on the American connection and would fall without it Only one Philippine President since independence (1946) has been elected against the machinations of the CIA, and the whole pattern of legislation and economic life since then has effectively prevented the rise of a national bourgeoisie with an identity and a coherence defined in opposition to US imperialism.
From the outset, the Bell Trade Act of 1946 established the neo-colonial pattern, and prevented the emergence of such a national bourgeoisie. It enforced free trade which prevented the growth of domestically owned industry within tariff walls. It granted American nationals parity rights with Filipino citizens in all financial matters, and it ceded sovereignty over foreign exchange transactions to the United States.
As with most Asian victims of imperialism, the Philippines has been forcibly underdeveloped to such an extent that the development of a native capitalism is ruled out by the objective conditions rather than the political failure of its leaders. Garcia, the only president elected against US pressure, tried during his period of office (1957-61) to create such a national capitalism, but with disastrous results.
Philippine domestic capitalism was defeated in this period by the familiar tools of international capitalism. In general two methods were used The first is exemplified by the fate of Filoil, the Philippine oil company set up to offset the domination of the oil industry by the multinationals. The fierce competition which ensued cut the profit margins of Filoil to the bone. It was unable to finance its continuing investment out of these margins and so it turned to the banks. But financial austerity at home, necessary for the balance of payments and for stabilising conditions for domestic capitalism, meant that no such credit was forthcoming. The Filoil bosses had no option but to sell out to Gulf Oil.
Secondly, mere is the case of Iligan Steel, the cornerstone of the attempt to create domestic industry in the Philippines. There the huge size of the capital needed (more than a billion dollars) meant vast loans from the World Bank and elsewhere. Devaluation of the peso made the Philippines quite incapable of meeting the repayments, and so this too went bust in 1972.
Quite simply, therefore, there is no national capitalist solution to the problem of the Philippines’ underdevelopment and poverty. No section of the bourgeoisie is capable of smashing the imperialist stranglehold. Only an anti-imperialist movement led by the working class and opposed to all forms of capitalist exploitation can possibly solve these problems. Yet is is precisely the national capitalist solution which Alejandro Lichauco defends in The Lichauco Paper against all the facts to the contrary. He argues for the need to build up domestic Philippine industry, and asserts that rich enough pickings are to be had from exporting manufactures based on cheap Filipino labour to pay for imported food – chiefly American wheat.
He has only two reasons for this view. Firstly, he says (and he is writing in 1972), wheat is cheap and is likely to remain so. Secondly a vigorously anti-imperialist line can work – the IMF was after all, he says persuaded to give Allende’s Chile a 40 million dollar loan.
Since then world grain prices have increased several hundred per cent, and those 40 million dollars were used by General Pinochet’s murdering gang to smash the Allende regime. Enough said.

