




Brecht said that: ‘I have never found anybody without a sense of humour who could understand dialectics.’ Ian Birchall has one, and explains this central idea of Marxism.











Between September and December 1914, the months immediately following the outbreak of the First World War and the collapse into patriotic treachery of most of the international labour movement, Lenin spent a good deal of his time in the reading hall of the library at Berne, in Switzerland. He was reading Hegel’s Science of Logic, and judged it sufficiently important to fill several school exercise-books with notes and comments. These notes take up some 160 pages of Lenin’s Collected Works (volume 38).
This episode has always puzzled Lenin’s biographers, many of whom omit it entirely (including, it must be said, Tony Cliff, who skips from August 1914 to Zimmerwald in a single page. The name Hegel does not appear in the index to any of the four volumes of Cliff’s Lenin.) And at first sight it is certainly perplexing that Lenin, the supreme organiser and man of action, should have been so fascinated by the most obscure and convoluted of all the German idealist philosophers.
Yet Lenin throughout his life insisted on the importance of Hegel and the dialectical method he initiated. He argued that it was impossible to understand Marx’s Capital without having studied the whole of Hegel’s Logic; and in his Testament notes that Bukharin has never understood the dialectic.
 
Lenin’s interest
The reason why it is so difficult to explain Lenin’s interest in dialectics is that in the last fifty years the whole question has got fouled up with a number of red herrings. Before any attempt to explain what dialectics is, it is necessary to clear the ground and explain what it is not.
Firstly, Stalinism transformed Marxism from a critical revolutionary theory into the ideology of the Russian ruling class. As part of this process, Stalin invented something called ‘dialectical materialism’ (snappily abbreviated to ‘Diamat’), a set of quasi-religious formulae. (Marx never used the term ‘dialectical materialism’; Stalin took it from Plekhanov.)
In the hands of a pig-ignorant bureaucrat like Stalin, dialectics was a gift for explaining away the barbarities of the new regime. In 1930 Stalin told the Sixteenth Party Congress:
‘We are for the withering away of the state, and yet we also believe in the proletarian dictatorship which represents the strongest and mightiest form of state power that has existed up to now. To keep on developing state power in order to prepare conditions for the withering away of state power – that is the Marxist formula. Is it “contradictory”? Yes, “contradictory”. But the contradiction is vital, and. wholly reflects the Marxist dialectic.’
The Great Helmsman, Chairman Mao, added his contribution to the great tradition by inventing the concept of ‘non-antagonistic contradiction’, as a nice way of saying ‘class collaboration’ (the bourgeoisie are the class-enemy, but we won’t fight them.)
The second problem that has dogged the argument is the famous debate about the ‘dialectics of nature’. Engels was fond of illustrating his account of dialectics from quantity to quality by comparing it to the boiling or freezing or water; water gets progressively warmer or colder, then at a given point turns to ice or steam.
The Stalinists eagerly latched on to this method. The French philosopher Georges Politzer tells us that when a chicken comes out of an egg, it negates the egg; but then the chicken grows into a hen and negates itself. So here we have the ‘negation of the negation’.
The trouble with all this is that it both oversimplifies and mystifies. Making a revolution is, after all, rather more complex than making a cup of tea – or even than breeding chickens. And for dialectics to claim to be rooted in the natural sciences allows it to bask in the reflected glory of ‘Science’, thus fudging the issue of what its true status is.
The question of the ‘dialectics of nature’ must be handled carefully. In his last year Engels, a keen but amateur student of natural science, wrote extensive notes on dialectics in relation to various branches of science. Since he rightly gave priority to working on Marx’s unfinished Capital, Engels never completed these notes for publication. The posthumous volume that appeared under the title Dialectics of Nature should be seen as no more and no less than the interesting but fragmentary speculations of a gifted thinker.
Since Engels’ time many notable scientists, from J.D. Bernal to the French physicist J.-P. Vigier, have claimed that the dialectical method has helped them in their work. It would be foolish to claim that dialectics has no place in the study of natural science – but equally dangerous to claim that the validity of dialectics as a method of social enquiry depends on the correctness or incorrectness of a theory about nature.
After all, it is conservative, bourgeois thought that tries to see society as subject to the same laws as nature. We’ve all heard of the economic ‘climate’, something unchangeable, for which no-one is responsible. As Marx, quoting Vico, points out, ‘human history differs from natural history in this, that we have made the former, but not the latter.’ To derive the laws of dialectics from inanimate nature leads to denying the role of human agency in the historical process.
What, then, is dialectics? The term was first used by the Greek philosopher, Plato. For him it meant the process by which pure thought advances towards the achievement of coherent knowledge. Over two thousand years later, Hegel took up the term to refer to the movement of ideas which, for him, was the driving force of human history. For Marx and Engels, dialectics came to be the processes by which human history itself developed.
Since Marx’s day, many people have tried to codify dialectics into a set of laws. However, no two seem to agree as to what the laws are, nor even whether there are three or four of them. Dialectics is, in fact, an extraordinarily slippery subject; attempts to explain it almost always end up in either incomprehensible jargon or banal platitudes.
 
Nothing sacred
So why bother? It is very easy to sympathise with socialists who say they are far too busy with the struggle to spend time on philosophy, and that they will rely simply on common sense. But unfortunately socialists cannot rely on common sense.
For common sense is the ideas shared by most people. And as Marx pointed out: ‘The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas.’ Most people trust appearances. For thousands of years it was common sense that the sun went round the earth. Today Stalinists and Free-World fanatics will agree that it is obvious that Russia and the United States have totally different social systems. Only a study in depth will reveal that both are governed by the same laws. It is the common-sense view of our society that capitalism is a fair system in which everyone is free. It is precisely our job to undermine that common sense.
Dialectics, then, is the study of how things change. The imperative underlying all dialectical thought is Marx’s eleventh thesis on Feuerbach: ‘The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point, however, is to change it.’ Or, as Engels was to put it:
‘Just as the bourgeoisie by large-scale industry, competition and the world market dissolves in practice all stable time-honoured institutions, so this dialectical philosophy dissolves all conceptions of final, absolute truth and of absolute states of humanity corresponding to it. For it (dialectical philosophy) nothing is final, absolute, sacred. It reveals the transitory character of everything and in everything; nothing can endure before it except the uninterrupted process of becoming and passing away, of endless ascendancy from the lower to the higher.’
This implies the need for a theory of history. There are, of course, a good number of theories of history already available, both in elaborated form, and embodied in the attitudes held by most people. Basically, they can be summed up under three headings: ‘You can’t really change things’; ‘you can’t stop Progress’; and ‘things ain’t what they used to be’. All of these are fundamentally reactionary. There is nothing progressive about ‘Progress’, as should be obvious in an age when millions of people are being thrown out of their jobs by machines. So revolutionary socialism needs an alternative view of history.
 
Hegel’s problem
And this is where Hegel comes in. Hegel (1770–1831) was one of a group of German philosophers who lived through the period of the French Revolution. These philosophers had a problem. They were greatly inspired by the Revolution, but they lived in a country which was far less socially developed than France. They couldn’t mobilise the masses to overthrow the kings, for there were no masses to mobilise. So they made revolution inside their own heads, translating the real changes of the French Revolution into philosophical abstractions.
What Hegel tried to show was that history was not a series of accidents, but had a logic running through it. As he put it: ‘All that is real is rational; and all that is rational is real.’ Now as Engels pointed out, this is a double-edged formulation. On the one hand it can be used to defend the status quo; but on the other it can be used to justify the forcible overthrow of that status quo. Hence the followers of Hegel rapidly split into left and right wings. For Marx and Engels the important thing was to reintegrate Hegel’s insights into a materialist view of history. As Engels put it, Hegel’s dialectic was standing on its head, and had to be put back on its feet.
One of the key categories that Marx takes from Hegel is that of totality. As the great Hungarian Marxist Georg Lukács wrote (in the days before he became a Stalinist hack):
‘It is not the primacy of economic motives in historical explanation that constitutes the decisive difference between Marxism and bourgeois thought, but the point of view of totality. The category of totality, the all-pervasive supremacy of the whole over the parts is the essence of the method which Marx took over from Hegel ...’
As Lukács pointed out, bourgeois thought sees the organisation of social and economic life from the standpoint of competing capitalists, and hence cannot see It as a whole. Moreover, bourgeois ideology tries to force this fragmented view on the rest oft us, precisely because it mystifies the process of change.
As Brecht put it, ‘the decisions about the meat that is lacking in the kitchen are not taken in the kitchen.’ The bourgeois social sciences will encourage us to spend our lives making the most rigorous, objective, detailed study of the kitchen – and as a result we shall never find what we are looking for, Raoul Vaneigem, a Situationist leader, in the sixties, neatly summed up this pressure to fragmentation when he wrote that the prevailing ideology
‘... insists that everyone be for or against the Rolling Stones ... the Mini-van, Chinese food, LSD, short skirts, the United Nations, pop art, nationalisation, thermonuclear war and hitch-hiking. Everyone is asked their opinion of every detail to stop them having one of the totality.’
So, rather than the whole being a simple sum of its parts, the parts can be understood only in the context of the whole. As Lenin points out, a hand is only really a hand if it is part of a body. Likewise, the working class is not produced by simply adding up individual workers. A worker is a worker only if she or he is part of the working class. (Hence the bourgeois enthusiasm for secret ballots, which add up individuals rather than taking the class as a collective.)
Similarly, failure to see every process as part of a totality leads to political errors in the movement. Trade union struggle is important, but if we fail to see it as part of the totality, we lapse into ‘economism’: Building the party is vital, but detached from the totality leads to sectarianism; and so on.
 
Contradictions
Now, if human society is perceived as a whole, the agency of change must be inside that whole. It cannot be something ‘outside’, like God, or a benevolent elite seen as standing outside society.
For once, an analogy with the natural sciences may be permissible. For many centuries it was assumed that the natural state of matter was immobility. This left an enormous problem – what made things move? One of the most intelligent thinkers of European Middle Ages, Dante, could find no other explanation of how the sun, moon and stars moved than to assume that they were being pushed by angels. But once it is understood that motion is the natural state of matter, then the problem is transformed.
It was this question that Marx confronted in his Third Thesis on Feuerbach, one of the most profound passages he ever wrote:
‘The materialist doctrine that men are products of circumstances and upbringing, and that, therefore, changed men are products of other circumstances and changed upbringing, forgets that it is men that change circumstances and that the educator himself needs educating. Hence, this doctrine necessarily arrives at dividing society into two parts, of which one is superior to society.’
In other words, if we see society as a single whole, the dynamic for change must be contradictions within that single whole. The shortest, but probably the most accurate definition of dialectics I know is Raya Dunayevskaya’s ‘development through contradiction’.
Thus Hegel insists that ‘Contradiction is the very moving principle of the world’. The English poet Blake, writing at roughly the same tone, declared that ‘without Contraries is no progression’. (Hegel and Blake almost certainly knew nothing of each other; but both were deeply influenced by the French Revolution.)
Of course, to identify contradiction as the dynamic of change is only the beginning of the problem. Marx went on to spend the remaining thirty-eight years of his life studying the specific contradictions of capitalist society – capital and labour, use value and exchange value, and so on.
This argument also enables us to avoid another stumbling-block of bourgeois philosophy, the relation of ‘is’ and ‘ought’. Bourgeois philosophy denies that we can ever get logically from ‘is’ to ‘ought’, from statements of fact to statements of value. But if society is transformed by contradictions internal to it, then it is no use
looking for change unless that change can be identified with an agency already present in the social system. Likewise, it is no good trying to prefigure socialism on the basis of moral ideas. Capitalism will be destroyed only by the existing working class, with all its flaws and weaknesses. In Lenin’s words: ‘We have to build socialism with people who have been thoroughly spoiled by capitalism.’
 
Processes
As a result, in Engels’ words, the dialectical approach means that ‘the world is not to be comprehended as a complex of ready-made things, but as a complex of processes. This is crucial for an understanding of the historical role of classes. In looking at any class’s place in history, we have to consider it, not in terms of its actual state at a given moment in time, but in terms of its potential for development. In Marx’s words:
‘The question is not what goal is envisaged for the time being by this or that member of the proletariat, or even by the proletariat as a whole. The question is what is the proletariat and what course of action will it be forced historically to take in conformity with its own nature.’
It was on this basis that Georg Lukács developed the concept of ‘imputed consciousness’, that is, the consciousness that a class is historically capable of achieving. Thus, for example, it is obvious to anyone operating in terms of common sense that Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher are far more united than the members of the NUR and ASLEF. It is only when we understand that class is not a thing but a process that we can continue to insist that working-class unity is a real possibility.
To take another example, it is clear that, in the light of what has been said so far, Trotsky’s theory of Permanent Revolution is one of the supreme examples of the application of the dialectical method. Firstly, Trostky stresses that we must see the world as a single totality, and not as a collection of separate nation-states, each with its own history of class development.
Secondly, in looking at the role of the working class, in the coming Russian Revolution, Trotsky argues that we must go beyond the facts, such as the small size of the working class (smaller than in many Third World countries today) and its low level of organisation compared with Western Europe, and focus instead on the potential historical role of the class.
On the basis of the foregoing it is possible to see how the dialectical method can enable us to overcome some of the dilemmas of bourgeois thought.
Firstly, the false alternative which bourgeois critics of Marxism often throw up: is Marxism a ‘science’ or a moral critique of society. As Lukács points out in his essay on The Marxism of Rosa Luxemburg, this is a problem only if we see society as something outside ourselves, like the weather.
 
Ends and means
If we do, then there are two alternatives: either we look for technical means of manipulating immutable laws, or we can take a purely inward-directed moral attitude. Thus if we can’t stop it raining, we can either respond technically (by using an umbrella) or morally (by deciding rain is good for us). But if we see society as a totality, then the false dichotomy evaporates; the historical process is not governed by immutable laws independent of us, but our actions are precisely part of that process. In the words of the old Sixties slogan: ‘If you’re not part of the problem, you must be part of the solution.’
Secondly, the relation between knowledge and action. Hegel tells the story of a philosopher who made the ‘wise resolution ... not to venture into the water until he had learned to swim’. Once again, the dialectical approach sees this as a false dichotomy. The working class, in particular, is deprived of knowledge by capitalist society. It cannot educate itself before fighting for power. Even the cadre of the revolutionary party cannot be educated in advance of the struggle. Knowledge is achieved only in the course of participation in revolutionary practice.
Thirdly, there is the age-old problem of ends and means. Once again, the way the question is normally posed (‘Does the end justify the means?’) suggests that the two can be separated and balanced against each other.
Discussing this question in Their Morals and Ours, Trotsky quotes a passage from a play by Ferdinand Lassalle:



‘Show not the goal
But show also the path. So closely interwoven
Are path and goal that each with other
Ever changes, and other paths forthwith
Another goal set up.



Ends and means cannot be separated, for both are part of the same process. Thus, for example, the ultimate reason why there can be no parliamentary road to socialism is that socialism is, by definition, the self-emancipation of working people, and one cannot delegate one’s own emancipation to a parliamentary representative.
Finally, a few words on two of the famous laws of dialectics.
 
The famous laws
Firstly, the transition from quantity to quality. It was argued above that boiling kettles don’t have much to do with revolution. None the less, the distinction between quantitative and qualitative change is an important one for understanding the process of historical development. Just because history is driven along by contradictions, its progress is not smooth and in a straight line, but rather through sudden jolts and upheavals. Just because society is a totality, it can’t be changed bit by bit. As R.H. Tawney pointed out, you can’t skin a tiger claw by claw; you must do it in one go, or you will be the victim.
The same thing applies to the progress of revolutionary organisations. These too do not grow in a smooth upward ascent. On the contrary, they stagnate or even decline for years, and then at a moment of crisis expand rapidly. But it is no good simply waiting for the qualitative leap. It is slow quantitative growth that decides whether the qualitative leap will be possible. Thus, at the beginning of 1968, the International Socialists (forerunners of the SWP) had some 450 members. During the massive upheavals of that year we grew to one thousand. But if we had had only two hundred at the start of the year, it is quite probable we should have been too thinly spread to intervene anywhere, and we might have come out of the year no bigger than we began it. (In that case Britain would probably have seen the flowering of ‘soft’ Maoism in the German or Italian style).
Secondly, the negation of the negation. In chapter XXXII of the first volume of Capital, Marx describes how the growth of capitalist property destroys individual private property, and replaces it by a more developed form of co-operative labour. But at the same time capitalist exploitation produces a discontented working class which will eventually destroy the whole system.
‘The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capitalist mode of production, produces capitalist private property. This is the first negation of individual private property, as founded on the labour of the proprietor. But, capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation. It is the negation of negation. This does not re-establish private property for the producer, but gives him individual property based on the acquisitions of the capitalist era; i.e. on co-operation and the possession in common of the land and of the means of production.’
 
Human activity
To this Marx might have added another dialectical twist. For when the working class destroys capitalism, the source of its exploitation, it also negates itself. The aim of socialist revolution is not the triumph of the working class, but its abolition.
This, incidentally, is an easily comprehensible proposition to most workers, who didn’t choose to be members of the working class, and would be quite happy to change their status. It is, however, quite incomprehensible to the bureaucracy of the Labour movement whose whole status as mediators depends on the continued existence of an exploited class and hence of exploitation.
To conclude: dialectics is not a set of ‘laws’ independent of human will. It is simply a means of describing how human beings make their own history. In Marx’s words:
‘History does nothing; it does not possess immense riches, it does not fight battles. It is mean, real living men, who do all this, who possess things and fight battles. It is not “history” which uses men as a means of achieving – as if it were an individual person – its own ends. History is nothing but the activity of men in pursuit of their ends.’







 





 


Elvis
Albert Goldman
Allen Lane, £9.95.
Elvis Presley was not a lovable man. He was reactionary, sexist, brutal and self-indulgent; he could, however, sing rather well. Albert Goldman, author of the ‘ultimate biography’ of Elvis, also reveals himself as distinctly unlovable. Maybe Albert is good at something, but it certainly isn’t writing books about rock and roll.
The whole book is written in breathless slang that drips with inauthenticity. Albert delights in the risqué pleasure of retailing other people’s racist remarks (and inventing, his own sexist comments); just enough to show he’s a real swinger, while keeping safely within the limits that show he’s a liberal as well.
And if that wasn’t bad enough, Albert is also an academic – Adjunct Associate Professor of English and Comparative Literature at Columbia University. So, mixed in with the lurid details of Elvis’s tastes in sex and drugs, we get Rilke and Proust, not to mention Lord Raglan on history and myth. Because someone once called Elvis ‘The King’, we get a whole chapter on American democracy’s ‘deep yearning for royalty’. (This approach could work wonders for Duke Ellington and Major Lance.) As a young performer Elvis used to hang the cardboard cylinder from a roll of toilet paper on a string inside the front of his trousers. Albert seems to be doing something similar for his brain.
A monstrous array of cross-cultural references is mobilised to demonstrate a commonplace of orthodox literary criticism, namely, that things don’t really change. Elvis used to break his guitar strings. But, a hundred years ago, Paganini broke violin strings. Conservatives can be consoled, there is nothing new under the sun.
Moreover, despite its pretentiousness, the book is sloppy and inaccurate. Albert confuses Meredith Hunter (killed at the Altamont Festival) with James Meredith (the first black to enter the University of Mississippi). He refers repeatedly to a song called I’m All Shook Up. If, in his three years of research, he had got round to looking at record labels, he might have discovered that the track is called All Shook Up.
The last point is not accidental. Albert is plainly not interested in music. He tells us down to the last milligram what drugs were in Elvis’s possession, but the few short pieces of analysis of Elvis’s songs radiate boredom.
That isn’t to say there is nothing we can learn from this book. Albert shows just how right Marx was when he says that ‘capitalist production is hostile to certain aspects of intellectual production, such as art and poetry.’ The whole history of popular music is one of fine performers with their roots in the oppressed layers of society being taken over by capitalism and turned into stars who aren’t worth listening to. (This is a universal truth, despite the view of some benighted elements in the Rock Against Racism milieu that the Beatles were not going downhill all the way after Love Me Do.
Albert reveals many of the squalid details of how Elvis was destroyed as a singer and an actor by commercial pressure. He was, for instance, never allowed to meet his song-writers, in case they did a deal behind Colonel Parker’s back. His films were budgeted so that all the other performers should come as cheap as possible.
But if capitalism destroys it does not always destroy in the same way. I have known for a long time that Colonel Parker ruined Elvis. What Albert brings out is the fact that, even in his own terms, Colonel Parker was a pretty poor manager.
He lacked imagination, and seemed positively afraid of Elvis doing anything original or controversial. He failed to organise really big concerts of the sort that were to be so successful for the Beatles. It was Colonel Parker, not the military authorities, who decided that Elvis should make no records for two whole years while he was in the Army, a time when he was at the peak of his powers.
Above all, Colonel Parker was responsible for structuring Elvis’s whole career around a series of mediocre films. It may be true that ‘the public gets what the public wants’, but it is unlikely that the public wanted, let alone deserved, such monstrosities as Frankie and Johnny.
Albert is also quite interesting on the circumstances in which Elvis’s type of music was able to emerge.
He documents vividly the racism which characterised the society in which Elvis grew up, and lists the varying musical influences that Elvis drew together. As well as making the fairly standard point about how Elvis combined the traditions of black and white song, he notes the important influence of Dean Martin – a connection I for one had never previously made.
But when it comes to the real historical significance of rock and roll, Albert is way out of his depth.
For a hundred years or more there had been songs which expressed working-class oppression. But rock and roll was the first music to express working class aggression. Arising out of the self-confidence engendered by the postwar boom, it was thus to become potentially one of the key art forms of the socialist revolution.
Because Albert cannot understand this, He cannot understand the importance – and the limits – of Elvis, he notes that Elvis was bypassed by the music of the late sixties – but fails to see how deeply that music was rooted in the experience of the Vietnam War. And, with his literary critic’s view that nothing ever changes, he can even suggest that Elvis Costello is an ‘Elvis epigone’. No-one could say that who had actually listened to Oliver’s Army. But then Albert hadn’t – just as he never really listened to Elvis Presley.
 






Nearly all the news about Eastern Europe in the last few weeks has come from Poland. But strange things have been happening in Albania. Curtis McNally looks at them.





The Polish coup has largely distracted attention from another political crisis in Eastern Europe. On December 17th it was announced that the Prime Minister of Albania, Mehmet Shehu, had killed himself ‘in a moment of nervous depression’. Shehu had been Prime Minister uninterruptedly since 1954, and before that he had established his reputation in leading the purges and executions of pro-Tito elements after the Tito-Stalin split in 1948. Not the sort of person that one would at first sight expect to be prone to fits of suicidal melancholia.
Hence it is hardly surprising that within a few days of his death there were widespread rumours that in fact Shehu had been killed. Some reports even suggested that there had been a shoot-out at a dinner-party between Shehu and the regime’s leader, Enver Hoxha, and that possibly Hoxha himself had been killed or injured as well.
It was also reported that portraits of Hoxha had been removed from public buildings. However, these reports mainly emanated from official Yugoslav sources, which scarcely have a vested interest in ensuring political stability in Albania. And it is now clear that Enver Hoxha is alive and well and living in Tirana, the only member of the original central committee of the Albanian Communist Party to have survived all the purges of the last forty years.
However, a certain degree of mystery still surrounds the affair. There has been no official mourning or public funeral for the late Prime Minister, and Pecol Shehu, Mehmet Shehu’s nephew, has been removed without any explanation from his position as Minister of the Interior in the new government formed on January 15th.
The political reasons behind the events are even harder to decipher. Le Monde (16.1.82), relying on Yugoslav sources, suggests one factor may have been divergences on the question of agricultural policy. Apparently at the Party Congress last November, Hoxha insisted on ‘ideological purity’ and on the ‘eradication of the remnants of capitalism in the country’, proposing the confiscation of the last remaining individual plots of land. Shehu, however, stressed ‘economic difficulties’ and ‘emphasised the necessity of improving social relations in the countryside.’
Another factor in the tortuous situation may have been Albania’s international situation, especially its relations to Russia. Albania has always been fiercely loyal to the memory of J.V. Stalin, although Stalin does not seem to have returned the compliment. Albania, for example, was the only East European Communist country not to be represented in the Communist Information Bureau set up in 1947. At the same time, Albania, trapped between Greece and Yugoslavia, had to pursue a cautious foreign policy sometimes at odds with its own rhetoric, as in 1949, when Hoxha interned Greek Communist partisans seeking refuge – in order to avoid a clash with Greece.
From the time of the Sino-Soviet split Albania became loyally Maoist, but by the mid-seventies that friendship too was cooling. In 1977 the Albanians attacked the Chinese theory of the ‘three worlds’, alleging that the logic of this was that Russia was worse than the USA, something amply borne out by Chinese foreign policy. In 1978 China withdrew all economic and technical support from Albania, and Albania has subsequently backed Vietnam against Cambodia and China.
With no political allies in the world, Albania had to aim at agricultural and industrial self-sufficiency. The economic difficulties which were concerning Shehu before his sudden death may have led some sections of the Party to consider a rapprochement with Russia. There had been rumours of such a move for some time, and Izvestia recently published a friendly article about Albania, a distinctly unusual move.
However, such moves have probably been stopped for the time being. The new Prime Minister, Adil Carcani, announced on coming to power that Albania will ‘never have relations with the two superpowers, the USA and the USSR’. But ‘never’ is not always a long time in Stalinist rhetoric, and when Hoxha, one of the last survivors of the political generation of 1945, departs this life things may well change.
Events in Albania may have some small repercussions on the international left. In the sixties and early seventies Albania was for most Maoists a beacon of socialism in Europe. When Mao died and the ‘gang of four’ were ousted, many of the more radical Maoists jumped off the Chinese bandwaggon and went over to support for Albania alone. If Albania were to enter into serious political crisis or to patch up things with Russia, it would mean the final death agony for Maoism as a political tendency. The recent uncritical support for the Polish military government and the Russian attitude to it by the Communist Party of Britain (Marxist-Leninist) may be a straw in the wind.
 



Ian Birchall examines the record of Mitterrand’s France so far.
The latest issue of the New Socialist carries a euphoric article about France under Mitterrand by Denis MacShane. In it he states that the Mitterrand government offers ‘one of the finest opportunities ever offered to the leadership of the labour movement ... to examine in detail the attempt to apply a sophisticated socialist programme, aimed at irreversible change based on democratic consent, to a modern industrialised capitalist society.’
There are indeed lessons to be learned from the French experience, but they are scarcely such as likely to bring comfort and joy to Messrs Foot and Benn. Already there are a number of signs that the initial reforming impetus of the new government, which undoubtedly set out with the goodwill of very many French men and women, is beginning to run out of steam.
A number of employers’ representatives, have recently made clear that they can quite happily live with a Socialist government. Thus on January 6th, Les Echos, an employers’ journal, wrote: ‘Over the last few weeks the tone has changed. The government is assuring us that it will keep the newly nationalised firms within the competitive sector.’ And Yvon Chotard, Vice-President of the CNPF, the main employers’ organisation, has commented on the government’s incomes policy: ‘In fact, Delors’ system is like a twin brother to the one Raymond Barre wanted to establish. The advantage that the former has is that he has more support from the trade unions than the latter.’
But popularity among employers does not necessarily mean popularity with the voters. In four by-elections held in January the Socialists did badly, losing all four seats on the first round. The anti-government swing varied between 4.6% and 9.3%. While these results scarcely affect the massive Socialist majority in the National Assembly, they are a clear indication that the honeymoon is over. The Communist Party did not stand in any of the elections, but indications are that it has lost support on a substantial scale since its dismal results last summer. If this is the case, there will certainly be pressure on the CP leadership to reconsider its line of participating as a very junior partner in the Mitterrand administration. A CP departure could be a further blow to Mitterrand, and would increase the tendency towards a rightward move.
In addition to this Mitterrand has met his Lord Denning in the shape of the Constitutional Council. This body of ageing politicians nominated by previous right-wing governments (eight out of nine are Gaullists or Giscardians, and the average age is 74) have rejected seven out of the fifty-one clauses in the government’s nationalisation bill. The government have responded by rapidly reworking the measures to conform to the ruling. This means a massive increase in the amount of compensation to be paid to shareholders – in some cases it will be up to fifty per cent more. The total cost of the nationalisation programme will now be twenty-five per cent higher than planned. Even The Economist (January 23rd) has commented that ‘the generosity of the new offer has surprised many.’
The ruling, and Mitterrand’s response, make it clear that the French ruling class is not afraid of nationalisation in itself – it has lived with it for a long time. But it is quite happy to use constitutional pretexts to squeeze more compensation out of Mitterrand and to give him a warning to stay on a moderate path. Committed as he is to the politics of parliamentarism and not of mass mobilisation, Mitterrand has no alternative but to conform. The government has recently made it clear that employees of nationalised companies will have no greater security of employment than those in private firms.
Meanwhile the government’s policies are having little visible effect in stemming inflation or the rise of unemployment. The government’s latest plans for price controls will have little more than cosmetic value.
Another area where the government’s promises are turning out rather thin is its immigration policy. The government has ruled that immigrant workers without papers can regularise their situation; but to do so they have to produce contracts of employment. But in many cases the employers, who have been using their ‘illegal’ status to exploit them cruelly, will not provide such contracts. There have been a whole number of fierce struggles over this issue, with a number of large demonstrations and several factory occupations by immigrant workers designed to get the employers to concede.
In the absence of any lead from the left, the stage seems set for a drift to the right over the coming months. The Communist Party and the CGT are deeply divided by the Polish events and seem unlikely to offer a fighting lead. There were no revolutionary candidates in the recent by-elections, and neither the centrist PSU nor the ecologists registered any gains. As the fervour of the first few months of power evaporates, Mitterrand is beginning to walk the road trodden by Wilson and Callaghan before him.
 



Early in May 1968, I received a draft editorial for the coming issue of International Socialism. It dealt, clearly but gloomily, with the political and organisational decline of the Labour Party, the alarming rise of racism, notably among London dockers, and the move to the right in British and international politics. I wrote back to the editor, commenting that perhaps the recent student unrest was a bright spot in an otherwise dark sky, but basically agreeing with his analysis. We didn’t call it a downturn in those days, but we knew what it was. Then I switched on the wireless and heard about fighting in the Paris Latin Quarter.


 


The causes of the student revolt which erupted in France in the Spring of 1968 are complex and various. The enormous expansion in student numbers meant that a University degree was no longer a passport to a good job; more immediately it meant grotesquely overcrowded lecture-halls and libraries. Some of the older student activists had been involved in the struggle against the Algerian War in the early sixties, while a younger generation had been radicalised by the American war in Vietnam. Sexual politics, too, played a part; one of the students’ demands was ‘free circulation’ – the right of male and female students to visit each others’ hostel rooms.
On May 3rd, following a series of demonstrations and meetings in the University of Paris, police were sent in to ‘restore order’. Students threw stones and the police retaliated with tear-gas grenades. More demonstrations culminated, on Friday, May 10th, in the so-called ‘Night of the Barricades’, when thousands of students built sixty street barricades and fought the police till 7.00 a.m. on the Saturday morning.
The students did not immediately win popular sympathy. The Communist Party newspaper, L’Humanité, denounced them as ‘the children of big bourgeois, contemptuous of students from working-class origins’ who just wanted to get on with revising for their exams. But if most workers felt distrustful of the students, they also felt a certain respect. For ten years, Charles de Gaulle had ruled France with political authoritarianism and economic austerity. Workers had made fun of him but had not had the confidence to do anything about it.
Now the students had shown it was possible to stand up and fight even against a well-armed modern state. The union leaders could see which way the wind was blowing. Hoping to defuse the situation and to get credit for themselves in the new militant mood, they called a one-day strike. On Monday, May 13th, ten million stopped work and a million people demonstrated in the streets of Paris.
The next day workers at the Sud-Aviation aircraft factory near Nantes decided to stay on strike and to occupy their factory. Twenty members of management were locked up in their offices, where they were to be kept for a fortnight. To begin with the Internationale was played to them over a loudspeaker as ‘an effective way for bosses to learn the Internationale without ideological effort.’ However, the workers themselves soon asked for this to be stopped!
While no-one knows exactly how it happened at Sud-Aviation, it is clear that one of the union branches there was led by members of a Trotskyist organisation, the OCI (in fact a right-wing, sectarian, and often thuggish Trotskyist organisation, but every dog has its day). It is at least an encouraging thought for comrades who spend years burrowing away at building a presence in their workplace that one day leadership will really mean leadership.
*****
What now happened was that the strike spread from one place to another. The power of example and the reports of the mass media showed one group of workers after another that they too could strike and occupy. (This was despite the fact that L’Humanité had played down the Sud-Aviation strike, giving it only seven lines on page 9.) Virtually every major factory in France was occupied. But though the industrial proletariat was the heart of the movement, the effects spread far beyond. Footballers and Folies Bergères dancers were involved in occupations. There were rumours of discontent and mutiny in the police and armed forces.
As in any general strike situation, it was not enough to stop work. Workers had to take into their own hands the running of society. During May and June action committees were set up throughout France to coordinate activities, organise supplies, etc. In Nantes striking workers took over the running of the town. They set up roadblocks on the main approaches to the city and issued their own travel permits and petrol coupons. The women set up committees to organise food supplies, and were able to purchase directly from the peasants in the surrounding countryside, undercutting the big grocery stores and forcing them to close.
Ten million workers on strike for a month – the biggest general strike in history – made a situation that was not easily wound down. If there had been a revolutionary party with roots in the working class, it might well have been impossible. But the revolutionary groups were almost wholly based among the students, while the Communist Party had a strong grip among the working class. And the CP, with its eyes firmly set on the parliamentary road, was not prepared to give any credence to ‘proletarian revolution’. Instead, it insisted on confining the movement to economic demands. Of course, real gains were won (35% on the minimum wage, an extra week’s annual holiday for all) but they were less than what had seemed to be at stake.
The CP-led union, the CGT, defused the occupations by sending most workers home and running the strike with non-elected committees of union activists. Then they manoeuvred and sometimes openly lied in order to get workers to return to work. They moreover agreed with de Gaulle to participate in fresh parliamentary elections – from which the right-wing parties emerged triumphant. The CP proved its parliamentary credentials by submitting to a disastrous electoral defeat.
As de Gaulle regained control of the state and the CP regained control of the unions, the revolutionary left had to learn, by a series of harsh lessons, that it was nothing like so strong as it had thought itsell in May. And yet things were never quite the same again. Revolutionaries would continue to be victimised or dismissed as cranks – but at least they would never be quite so lonely. For a few glorious weeks there had been ten million of us.
 



Aftermath: The Struggle of Cambodia and Vietnam
John Pilger and Anthony Barnett
New Statesman Report 5: £3.50
For those who think Vietnam was just a campaign issue for the sixties generation, this collection of New Statesman articles by John Pilger, Anthony Barnett and others is a sharp reminder of the millions of people in Indochina who still have to live (or die) with the legacy of Western imperialism. This is a very valuable compilation, especially for those of us who will not have the New Statesman in the house (one would not wish a young child to pick up an article by Christopher Hitchens).
As reporters who have had the courage to travel in Indochina and the honesty to report what they saw, Pilger and Barnett have few parallels in contemporary journalism. Pilger describes the continuing effects on North Vietnamese life of the years of US bombings:
‘In some forests there are no longer birds and animals; and there are lorry drivers who will not respond to the hooting of a horn because they are deaf from the incessant sound of bombs.’
Barnett and Mike Goldwater tell of the lasting effects of spraying with Agent Orange; in one heavily affected area near Saigon still, in 1980, ‘one quarter of all births are miscarriages.’ (This, of course, was not enemy territory; these were the people the Americans were defending).
Barnett managed to rescue from Cambodia documents about the torture and mass executions under Pol Pot. One document (the ‘confession’ of Hu Nim) gives a fascinating account of one of the orginal members of the Pol Pot government, who subsequently became an oppositionist and who was framed as a CIA agent in terms reminiscent of the Moscow Trials.
Finally, Pilger reminds us that while those who organised the war, like Henry Kissinger, can make fortunes writing about it, those who did the dirty work on the ground are cast aside; in 1979 sixty per cent of all black combat veterans were unemployed.
In their search tor those responsible Pilger and Barnett spare no-one. Not Margaret Thatcher, whose intervention cut off supplies of milk to malnourished children in a Saigon hospital. Not the Russian and Chinese advisers in Vietnam, whom Pilger accuses of the same racist arrogance as their American predecessors. And not Francois Mitterrand, who switched the French vote in favour of seating the representatives of Pol Pot in the United Nations (Giscard had the decency to abstain).
Moreover, Pilger shows with devastating detail how Western aid organisations are being manipulated in order to further American plans to use Khmer Rouge forces still fighting in Cambodia to weaken the Vietnamese regime. He writes in 1980:
‘Certainly, my own journey across the border, to Phnom Chat, produced a spectacle of proof of how UNICEF (United Nations Children Fund) and the Red Cross have restored the Khmer Rouge and helped to mould them into an effective force now estimated at 30,000 troops or double their strength since the inception of “cross border feeding”.’
Next time someone asks you to buy a UNICEF Christmas card, remember you may be financing the gang who murdered hundreds of thousands of Cambodian children.
Pilger clams that he and Barnett write ‘with subservience to no ideology’. This is their strength ... and their weakness. For, in the last resort, they end up seeing things from the point of view of the options open to the present Vietnamese regime.
This is not the starry eyed fawning of 1930s Stalinists (Pilger, for example, comments acidly on the elimination of former NLF combatants from public life in South Vietnam). It is rather an inability to perceive any alternative.
To argue that, in the war-weary, blood-soaked territory of Indochina the only way forward is a new revolution may well seem intolerable. Yet in their gripping reports, Pilger and Barnett confirm that this is indeed the bitter truth.
 






The advent of Eurocommunism led to hopes in some quarters of renewal inside the Communist Parties of Europe. But, as Ian Birchall reports, the long decline continues.



Crises of conscience aren’t what they used to be. In 1956, when Russian tanks smashed the Hungarian workers’ councils, tens of thousands of workers and intellectuals resigned from, or were expelled by, Communist Parties all round the world. The debates and discussions gave birth to a whole new wave of socialist thought. In 1968, when Russian troops invaded Czechoslovakia, Communist Parties in many different countries publicly denounced the Russian action, in some cases making their first open criticism of Russia Since the twenties.
Jaruzelski’s coup in Poland and the smashing of Solidarity produced no such upsurge. The ritual denunciations, and the equally ritual but more muted defences, produced nothing so much as an overwhelming sense of tedium and a feeling that we had all been here before.
The most noticed of the damp squibs was the resolution of the Italian Communist Party (PCI) which has now been translated into English, along with a number of related documents (Enrico Berlinguer, After Poland, Spokesman, £2.25).
It is not a matter of any great surprise that Pravda described some of the book’s arguments as ‘sacrilegious’; it tells us more about the dogmatic quality of Russian ideology than about the actual contents of the book. And when Eric Heffer tells us that the PCI’s resolution ‘is of the greatest importance to all socialists in Europe and the world’, we learn something of the intellectual standards of the Labour Left.
The problem with the book is not refuting the arguments, but rather discovering what the arguments are in the first place. Much of the discussion is conducted on such a level of abstraction that it is virtually impossible to dissent – ‘freedom’ and ‘democracy’ are Good Things, ‘dogmatism’ is a Bad One.
One of the main claims of the resolution and Berlinguer’s commentary on it is that ‘we have entered a third phase and are now living in it’. The historical analysis lying behind the concept of the ‘third phase’ is as follows:
’We have seen in the course of history the limitations met in the phase of social democracy and the limitations in the socialism to which the October Revolution gave rise.’
Now the claim to reject both Stalinism and Social Democracy is an attractive one, and it might seem churlish to refuse to welcome Berlinguer if he’s saying what some of us have been saying for a long time.
Unfortunately the theory of the ‘third phase’ won’t stand up to any serious examination. The Second International was based on the mass working-class organisations – parties, trade unions, newspapers, cultural associations – that grew up before 1914. These were a magnificent achievement of working-class self-organisation; they were also disastrously flawed, as was shown in 1914, when the involvement of the labour movement in the state machine led to large sections of the working class going over to support for the imperialist war. Social Democracy was not just an idea – it had a very real material base in a particular phase of working-class development.
The October Revolution was based on a new and different form of working-class organisation – soviets or workers’ councils. The spread of soviets to Hungary, Germany and Italy gave the Third International a brief but very real material basis. Stalinism was not the product of the October Revolution but its negation; it was founded on the destruction of what was left of the soviets; and wherever soviets reappeared – Spain in the thirties, Hungary in the fifties – Stalinism was quick to strangle them.
A third phase, then, can scarcely be ushered in by a resolution of a Central Committee -it requires a material base in a new form of working-class organisation. But Berlinguer and the PCI have little to offer in the way of explaining what this new form might be; the best they can offer is:
’There exist, and there are developing, movements, associations, organisations, groups, particularly of women, youths and intellectual workers, that are expressing in hundreds of ways outside working class parties also and beyond the traditional forms of politics, demands that are being pressed, aspirations, willpower that collides and enters into conflict with economic mechanisms, with the social set up, and with contemporary capitalism’s cultural output. All this demands a different kind of society, a better society than the capitalism we have.’
The PCI resolution has been hailed as marking the most radical critique yet of Russian-style societies emanating from an orthodox Communist Party. Yet in fact the resolution is remarkably vague in its analysis of Russian and Eastern European society. It declares that ‘this phase of socialist development (which began with the October Revolution) has exhausted its driving force’. And it explains the repeated crises in Eastern Europe by the fact that ‘conformity to the Soviet model constituted, essentially, for Poland as for Hungary, and other countries, a big mistake destined to make for serious repercussions during the following years.’
These are bold words; yet almost immediately they are qualified:
’Through hard times, heroism, immense sacrifices, and though weighed down by the tragedies and degeneration of the Stalinist period, the USSR got herdrlf free from the terrible backwardness of the pre-revolutionary epoch; it has become a great industrial power, was capable of resisting the nazi/fascist aggression and decisively contributing to its defeat and so opening a new road for the peoples of Europe and the world. The October Revolution has broken the unchallenged domination of capitalism and imperialism, has contributed to the birth of communist parties all over the world, has given strength to their struggle for economic and political emancipation and the struggle of revolutionary movements, for freedom and independence in ex-colonial countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The gains that flowed from the October Revolution for the working class and popular masses in many countries and the changes that it brought in the world balance in favour of the socialist cause were and are important. The CPI doesn’t underrate the role that the USSR has played on a world scale. This role sometimes coincides with the interests of those countries and peoples which are fighting reactionary regimes and imperialism for liberation and national independence, some other times it clashes with these interests or even violates them openly as it happened with the military intervention in Afghanistan.’
What is striking about this passage is not so much the fact that every sentence of it is open to challenge, as that the whole thing represents a skilful exercise in ducking the key question: what class interests does the Russian state actually represent? The PCI’s reply to Pravda insisted that ‘we are not overlooking the many positive features of society in the socialist oriented countries.’ This neat evasion is a declaration that if Russia does something popular the PCI will bask in its reflected glory, but if it does something unpopular the PCI will drop all responsibility like a hot potato.
Rather more significant are the strategic conclusions that the PCI draws from its analysis of the ‘third phase’:
’The PCI confirms that it believes the idea of a separate communist movement (homogenous and separate from the bulk of the international working class movement, that is from socialist, progressive and liberation movements) is now outmoded and no longer valid.’
A naive reader might take this as an announcement that the PCI was seeking immediate unity talks with Signor Craxi’s Socialist Party. On the contrary, the theory of the ‘third phase’ is inspired precisely by the PCI’s anxiety at the fact that the Socialist Party is threatening to erode its support and electoral base. The new line is not so much a response to the Polish events as an attempt to forestall Craxi’s attacks on the PCI as being undemocratic and pro-Russian.
Hence the PCI’s concern to establish links with parties in other European countries, in order to claim some of the credit for their achievements, and to prevent Craxi putting himself forward as the authentic Italian equivalent of Mitterrand or Helmut Schmidt. Thus the PCI has boasted of its links with the German SPD (despite the fact that in SPD-ruled West Germany last year a Post Office clerk with thirty years service was dismissed purely for being a Communist Party member). Since Mitterrand’s victory last year Craxi and Berlinguer have both been keen to meet him, and in March Berlinguer met the leaders of the French Socialist Party. The meeting was claimed by both parties as ‘positive’ and showing ‘broad agreement’ though nothing concrete came of it. By contrast the PCI’s meeting with the French CP in May seems to have been a pure formality.
If any readers are beginning to feel that we have been here before, the answer is that we have. In November 1961 the PCI Central Committee held a major debate on what was then called ‘polycentrism’ (i.e. independence from Russia), the origins of Stalinism and inner-party democracy. This debate too was hailed by British centrists as of great significance and a lengthy transcript appeared in New Left Review 13/14. The Spokesman book gives extracts from the January 1982 PCI Central Committee meeting. Of eight contributions printed, five names (Cossutta, Ingrao, Garavini, Napolitano, Pajetta) also appeared in the 1961 debate.
Some years ago, when an Anglican bishop wrote a book to show that Christians didn’t need to believe in God, Michael Frayn described the operation as ‘keeping the old firm in business marketing a totally new product’. The description would equally well fit the PCI. An old leadership clique has adopted a new line, but little else has changed. There has been virtually no rank-and-file participation in the elaboration of the new line, and the pro-Russian minority in the PCI are now finding themselves on the receiving end of Stalinist methods. Thus Unità has denounced the pro-Russians, referring to ‘the activity of a small group preparing initiatives which are clearly contrary to the statutes and the moral and political rules which are the inalienable patrimony of a parry like ours.’ The pro-Russians have launched their own journal Interstamp – and the PCI weekly Rinascita has refused to carry an advertisement for it.
In the last resort the new line of the PCI owes more to the internal situation in Italy than to events in Poland. For most of the seventies the line of the PCI was the ‘historic compromise’ with the Christian Democrats. After 1976 this left the PCI in a position of supporting a government over whose policies it had no control, in the vague hope that it would be rewarded by the offer of seats in the government at a later date. This led to the PCI supporting austerity programmes, calling for cuts in public spending and declaring the need to control wages. Eventually the PCI abandoned the ‘historic compromise’ in favour of the ‘democratic alternative’, which might follow the pattern of the French Union of the Left.
But it was precisely the Union of the Left which enabled Mitterrand to overtake and eventually subordinate the French Communist Party. The PCI is now haunted by the threat that Craxi might emulate Mitterrand. The CPI leaders have undoubtedly learnt the disastrous lessons of the French CPs ‘left turn’, when a return to a pro-Moscow line accelerated its isolation. Yet the alternative is also fraught with dangers; for the more the PCI comes to resemble a social-democratic party, the less reason its supporters will see for backing it rather than Craxi. Hence all the rhetorical flourishes about the ‘third phase’; yet a third phase without any real intellectual or social content is unlikely to do the job.
The other major ‘Eurocommunist’ CPs are suffering problems just as grave as those of the PCI. The Spanish CP (PCE) lost one third of its membership between 1978 and 1981. Santiago Carrillo has kept his grip on the party apparatus, but at the price of heavy losses on both left and right. There has been a substantial pro-Russian split from the quasi-autonomous Catalan CP; the Basque CP has broken with Carrillo to fuse with a Basque nationalist party; after setbacks in the Andalusian elections Marcello Camacho – a well-known leader of the Workers Commissions and a representative of the left in the Party – has resigned from the PCE leadership; and pro-Russian journals are circulating freely in Spain. While Carrillo has not gone so far in denouncing the October Revolution his line is substantially the same as Berlinguer’s; he has proclaimed the ‘definitive death’ of any ‘organisation of the revolutionary movement centred on the USSR’. Yet while the debates about Poland and the Russian model have been to the fore in the PCE, the real cause of the Party’s crisis is its failure to take advantage of the post-Franco period and the consequent electoral rise of the Socialist Party.
The French CP (PCF) is in equally deep crisis. The cantonal elections in March showed no sign of any electoral recovery from last year’s severe losses to the Socialist Party. The PCF leader Marchais chose his words carefully on the Polish question; he regretted the turn of events but did not condemn, and stressed his deep emotions about the whole matter. But this line only aggravated the internal problems of the PCF, with many dissident members and ex-members calling for demonstrations of support for Solidarity.
But if the PCF has many dissidents, this does not imply an evolution to the left; on the contrary the main force of attraction is still Mitterrand’s Socialist Party. One of the best-known excluded PCF members (and critics of the Polish line) Henri Fiszbin recently wrote an article in Le Monde criticising the PCF for its (albeit lukewarm) opposition to Mitterrand’s wage-freeze.
The fact that the PCF is trapped in government has led to other conflicts; for example Fiterman, one of the PCF ministers, has publicly criticised L’Humanité for supporting Argentina over the Falklands.
The debate on Poland, then, is only a symptom of a much deeper crisis in the Eurocommunist CPs. The death-agony of Eurocommunism will be prolonged and unpleasant; but the disease is incurable. In itself this is no cause for rejoicing. There can be scarcely any genuine rank-and-file revolutionaries left in the PCI, the PCE or the PCF; so there will be no flood of recruits to the revolutionary left. The best we can hope from the slow demise of the remnants of the stalinised Comintern is that it will clear the ground on which we have to build afresh.
 









It’s not just the British Labour Party that has been in the news lately. The ups and downs of other European socialists have been prominent too. We look here at their background and record. Ian H. Birchall looks at the French Socialist Party in power.







‘President Mitterrand ... is now taking a line that, price-and-incomes control apart, even Mrs Thatcher might appreciate.’
(The Economist, 19 June)
In a recent article in The Guardian Eric Hobsbawm enthused over the achievements of President Mitterrand of France.
‘... This very able politician recognised the logic of his enterprise with unusual clarity ... Victory depended on mobilising all possible support against a reactionary and anti-democratic regime which was unpopular as such, and not only because it also seemed in its last years to be unable to cope with its economic troubles. It depended on mobilising the forces of progress against reaction and corruption.’
Professor Hobsbawm does not seem to have grown any more perceptive since the days, thirty years ago, when he was writing sycophantic defences of Hungarian Stalinism. For what he identifies as the strength of Mitterrand’s achievement is precisely the weakness that has now led it into a deep crisis.
In order to come to power Mitterrand had to do two things. He had to convince the majority of French workers that he would go at least some of the way towards meeting their demands for a better society. At the same time he had to persuade at least a section of the French ruling class, together with their hangers-on and ideological representatives, that he could offer some way of escape from France’s economic crisis.
It always was intrinsically implausible that he could satisfy both groups of supporters. The U-turn he was forced to make in June of this year showed that he was satisfying neither.
Mitterrand’s attempt to be the only country in Europe to solve the problem of unemployment by reflation fell flat on its face. Reflation produced a consumer-led import boom. In July for the first time France imported more cars than it exported; its deficit on trade with West Germany worsened by 80% in the first quarter of this year. Just about the only success story was a rise in arms sales. In the first half of 1982 the trade gap was twice as wide as the previous year, and the budget deficit is likely to double. French inflation is 10%, double West Germany’s.
The new economic orientation adopted in June showed clearly that Mitterrand had now recognised that he must stop trying to balance between capital and labour and openly serve the interests of the French bosses. The new policy was geared to the defence of the franc, the improvement of foreign trade, and the struggle against inflation. Inflation, not unemployment, was to be the number one enemy. The short-term solution adopted was a four-month wage and price freeze, announced on 13 June.
The wage-freeze seems to have been largely successful, even though it nullified rises already agreed by the employers (for example, phased increases negotiated at the time of the introduction of the 39-hour week).
But the freeze is only the opening shot in what will be a long-term struggle to hold down wage-levels. The government intends to use the public sector to hold down wages over the coming year. There is to be a maximum of 8% for wage rises in 1983 (for civil servants the figure of 6.1% has been proposed). The 8% figure is based on the predicted figure for inflation next year; just in case the prediction is wrong, there are to be no agreements linked to the cost of living. Le Monde has suggested that the loss of purchasing power over the next three years could be as much as 20%.
The price-freeze, needless to say, has been rather less effective. Despite the freeze prices rose by 0.7% in July (a rate of over 8% a year). One consumer organisation did a survey in the first week of the freeze checks on 1,400 supermarket prices which showed that 10% had been increased – by up to 19%. Many prices were increased on the very day the freeze was announced.
Moreover, the government allowed many loopholes in the freeze. Postal charges rose by 13% only days before the freeze began; petrol and electricity prices were not covered by the freeze, nor were prices of fresh food covered by EEC decisions.
Debating on television with Giscard d’Estaing the week before his election Mitterrand declared that ‘the main axis of policy must rotate around solutions to unemployment’. If Mitterrand ever had such a policy, it is now in ruins. The jobless total passed the two million mark in May. Mitterrand promised to create 210,000 public sector jobs in his first eighteen months; the first year saw only 55,000, and there seems little likelihood of many more. A charitable estimate is that unemployment is 100,000 less than it might have been if Mitterrand’s policies had not been applied.


 


The government has made much of its so-called ‘solidarity contracts’, agreements signed between companies and the government giving the firms financial benefits in return for guarantees on jobs. Nearly 2,000 such contracts have been signed, yet only 2,600 new jobs have been created; the usual pattern is for firms to give early retirement to older workers, replace them by young workers on lower wages, and boast that employment levels are being maintained.
Meanwhile the 35-hour week, much vaunted by the Socialists before they came to power, has been lost without trace. Prime Minister Mauroy has said there will be no further reduction in the 39-hour week before 1984, and perhaps not even then.
Other social measures fit into the same picture. The new wealth tax has got even more loopholes than had been expected. Increases in VAT will hit the least well-off workers most severely. And the new legislation on workers’ rights in the factories has been so watered down that it adds virtually nothing to existing legislation.
Social services are also under attack. A proposal is now being put forward that hospital patients should have to pay towards their food and accommodation; a figure of £3 a day has been suggested. And the government’s encouragement of experimentation with new patterns of education in schools seems to be based not so much on enthusiam for local participation as on a desire to find ways of cutting costs.
One of the worst retreats has been the government’s abandonment of its promise to introduce measures refunding 75% of the cost of abortions. While this fits into the pattern of social service cuts, it is not simply an economic matter. The Minister for Social Affairs has said that it is not a matter of money, but that it is necessary to have the broadest consensus of French society. In other words, now that the government’s support is flagging, it cannot afford to offend the anti-abortion lobby. Mitterrand did his best to improve the government’s image in this respect when, on the day after Mother’s Day, he presented medals to mothers of large families. However, he does not seem to have made a good impression on irate feminists who threw leaflets from the gallery of the National Assembly in protest at the government’s betrayal.
No cuts, however, are planned in defence spending. Mitterrand has ordered a seventh nuclear submarine, something Giscard was reluctant to do, and research is continuing towards the manufacture of the neutron bomb. The traditional Bastille Day military parade was this year deliberately extravagant, at twice the usual cost, in order to reassure the Army leaders of Mitterrand’s good-will.
The economic measures have been paralleled by an increase in repression. The immediate excuse was an attack on a Jewish restaurant in Paris in August, when six people were killed. Mitterrand followed this with a special television broadcast, promising a range of ‘anti-terrorist’ measures – extra border squads, tougher visa controls, a new arms-traffic unit and closer scrutiny of diplomats. Gaston Deferre, the minister of the Interior, has called for a tightening up of the right to political asylum – a singularly irrelevant demand, since it is scarcely likely that ‘international terrorists’ would go through the formalities of officially registering.
The chosen scapegoat for the government’s new tough line has been a small, politically erratic ultra-left grouping called Action Directe. This has at most 200 members, and while it has certainly planted the odd bomb, it almost certainly did not have either the capacity or the political will to organise the murderous assault on the Jewish restaurant. That was far more likely to be the work of home-grown anti-Semites (of which France has many), of PLO dissidents, or even of the Israeli secret services.
The effect of the repression should not be overestimated. It will certainly contribute to the general drift to the right. But far more serious is the absence of any serious labour movement response to the government’s new economic policy. No union has proposed a united response to the freeze, in the form of strikes or even a national demonstration. The main complaint of the unions seems to be not so much the measures themselves, as the fact that their right to negotiate was removed. In future they will doubtless get ample opportunity for consultation in return for acquiescence in government policy.


 


The pro-Socialist CFDT had made no direct criticism of the wage-freeze. The Communist-led CGT had made strong verbal opposition, but has limited itself to a call for local action rather than coordinating a centralised response. It has supported the price-freeze and offered to set up workers’ committees to make it more effective; a proposal which can only sow illusions in the price-freeze and divert energies away from the need to defend wages. At its recent Congress the CGT (which lost 12% of its membership between 1978 and 1980) declared itself part of the ‘governmental alliance’ and maintained that the government was going ‘in the right direction’ and was ‘no longer our enemy’.
The CGT’s acquiescence in the freeze is of course linked to the presence of Communist ministers in Mitterrand’s government. The Communist Party is putting its main emphasis on calling for higher production to solve France’s economic difficulties. At the same time it tries to cover its left flank. CP leader Marchais announced that CP deputies would vote for the freeze, but that ‘a vote doesn’t mean approval’.
Unfortunately, the revolutionary left does not yet seem ready to fill the vacuum on the left. Lutte Ouvrière has called on French workers to ‘build another left, other workers’ organisations worthy of the name’. This is a laudable sentiment but it is hard to., see how it will be concretised. Lutte Ouvrière and Rouge (paper of the LCR, French section of the Fourth International) are now publishing a monthly common supplement to their papers. Once again a positive gesture of unity, but it is likely that little will come of it except perhaps a joint revolutionary slate for the municipal elections next Spring. Since new electoral rules mean any party geting over 5% will get council seats, the municipal elections will be an even greater attraction to the revolutionary left than in the past. Meanwhile no one on the left is offering an effective focus to the discontent and disillusion that is now gaining ground among many who voted for Mitterrand.
 



The last decade has seen the production of a considerable amount of work in the area of Marxist aesthetics and literary criticism. This work has been very uneven in quality and in general has revealed serious limitations. A brief historical sketch, necessarily schematic, may help to put this work into some sort of context [1]:

In the ten or fifteen years after 1917, it was possible for cultural theory and practice to develop in close interaction with revolutionary politics and organisation. The most important developments and debates took place in Russia and Germany; the writings of Trotsky and Gramsci, and the early work of Brecht, are the best-known products of this period.
 
The rise of Stalinism put an end to the fertile interaction of politics and aesthetics. On the one hand the doctrines of socialist realism and ‘Zhdanovism’ sought to reduce literary judgements to political standards that were ultimately conservative. In opposition to this, the theoreticians of anti-communism proclaimed the complete independence of literature from political criteria. The few individuals who tried to swim against both streams – Orwell, the early Sartre – bear the marks of their isolation.
 
The crisis of Stalinism after 1956 opened up the debate again. In their various ways Sartre, Raymond Williams, Lucien Goldmann and Ernst Fischer tried to defend the social relevance of literature while insisting that the relation between writers and class was more complex than the Stalinist framework could allow. The seminal work of Lukács was translated into English and was widely read and discussed.
 
By the early seventies a new generation, radicalised by the events of 1968, was entering the field. They attempted to develop the important work of the post-Stalinist period. This new generation, however, found itself still working largely in isolation from revolutionary practice; and in general its work was done within the still expanding institutions of higher education. This situation necessarily imposed certain limitations and distortions on the work being done.

Firstly the rarefied atmosphere of academic debate tended to produce an ever-increasing weight of cross-reference to a growing body of trendy theorists, removing the argument further and further from the central issues. By the time one had read Eagleton on Macherey on Lukács on Engels on Balzac, one probably hadn’t time to actually read Balzac.
Secondly, because much of the argument took place in the framework of existing academic structures and syllabuses, a great deal of work focussed on the established literary tradition rather than on the task of creating an alternative revolutionary ‘tradition’.
And finally, most of the work tended to be done in isolation from the contemporary developments of radical cultural practice; there was little dialogue between the seminar on Barthes or Derrida and the emergence of political theatre or politicised rock music.
None the less it would be quite wrong to dismiss all this work as valueless. If most of it has signally failed to come up with the right answers, at least it is asking some of the right questions. And even that is now under threat. The current Tory attack on higher education is ideological as well as economic, and one target will be those approaches (Marxism, feminism, structuralism) which seek to relate the study of literature to the critique of ideology. (The recent MacCabe affair at Cambridge was an early skirmish).
The questions raised include some fundamental ones. What is the relation between literature and ideology? Do works of literature simply embody ideologies, or can they be the basis for criticising and transcending ideology? Can Marxism offer a method of evaluating literary works without resorting to the crude mechanical formulations of Zhdanovism? To what extent does a sociological account of literary production lead us to deny any significance to the intentions of the individual author? To what extent is materialism compatible with the application of recent work in linguistic theory? How can a political account of a literary work succeed in confronting, not just the overtly political aspects of the text, but the work as a whole, and in particular its form?
In many ways the work of Terry Eagleton can be taken as symptomatic of the new generation. Several books, plus a large number of articles, notably in New Left Review, have established a well-deserved reputation. [2] Moreover, unlike many of his contemporaries, Eagleton is a committed revolutionary socialist, for whom Marxism is much more than a set of abstract categories. He may not have successfully achieved the unity of theory and practice; but one can at least sense the anguish that he has failed to do so.
What follows is merely a provisional attempt to confront some of the problems raised in Eagleton’s work. Provisional, not only because of the scope of such an article, but because of the particular complexities of Eagleton’s work. In reading earlier marxist aestheticians, such as Georg Lukács or Lucien Goldmann, one is struck by a serene self-confidence, an assertiveness of tone; Eagleton’s work comes closer to the fragmentary, rambling style of his hero Walter Benjamin.
Moreover, Eagleton’s work is in continuous evolution, marked by acknowledged and unacknowledged shifts of position. His earliest work derives from Raymond Williams and left Catholicism and includes a book on Shakespeare. But by 1970 Eagleton seems to have become unduly impressed by the thesis, emanating from Perry Anderson and New Left Review, that English Marxism is peculiarly backward, and that other countries have achieved much more (though unfortunately not actually the revolution). Exiles and Emigrés develops this theme, and Criticism and Ideology begins in an uncharacteristically cringing tone, describing the English Marxist aesthetician as ‘acutely bereft of tradition ... a tolerated house-guest in Europe, a precocious but parasitic alien.’ (CI, p. 7)
Hence Eagleton’s love-hate affair with French literary theory, in particular the work of Pierre Macherey and Jacques Derrida. Often he seems to be frantically plundering their work in search of the solutions that evade him. Yet at the same time he is clearly aware of their limitations (he has recently described Derrida as ‘among many other more interesting things, one of the more recent mutations of a clapped-out bourgeois liberalism’). [3] Yet he has not found any point of reference that will enable him to get free of their clutches.
The major strength of Eagleton’s work is his insistence on the relation between literature and ideology. For him every work has something to say about society and about the ideas that serve to maintain the existing social relations. Moreover, he points to the particular ways in which literature is used as a means of ideological conditioning in our culture:
From the infant school to the University faculty, literature is a vital instrument for the insertion of individuals into the perceptual and symbolic forms of the dominant ideological formation, able to accomplish this function with a ‘naturalness’, spontaneity and experiential immediacy possible to no other ideological practice. (CI, p. 56)
It is this central importance accorded to ideology that makes Eagleton’s work of value to us. Even if we discard his solutions, we shall have to come back to the central questions that he is asking.
But if the concern with ideology is Eagleton’s main merit, his greatest weakness is a failure to define exactly what his project as a critic is. For a ‘Marxist literary critic’ can play a variety of different social roles. On the one hand he can exist within the academic establishment, providing an alternative Marxist view to the orthodoxies of university convention. Nowadays the many anthologies of critical view-points that are published for the benefit of students are not considered complete without the presence of a token Marxist. Such work may often be interesting, but capitalism can learn to live with such Marxists, just as it has learned to live with the trade union bureaucracy and rock and roll.
In Walter Benjamin Eagleton outlines an alternative and ambitious programme for ‘Marxist criticism’:
The primary task of the ‘Marxist critic’ is to actively participate in and help direct the cultural emancipation of the masses. The organising of the writers’ workshops, artists studios and popular theatre; the transformation of the cultural and educational apparatuses: the business of public design and architecture; a concern with the quality of quotidian life all the way from public discourse to domestic ‘consumption’; in short, all of the projects on which Lenin, Trotsky, Krupskaya, Lunacharsky and others of the Bolsheviks were intensively engaged remain, for all the differences of historical situation, the chief responsibilities of a revolutionary cultural theory that has refused, other than tactically and provisionally, that division of labour which gives birth to a ‘Marxist literary criticism’. (WB, pp. 97–8)
Such a project is exemplary; but it cannot be wholly realised by an act of individual will – it needs a mass movement. In the absence of even an embryonic mass movement to relate to Eagleton vacillates between the two different conceptions of his role.
One point at which Eagleton’s vacillation becomes evident is his style. For one professionally employed to communicate the beauties of English literature, Eagleton writes English extraordinarily badly. His style is often condensed and overladen with an erudition which the readers are assumed to share. Style is not a matter of accident or personal competence. Eagleton writes like this because he is unsure what audience he is addressing, on what grounds he is fighting the class struggle.
A brief example may help to make the point:
Who is the major English Marxist critic? Christopher Caudwell, hélas. It is in such a pat question and answer that the problem of a Marxist criticism in contemporary Britain is most deftly posed. (CI, p. 21)
What can we make of this? Firstly, it assumes a familiarity with the small talk of literary history (André Gide, asked who was the greatest French poet, replied ‘Victor Hugo, alas’). Secondly, the reference to ‘pat question and answer’ seems to relate to an academic circle of which Eagleton is a member in which such exchanges are taken for granted.
The central focus of Eagleton’s work is ideology. But this is not to say that his account of ideology is wholly satisfactory. Indeed, many of his formulations tend to a fatalism that defuses class struggle rather than serving it. It is, of course, salutary to be reminded of the power and resilience of ideology, to insist that we cannot transcend or destroy it by a simple act of will. And yet the problem remains that, if we are concerned to change the world rather than merely interpret it, then we must find means of transcending ideology. A model in which some authors and books are ‘on our side’, allies in struggle, weapons in our hands, may be cruder than Eagleton’s elaborate theoretical constructions, but the reality of struggle may also be crude.
Eagleton attacks two opposed concepts of the relation of literature to ideology. On the one hand, he rejects the ‘vulgar Marxist view’ that literary works are merely ‘reflections of dominant ideologies’. But he also rejects the position, identified with Ernst Fischer, that authentic art ‘always transcends the ideological limits of its time.’ (MLC, p. 17). Likewise, he rejects Lukács’ model of the transcendence of ideology:
Georg Lukács, in his Studies in European Realism, argues that Balzac’s greatness lies in the fact that the ‘inexorable veracity’ of his art drives him to transcend his reactionary ideology and perceive the real historical issues at stake. Ideology, here, clearly signifies a ‘false consciousness’ which blocks true historical perception, a screen interposed between men and their history. As such, it is a simplistic notion: it fails to grasp ideology as an inherently complex formation which, by inserting individuals into history in a variety of ways, allows of multiple kinds and degrees of access to that history. (CI, p. 69)
In an attempt to go beyond such an oversimplified view of ideology, Eagleton draws on the work of Althusser and Macherey for an account of the particular relation of art to ideology, one in which art ‘is held within ideology, but also manages to distance itself from it, to the point where it permits us to “feel” and “perceive” the ideology from which it springs.’ (MLC, p. 18). In Criticism and Ideology, his final formulation is dense and cryptic in the extreme:
... a ceaseless reciprocal operation of text on ideology and ideology on text, a mutual structuring and destructuring in which the text constantly overdetermines its own determinations. The structure of the text is then the product of this process, not the reflection of its ideological environs. The ‘logic of the text’ is not a discourse which doubles the ‘logic of ideology’; it is rather, a logic constructed ‘athwart’ that more encompassing logic. (CI, p. 99)
The trouble with such a formulation is that, by employing the abstractions ‘ideology’ and ‘text’, it glosses over the fact that different texts have very different relations to ideology. Clearly texts by, say, Brecht and Patience Strong do not relate to ideology in the same way. In practice, the theory must be judged by its treatment of particular texts. And in fact Eagleton’s critical writings tend to stress the pervasive, inescapable nature of ideology. In the earlier Exiles and Emigrés he had shown that despite the critical aspirations of both upper-class and lower middle-class novelists, ‘both modes of fiction were tied, at crucial points, to the dominant orthodoxy they opposed.’ (EE, p. 13). The limits of Orwell’s social criticism is shown in an essay which makes no mention whatsoever of Homage to Catalonia. And in Criticism and Ideology the overview of writers from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (George Eliot, Dickens, Henry James, Yeats, Lawrence and others) stresses the recurrence of ‘organicist’ ideology in apparently diverse writers.
In Marxism and Literary Criticism Eagleton develops a theory of the relation between the text and ideology that derives largely from the work of Macherey:
The text is, as it were, ideologically forbidden to say certain things; in trying to tell the truth in his own way, for example, the author finds himself forced to reveal the limits of the ideology in which he writes. He is forced to reveal its gaps and silences, what it is unable to articulate. Because a text contains these gaps and silences, it is always incomplete. Far from constituting a rounded, coherent whole, it displays a conflict and contradiction of meanings; and the significance of the work lies in the difference rather than unity between these meanings. (MLC, p. 35)
The problem is that in such account ‘truth’ has become purely relative. Dickens telling lies about trade unions in Hard Times and Zola telling the truth about miners’ working conditions in Germinal; both are simply contradictory texts. Camus creating racist myths about Algeria and Sartre telling the truth about the French army’s torture there: both texts. The French state was more perceptive: it knew which one to ban.
Most of the texts which Eagleton chooses to illustrate his account of ideology are drawn from established figures of English literature: Dickens, the Brontës, George Eliot, Conrad, Lawrence, T S Eliot, etc. In itself this is a worthwhile activity. In the universities, the comprehensive schools and through television adaptations, the classics of literature are used to propagate ideology. Thus Thomas Hardy was a ‘Great Writer’ who believed that an omnipotent fate inevitably thwarted human aspirations. Every time that lie is repeated another blow is struck by those who want us to believe that we cannot change the world. There is a job of demystification to be done and Eagleton’s account, if not wholly original, is at least clear and incisive:
Until quite recently, the story of Jude might have been summarised in a conventional critical account as the tragedy of a peasant boy who uproots himself from a timeless and settled rural community in the pursuit of learning, fails to achieve that worthy ideal through excessive sexual appetite, and in failing reveals the inexorable destiny of man himself, doomed to perpetual unfulfilment on a blighted planet. No part of that statement is in fact true, and to ask why not provides a starting-point for a more accurate reading of the novel. Jude is neither a peasant nor particularly oversexed; Marygreen, his childhood home, has nothing settled or timeless about it; the Christminster culture which attracts him is shoddy rather than worthy; and his failure to achieve it has no ‘cosmic’ significance whatsoever. The novel goes out of its way to emphasise all these facts, and only a reading biased by ideological preconceptions about Hardy’s fiction could fail to recognise them. [4]
But valuable as such attacks are, they are only part of the task of a Marxist critic, and Eagleton often defines other parts as outside his concern. He has little interest in so-called ‘popular culture’, seeing its relation to ideology as being less interesting than that of ‘great literature’. More importantly, he excludes much of the tradition of radical proletarian culture. Thus in discussing English culture’s ‘impermeability’ he observes ‘While Meyerhold and Piscator were at their peak, English theatre was dominated by the grandfather of all naturalists, George Bernard Shaw ... there is no English Brecht’ (WB, pp. 94–96). We can leave aside the dismissive attitude to Shaw (Lenin called him ‘a good man fallen among Fabians’ and Brecht, who wrote an article called Three Cheers for Shaw were more generous). But much more significantly this formulation disregards the whole tradition of political theatre, mainly associated with the Communist Party, in Britain from the twenties to the forties. This tradition may have been technically mediocre, and it was certainly distorted by Stalinism, but it existed and it has lessons for us. To pose the question in terms of an ‘English Brecht’ is to surrender to the bourgeois myth that literature is a gallery of great individuals. Again, Victor Serge does not earn a mention in any of Eagleton’s writings. For Serge stands outside the established hierarchies of literature (largely because he was stateless: syllabuses tend to be constructed on the basis of national literatures).
Time and again Eagleton stresses the area of agreement with established academic opinion. Thus he tells us: ‘most of the agreed major writers of the twentieth century – Yeats, Eliot, Pound, Lawrence – are political conservatives who each had truck with fascism’. (MLC, p. 8) Who, we might ask, did the agreeing that, for example, the convoluted and incomprehensible racist Pound is more major than the anti-fascist Orwell?
Eagleton’s insistence on remaining on the terrain of the established literary tradition must, in part at least, be explained by his theory of ideology. For if all texts stand in relation to ideology then what possibility is there of developing a revolutionary alternative?
Thus Eagleton is positively hostile to what he calls ‘literary ultra-leftism’ (CI, p. 162), identified in particular with revivals of the proletcult which:
aims an unintended insult at – to chose merely one example – those Lancashire mill girls of early Victorian England who rose an hour before work to read Shakespeare together. It would be a curious kind of materialistic critic who would now wish to inform those women, in wise historical retrospect, that they wasting their time over a reactionary hack. (CI, p. 166)
Here an ultra-left Aunt Sally is used to evade the real issues. What we tell the dead can have little relevance; but surely Eagleton would not want to tell the living women of Chix or Lee Jeans that they should be reading Shakespeare instead of picketing. And can he be confident that there is no connection between deference to ‘great literature’ and deference to the employer?
This in turn leads to the difficult problem of literary evaluation. For Eagleton one of the tasks of the Marxist critic is to provide a scientific basis for such evaluation:
It should not, then, be a matter of embarrassment that the literary texts selected for examination by Marxist criticism will inevitably overlap with those works which literary idealism has consecrated as ‘great’; it is a question of challenging the inability of such idealism to render more than subjectivist accounts of the criteria of value. (CI, p. 162)
Yet even a thoroughly scientific account of such criteria may be of only limited interest. Eagleton devotes a book to the Brontës in order to reach the not very startling conclusion that Jane Eyre is a good book but Wuthering Heights is a better one. (MP, p. 94) Sometimes such judgements may be of interest; he makes a good case for claiming that Lawrence’s Women in Love is less successful than The Rainbow because personal relationships are less rooted in society. (EE, p. 213) But ultimately it is not really very useful to ask whether, for example, Robert Tressell is a better writer than Henry James. What is important is to argue that the former is on our side, a producer of texts that are weapons in our struggle, while the latter is at best a producer of documents to be analysed and demystified.
Eagleton’s fatalistic conception of ideology also leads him into severe problems in dealing with the question of intention in literary production. The discrepancy between the intentions of the author and the actual text he or she produces is of course a commonplace of Marxist criticism. It can be traced back to Engels’ famous remarks on Balzac, where he notes the contrast between the novelist’s conservative ideas and the way in which his books confirm a revolutionary understanding of history. And, in more general terms it is the fact that human beings’ achievements do not coincide with their intentions that makes political practice necessary.
Much of Eagleton’s literary criticism is concerned with drawing out the contradictions between the intentions of authors and the way the texts actually operate. Thus in discussing Conrad’s Under Western Eyes he notes that ‘there is a tension between what the novel shows us of Razumov and what it says of him.’ (EE, p. 26) Drawing on the French Althusserian theorist Pierre Macherey, Eagleton tries to show how what is omitted or suppressed in a text may illuminate the contradictions of the author’s ideology. In Criticism and Ideology he attempts to construct a theoretical model including both ‘General Ideology’ and ‘Authorial Ideology’: ‘There is no question here of “centring” the literary text on the individual subject who produces it; but neither is it a matter of liquidating that subject into ‘general’ aesthetic and ideology forms.’ (CI, pp. 59–60)
But Macherey wants to go further. Eagleton tells us that ‘Macherey is in fact opposed in the final analysis to the whole idea of the author as “individual subject”, whether creator or “producer”, and wants to displace him from his privileged position. It is not so much that the author produces his text as that the text “produces itself” through the author.’ (MLC, p. 83)
There are many indications in Eagleton’s work that he has been tempted along this road. Not only does he write of the ‘spurious belief that the truth of a text resides in the consciousness of its author’ [5]; he adopts formulations which seem to liquidate the individual writer completely:
The phrase ‘George Eliot’ signifies nothing more than the insertion of certain ideological determinations – Evangelical Christianity, rural organicism, incipient feminism, petty-bourgeois moralism – into a hegemonic ideological formation which is partly supported, partly embarrassed by their presence.’ (CI, p. 113)
But if no space is to be found for the individual intention, then the question of revolutionary artistic practice can be postponed to the millennium; only the revolution will make revolutionary art possible, rather than revolutionary art helping pave the way for the revolution.
In Eagleton’s case, unlike that of some of his contemporaries, there is no question of the use of Marxist categories being merely decorative or incidental. He is a committed Marxist, a revolutionary first and a literary critic second. He is scathing about the academic ‘Marxism’ that is so widespread in some circles; thus he describes the currently fashionable work of Foucault as ‘a glamorous rationale for erstwhile revolutionaries unnerved into pessimism by the current problems of class struggle in the advanced capitalist societies.’ (WB, p. 58) His Marxism is resolutely anti-Stalinist; time and again he takes Trotsky as a model of Marxism in general, and Marxist cultural theory in particular, although his belief that ‘Stalinist theory is... a radical deformation of Marxism from which valuable materialist concepts may nevertheless from time to time be salvaged’ (WB, p. 90) allows him to make continued borrowings from the Althusserian school.
On the status of the Marxist method Eagleton takes a hard position. The Marxist aesthetic is an integral part of the totality of Marx’s thought [6]; Marxism is not just another ‘approach’ to literature, to be taken alongside Freudian or mythological criticism (MLC, p. vii); Plekhanov and Mehring were wrong to believe that Marxism had to be supplemented by an aesthetic drawn from Kantianism.
And yet, perhaps by contamination from the academic milieu, more likely out of an exaggerated desire to avoid any over-rapid reduction of text to class alignment, Eagleton time and time again is to be found doing what he argues against supplementing Marxism with some form of idealist thought. In various parts of his work Eagleton draws heavily on feminism, psychoanalysis, and above all the work of the French structuralists and post-structuralists. Very briefly, structuralism seeks to extend the methods of linguistics to other areas of human activity by discovering rules – like those of grammar – of which the participants are not conscious; thus the intentions of the subject are subordinated to the laws of structure. Post-structuralism – especially the work of Jacques Derrida – puts more stress on the ambiguities of language and effectively dissolves the subject altogether; pushed to its limit, it implies that any text can mean anything- and hence nothing. Structuralist and post-structuralist thought in particular concern themselves with the relation between the ‘signifier’ (the written or spoken sign) and the ‘signified’ (the concept to which it refers). The signifiers are not simply expressions of a reality beyond themselves, but are themselves material as written or spoken words.
Such an approach contains enormous dangers. In the name of materialism the materiality of the text itself becomes substituted for a concern with the world beyond the text. Eagleton’s love-hate relation with post-structuralism has not blinded him to the reactionary potential of such theorising and its incompatibility with a Marxist materialism:
In rematerialisising the sign, we are in imminent danger of de-materialising its referent; a linguistic materialism gradually inverts itself into a linguistic idealism. In evolving a practice upon literary texts which every English University greets with a certain nervous contempt, we have played straight into the hands of the Yale English school. For nothing could suit that particular group of modish academics better than the notion that even ‘history’ is a text. The proletariat is to be neither supported nor repulsed; it is to be textualised. And since we have rejected the theological concept of hierarchies, then it is the crassest folly to insist that the proletariat is in principle a more significant text than Adolphe or Crotchet Castle. [7]
In one of those flashes of satirical brilliance that occasionally illuminate his erudite pages, Eagleton has demolished the pseudo-materialism of certain post-structuralists:
Few things could be more material than goblins. Those who dismiss them as mere phantasms, products of ‘illusion’ or ‘false consciousness’, fail to recognise that goblins belong to material, historically specific discourses, inscribed in certain definite, material apparatuses, producing certain pertinent material effects. Goblin-discourse is the support of certain specific social practices, with concrete ideological effectivities, not least in the Cornish region of the social formation. It if may seem unnecessary to insist upon this simple fact, we need only recollect the stubborn persistence of an older empiricist problematic which would seek to unbare some spontaneous ‘correspondence’ or ‘non-correspondence’ between goblin-discourse and the ‘real’, encoded, no doubt, in some basic observational language itself metaphysically privileged and theoretically unproblematised. There are those, in short, who remain obsessed by the question of whether goblins actually exist or not, as there are those, indeed, who would still seek to pose the problem of whether gendarmes actually exist or not. The materiality of the signifier ‘goblins’ is brutally repressed: deprived of its concrete effectivity within an articulated set of discursive practices, ‘goblins’ becomes no more than a transparent sign within the order of discourse, to be endorsed or eradicated insofar as anything in the order of the real may be found to ‘fit’ with it, or insofar as anything in the order of the real may be deduced from it. [8]
A parallel influence, which Eagleton often seeks to combine with post-structuralism, is that of Brecht and his stress on the concept of production. The artist is to be understood as engaging, not in some mysterious act of ‘creation’, but in production. So, in examining the literary text, we should see it, not as something complete and perfect, but as something which reveals the way in which it was produced. The classic example of this is the so-called ‘estrangement’ effect in the plays of Brecht; Brecht never allows us to surrender to the theatrical illusion, but constantly reminds us that we are watching a play, not reality.
This current is a much more positive one, and no revolutionary aesthetic can evade the achievements and problems of Brecht’s work. Yet if over-emphasised the ‘production aesthetic’ too can substitute a materiality of the text for the relation of the text to the real world. In recent years a kind of bastard Brechtianism has stressed Brecht’s techniques and ignored his politics; its ultimate logic would be to see Blazing Saddles as the great revolutionary film of our era.
If Eagleton stops well short of the worst excesses of this trend, he still stands clearly on the side of Brecht against Lukács, that is, his identification is with the formal innovations of twentieth century modernism, and against the classic tradition of nineteenth century realism.
He is, of course, quite right to insist that literary form is of crucial importance, and that it forms an integral part of the ideology of the text. But his approach leads him to overestimate the subversive impact of purely formal dislocation:
If George Eliot had decided on a fit of wild abandon to kill off all the characters of Middlemarch in the final paragraph, she would certainly have radically undermined Victorian ideological expectations and it is unlikely that the novel would ever had been published; but she would not have undermined such expectations as effectively as if she had finished the novel in mid-sentence. (WB, p. 72)
The word ‘effectively’ invites consideration. Since George Eliot’s day a good many novels have ended in mid-sentence; some have dispensed with sentences altogether. But bourgeois ideology has survived.
The debate between realism and modernism points to some of the crucial limitations of Eagleton’s thought. It is, of course, true that the classic realism of the nineteenth century novel is no longer an adequate model, and that the structuralists have made some valid points in criticising the over-naive notion of the ‘real’ that lies behind much nineteenth century realism. But despite that concession, it remains true that realism of some sort is central to any Marxist aesthetic. No work that does not, in some way or another (and obviously a wide variety of styles are possible) relate to and criticise the reality of the external world can be a tool in the transformation of that world. In Walter Benjamin Eagleton suggests that it may be time to go beyond the modernism/realism debate. (WB, p. 90) His remarks are brief and inconclusive, however, showing that this remains an unresolved dilemma in his work.
Finally, the theoretical ambiguities of Eagleton’s work culminate in a political ambiguity. He notes that his work has been produced in a period when ‘the class struggle is effectively on the downturn’. (WB, p. 96) He also observes that ‘the vulnerability of Western Marxism to idealist deformations lies above all in its relative separation from mass revolutionary practice’. (WB, p. 82) But mass parties do not grow on trees: they have to be built. And what is crucially lacking from Eagleton’s work is a sense of how the valuable and necessary ideological work he is engaged on relates the task of building such a party. In his personal political practice Eagleton may be an exemplary Leninist. But such Leninism does not structure his work. As a result, when class struggle or revolution are brought into the text, they seem like rabbits out of a hat, laudable gestures, but not rooted in the fabric of the preceding argument.
Eagleton’s own works, then, just as much as those he studies, are riddled with contradictions. He wishes to challenge the whole ideological apparatus of ‘Literature’, yet defends the established evaluations of traditional literary criticism. He recognises the need for revolutionary writing, yet dissolves the intentions of the author in a swamp of determinations. He sees the need to combat ideology with the utmost vigour, yet surrenders to a fatalistic notion of a pervasive, inescapable ideology. He defends materialism, yet perpetuates the myth of the self-contained text.
Eagleton still holds an open choice. Nothing he has written as yet can prevent his co-option back into the academy. Yet much of what he has to say is of relevance to those seeking to build a revolutionary movement. The choice, when it comes, will not be simply a matter of personal integrity, but of the fortunes of the class struggle in Britain.

Notes
I am indebted to Gareth Jenkins for his searching criticism of an earlier draft of this article. I have adopted a number of his formulations, but the responsibility for the judgements made remains my own.
1. For more details on some aspects of this, see my earlier article The Spectre of Zhdanov, IS 2:1.
2. The works dealt with in this article are Exiles and Emigrés (London 1970) (EE); Myths of Power (London 1975) (MP); Marxism and Literary Criticism (London 1976) (MLC); Criticism and Ideology (London 1976) (CI); Walter Benjamin or Towards a Revolutionary Criticism (London 1981) (WB).
3. Literature and History 6:2, 1980, p256.
4. Introduction to Jude the Obscure (Macmillan, 1975).
5. New Left Review 110.
6. Introduction to M. Lifshitz, The Philosophy of Art of Karl Marx, London 1973.
7. New Left Review 107.
8. A Note on Brecht and Realism, in F. Barker et al. (eds.), The Politics of Modernism (Colchester 1979).
 



Problems of Knowledge and Freedom
by Noam Chomsky
Barrie & Jenkins, £1.50
The two lectures printed in this volume were delivered last June as the Bertrand Russell Memorial Lectures at Cambridge. Chomsky, quite correctly, sees himself as following in Russell’s footsteps. Chomsky’s work in linguistics, like Russell’s in mathematical philosophy, represents a substantial contribution to human knowledge within a limited field; Chomsky, like Russell, has taken a firm and courageous stand in opposing particular crimes of capitalism (for both men the Vietnam war was a key issue); and like Russell, Chomsky sees only tenuous links between the two activities – if they are joined at all, it is by a rather vague notion of ‘humanism’.
The aim of Chomsky’s work in linguistics is to show that there are certain basic structures underlying all human languages. Why is it necessary to suppose this? Take, for example, the two sentences: ‘John appealed to Bill to like himself’ and ‘John appeared to Bill to like himself.’ In appearance they differ by only one letter; yet the ‘himself’ means Bill in one case, John in the other. Or again, try to lay down the rules for forming sentences, especially complex ones, into questions. Any mechanical rule, which treats a sentence just as a string of words, will not work in all cases. The structural rules Chomsky proposes not only work, but appear to be similar in all known languages.
The implications for the specialised study of languages are enormous. But Chomsky has also been concerned to draw some more general conclusions. Fundamental to his work is the point that human language is ‘creative’; that is, all of us can produce sentences which have never previously been uttered, and yet these sentences can be understood by anyone else who speaks the same language. There is, quite literally, no limit to the number of sentences in any given language.
This means, first of all, that no language is ‘better’ than any other; all languages have the same unlimited potential Various racialist notions of the ‘primitive’ can thus be discarded. It also disproves the myth, common on the left, that human beings can be imprisoned by their language – the myth embodied in Orwell’s ‘Newspeak’ in 1984, where men cannot challenge the system because the language they speak does not allow them to phrase such a challenge. Chomsky’s findings seem to be incompatible with the fashionable but basically reactionary ideas of Basil Bernstein, who argues that working class children suffer from the limitations of the language available to them – the working class thus cannot liberate itself, but must be liberated by benevolent middle-class school-teachers.
Further, if Chomsky’s view of how we learn languages is correct, then it is quite incompatible with behaviourism, the psychological school which sees man as being an input-output device, a machine which gives certain responses to certain stimuli. Behaviourism is, of course, a psychology ideally suited to a social system which treats human beings like machines, and wherever possible replaces men with machines. The ability to produce, not just a set of sounds, but a language which is infinitely variable, is one of the important distinctions between men and all other animals, and Chomsky’s humanism gives us good reason to believe men can never be totally dehumanised.
So far, so good. Chomsky rejects empiricism – the philosophical doctrine which says that everything inside our heads got there through our senses. But for him the only alternative this leaves is the old notion of innate ideas – we are born with certain ideas, or at least structures, inside our heads.
As long as we remain within the framework of studying man as an individual, then these are the only choices available. But the ability to use language is not the only thing that distinguishes man from the beasts. Man is also a producing animan, and human history is the history of the social organisation of production and the social struggles resulting therefrom.
In an interview with New Left Review in 1969, Chomsky tried to draw the connections between his linguistics and his politics.
‘... My own feeling is that the fundamental human capacity is the capacity and the need for creative self-expression, for free control of all aspects of one’s life and needs. One particularly crucial realisation of this capacity is the creative use of language as a free instrument of thought and expression ... one might actually develop a social science in which a concept of social organisation is related to a concept of human nature which is empirically well-founded and which in some fashion leads even to value judgements about what form society should take, how it should change and how it should be reconstructed.’
In short, we can derive a social programme from a study of the needs of the individual. What is missing is any account of how the various forms of repression that exist came into being in the first place.
Chomsky describes his own politics as ‘libertarian’ – a word which indicates some indeterminate area between liberalism and anarchism. The paradox of these two lectures is that the first, dealing with linguistics, is exciting, thought-provoking and relevant even where it is wrong; the second, dealing directly with political questions, is just plain boring. Chomsky bewails the prostitution of American academic life. For example, while hundreds of sociologists are exploring every facet of the society of Thailand, a vital strategic base for US imperialism in the Far East, not one has ventured to do a frank study of the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, an institution which concentrates colossal economic and political power in its hands.
But all this is nothing new; the real question is what do we do about it. Chomsky sees little hope except in the student movement, and at the end of his second lecture comments:
‘It is the problem of survival, not revolution, that has obsessed us ... It is proper and necessary that this should be so.’
The struggle for survival is the struggle for revolution. A view of the world, like Chomsky’s, which sees political issues as only loosely linked to philosophical questions, which sees the individual as the agent of historical change, cannot perceive this. But the fault is not wholly Chomsky’s – the real tragedy is the absence of a credible revolutionary force which could enable isolated intellectuals to go beyond the politics of moral gesture.



Shipwreck of a generation
Joseph Berger
Harvill, £2.50
Under Stalin the Russian revolution was transformed into its opposite. A mass terror cast thousands upon thousands of men and women into prison. Men like Nikolay Yemelyanov, who had helped Lenin escape from Russia when Kerensky ordered his arrest in July 1917. Men like the Old Bolshevik metal worker Belousov who had been in Tsarist prisons, and found it difficult to remember to call the guard ‘comrade’ instead of ‘Your Honour’.
These are just two of the many characters who appear in the memoirs of Joseph Berger, a veteran Communist and one of the founders of the Communist Party of Palestine, who spent the years from 1935 to 1956 in various Russian prisons and camps, and is one of the few to survive such an experience.
Though Berger himself now has a jaundiced view of revolutionary politics, he gives us some valuable insights into the life of the camps under Stalin. It is not the physical horror of the camps that were their dominant feature, though some grotesque features emerge. For example, each camp had its ‘mortality quota’; as long as the death rate did not go above a certain figure, no-one worried, but when it rose too high, there was an investigation. Yet despite the abolition of privileges for political prisoners the camps, filled with oppositionists as well as purged loyalists, were hotbeds of the most sophisticated political discussion. How did Stalin bring it off? How did he break the spirit of militants like the Ivanovo district Party officials who in 1932 showed their solidarity with strikers by boycotting the special party shops, wearing workers’ clothes and standing in the food-queues? Not by force alone. No state machine, no police force is strong enough to do that. But because he was able to present himself as the heir to the October revolution, he won a victory in the battle of ideas. The Russian revolutionaries who had studied the failure of earlier revolutionaries, saw that they were defeated by disunity and lack of ruthlessness. Stalin’s monolithic ruthlessness could be made to seem the embodiment of revolutionary necessity. The cultivated arbitrariness and irrationality in the dispensing of ‘justice’ helped to encourage a sense of fatalism.
Berger shows how all this worked on the psychology of the prisoners. Almost all believed the regime to be basically just, and hence saw their own cases simply as ‘mistakes’ that would soon be corrected. When the war came they were almost all loyal, and actually believed Stalin would now turn to them for help. He tells the pathetic story of one prisoner who had so impressed on his wife the need to accept all that was done in the name of state security, that when he himself was arrested, he was unable to convince her of his innocence.
Berger’s memoirs are often scrappy in form, and lack the illuminating power of Serge’s The Case of Comrade Tulayev or Solzhenitsyn’s First Circle. Nonetheless, they are a useful document to help the understanding of the greatest tragedy of this century.



Any Marxist concerned with the building of a revolutionary party in Britain today must give serious attention to the question of the British Communist Party. The party has been, from its foundation, marginal to the mass organisations of the British labour movement, and it has made little impact on national political life; but at the same time it has been the only organisation that has borne Marxist ideas – in however distorted a form – into significant sections of the British working class, and the only organisation that has been able to offer some kind of national framework to industrial militants.
Yet the materials for such a serious study are largely lacking. Recent years have seen the publication of weighty volumes by Kendall, MacFarlane and Klugmann on the early years of the Party’s history. But on the equally interesting question of the Party’s evolution since 1945 there is virtually no useful literature. [1]
In the absence of an adequate analysis, one-sided views of the Party flourish on the revolutionary left. On the one hand there is the approach which sees Stalinism as a static phenomenon, and therefore considers any critique of the Party must begin from a full historical examination (and in particular a settling of accounts over the Moscow Trials); this is to disregard the important changes that have taken place in the Party since 1945, and the ambiguous and defensive attitude that the Party now has to its own traditions. The opposite approach concentrates on the flabbiness and passivity of the Party’s current practice; but the attempt to challenge the Party on the level purely of activism neglects the fact that the Party’s lethargy derives directly from its politics.
What follows is merely an outline sketch of the Party’s history from the end of the Second World War to the advent of the Labour Government in 1964, attempting to locate this history both in the development of the world communist movement, and in the specific circumstances of the British class struggle.
 
From Stalinism to Social Democracy
The Communist International, created by the revolutionary upsurge which followed the First World War, was inherited by Stalin and transformed into an instrument of his politics. The logic of the theory of ‘socialism in one country’ implied that the requirements of Russian internal and foreign policy must take precedence over the interests of the world’s workers. Loyal communists successively followed the changing line – class against class, alliance with the progressive bourgeoisie, opposition to imperialist war, defence of the Soviet Union. Even in those countries where the Communist Parties had mass working-class support their political line was essentially determined by an international strategy.
The situation in 1968, when most of the world’s CPs denounced the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia, was not an overnight transformation, but the culmination of a long process. For the British Party this process began during the latter part of the Second World War. Not only was the Party able to demonstrate its patriotic loyalty by backing up the war effort and encouraging production, but the general popularity of the Soviet Union was such that even the right-wing press rarely ventured to criticise it. After decades as a persecuted minority the Party had at last broken out of the ghetto.
But it was still clear to the Party’s friends and enemies alike that this new-found respectability was conditional upon a temporary convergence of British and Russian war-interests. In the period after 1945 a much more fundamental transformation began to make itself apparent. The following seem to be the main factors which led to this change:

After about 1950 the Stalinist parties were no longer a central instrument of Russian foreign policy, as they had been, for example, at the time of the Popular Front. Russia now essentially relied for her defence on the balance of nuclear terror.
 
The working class in Britain experienced very different conditions in the fifties and sixties than those it had known before the war. With full employment and relatively prosperous living standards, and above all with the knowledge that gains were to be won, not through Parliament, but through strength and organisation on the shop-floor, workers felt much less need to identify with a socialist paradise far away. Moreover, until the mid-sixties at least, there seemed no obvious link between industrial and political questions; Communists who were accepted as shop-floor leaders got a derisory vote in municipal or Parliamentary elections.
 
By 1950 there were about a dozen countries in the so-called ‘socialist bloc’. But this bloc showed itself obviously incapable of achieving harmonious economic and political integration. Deep splits, based on economic and ideological factors, emerged first between Russia and Yugoslavia, then Russia and China. The loyalty and discipline that could be demanded in a monolithic International was no longer possible when several leaders were in open competition.
 
Stalinism in the thirties had already transformed Marxism from a critical revolutionary science into a set of sterile and conservative dogmas. This was disastrous in a postwar world which was confronted with new social phenomena which required the full resources of scientific analysis. In particular, the Stalinist identification with Soviet Russia made it impossible to develop an adequate theory of the state, and especially to understand the nature of nationalisation and planning in modern capitalism. [2]

The choice facing the CPs in the West from the fifties on was between continuing as Stalinist parties or transforming themselves into some kind of social democratic party. The former choice, involving unswerving loyalty to Moscow, was particularly appealing to small parties with no native base, which rapidly came to function as extensions of the Soviet Embassies. For parties with some base, the latter alternative was more attractive. In France, for example, where the traditional social democratic party was corrupt, fragmented and denuded of many working-class base, the CP could, in the long term, hope to establish itself as a replacement.
In Britain, where the CP was always overshadowed by the Labour Party, the ambition to become an alternative social democratic party met with little success. The Party’s electoral performance showed a slow but irreversible decline. The average total of votes per candidate put up fell as follows:



1945


1950


1951


1955


1959


1964


1970




   4,894   


      917 [3]


   2,164   


   1,950   


   1,716   


   1,236   


     654   



A particularly striking example is the case of West Fife, where Gallacher was elected MP in 1945. The following were the percentages of the poll gained by CP candidates:



1945


1950


1951


1955


1959


1964


1970




  32.5%


  18.5%


   9.2%


  10.1%


   6.8%


   5.4%


   1.7%



The decline in political impact was accompanied by a change in tone. In the forties, whatever the Party’s politics, its language was still the language of Marxism; by the sixties it was all set for respectability, Christian-Communist dialogues, etc. To take one example. The British Road to Socialism was always a reformist programme; but the original version did have some echoes of the class struggle. For example: The large country houses of the rich will be taken over for use as holiday rest homes, sanatoria for adults and children, and similar social purposes’. [4] In later editions this is missing, replaced by generalities about the nationalisation of land.
 
The Post-War Carve-Up
As the Second World War drew to a close, the leaders of Britain, Russia and the USA – Churchill, Stalin and Roosevelt – met to share the booty. The haggling was consummated in the Yalta Conference of February 1945. In return for a free hand in most of Eastern Europe, Stalin renounced any attempts to spread ‘socialism’ to the rest of the world. [5]
However, the workers of Western Europe had no fought a long war against fascism in order to go back to the social and economic order of the thirties. In France and Italy, the Communist Parties had substantial influence in mass armed Resistance movements. Factory and local committees sprang up. But as the French Communists entered de Gaulle’s government, and the Italian CP agreed to serve under Marshal Badoglio, who had been one of Mussolini’s military commanders, the upsurge was held in check.
The British CP was, of course, in no position to either launch or hold back a revolutionary upsurge. But the Party had grown very considerably in size and influence since Russia entered the war in 1941. Its membership had reached around 56,000 in 1942 and was still over 45,000 in 1945. The Party’s line of total support for the war meant that it could make no substantial criticism of the policies of the coalition Government; but at the same time, since it had to preserve its base among industrial workers and servicemen, it had to use the language of militancy and class struggle. The Party had rendered valuable service to the war effort by participation in Joint Production Committees, and until the end of hostilities it opposed any strike action. This opposition, however, had to be expressed in guarded terms, usually in the form of putting ‘political’ considerations before the requirements of particular struggles. Thus the Daily Worker on 7 March 1945, told London dockers on strike against the disciplinary methods of the Dock Labour Corporation: ‘Every striker should therefore be conscious of the fact that the strike is playing into the hands of that bad type of employer who wants to dissolve the corporation and return to the bad old days of unemployment, casual labour and the victimisation of militant workers.’ Likewise, on 6 April, commenting on a strike by 11,000 A.V. Roe workers over falling bonuses, the Worker said:
‘This question, however, can only be completely solved on the national plane. Having called attention to this burning grievance, the workers should now return and leave the matter to be negotiated by the trade unions ... a series of local strikes ... can only exhaust the workers without attaining any positive results.’
The CP’s industrial penetration had been assisted by the fact that, in gratitude for its contribution to wartime production, the 1943 Trades Union Congress at Southport had withdrawn, on the recommendation of the General Council, the Black Circular which banned Communists from serving as Trades Council delegates.
The CP of course approved the international policies agreed between Churchill and Stalin; in particular they endorsed the use of nuclear weapons on Hiroshima. On 14 August 1945 the Worker actually criticised the Allied Powers for being too soft, under the heading ‘Japs still trying to haggle’. (The semi-racialist term ‘Japs’ was used almost invariably in the Worker at this time). In 1952, the Worker of 7 August called Hiroshima a ‘bestial action’.
These were not merely tactical concessions. In April 1945, Emile Burns, one of the Party’s chief theoreticians, wrote arguing that the whole Marxist analysis of capitalism as a system required modification: ‘In these circumstances, the “laws of capitalist development” cannot operate as if the whole world was still capitalist. Of course, they are there as a tendency, and a very strong tendency. But they are not “inevitable”. They are being checked, and can be further checked, by the power of the people.’ [6]
It is in this context that the CP’s rather grotesque manoeuvring before the 1945 General Election must be understood. The Party leadership, with its sights set on the kind of broad coalition with Communist participation that had taken office in several European countries, made the mistake both of underestimating the strength of pro-Labour feeling, and of overestimating its own potential. The main slogan was therefore the demand for a ‘Labour and progressive majority’. The hope was that Labour would stand down in a number of constituencies to let Communist members be elected, some of whom might aspire to Ministerial office. (The word ‘progressive’ was a key item in the Party’s vocabulary at the time. One might think it referred to all left wing parties. But although it might sometimes be stretched to include the Liberals, if was clearly designed to exclude the Independent Labour Party. At the time of the Newport by-election in May 1945, the Daily Worker correspondent recommended abstention in face of a choice between ‘the black record of the Tory Party and the equally black record of the Independent Labour Party.’) [7]
For a time even the Tories were in the happy family. On 155 March, Churchill, sensing possible defeat, had proposed a post-war coalition to Labour. On 20 March, the Daily Worker carried a statement by the Party Executive under the headline ‘All Party National Government Is Essential after the Election’. A London District Committee pamphlet in April spelt this out, saying ‘... the Labour Party should then form a new National Government and invite others, including Tories like Churchill and Eden, to participate’.
In the event the Labour Party rejected both Tory overtures and alliance with the CP, and was returned with a massive majority. The CP was left with two MPs only. One of these, Gallacher, made his first contribution to the new Parliament by thanking the Speaker for his fair treatment of minorities.
 
The Labour Government
The 1945 Labour Government was brought to power by working-class aspirations to a better life after the war; its main task was to modernise British capitalism. It introduced significant welfare reforms – notably the National Health Service, but showed a brutal face to working-class demands and direct action. Clearly a Marxist Party would have to show an intelligent strategy; to avoid both sectarianism and tail-ending and to stand firm on class issues. The CP failed the test.
The Labour election victory was announced on 26 July. Five days later, on 31 July, troops were sent into the Surrey Docks to break a ten-week-old go-slow by dockers demanding a 25-shilling-a-day basic rate. In the Daily Worker of 1 August one quarter of one of the six columns on the front page was devoted to a piece headed ‘Troops take over in London Dock’. It was a factual report only, expressing no condemnation.
This set the tone for the first two uneasy years- of Labour rule. Once the war was over the CP no longer followed a line of opposition to strikes and other militancy. The period saw Party militants taking a lead in strikes and in the squatters movement; the Party was active lobbying councils for the requisitioning of empty houses, in defending servicemen imprisoned for mutiny, etc. But despite this activity the Party was still concerned to preserve its image of respectability and responsibility. Its leading trade unionists – notably Arthur Horner of the NUM – did much to encourage a ‘responsible’ approach to productivity. The editorial of the Worker on 4 November 1946 set out the issues clearly: ‘Increased production necessitates closer cooperation between workers and managements in the various industries. Everyone pays lip service to this principle – employers, unions and Government – but nobody does anything about it. Is the Government going to do anything positive to bring both sides together so that they can get on with the job?’ And in his pamphlet A Wage Based on Human Needs (1946) Reg Birch wrote:
‘Years and years of necessary work stare us in the face. The engineering workers are willing to cooperate. Nothing must be allowed to stand in the way.’
In particular the whole question of the Labour nationalisations presented problems to the CP. The Party’s theoreticians made a distinction between ‘capitalist’ and ‘socialist’ nationalisation. But for those who took Russia as a model the distinction was hard to draw. Will Paynter recalls that on the first day of nationalised coal-mining he made ‘an enthusiastic speech about “the dawn of a new era” ... the significance of the day being one where the “workers were moving forward to the control of their own destinies”.’ [8]
The notion of ‘workers’ control’ was absent from CP thinking [9], and criticisms of nationalisation largely centred around the nature of the administrative personnel. Thus Pollitt’s comments on the National Coal Board:
‘Just as the leopards cannot change their spots, neither can former coal-owners or directors ... If the problems are to be rightly tackled, the National and Divisional Coal Boards must be completely reorganised so that the majority of the members are drawn from Labour and trade union circles.’ [10]
Likewise, a Worker editorial of 29 October 1946 replied to Stafford Cripps’ charge that few workers were capable of running industry:
‘When Sir Stafford uses the term worker, does he include the supervisory grades in industry, who have daily experience of the practice of management ... Many of those supervisory workers are keen trade unionists, are anxious to see nationalisation succeed and should be given a chance in the higher ranges of management.’
In 1947 the honeymoon went sour. A report written by Zhdanov for the newly formed Communist Information Bureau declared that the right wing of the Labour Party ‘remain in all respects loyal supporters of the imperialists’. [11] In face of this theoretical discovery the British Party could not remain silent. A new period had opened.
 
The Cold War
On 12 March 1947, President Truman, announcing US intervention in Greece, established what became known as the Truman Doctrine; in effect it committed itself to intervene against any revolution believed to be ‘communist’. The stick was followed by a carrot. On 5 June the Marshall Plan for economic aid to Europe was announced. It was an open secret that the French and Italian Governments had been told that the price of Marshall Aid was the exclusion of the Communist ministers.
This was a clear challenge to the balance of forces established at the end of the Second World War, and Stalin could not lie down to it. On 2 August Russia rejected the Marshall Plan and the CPs of East and Western Europe followed suit. On 5 October the Communist Information Bureau (Cominform) was founded. This was not a revival of the Communist International. The only parties outside the communist bloc to be included were the French and Italian. The British CP got its ‘information’ via France. The CPs took the lead in massive struggles in France and Italy. The Cold War – to be fought out in not-so-cold form in Korea from 1950 to 1953 – had begun.
In the spring of 1948 Sir Stafford Cripps, Chancellor of the Exchequer, told the House of Commons in his budget speech ‘the country cannot now afford any general rise in personal incomes of any sort’. In 1948 wage increases were held to 4 per cent (while the cost of living rose by just under 5 per cent); in 1949 wages rose by 2 per cent, the cost of living by 4 per cent.
Internal and external factors both required a turn to the ‘left’. The Party took it loyally enough, and even showed a touch of sectarian enthusiasm. The essence of the turn was, of course, a change in the line on cooperation in production. J.R. Campbell set out what this involved:
‘The essence of Harry Pollitt’s thesis on production is that we cannot obtain sufficient production to guarantee national recovery and independence unless there is a complete change in the policy of the Government. “Without a decisive change in Government policy no solution to the crisis is possible, however hard the workers strive. Any tendency to separate the issue of production from the main issue of the change of policy necessary can only result in trailing behind the Government’s reactionary policy”.’ [12]
Such a course naturally meant a rapid loss of the Party’s respectability. There was no real parallel to McCarthyism in Britain, though there were some cases of victimisation – for example Andrew Rothstein was dismissed from the London School of Slavonic Studies, ostensibly for ‘inadequate scholarship’ and Communists were banned from becoming head teachers in Middlesex. But the main attack came in industry.
In November 1948 the TUC General Council issued a document called Defend Democracy in which it urged unions to consider banning Communists from holding union posts and acting as union delegates. The proposal scored a victory in the Transport and General Workers Union, which in 1949 voted to ban Communists from holding office. Nine full-time officials were dismissed, including Bert Papworth, the only Communist on the TUC General Council who lost his seat thereby. Though similar moves in the AEU, CAWU and Civil Service Clerical Association did not establish complete bans on Communist office-holders, strong anti-Communist currents emerged which limited CP’s activity. In 1950 the TUC issued warnings to the London Trades Council, also substantially under Communist influence; and in 1952 it was disaffiliated.
As if all this were not enough, the Cominform, meeting in June 1948 denounced the Yugoslav Communist Party, the only one in Eastern Europe that had come to power by its own struggles rather than with the aid of the Red Army, accusing it, among other things, of ‘breaking with the Marxist theory of classes’. For the first time since the twenties there was an open dispute between major Communist leaders. It was a disconcerting development for British CP members, in many of whose homes portraits of Tito had hung next to those of Stalin.
‘Men make their own history, but ... they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves.’ The British CP had not chosen the circumstances of the period from 1948 on, but it must certainly bear the responsibility for its sectarian response to them. At this time the Party needed above all to regroup its forces and strive for a united front against an attack that was aimed not just at ‘Communists’ but at all industrial militants and at workers’ living standards. Instead it not only found time to publish two books – Derek Kartun’s Tito’s Plot Against Europe and James Klugmann’s From Trotsky to Tito – whose untruthfulness was exceeded only by their irrelevance to the struggle in Britain, but it also broke its links with one of the most strongly pro-Russian Left Labour MPs, Konni Zilliacus. In 1949 Zilliacus was expelled from the Labour Party for his uncompromising opposition to the Attlee leadership. Instead of waging a vigorous campaign against this as being part of the anti-left witch-hunt, Ivor Montague preferred to proclaim: ‘those who thought to keep their shirts clean of “real” communism by holding Tito’s hand as well as that of the world progressive movement ... like Zilliacus, are left frantically treading water in an ocean of lies.’ [13]
Just at a time when new ideas and new analysis was badly needed, the CP’s sectarianism drove it into a ghetto of intellectual sterility. Almost any historical or social problem of real interest was too sensitive to be touched. Instead the Party’s journals carried articles with titles like: T.S. Eliot – An Enemy of the People. [14] Of course the fact that the Party’s Marxism, however bastardised, gave it something to say on every aspect of ideology and culture was one of its strengths. J.B.S. Haldane’s science column was one of the most popular features in the Daily Worker. But the price that the Party was prepared to pay in defence of doctrinal orthodoxy, even in an apparently non-political field, was shown in the ‘Lysenko affair’ of 1948–9. The acceptance of Lysenko’s theories of genetics as official orthodoxy in Russia was loyally followed by the Party’s leading intellectuals – but unfortunately not by the Party’s geneticists. A controversy which engaged wide interest among the membership ended with the resignation of several geneticists and the withdrawal from activity of Haldane, probably the Party’s most distinguished scientist.
The period 1948–53, then marked a ‘left’ turn with strong elements of sectarianism and ultra-leftism. But it was not a repeat of the ‘Third Period’ of 1929–34. Despite the Korean war, the Russian leaders still had a long-term perspective of ‘peaceful coexistence’; the British Party leadership were still concerned with integration into British political life. The clearest evidence of this is the emphasis put on the building of the peace movement throughout this period. The British Cultural Committeee for Peace (later the British Peace Committee) was formed in 1948, and surrounded by a cluster of satellites (Teachers for Peace, Artists for Peace, etc.). The Stockholm Conference of 1950 launched a peace petition which became a focus for activity for the British Party and in particular gave an important field of activity to the non-industrial branches. The claimed total of one and a half million signatures is probably not too much of an exaggeration. Of course, in the frenetic atmosphere of the American cold – and hot – war offensive against the Russian bloc, ‘peace’ was far from being an uncontroversial demand, and the CP were just about the only organisation fighting on this slogan. Nonetheless the strategy for the peace movement was for a broad front on minimum demands, and prefigured the Party’s line on peace later in the decade.
 
Organisation
But it was not only the Party’s political line that developed throughout this period; it was also the nature of the organisation. The influx of members during the war had led to a lower level of active commitment; Peter Kerrigan in 1945 outlined the new attitude to recruitment and membership:
‘Are we in the position to take full advantage of the new atmosphere and greater willingness to listen to our views? We are, if we get rid not only of the sectarianism which still acts as a brake and barrier between ourselves and those we have to win, but also if we adapt our organisation so that it can cater for the thousands upon thousands of new members who will join our Party as our fight for the application of the Crimea decisions succeeds. It is in this light that we are asking the Party to carry into effect the organisational proposals now decided upon by the Party. The proposals have been worked out in great detail, full directives issued as to their application and more material is in preparation. Everything, however, depends on the understanding with which they are operated. The change to a residential basis of Party membership, the new methods of factory organisation, the concepts about responsibilities of members, and the new kind of monthly branch meeting we envisage, all have one principal objective. It is to make entry into the Communist Party easier; to ensure we retain members who join; to organise the activities of our members in the best way where they want to be active as Communists; to make our Branch meetings places where members eagerly attend because of what they gain from such attendance; to educate our members in Marxism and Leninism.’ [15]
Although membership was not in fact growing in this period, members were always conscious of the fact that, by the side of either the Labour Party, or the French and Italian Communist Parties, the British CP was a very small organisation; and the main task facing it was to grow into a mass organisation as rapidly as possible.
Yet for a small party of around 40,000 members in the late forties and early fifties, the Party had a fairly high level of activity. [16] The Daily Worker had a circulation of 100,000 a day in 1945, rising to 118,000 in 1947–8. In 1950 Brian Behan claims 180 Workers per day were sold on the Festival of Britain site. [17] In general the sale of literature reached a high level of intensity, though figures are hard to judge, since morale was such that comrades were accustomed to paying for unsold literature.
There was little real internal life or debate in the Party in this period; what discussions of inner-party democracy there were hinged mainly on formal questions such as the mode of electing the Executive. But the ‘Stalinist’ regime in the Party was in no way comparable to a Stalinist state, nor even to the physically-imposed discipline of, say, the French Communist Party. Some branches, indeed, did have the regular annual institution of a self-criticism session. But the main basis of loyalty and discipline in the Party was the fact that the Party, however small, was part of a world movement that contained mass parties and ‘socialist’ countries; plus the fact that the Party could still plausibly claim a monopoly of ‘Marxism’ in Britain.
The Cold War atmosphere of the early fifties, intensified by hysterical reaction to the Eastern European purges, did nothing to help the internal life of the Party, as is shown by the following advice from Betty Reid:
‘There is a tendency to believe that vigilance merely means keeping ears and eyes open for disruptive activities, and reporting them to the Party committee. This is one of the serious weaknesses we have to fight. It is the immediate challenge, the fight openly in the basic units of the Party, against statements or conduct we consider harmful, which is the most effective way of dealing with a situation, and not weeks afterwards when the issues have become obscure. Political differences, if they are not challenged and thrashed out, can over a period become so deep that in the end disciplinary action is the only solution.’ [18]
Association with a world movement had other effects on the Party. Embassy visits and trips to ‘socialist countries’ helped to create a situation in which militants, even workers, became increasingly remote from the preoccupations of the day-to-day struggle.
 
The Working Class in the Fifties
The British working class in the early fifties had not suffered a major defeat since 1926. The arms economy was permitting an extended period of full employment, and a degree of relative prosperity for most workers. The Tory slogan ‘you’ve never had it so good’ had a certain plausibility, and the Tories were elected with increasing majorities in 1951, 1955 and 1959, while active membership in the Labour Party and trade unions declined.
But working-class self-confidence was on the increase. There was a rapid growth of shop steward organisation, especially in the engineering industry; the strike level rose from the mid-fifties, and the election of Cousins in place of Deakin at the head of the TGWU was symptomatic of a new mood of militancy.
The consequence was a growing gap between the political and the economic. This was not the Party’s fault, though its definition of ‘polities’ in a narrow electoral sense helped to aggravate the situation. Communists continued to be elected, both as union officials and as shop stewards. But Gramsci’s statement that ‘if the trade unions have spontaneously chosen a member of the party as their leader, it means that the trade unions freely accept the directives of the party’ was decreasingly true, on either the national or the local level. It followed that the contesting of union elections became less and less what Lenin had defined it as in Left-Wing Communism, one means to the development of political consciousness, and more and more an end in itself.
Despite the witch-hunt of the late forties the CP maintained its industrial base during the early fifties. In some unions, notably the ETU, it had had a controlling influence since the end of the war, and a number of Communists won leading positions in the NUM, FBU etc.
But more important than particular areas of influence is the fact that, until 196, the whole orientation of the Party was to the point of production. Industrial comrades were discouraged from becoming involved in local activities at the expense of factory and union work, and the factory branch was still a major unit of organisation. As Pollitt told an Extended Executive Committee in February 1949:
‘There can be no substitute for factory organisation. To underestimate the key role of the factory branch is a Social-Democratic attitude.’
The depth of the Party’s penetration in the class (and its misuse of it) can be judged from a feature which used to appear regularly in the Party journal World News, entitled Around the Districts. The following extract from the column that appeared on 12 May 1956, even allowing for exaggeration, gives an impressive picture. Nothing comparable is to be found in the Party press after 1956:
‘In Yorkshire David Brown’s shop stewards, Huddersfield, have met their MPs and have called for the lifting of restrictions on trade (i.e. East-West trade – IHB). Holmes Mill have put forward a resolution for the Sheffield District Conference of BISAKTA on the same question.
‘David Brown’s shop stewards in Leeds have received a reply to their letter to the Chinese Embassy, in which the Embassy expresses its eagerness for trade. The letter has been displayed, with permission, on the firm’s notice-board, and has created considerable discussion.
‘In Lanarkshire, over 100 delegates have already been elected to a jobs conference, coming from wide sections of the Labour movement, including Labour Parties. North Lanarkshire Labour Party has admitted a resolution on East-West trade and also called for a forty-hour week. A trade union deputation has visited MPs and the Lanarkshire County Council on the question of jobs for Lanarkshire.
‘In Wales, the Forest of Dean Trades Council has demanded trade with China. A packed meeting of 500 engineers, in the Rhondda, held to discuss redundancy, passed a strong resolution on East-West trade. Aberdare Branch of the Communist Party has issued an excellent local leaflet against the transfer of Hirwaun factory to England. Strong pressure, including strike action, at Dialoys foundry, in Cardiff, reduced the number of sackings and forced an agreement on re-engagement procedure.’
 
The British Road to Socialism
The British Road to Socialism – issued by the Executive Committee of the CP in February 1951, and revised and adopted by the 22nd Congress in April 1952 – provides the best summary of the Party’s post-war strategy, but it does not in itself mark a turning-point in the Party’s development. As John Gollan pointed out, not only was it published in Stalin’s lifetime, but it was printed in full in Pravda with Stalin’s approval. [19] The basically nationalist and reformist framework which it made explicit had been implicit in the Party’s politics in the Popular Front, and even more so during the latter part of the Second World War (when World News and Views had carried a regular forum on Our National Traditions, in which readers had complained at the use of ‘foreign’ words like comrade, and claimed the CP as a successor of ‘Queen Elizabeth and her pirates’.)
The nationalistic strain was given full play in the British Road. Demands – such as withdrawal from NATO – which were in themselves unexceptionable, were phrased in terms apparently designed to appeal to patriotic elements and to mark an open break with the traditions of Communist internationalism. Thus ‘The Communist Party would ... restore the command of the British Armed Forces to British commanders.’ Or again ‘The enemies of Communism declare that the Communist Party, by underhand subversive means, is aiming at the destruction of Britain and the British Empire. This is a lie.’ [20]
Similar denunciation faced those who suggested the CP might still be a revolutionary party accepting the Leninist theory of the state.
‘The enemies of Communism accuse the Communist Party of aiming to introduce Soviet power in Britain and abolish Parliament. This is a slanderous misrepresentation of our policy ... British Communists declare that the people of Britain can transform capitalist democracy into a real People’s Democracy, transforming Parliament, the product of Britain’s historic struggle for democracy, into the democratic instrument of the will of the vast majority of her people.’ [21]
 
After Stalin
In March 1953 J.V. Stalin departed this life; in August of the same year Russia exploded its first H-Bomb. The two events between them were to have enormous repercussions for the world Communist movement. Stalin’s passing was of course greeted with sickening effusions on all sides [22], but the disappearance of the one man whose prestige in the movement had been unquestioned for two and a half decades struck at the very heart of the Stalinist monolith.
For Khrushchev, who eventually emerged from the power struggle, the possession of nuclear parity with the West meant that the world communist movement was of decreasing relevance to him. Slowly, by fits and starts, a new pattern of international relations emerged – in 1953 peace in Korea, 1954 peace in Vietnam, 1955 reconciliation between Russia and Yugoslavia, 1956 dissolution of the Cominform.
But Stalin’s heirs had to move cautiously. Within three months of Stalin’s death revolts broke out in Eastern Europe, first in Czechoslovakia and then, on a wider scale, in East Germany. The notion of ‘separate national roads to socialism’ obviously had dangerous implications if taken up in the wrong quarters. Only in 1956 did Khrushchev feel sufficient confidence to start making a break with the past. At the Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in February 1956, Khrushchev made two speeches; in the first, public speech, without naming Stalin, he denounced the ‘cult of the personality’; in the second, ‘secret speech’ he gave a detailed account of Stalin’s crimes. This provoked the beginning of a differentiation between the Communist Parties of the world. The French and the Chinese were the most anxious to defend Stalin’s reputation; the Poles and the Italians were keenest to follow through the logic of ‘destalinisation’. The Italians in particular began to develop the idea of ‘polycentrism’ – the view that world communism should not have one centre, but that the various national parties should enjoy greater autonomy. The problem was obvious. National leaders who had identified their own small-scale personality cults with Stalin were anxious to jump when Russia jumped, yet were aware of the logic of liberalisation -as Sartre put it – ‘Destalinisation will end up by destalinising the destalinisers’. Moreover, it was clear that, in Western Europe at least, the CPs would be able to integrate themselves into national political life, and even make electoral agreements with other parties, only to the extent that they could show themselves to be independent of Moscow.
The choice that confronted the CPs throughout the period -Stalinism or Social Democracy – was now posed in a particularly acute form. In France and Italy the perspective was electoral alliances with the socialist parties; in Britain the whole question of the Party’s relation to the Labour Party aroused considerable discussion, with many members urging renewal of the campaign for affiliation to the Labour Party or even liquidation into the Labour Party.
The CP destalinised itself-slowly, and without enthusiasm. Pollitt, who had attended the 20th Congress of the CPSU, though apparently not Khrushchev’s “secret speech’, told the CP Congress in April 1956 that the Party leadership had been ‘misled’ over Yugoslavia, and recounted some criticisms of Stalin. [23] Dutt, on the other hand, wrote shortly afterwards that Stalin’s errors were mere ‘spots on the sun’. [24] Disquiet in the Party had not yet crystallised, but some changes were clearly called for. Pollitt was replaced as secretary by John Gollan and took the higher but less central position of chairman, and a ‘Commission on Inner Party Democracy’ was set up.
Hitherto opposition within the Party had been minimal. There was of course no right of faction. But in July two Yorkshire intellectuals, E.P. Thompson and John Saville, launched an opposition journal, the Reasoner, in cyclo-styled form. Despite the intervention of the Yorkshire District Committee, then the Political Committee, they refused to close down.
Even if events had been left to run their own course the Party was clearly in for the biggest internal crisis since the twenties. But the initiative now passed to the Hungarian working class.
 
Hungary
On 23 October a demonstration of workers and students in Budapest assumed insurrectionary proportions. Workers’ councils began to be set up throughout Hungary. Russian troops intervened almost immediately to ‘restore order’, but on 29 October, it was announced they would withdraw. On 30 October, Nagy, the Hungarian Premier, formed a National Government, and withdrew Hungary from the Warsaw Pact. On 4 November, Russian troops intervened again, in much more brutal form, and in the ensuing fighting some 30,000 Hungarians were killed before the rising was finally crushed. The British CP leadership were able to appreciate the full implications of the Hungarian events, for the Daily Worker Budapest correspondent was a man of integrity and considerable journalistic ability, Peter Fryer. Such were his reports that the Worker first mutilated them, then suppressed them altogether. Dutt’s comments in the Worker of 10 November, stressed the fact that ‘the Soviet armed forces were legally in Hungary by agreement under the Warsaw Pact’.
The simmering opposition in the Party now had a focus. Some opponents of the Party leadership resigned immediately – John Horner, secretary of the Fire Brigades Union, Alex Moffat, of the Scottish Miners, and, after writing to Gollan urging the dissolution of the Party, Les Cannon followed. Other more determined elements tried to fight in the Party. Saville and Thompson issued a further number of the Reasoner denouncing the repression in Hungary, and were suspended, whereupon they resigned. Peter Fryer published his book Hungarian Tragedy and addressed public meetings; for this he was expelled. The Daily Worker refused to publish a letter received on 20 November criticising its line on Hungary on the grounds that this, contrary to normal practice, was ‘signed by a whole number of comrades living in different parts of the country.’ [25]
The leadership was forced to hold a special Congress at Easter 1957, and here, though the membership was disintegrating between its hands, it maintained the apparatus intact. The official line was supported by a considerable majority, and the only oppositionist on the Executive, Brian Behan, was removed.
The debate leading up to this Congress was not only about the events in Hungary. It was also about democracy in the Party itself. The Commission on Inner Party Democracy, set up the previous summer, reported in December 1956. It consisted of 10 Party full-timers and five rank-and-file members. Three of the five rank-and-filers – Christopher Hill, Malcolm McEwen and Peter Cadogan, all subsequently to leave the Party – issued a Minority Report, in which they called into question ‘democratic centralism’ as practised by the British Party.
The debate on democratic centralism was in general turgid and confused. Such had been the theoretical sterility of the Party that it was necessary to start almost from scratch in rediscovering the Leninist traditions. For the most part the debate hinged around rather crude antitheses. The Majority Report stressed the need for monolithic solidity in the organisation: ‘The common interest demands that fractional groupings be not permitted, that they should be one, not two or many, centres of leadership.’ The opposition, however, tended to draw on liberalism rather than Leninism – in his first polemic E.P. Thompson quoted Milton and invoked the British democratic tradition. And the Minority Report rejected the obligation to accept majority decisions in public. ‘How can it be suggested that Party members, who have publicly expressed their disagreement with the Party policy on Hungary, have a duty to support that policy in their trade union branch? How can they do so without exposing themselves as hypocrites?’ [26] Only a very few individuals – Cliff Slaughter, E.J. Hobsbawm – attempted to defend democratic centralism while breaking with the Stalinist model.
Destalinisation and the Hungarian revolution led to a sharp setback for the Party’s membership, which slumped as follows:



March 1955


   


32,681




February 1956


33,095




February 1957


26,742




February 1958


24,670



Of course not all who left were revolutionaries whose faith in workers’ councils had been fired by Hungary. Many were people for whom CP membership had long been an embarrassment in their academic or trade union careers. Such elements moved rapidly to the right; an obvious example is Les Cannon of the ETU.
But other elements moved to the left and provided the basis for a regeneration of socialist thought and activity in Britain. The main groupings were some two hundred ex CPers – half of them workers – who joined the small Trotskyist group around G. Healy, leading to the launching of the Newsletter (edited for a time by Peter Fryer) in May 1957. The grouping around the Reasoner, mainly academics, founded a printed journal The New Reasoner, which in 1960 merged with the Universities and Left Review to form the New Left Review. [27]
It was the claim of the Party, and often accepted by those with faith in the ‘middle class conscience’, that the great majority of those who left the Party over Hungary were intellectuals, while the industrial membership stayed loyal. Brian Behan (a building worker and the only member of the Executive to leave over Hungary) attacked this notion early in 1957 in a letter to World News: ‘The myth of a rock-like working class and the wobbly intellectuals should be thrown out once and for all. Many industrial comrades are worried about Hungary. Some very good ones have left.’ [28] While it is impossible to give direct statistical evidence, the Credentials Reports for National Congresses support Behan’s view:



Occupation


      


1954


      


1956


      


1957


1959




Engineering


23%


25%


18%


22%




Building


   8%


 10%


   7%


 10%




Teaching


   6%


   7%


  11%


           9% [29]




Trade Union Strategy After Hungary
But Hungary did not just mean a loss in numbers; much more crucially it involved a decline in the Party’s credibility, a loss of self-confidence which made it less and less willing to seek confrontation, more and more entrenched in electoralism. Taken in conjunction with the evolution of the industrial struggle during the fifties, this plunged the Party deeper and deeper into difficulties.
For on the one hand its members had achieved a number of official positions in the unions; on the other hand, the growth of decentralised bargaining and the shop stewards’ movement meant that many Communists were elected as stewards, just because they were the best and most conscious militants. The result was a serious contradiction:
‘But for the industrial militants, perhaps the most important factor of all is the growing division between the rank and file and the full-time officials in the unions. This division has important implications for the Communist Party, which has many union officials within its ranks. For Party members and non-Party lefts alike, the Party has provided a career structure within certain unions, in line with its essentially reformist emphasis on getting “left” candidates into office. Once in office, many of these “left” officials have succumbed to the pressures of their positions and have lost the militancy that gave them their support while they were on the shop floor. A whole series of minor betrayals, failures to give adequate support, ineptitudes, petty bureaucratic attitudes and so forth have tended to embitter many of the Party’s loyal militants. But the Party is committed to its current line on getting “left” officials elected and will defend its officials against criticism from dissatisfied rank-and-file militants’. [30]
Examples could be accumulated. In 1960 Frank Foulkes, CP President of the ETU, denounced the unofficial Power Workers’ Combine, of which the secretary was CPer George Wake. [31] In the Ford strike of 1962, where the Communist Party had a long-standing organisation, the orientation towards reliance on full-time officials led to eventual demoralisation and the halving of Party membership in the factory. As a result, time after time the CP found itself supporting policies that were at best dubious and at worst positively dangerous. The CP-led ETU and individual CPers played an important role in carrying through the Fawley agreements of 1960, which pioneered productivity bargaining in Britain. [32]
The smouldering contradictions in the CP’s industrial strategy exploded in 1961 with the ETU case. CP members had controlled the ETU since the end of the Second World War; however, after Hungary two leading CPers, Les Cannon and Frank Chapple joined the already existing right-wing current in the union. The union had in general had a militant line – in the London bus strike of 1958 the ETU had been the only union to pledge positive assistance in the form of power cuts.
The climate of the early sixties – with a tired Tory Government faced with rising industrial unrest – was ripe for a witchhunt. Unfortunately the CP elements in the union made the attack easier. Not only had they not used their period of control to extend democracy in the union – they never changed the rule which gave the conference power only to make ‘recommendation’ to the Executive Council – but, in face of the disarray of their own ranks, certain CPers indulged in ballot-rigging. In the summer of 1961, the High Court found Foulkes, Haxell and three others guilty of fraudulent conspiracy in respect of the 1959 election for the general secretaryship, and replaced Haxell by Byrne as general secretary. The General Council of the TUC then followed up by demanding that Foulkes submit himself to a ballot. When the demand was refused the TUC expelled the ETU; in the executive elections shortly afterwards a right-wing majority was won. and in 1962 the ETU returned to the TUC. Instead of waging a political fight the CP allowed Haxell – who in the 1959 CP Executive elections had had the top vote (five more than Pollitt himself) – to be made a scapegoat and accepted his resignation.
Of course ballot-rigging was never central to the CP strategy; it was a temporary and foolish lapse, but one that was. symptomatic of an electoral orientation. Slowly but significantly the Party was being weakened in industry.
 
The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament
Having settled accounts with the Hungarian working class, Khrushchev was anxious to achieve better terms with the American rulers. There followed a long and uneven process of scaling down of the Cold War, which reached its high-point with Khrushchev’s amicable visit to the US in the autumn of 1959. The collapse of the 1960 summit conference following the shooting down of an American spy-plane over Russia marked a temporary turn in the opposite direction, though ‘peaceful coexistence’ was still undoubtedly central to Russian policy.
But if Khrushchev and Eisenhower found a balance of nuclear terror, in which each side was ‘defended’ by its capacity to destroyed the other side’s population, a suitable basis for understanding, thousands of people were less happy about the state of affairs. In February 1958 the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament was founded, and at Easter 1958 5,000 marched to Aldermaston. The Campaign’s politics were confused, and its leading sponsors a wierd mishmash of Christians, old-style pacifists, liberal academics and Labour lefts. But it responded to a very deep concern about the possibility of nuclear war. At Easter 1960 and 1961 some 100,000 people inarched in support of CND – many students and middle-class elements, but with a good representation of trade union delegations and ordinary workers. In October 1960 the Labour Party Conference, in defiance of Gaitskell and the Parliamentary leadership, voted for a policy of unilateral disarmament. This was the biggest mass movement Britain had seen since the thirties, and it arose outside the framework of traditional organisations.
The job of Marxists was clear; to help build the campaign, to clarify politically the questions of NATO and the relation of arms production to the capitalist economy, and to channel the newly radicalised youth towards the Labour movement. The CP saw things differently. Just after the founding of the Campaign, World News commented:
‘Whatever one’s views about the manufacture of the Bomb by Britain, there can be no substitute for pressure on the Government to change its attitude on international agreement ... The most disastrous aspect of the present situation is not that there is no campaign by Labour for unilateral renunciation of the Bomb but that there is no campaign for Summit talks’. [33]
The 26th Congress in 1959 took a similar position. Marxism Today reported: [34]
‘Congress cleared up some mistaken ideas about our attitude to the demand for the unilateral banning of the H-Bomb. John Gollan pointed out that the Communist Party had always been against the bomb ... Experience has shown that unilateralism only divides the movement, and diverts attention from the real issue, namely, international agreement to ban nuclear weapons. This is the only way to banish the menace of nuclear war and also the issue on which the greatest number of people agree’.
In 1960 the CP changed its line. It participated in the 1960 Easter March and in May 1960 formally urged all its members to join CND. The main cause for the shift was undoubtedly the fear that otherwise its members would participate without Party blessing and that the Party’s influence would be thereby weakened. The changing international climate with the collapse of the Summit Conference also made it even harder to rely on a consensus support for ‘peace’.
Contact with a living movement did the Party some good. From 1961 on its membership began to creep upwards again, though CND was more likely to increase the proportion of middle-class members. But the CP was not able to halt the decline in CND which was accompanied by a growing reformism in its political perspective. On the contrary, the CPs concern for ‘broad unity’ survived, and it supported most tendencies to water down CND’s programme. Moreover, the CP’s preference for opportunistic slogans, plus the current of nationalism that had long been present in its propaganda, led it to encourage support for slogans and campaigns which suggested that the participation of West Germany in nuclear alliances was inherently more pernicious than that of other countries.
 
The Sino-Soviet Split
In the autumn of 1962 a crisis over Russian missiles in Cuba led to a full-scale confrontation; for a week nuclear war seemed imminent. It was the gravest of a series of such crises over the preceding decade, but it was the last. ‘Peaceful coexistence’ had no come out on top and was to survive even the American slaughter in Vietnam. At roughly the same time fighting broke out between India and China. Russia declined to give any support to China, and the British CP called for ‘friendly negotiations without prior conditions from either side’. [35]
These events led to the dispute between Russia and China, which had been developing in secret since at least 1958, breaking into the open. The world communist movement now contained a spectrum of views; on the one hand the Italian Party was making more extensive concessions to liberalism than the official Moscow line recommended, while on the other the Chinese Party was denouncing Moscow’s revisionism. The central feature of Maoism was its voluntarism, the fact that it stood for a break with the cautious ‘realism’ and adaptation to existing institutions that had dominated orthodox communism since the early fifties.
The British leadership sprang to the defence of the Russian line. This was more in order to justify their own practice than because they were seriously threatened by Maoist elements in their own ranks. In 1963 a group of Party members split to form the ‘Committee to Defeat Revisionism for Communist Unity’, under the leadership of Michael McCreery. Maoism held an appeal both to industrial militants who looked back to the greater activism of the early fifties, and to those who felt the CP did not give adequate support to the colonial revolution – in short to those who rejected the social-democratic path being followed by the Party leadership. But the only epitaph on Maoism as an attempt to relive the experience of classical Stalinism is Marx’s phrase: ‘the first time as tragedy, the second as farce’.
 
Results and Prospects
Membership in 1964 was 34,281, well up on the post-Hungary 26,742, but still well behind the 1945 figure of 45,435. But the level of commitment required of members had fallen, and th; activity was in no way comparable to that of the pre-Hungary period. The Political Resolution for the 26th Congress in 1959 stated:
‘Our main weaknesses were an inadequate public fight for the Party’s policy and completely insufficient efforts to develop united action in spite of all the obstacles; little or no recruitment to offset losses; failure to significantly develop our Branches as political campaigning bodies and as a result not bringing enough of the members into the work; and, despite big efforts, failure to stop the decline in Daily Worker circulations’.
Despite efforts the overall picture remained similar. The 28th Congress in 1963 was told that Daily Worker sales in Britain had fallen to such an extent that many Party members were not even readers, let alone sellers. One left-wing critic of the Party claimed that by 1963 the Party had only 15 per cent of its members in factory branches. [36]
The only answer that the leadership could offer .without calling the whole history and politics of the Party into question was to intensify the Party’s electoral activity. The Draft Resolution on Electoral Work for the 27th National Congress in 1961 stated:
‘It is absolutely essential to bring about a fundamental change hi our electoral position; in order to do so we must make more strenuous efforts to overcome the serious under-estimation of the importance of electoral work throughout the Party, the succumbing to the difficulties created by the electoral system, insufficient all-round mass local leadership and our inconsistent electoral record, to which the Electoral Commission drew attention in 1953. While there has been an improvement in our work since then, these weaknesses remain and we will not make a basic change in our position until they are overcome’.
Symptomatic was the decision in 1964 that the National Congresses of the Party, which since the early fifties had been held at Easter, should henceforth be held in the autumn so as not to interfere with work in the municipal elections.
More and more the Party covered up for its own impotence by charting strategies of alliance with other bodies, not in the traditional line of the united front, but around a vague notion of unity, which if anything went even further than the classic line of the Popular Front. This was spelt out in the 1958 edition of the British Road:
‘A united labour movement ... would win the support of men and women and young people who are at present not associated with Labour but who are striving for progressive social aims and a better life through tenants’ and residents’ associations, youth organisations, women’s institutes, British legion sections, church organisations and many other national and local bodies of this kind. It would win the support of many professional workers, small farmers and business people who now support the Tories’.
The 25th Congress in 1957 elaborated a strategy towards the Labour Party which implies that all the weaknesses of that organisation can be ascribed to its right-wing leadership:
‘We fight for an organised association with the Labour Party ... The stage of closer political unity possible, for example, in affiliation means that the Marxist view would still be in a minority in the movement. The eventual winning of the majority in the movement for that view will then open up the possibility of a single working-class party based on Marxism’.
The 27th Congress (1961) offered an even more naive perspective:
‘Today it is becoming increasingly clear that the struggle opened up by Scarborough must be carried forward to the final elimination of right-wing capitalist influence and leadership in the Labour Party’.
In October 1964 a Labour Government was returned to power. It proceeded to freeze wages and attempt to legislate against trade unions, to make immigration control more stringent and to acquiesce cringingly in the US massacre in Vietnam. Social Democracy had demonstrated that it could no longer deliver even minimal reforms, and the need for a revolutionary Marxist party, firmly committed to the defence of working class interests, became clear. The British Communist Party, which had irrevocably opted for the vain attempt to become an alternative social democratic party, had disqualified itself for the task.
 



PETE Glatter, who died in March 2008, was a revolutionary activist and writer for some 40 years. Pete was the child of Jewish refugees from Vienna. According to a story he liked to tell, his first act of rebellion came at the time of his Bar Mitzvah. Pete was preparing enthusiastically, and learning a Hebrew song. Then one day he was visiting the rabbi, and the latter asked him to remind his father to send the money. Pete was so shocked that payment was involved that he refused to proceed with the Bar Mitzvah.
Over the next few years, he broke sharply with his childhood religion and, even more importantly, with Zionism. But he retained an implacable hatred of all forms of racism.
In 1968, he joined the International Socialists (IS: forerunner of the Socialist Workers Party). He was somewhat hesitant, and another comrade filled in the membership form on his behalf. It was nonetheless a decision that was to shape his remaining 40 years. As an activist in Kingston he helped to recruit Harry Wicks to IS.
Pete had become a student and was involved in the struggles of the time. At an occupation at Kingston Polytechnic, students were presented with the choice of a motion to occupy, and one emanating from Jack Straw (then president of NUS) proposing that they should write to their MPs. With the tactical common sense he was often to show later, Pete urged them to vote for both resolutions.
Pete was critical of the IS student strategy, believing that we should concentrate on students in the newly-created Polytechnics and in FE colleges, who suffered from the worst conditions. His first article in International Socialism (no. 47, 1971), Second Class Students, dealt with this question. Beyond the tactical question, he was undoubtedly right when he wrote of the continuing drive to ‘subordinate directly more and more of the student’s life to purely capitalist ends’.
The early 1970s were the time of the biggest wave of working-class militancy in Britain since 1926, the years of the Saltley picket and the Pentonville Five. Pete abandoned his studies to put himself at the heart of the struggle, and for many years worked as a London busman.
He enthusiastically supported the 1972 miners’ strike, but remained totally irreverent towards the bureaucracy of the labour movement. During the strike he and another young worker, Vic Richards, wrote a letter to Socialist Worker that said: ‘Miners should use the coming lobby of parliament to make the left MPs fight. Stand your MP on the line in front of a scab lorry — and see what happens.’
The IS perspective at this time was the building of rank-and-file groups, and Pete was involved in the formation of a London bus workers’ bulletin called The Platform. According to figures from the IS print-shop, three issues were produced in 1973, with a print order of 3,000, of which 50 per cent were paid for. In the industrial report to the 1974 IS conference, the section on the bus industry — undoubtedly written with Pete’s involvement — realistically pointed to the difficulties of building a bus workers’ fraction with a range of different employers and the problem of getting workers together at the same time since they were always ‘on the road’. Nonetheless, the hope was for ‘the building of a national busmen’s organisation which is large enough to have influence in every region’.
But as well as his activities as a trade unionist and an IS member, Pete found time for historical work. His first major article was about the 1930s: London Busmen: Rise and Fall of a Rank & File Movement (International Socialism, no. 74, 1975). He had dug out original documents, including copies of the rank-and-file paper The Busman’s Punch, but also brought to the study his own experience of involvement in a similar project. He showed the strengths and weaknesses of the Communist Party, told the story of the Coronation Strike in 1937 and recalled a bus workers’ song to the tune of Clementine that asked: ‘What’s the use of having a pension / Unless you are still alive?’
In March 1974, Pete was one of over 500 delegates to the National Rank and File Conference. He spoke, calling for more specific organisation around rank-and-file papers rather than a general newsletter for the movement.
Pete was a talented linguist and also involved himself in IS’s international work. In July 1975, I travelled (as interpreter) with Pete, another bus worker called Les Kay and a young civil servant to Brussels to meet a group of rank-and-file bus workers there. In those hopeful days the possibility of an international rank-and-file movement seemed to be something we could aspire to.
Pete and Les shared the driving and there was much criticism of each other’s road skills. But they also regaled us with stories of their confrontations with management and with union bureaucrats. In fact this was just after Denis Healy had introduced wage controls which would mark a sharp turn in the pattern of class struggle, but these young workers were still full of the self-confidence bred of the preceding years of militancy. That sense of working-class strength would stay with Pete for the rest of his life.
When we re-entered Britain, we were held up while customs officials spent an inordinate amount of time dealing with the vehicle in front, occupied by a black family. Pete and his mates jumped out of the car and accused the customs men of racism.
Later that summer Pete was in Portugal at the high point of the revolution. He also took a close interest in Italy, and especially in Avanguardia Operaia, with whom IS had close links at the time. He recognised the value of AO’s work in building CUBs (Unitary Base Committees — autonomous rank-and-file committees), but was critical of the political weaknesses that would lead to its decline after 1976.
For most of the 1970s, he worked as a bus driver, then became an ambulance driver. With the advent of Thatcher and the downturn in industrial struggle, the rank-and-file groups came to an end. But Pete remained committed to revolutionary politics and to building the SWP, believing it would have a vital role when a new wave of struggle arose. He said to me quite recently that he had never been disappointed in the SWP because he had never expected more than what it gave him. What it had given him was a rigorous but flexible Marxist view of the world and a permanent commitment to activism.
Pete had a naturally friendly and generous personality. But he also believed in honesty and plain-speaking. I recall in the 1980s speaking at a meeting of Brixton SWP, where Pete was a leading member. Smugly, I felt I had spoken rather well, but at the end Pete took me on one side and said ‘That was good — but not good enough!’, and proceeded to tell me what I had failed to do.
In the 1980s Pete opted for an academic career. He took a first-class degree in Russian and became a research student at the University of Wolverhampton. Through this he became both a close friend and an intellectual collaborator with Mike Haynes.
Unfortunately, Pete did not manage to get a permanent academic job. Doubtless his intransigent Marxism and his deviation from orthodoxy did not help his career prospects. He worked at both the British Library and Amnesty International.
He was now writing more extensively, both for the SWP press and for academic journals. There is an excellent account of his work in Mike Haynes’ article on Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pete_Glatter), and an archive of his writings at http://www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/glatter/. Pete had always been particularly enthusiastic about the 1905 revolution, and had considered writing a book for the centenary. When that fell through, he was very pleased to be put in touch with Revolutionary History, and he agreed to edit a special issue devoted to 1905 (Volume 9, no 1, 2005). Here he translated a substantial amount of material previously unknown in English and enriched our understanding of these crucial events. He attended the Revolutionary History editorial board regularly, and was pleased to make new friends and to work with a group of people from varying political standpoints but united in their concern with the history of the socialist movement. He was particularly pleased at working with Brian Pearce, who he felt had given him a ‘master class’ in translation skills.
Pete published several articles on 1905, dealing with various aspects — the impact of the Russian-Japanese war, the role of women workers, etc. But his central concern was a theme that fascinated him and which he wished to pursue further, what he called ‘change through struggle’ (the subtitle of the Revolutionary History volume), the way in which working people set out to change the world and transformed themselves in the process.
Although now in his late fifties, Pete seemed to be at the height of his powers, and his intellectual curiosity was undimmed. It seemed reasonable to think his best work was still ahead of him. For the last 14 years of his life, his close friendship with the Chilean Monica Riveros became an intellectual partnership that was crucial to his development of new ideas.
His studies of Russia led him to new fields of enquiry, for example the criticism of ‘élite theory’. During the Historical Materialism conference in late 2006, he was very active in making contacts with visitors from Russia and with scholars of Russia from the USA. He was also making plans with Neil Faulkner to respond to right-wing revisionist accounts of the First World War and the Russian Revolution with ‘a grand narrative account of the global crisis of 1914–1921’.
He took a keen interest in my biography of Tony Cliff (Cliff had been an important influence on him). When I became demoralised at my lack of progress, he was very encouraging, and for a time it was agreed he would phone me once a month to check that I was up to schedule and not slacking.
Recently he had had health problems, but his friends were shocked to learn that he was suffering from a rare form of sporadic CJD which affects about one person in 20 million. I spoke to him on the phone late in 2007 when he was already in hospital, and he was anxious for news of the SWP. But the illness produced massive loss of memory. When I visited him a few weeks before his death, he thought I had been sent from Cottons Gardens (the IS headquarters in the early 1970s). By now he was living in a world of his own fantasies. But when I mentioned the names Lenin and Cliff there was a strong reaction — his revolutionary commitment was clearly at the very core of his being.
His funeral at Golders Green Crematorium was attended by close to a hundred friends and comrades who had shared his life and struggles and various times. One of the most moving moments was the reading of a poem by his daughter Nadine. As often happens, parent-child relations had not run smooth. But her account of the ups and downs was marked by a combination of warmth and honesty which showed just how much she had inherited from her father.
As we celebrate the fortieth anniversary of 1968, it is fashionable for supercilious media commentators to disparage the events of that year. If any investigative reporter had ventured out of the closed, self-congratulatory circle in which so many journalists dwell in order to attend Pete’s funeral, they could have met literally dozens of Pete’s friends who, in their varying commitments and activities, have, like Pete, stayed true to what they learned in that year of workers’ power.
 



Jan Willem Stutje
Ernest Mandel: A Rebel’s Dream Deferred
Verso, 2007, £19.99
Ernest Mandel was a tireless socialist activist over five decades. He wrote prolifically on economics, history and contemporary politics, and was an impressive lecturer and debater in several languages. He was one of the most influential figures on the revolutionary left in the second half of the 20th century, and certainly deserves an intelligent biography. Stutje has done him justice with this account, which is both readable and scholarly, based on over 40 interviews with those who knew Mandel and on the 20 metres of Mandel archives stored in Amsterdam. (There are a few slips, such as the bizarre claim that British publisher Victor Gollancz was in Buchenwald.)
So Stutje’s account can be recommended, both to those who remember Mandel and to those who do not. Stutje achieves a good balance between the personal, the political and the intellectual. The story of Mandel’s love life – two marriages and an unrequited youthful passion – is sometimes touching but not sensational. The revelation that he might have lived ten years longer but for overeating and indulgence in diet pills is a warning to us all.
However, the dour readers of International Socialism will doubtless be mainly interested in Mandel’s political evolution. The most inspiring part of the story is the opening section devoted to Mandel in the Second World War. Though only 16 at the outbreak of war, he was involved in the Trotskyist movement from the outset (his father was a Trotskyist activist). The essence of the Trotskyist position was to reject the nationalism which contaminated all other sections of the left, and to insist that German soldiers were “workers in uniform”, to be approached on a class basis.
Mandel worked closely with Abram Leon, author of The Jewish Question, and with Paul Widelin, who produced the journal Arbeiter und Soldat (Worker and Soldier), distributed to occupying German troops in France. Mandel was the only one of the three to survive the war. He was himself involved in producing a pamphlet in German, which told soldiers: “You are being sacrificed as cannon fodder while your masters negotiate to save their possessions.” He also showed great personal courage, escaping from a German work camp by climbing over the fence during the few moments when the electricity was switched off. This section confirms the view that the Second World War was the golden age of the Fourth International, when its militants combined heroic actions with theoretical clarity.
Internationalism was always central to Mandel’s politics. Not only was he, in Isaac Deutscher’s phrase, a “non-Jewish Jew”, he was also a “non-Belgian Belgian” – born in Germany with a Polish father, he obtained Belgian citizenship only in 1956. He was a Fleming in a country where most militant workers were French speaking Walloons. He also – unlike the “Western Marxists” beloved of Perry Anderson – believed passionately in the unity of theory and practice, and he knew well that such unity could only be achieved through organisation. This explains his lifelong commitment to the Fourth International. And that is where the problems start.
Stutje writes from a stance of “critical admiration” for Mandel. His account is far from hagiography, and provides the information needed for a serious assessment of Mandel’s politics. This needs to be done in a measured fashion. In the 1960s and 1970s Mandel inspired a generation of activists in several countries, and was undoubtedly an asset to the socialist cause, whatever tactical differences we might have had with him. And since none of us have made the revolution, there can be no question of counterposing Mandel’s “errors” to the allegedly “correct” line followed by someone else. Nonetheless Stutje’s account suggests certain reservations from which there may be lessons to be learned.
The first paradox that strikes a reader is that while Mandel was totally committed to Marxism, a theory of working class self-emancipation, there is relatively little in the narrative about actual workers. There are “workers’ states” and “workers’ parties” aplenty, but few actual workers in mines, factories or offices. Certainly Mandel enthused about the great explosions of mass working class struggle in the Belgian General Strike of 1960–1, France 1968 and Portugal 1974–5 – he participated in all of them. But his orientation was generally towards radicalised youth, especially students.
As he said in Paris on 9 May 1968, “When this universal struggle succeeds in enlisting the adult workers, then we can remake today’s vanguard into a powerful revolutionary party that can take its place at the forefront of the masses.” The implication was clear: students today, workers tomorrow.
In 1956 Mandel took the initiative in launching the weekly paper La Gauche (Left), which represented the broad left within the Belgian Socialist Party – though Stutje records that during the 1960–1 General Strike it had “no decisive influence”. But even here we hear far more about Mandel’s relations with senior party figures and trade union leaders such as André Renard than about building in the working class rank and file of the party.
Likewise Mandel maintained close links with a number of the most important left intellectuals of his day – Ernst Bloch, Roman Rosdolsky, Lucien Goldmann, and among the younger generation Perry Anderson, Tariq Ali, Robin Blackburn, Rudi Dutschke, Michael Löwy, and Daniel Bensaïd. These are figures of some importance, and it is certainly to be hoped that parts of his voluminous correspondence with such people will eventually be published. But there is no indication of any similar contacts with worker militants.
After the Cuban Revolution, Mandel believed that its “revolutionary leaders have unconsciously resorted to Trotskyism”. So in 1964 he was pleased to be invited to visit Cuba, where he stayed for seven weeks and had a long discussion with Che Guevara. In the economic debates then taking place between Che’s friends and the more Stalinist elements, Mandel advocated “a management by the workers at the workplace, subject to strict discipline on the part of a central authority that is directly chosen by workers’ councils”. There is something decidedly odd about this. Historically workers’ councils have been the product of working class struggle, not of the decrees of governments, however left their rhetoric. Mandel’s enthusiasm for the Cuban Revolution seems to have led him into advocacy of socialism from above.
Mandel’s whole life was bound up with the tangled history of the Fourth International. The many polemics and interminable splits may seem marginal to serious politics. Yet often the issues raised were of great importance. As Stutje notes briefly, in 1947 Mandel first came into conflict with Tony Cliff. Mandel was arguing that amid capitalist decadence an economic revival was impossible; Cliff argued the contrary. Of course neither man had as yet the remotest idea of how long the post-war boom was to last, but Cliff certainly seems to have had a superior ability to look the facts in the face.
Mandel was initially resistant to the idea that the Russian satellite states in Eastern Europe had become workers’ states themselves despite the absence of working class self-activity and independent revolutionary parties. Only in 1951 did he finally give way on this question, probably more out of concern to hold the Fourth International together than from any conviction that the basic principles had changed. But it was a slippery slope.
In the early 1950s Michel Pablo argued that since world war was impending there was no time to build revolutionary parties and that the Trotskyists should therefore “enter” the mass Communist parties to intervene in a new situation in which the class struggle would acquire the form of a conflict between blocs of states. Mandel clearly had serious reservations about this but apparently told a comrade he would “rather serve unity than get his own way”. The fact that the leaders of the opposing camp contained at least one unprincipled thug (Gerry Healy) was doubtless a factor in the argument.
In the early 1970s some of the Latin American sections, backed by the more Guevarist elements in Europe, launched a strategy of guerrilla warfare, which led to defeat and the death of numerous militants. Mandel seems to have had reservations about this disastrous course, but not to have fought for his position so as not to fall out with the pro-guerrilla comrades, especially in France.
The upsurge in struggle that began in 1968 gave the Fourth International a new lease of life. On Stutje’s figures, which seem plausible, the International had about 10,000 members by the early 1980s, the bulk of them in France, Spain, Mexico and the US. Mandel now devoted his attention to building an international leadership team. (Britain was represented by John Ross who was later to enthuse about the contribution of hedge funds to London’s economy.) A Paris office was opened with some 20 full timers. Wasn’t this somewhat top-heavy – an attempt to build the International from the summit downwards rather than by the patient construction of local sections with real roots in the class?
For Mandel it meant that he was required to pronounce on the situation in countries around the world, often on the basis of secondhand information. I recall a meeting in 1986 where I ventured to criticise the Fourth International position on the Labour Party. Mandel howled at me scornfully that the Labour Party had ten million members. (Neil Kinnock would have been delighted at the news.)
By the early 1980s it was clear to many that the upturn in struggle begun in 1968 had come to an end. But Mandel refused to face the facts, insisting that the movement was still going forward. As Tariq Ali puts it in his foreword, Mandel’s motto was “Optimism of the will, optimism of the intellect”. The result could only be serious tensions within the International. Here it seems fair to contrast Mandel with Cliff, who, in 1979, argued that the Socialist Workers Party (SWP) must face up to a period of “downturn”. Certainly the SWP suffered losses but Cliff was far more successful than Mandel in holding his organisation together.
Mandel rightly identified Trotskyism as embodying the healthy essence of Marxism and of Leninism. But this led to the attitude that anything that called itself “Trotskyist” deserved to be taken seriously. One of the saddest episodes in this story occurred in 1994 when Mandel, old and in declining health, took part, against the advice of his own comrades, in a public debate in New York with the Spartacist League, a bunch of buffoonish provocateurs. Would he have debated with Screaming Lord Sutch if he had called himself a Trotskyist?
Yet perhaps all this is too harsh. Since 1945 it has been a hard task to keep the flame of revolutionary socialism alight in a world system that has become progressively more rotten, corrupt, violent and self-destructive. Mandel was one of those who tried to do so, and he deserves to be remembered.





Stalin
Alex de Jonge
Collins £17.50/Fontana £5.95



The rose bud opens
Bluebells all around
The iris too awakens
Flowers wave in the wind



I HAVE always distrusted people who like flowers, and when I discovered the above poem by J.V. Stalin my suspicions were confirmed. (Doubtless many comrades will be interested to learn that Beria, Stalin’s murderous henchman, was a vegetarian.) If it’s anecdotes you want, de Jonge has got plenty.
After Lenin’s death Stalin realised that he had to establish himself as a theoretician, so he hired a philosopher to give him regular tutorials on Hegel’s Phenomenology of Mind. The tutor was not very successful; as a reward he was shot in 1937.
Stalin was bitterly opposed to mathematical economists (because they disagreed with his plan targets). So hostile was he to mathematics that he banned the production of desk calculators or cash registers and made accountants use the abacus.
During the purges one man was charged first with Trotskyism, then with Tartar nationalism. He was told that the authorities had “sent the file back saying they had exceeded the quota for Trotskyists but were short on nationalists”.
Stories like this are so good it doesn’t really matter if they aren’t true. As they may well not be. For de Jonge is not very scrupulous about his sources. If his bibliography is to be believed he has read a lot of books, but he hasn’t read them very carefully. On two points where I checked his references to Isaac Deutscher, he either failed to understand his source or wilfully distorted it.
But even if only half the material in de Jonge’s 517 page account is true it makes its point. Stalin was a very nasty piece of work and Russia under Stalin was the next best thing to hell on earth.
Buy why do we need a book to tell us that in 1987? Today the overwhelming majority of Communist Party members treat Stalin the way the Queen treats her mentally handicapped relatives – one simply doesn’t refer to them.
Of course the understanding of Stalin is still relevant. But for that we need an analysis, not just a catalogue of crimes. And analysis is something that de Jonge is incapable of giving us.
He simply cannot grasp the ideas and the circumstances that led people to make the 1917 revolution. As a result he cannot understand the Stalinist counter-revolution. He is like someone producing a detailed second-by-second record of the movements of a grave digger – without ever noticing the coffin and the corpse.
To be fair, de Jonge has one interesting insight. In his introduction he compares Stalin’s methods to those of a chief executive in a British corporation who never listened to advice and created fear by random sackings.
But he does not follow this up. For to do so would be to recognise that Stalin was a product of the same system that oppresses us here in the West.
De Jonge’s book is not wholly without interest, but if you want a serious political biography of Stalin that sets the man among the ideas and events of his time, Isaac Deutscher’s Stalin – for all its limitations – is still a hundred times better.
 






Tribune, the paper of the Labour left, this year celebrates its fiftieth anniversary. Fifty years of more or less uninterrupted production is no mean achievement for a paper of the left.
During that time Tribune has been associated with some worthy causes – from anti-Fascism to nuclear disarmament – and it has had some distinguished contributors.
Among Labour politicians it has been closely associated with such noteworthy figures and talented writers as Aneurin Bevan and Michael Foot, and others who began their journalistic careers with Tribune include the cartoonist Cummings and the novelist John Braine. Ian Birchall looks at the paper’s history.



* * *
ON the occasion of Tribune’s tenth birthday in 1947 George Orwell, perhaps the best writer ever to serve on its staff, wrote that Tribune was “the only existing weekly paper that makes a genuine effort to be both progressive and humane – that is, to combine a radical Socialist policy with a respect for freedom of speech and a civilised attitude towards literature and the arts.”
It would be pleasing to be able to make a similar judgement in 1987. Unfortunately the historical record tells a rather different story. It is only by examining Tribune’s failures and defeats that we can learn something of the inadequacies of the Labour left over the last half century.
1936, the year in which Tribune was conceived, was one of deep crisis for the left. Mosley was on the streets at home, while in Spain civil war was raging; a new world war was already looming on the horizon.
At Labour’s Conference in Edinburgh the left, seeking unity against fascism, had called for aid to the Spanish Republic and the right of the Communist Party to affiliate to the Labour Party. But the bureaucrats of the right held the line and these policies were defeated.
In the aftermath a number of Labour politicians – Aneurin Bevan, Stafford Cripps, George Strauss and William Mellor, met to discuss the founding of a new paper. Cripps and Strauss provided £20,000, no mean sum in those days, and on 1 January 1937 the first issue hit the streets. The cover, showing the British working class as a lion being subdued by a fascist, indicated the grim urgency of the period.
The campaign for left unity was central to Tribune from the beginning. But this was couched in a language of class struggle which few of Tribune’s supporters today would dare to use. In the first issue William Mellor wrote:
“The defeat of capitalism depends upon the unity of the working class. If its forces are divided, as in Italy and in Germany, it is defeated in detail. A united working class can take the offensive ... A united working class can go forward to a defined goal.”
The goal of unity in action between workers belonging to the Labour Party, the Communist Party and the ILP was indeed a worthy one. But a real United Front must always combine the broadest possible unity in action with political clarity in analysing the situation and selecting objectives. From the beginning Tribune allowed the need for unity to blur its concern for clarity.
The thirties were a time of high hopes. But they were also a time when the politics of Stalinism led to a squandering of those hopes. The monstrous perversion of justice in the Moscow Trials disgraced the name of socialism; while Communist policies led to the loss of the Popular Front gains in France and the defeat of the Republic in Spain. In the name of “unity” Tribune failed to expose these disastrous policies. The Moscow Trials were passed over in embarrassed silence and even partially justified; Mellor enquired in February 1938:
“Who can believe that the transformation of old Russia into a socialist society could proceed without severity or without error?”
Barbara Castle wrote a series on women in Russia, “where women live with new assurance”, while Trotsky was slandered as “the madman in Moscow”. Certainly contributors like Bevan were not themselves naive about Russia, but they ducked the issues in the interests of unity.
Yet the compromises did not serve to win the unity that was needed. Tribune failed to defend the position of the Labour left and on the eve of the war Bevan, Cripps and Strauss were expelled from the Labour Party. Bevan and Strauss were readmitted only after making major concessions to the right.
 
DURING the Second World War Tribune’s line was one of critical support for the wartime coalition. Churchill and his cabinet could be criticised, and on occasion were sharply criticised, for particular tactics and policies, but there was overall acceptance of the idea that it was possible to fight fascism in alliance with one of the most ruthless champions of British capitalism.
Certainly Tribune’s line was considerably more healthy than the slavish admiration of Churchill shown by the Communist Party between 1941 and 1945. In May 1942 Tribune published an article under the provocative title Why Churchill?, which accused the Prime Minister of delaying military action against Germany in the interests of his own ambitions.
Since the author, who used the pseudonym Thomas Rainboro’, was a serving soldier, his articles soon attracted the attention of the War Office. But even here Tribune’s radicalism was part of a rather bizarre “united front”.
Tribune’s campaign for a “Second Front” – a land invasion in Western Europe to take the pressure off Russia in the East – echoed the policy of the Communist Party. But it was also the policy of Lord Beaverbrook, the newspaper tycoon.
Beaverbrook, as a member of the War Cabinet, could not criticise Churchill in public, but he masterminded the campaign through his paper The Evening Standard. And Tribune’s “Thomas Rainboro’” was in fact one Frank Owen, until recently editor of The Evening Standard.
Tribune greeted the accession of a Labour government in 1945 with enthusiasm. While reserving its right to criticise, it placed its main emphasis on praising the achievements of Attlee’s government. In November 1946 Tribune went so far as to claim that
“… the first session of the Labour Government’s Parliament which ended on Wednesday did more revolutionary things to this country than the first three years after the 1917 Revolution did for Russia.”
Whatever criticisms there might be in detail, there was certainly no inkling of a notion that Labour’s nationalisation and welfare policies were designed to prop up capitalism, not to undermine it.
Certainly Tribune’s initial enthusiasm for Attlee mirrored a widely shared feeling in the working class. But as the Attlee government went down the slippery slope to wage restraint, spending cuts, strike-breaking and the Cold War, there was a place for a voice on the left which could rally a socialist opposition to Attlee. But Tribune was not to be that voice.
In the last years of the Labour government its influence was on the decline, and in 1950 it was forced to move from weekly to fortnightly production. Transport House paid for two pages a week to put across official party policy, and the rest of the paper often differed very little from this.
Tribune went most of the way with Labour’s capitulation to anti-communism and Cold War politics in the late forties. After initial hesitation Tribune supported the establishment of NATO, though Ian Mikardo did resign from the editorial board on this issue.
In 1949 Tribune gave a platform to American trade unionist Walter Reuther, who had come to London to engineer a pro-American split in the World Federation of Trade Unions. When the Korean War broke out in 1950 one of Tribune’s rising stars, Michael Foot, defended the American intervention saying that
“American soldiers are fighting in Korea … to uphold the principles of collective defence against wanton aggression.”
 
BUT in the early fifties Tribune took on a new lease of life. Aneurin Bevan resigned from the Labour government in protest at health service charges and when the Tories returned to power in 1951 Bevan became the focus for a frustrated left.
”Bevanism” as a political current rapidly gained support, and Tribune, once again a weekly, became its public organ. For a while the paper was a public focus for labour left organisation; the famous “Tribune Brains Trusts”, with panels of well-known personalities, were held in constituencies up and down the country, an effort described by one journalist as “the biggest, most continuous and widespread propaganda effort ever conducted within the Labour Movement.”
Tribune intervened in the campaign against German rearmament, but in so doing allowed itself to lapse into some crudely nationalistic anti-German statements, accusing Germany of overrunning France “three times in sixty years”. And in 1954 Tribune took a step that was virtually unique in its history, either before or since; it intervened directly in a trade union dispute lining up with the rank and file against the bureaucracy.
Normally Tribune respected the division between “political” and trade union issues, and was careful not to give offence to the bureaucracy.
In supporting northern dockers who joined the stevedores’ union out of opposition to right-wing domination in the T&GWU, Tribune infuriated the right wing. But its motives were primarily to further its struggle against Arthur Deakin, the T&GWU’s right wing leader who wielded a massive block vote in the Labour Party. It was certainly not a conversion to the primacy of workplace politics.
But in 1955 Bevan was threatened with expulsion and was forced to “apologise” for his criticisms of Attlee. From now on Bevan set out to refurbish his position as a future cabinet minister, and his utterances became increasingly statesmanlike.
At the time of the Suez crisis Bevan treated Tribune readers to a ringing denunciation of the Egyptian leader Nasser for “stirring the pot of nationalist passion”. As Bevan cut his links with the left, Tribune, which had linked its politics all too closely to Bevan’s ambitions, was left disoriented.
 
FORTUNATELY for Tribune a new campaign was to emerge. Tribune, to its credit, had taken up the issue of nuclear weapons and the threat they posed from the early fifties, and when the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament started to put thousands of people on to the streets, Tribune was there to welcome its new audience.
The front page carried a banner “The paper that leads the anti-H-bomb campaign”, and the paper gave extensive coverage to the issue.
Bevan had now defected to a pro-nuclear stance and the paper’s guiding spirit was Michael Foot, who, however, idolised Bevan and was unable to carry through a clear critique of his position.
Moreover, Tribune’s commitment to nuclear disarmament did not lead it to break with its parliamentarism and deferential attitudes to the trade union bureaucracy.
Tribune contributed to the movement which produced the pro-unilateralist victory at Labour’s 1960 conference; but when the block votes swung the other way and the policy was lost in 1961, Tribune had no strategy to offer.
It certainly had no sympathy for the wing of CND that turned to non-violent sit-downs; in April 1961 Tribune editorialised:
“The group of demonstrators who broke away from the massive CND demonstration in Trafalgar Square to stage their own ‘direct action’ protest outside the American embassy and Savile Row police station could not, if they had been Empire Loyalists or Mosleyites, have done the nuclear disarmament movement greater disservice.”
There were indeed criticisms to be made of the “direct action” strategy, but to compare its proponents to fascists was to display a sectarianism towards the far left to which Tribune was to become increasingly prone.
In any case, as the chance of a Labour election victory appeared on the horizon, nuclear disarmament became an increasingly embarrassing issue. Tribune dropped its front-page anti-H-bomb banner and instead identified itself with the rather more respectable campaign against the Common market. Here again the nationalism which had marked the campaign against German rearmament became all too apparent.
 
HAROLD WILSON’S election victory in 1964 was greeted with a “celebration issue” of the paper. Under the headline “TRIBUNE takes over from ETON in the Cabinet” there were pictures of former Tribune contributors (Crossman, Cousins, Castle, Lee) now in Wilson’s government.
Wilson had been, at one time, a half-hearted Bevanite, and when Bevan was safely dead he delighted in quoting his name. In the run-up to 1964 Tribune had backed Wilson for the leadership and praised him fulsomely when he won it.
As Wilson’s government moved from compromise to capitulation to betrayal, Tribune reacted sluggishly. Certainly there was sharp criticism on individual issues. When Wilson slandered the striking seamen, Tribune supported them, and when health service charges were reintroduced, Tribune headlined “The Shame of it all”. But all this was within the framework of “critical support”; in 1966 Tribune warned:
“Every socialist has the right to criticise the design and performance of the Labour automobile – so long as he also helps to put some petrol in the tank.”
Tribune was unable to mobilise against Wilson’s policies. As a new, harder left emerged out of the Vietnam movement and the events of 1968, Tribune remained stuck in its obsessive parliamentarism.
From now on it was downhill all the way. The 1974–79 government was even worse than that of 1964–70, and Tribune’s response was even feebler.
A brief flurry of activity on the anti-Common Market campaign led nowhere, In 1974 a rising star of the Tribune group in Parliament, one Neil Kinnock, proclaimed that Tribune supporters
“like millions throughout the world, refuse to accept the permanence and desirability of the ‘realities’ of capitalism and totalitarianism or even concede the ‘realism’ of changing those systems and removing the stupidities and injustices which spawn by feeding and appeasing them.”
Unfortunately when Labour moved to control wages and cut public spending these fine words meant little. In October 1974 Tribune had expressed enthusiasm for Labour’s proposed “social contract” with the unions; but when, in 1975, the “social contract” turned into good old-fashioned wage control, Tribune merely mumbled:
“The aim, we would submit, must be, with justified exceptions, to hold living standards for a year or two while we move ahead with our massive investment programmes and socialist policies.”
The Tribune group in parliament was split down the middle and as long as the “social contract” was backed by left union bureaucrats like Jack Jones, Tribune would not fight it. Instead its columns were filled with mealy-mouthed equivocations. For those on the left, like the Right to Work Campaign, who sought to organise against Labour policies, Tribune reserved some of its most sectarian sneers and vituperations. Only the Anti-Nazi League proved too big to oppose.
At the beginning of the Thatcher government Tribune’s response was equally feeble. In 1980 it warned the TUC that a day of action against Thatcher must not offend “the public at large”, and during the 1980 steel strike Tribune was guilty of what can only be called scabbing by printing a full page advertisement for the British Steel Corporation, urging participation in the strike-breaking ballot.
Tribune was not, however, immune to the rise of Bennism in the early eighties. When Benn ran for deputy leader in 1981, John Silkin, backed by Neil Kinnock, stood to split the left vote and ensure Benn’s defeat.
Tribune took a line of neutrality between Benn and Silkin, but published an editorial headed “The labour movement is more important than its leaders”, implicitly criticising the Benn cult.
 
CHANGES came in May 1982, when Chris Mullin took over as editor from Richard Clements. Mullin was close to Benn’s politics, though he denied that Tribune had become a Bennite organ.
While he remained committed to a parliamentary road to socialism, he saw the value of extra-parliamentary action and pressure more clearly than previous Tribune editors had done. He was also prepared to engage in reasonably fraternal discussion with the revolutionary left, a sharp break from his predecessor’s sectarianism. Mullin proclaimed sharp opposition to the Falklands War and introduced some new and livelier features to the paper – notably an “Extra-Parliamentary Column” which was open to anyone except MPs.
The new line brought a prompt rebuke from Michael Foot, who sent an open letter accusing Tribune of “infantile leftism”. More seriously Kinnock’s friend John Silkin launched a bid via share control and legal action to take Tribune out of Mullin’s hands.
After the 1983 election Tribune backed Eric Heffer for the Labour leadership. If Kinnock was its second – and more realistic – choice, it urged that support for Kinnock be “without illusions” in view of his visible drift to the right.
Mullin, a talented novelist and investigative journalist, saw no long term future in the dwindling pool of Tribune; and after his resignation he left behind no political heritage.
Tribune soon swung back to its old traditions under Nigel Williamson’s editorship. In October 1986, after Kinnock’s vomit-provoking promise to Labour conference that he would “die for his country”, Tribune published an editorial eulogy of the labour leader:
“He has set about rebuilding the party in a principled way. On nuclear weapons and international issues he has stood as firm as anyone could hope or desire. On issues such as social ownership, the policy has been modernised and made more attractive, but the basic principles remain.”
And in January 1987 Tribune carried a half-page article by Mullin’s former adversary John Silkin, denouncing the Campaign Group as the “authoritarian Left”, an article replete with dishonest references to Aneurin Bevan.
In the same month, fifty years on from Tribune’s founding, its editor, Nigel Williamson was with a Labour Party delegation to NATO headquarters, aimed at stressing Labour’s loyalty to the nuclear alliance.
So, in this anniversary year, Tribune’s future looks bleak. If New Socialist has gone down the road of pursuing style without content, Tribune has remained resolutely on the side of the “drabbies”. Its clumsy layout succeeds in making even the odd interesting article look boring.
By the early eighties its claimed circulation was only twelve thousand; the reality was probably well below this. Before the war it had reached a sale of 30,000, but even in the high period of Bevanism it was no more than 18,000.
Financial difficulties are no secret; appeals for funds refer, not to expansion, but to “survival”. The loss of GLC advertising was a blow and Tribune is now ever more dependent on donations and advertisements from trade unions.
But such dependence makes Tribune ever more incapable of leading a political fight against the union bureaucracy. It seems unlikely that Tribune will see a sixtieth, let alone a hundredth, birthday.
* * *
(Thanks to Andy Zebrowksi for help with research and to Chris Harman for his invaluable articles in International Socialism (first series] 21 & 24).
 



A SOCIAL revolution involves far more than just the seizure of political power. When working people who have been physically and spiritually oppressed take power into their own hands, they totally transform their view of the world, their way of life – their culture.
In the heady days of a post-revolutionary period, they may become naively, even absurdly over-optimistic about what can be achieved. But such optimism is an integral part of the revolutionary process.
It is in such a context that we have to understand the heated debates that took place in post-revolutionary Russia about the question of “proletarian culture”.
Seven decades on, it may seem an easy target for any hack armed with an aptly chosen quotation from Trotsky. But the real debate was something much more complex, part of the subtle unfolding of revolutionary consciousness.
The first conference of proletarian cultural-educational organisations was held in Petrograd in October 1917, one week before the Bolsheviks took power. It was attended by some two hundred delegates from Soviets, trade unions, factory committees and similar bodies; it was estimated that about three-quarters of the delegates were workers, most of them Bolsheviks or Bolshevik sympathisers.
The conference set up a permanent organisation, the Petrograd Proletcult. A Moscow Proletcult soon followed, and from 1917 until the early thirties, with various ups and downs and under various names, organisations existed which defended the concept of “proletarian culture”.
It is, however, hard to pin down exactly what the theory of “proletarian culture” was. The 1918 Proletcult convention passed a resolution (drafted by Bogdanov, a long-standing ultra-left, who had had several brushes with Lenin) stating:
“A class-art of its own is indispensible to the proletariat for the organisation of its forces for social work, struggle, and construction. Labour collectivism – this is the spirit of this art, which ought to reflect the world from the point of view of the labour collective, expressing the complex of its sentiments and its militant and creative will.”
A new art is not created by conference resolution, and many and varied interpretations could be put on such words. What lay behind them was more important – a feeling that a new age of human history was beginning and that a new culture had to be forged to embody its values. As the novelist Bessalko put it: “We do not need to fill the gap between the past and the present. Let us simply reject the past.” A speaker from the floor at the first national Proletcult conference in 1918 elaborated:
“We are entering the new life with a load of proletarian consciousness. They want to load us with another excessive burden – the achievements of bourgeois culture. In that case we will be like an overloaded camel, unable to go any further. Let us throw away bourgeois culture entirely as old rubbish.”
In the face of famine, civil war and the massive backwardness of Russian society, such aspirations were hopelessly over-ambitious.
As the revolutionary novelist Victor Serge, a sympathetic observer of the Proletcult, remarked:
“After all, what cultural work could be expected when every committed party member lived on 200 grams of black bread a day, plus three dried herrings a week?”
As Trotsky pointed out, even in 1924 the cultural needs of Russia were above all the struggle against illiteracy, lice and syphilis. And for such a period, he argued, bottle-making machines were more important than heroic poems.
Culture could not race ahead of the material conditions. As Valerian Pletnev – a joiner who worked nineteen years at the factory bench before becoming a Proletcult organiser – pointed out, the formation of workers’ theatre groups became possible only with the introduction of the eight-hour day.
Because of its over-ambitious programme, the Proletcult soon came into conflict with the Bolsheviks. Many Bolshevik leaders were suspicious of the Proletcult’s claim to be an autonomous mass organisation, fearing that it could become a focus for left-wing intellectuals hostile to Bolshevism.
The involvement of non-Party members such as Bogdanov, a leading figure in the Moscow Proletcult, compounded this anxiety.
Not only Trotsky but also Lenin was sharply critical of the Proletcult. In a speech in 1919 Lenin denounced the “intellectual fantasies” of proletarian culture, arguing for a much more down-to-earth approach:
“The task of proletarian discipline is to distribute bread and coal in such a way that there is a careful attitude to each unit of coal and each unit of bread ... The basic task of ‘proletarian culture’ is proletarian organisation.”
Yet the fact that Russian backwardness doomed the idea of “proletarian culture” to ultimate failure should not blind us to the facts of its very real achievements on the ground.
It is one of the tenets of class society that “culture” is the preserve of a small layer of talented people; the role of workers, at best, is to admire the achievements of others in a state of passive awe.
The Proletcult organisation set out to create writers’ circles, theatre groups and orchestras in which workers could begin to realise that culture was not beyond their grasp. In 1920 the Proletcult was operating 300 workshops with 84,000 members.
In 1925 Victor Serge reported that fifty workers in the Workers’ Springtime group had tackled “15 plays, 76 short stories, 261 poems and 20 lectures in 96 evening meetings attended by 450 writers.” Serge described a typical meeting of a Proletcult circle:
“The Vagranka group in the Rogoysko-Simonovsky suburb of Moscow is made up of sixteen workers who write for the press. Perkati-Pole, an old Bolshevik writer, a forgotten man, blind and dirt poor, gathers them in his comfortless lodgings and teaches them how to get rhythm into their verse and prose. There are not enough chairs; they crouch in a circle on the floor. They arrive smelling of tar, machine oil, and metallic dust.”
Pletnev describes how workers coming to the theatrical studios would stay till eleven at night, so that “the leaders have to switch off the lights to force the workers to stop.”
It would be foolish to claim that the Proletcult produced artistic work of lasting value. All too often it combined facile images with an over-heavy rhetoric. Thus the poet Gastev, of the “Smithy” group, wrote lines like:



“Look! Here I stand: among lathes,
hammers, furnaces and forges –
among hundreds of comrades.
There are iron-forged spaces above me.
Girders and angle-bars on the sides,
Rising seventy-five feet,
Bending right and left.”



An account of the Proletcult play The Mangy Dog describes how it portrays “fat men” engaged in the purchase of human beings for cannon fodder.
“The conclusion was a tableau. The electric light was turned off, there was a peal of thunder, and the blood-red soviet star rose above tall factory chimneys. In the light of lurid flames the ruins of the Stock Exchange were seen.”
In retrospect it is easy to patronise or sneer at such works; but in the context of the time their effect was doubtless much more powerful. And even where the products had no intrinsic value, the fact of their production was a symptom of a slow process of cultural transformation, one which would surely have borne fruit had it not been swallowed up in the bloodbath of Stalinist counter-revolution.
Trotsky’s critique of the Proletcult, developed in Literature and Revolution and numerous other polemics, was cogent and powerful. A culture, he argued, was a rich and complex historical creation; it could not be summoned up overnight.
In the relatively short time that the proletariat would rule (he hopefully foresaw) before disappearing into a classless society it would not have time to produce anything worthy of the name of a culture.
For whereas the bourgeoisie, as a relatively privileged minority, had been able to develop its culture with feudal society, the proletariat, deprived of all power and privilege, could do nothing of the sort.
Trotsky was particularly anxious that the proletariat should take over and make use of the cultural achievements of the bourgeoisie in the fields of science and technology, where they represented a real increase in humanity’s control of nature.
But he also believed that much should be taken from bourgeois art and literature too – from the work of Shakespeare, Pushkin, Goethe and Dostoevsky – the working class could learn much about the human personality and human feelings.
However, Trotsky did not dismiss the Proletcult as worthless; he argued that its organisations had a useful role to play if they abandoned the mirages of a “new literature” and confined themselves to trying to “elevate the literary level of the working class.”
But however sharp the polemics, it is important to remember that the Bolsheviks never made any attempt to suppress the Proletcult administratively. Trotsky and Lunacharsky (Commissar for Education) both publicly defended the Proletcult’s right to exist.
It was Stalin who, in 1932, finally dissolved the RAPP (Russian Association of Proletarian Writers), the latterday descendant of the Proletcult. Any suggestion that workers could do things for themselves was unacceptable in this new epoch.
If the term “proletarian culture” was used after this time, it was purely as an abstract label to indicate political correctness; it had nothing whatever to do with workers’ self-activity.
Clearly the Proletcult failed to live up to its own ambitious claims; yet within the limits of the age its achievements were not negligible, and do not deserve the contempt of posterity. Perhaps the last word can be left to Victor Serge. While accepting the main points of Trotsky’s argument, he added the following proviso:
“Many generations of workers may very possibly never know other times. More than anything they will have to fight; they will have to destroy and suffer enormously to remake the world. But like the armies of antiquity, they will have their bards, their story-tellers, their musicians and their philosophers. In order to conquer the proletariat must be led by real thinkers and strategists who, like Marx and Lenin, have assimilated the essentials of modern culture.”
In short, the proletariat must have its own great intellectuals. It needs lesser ones as well, for the smaller but equally vital tasks. What is imperative is that both these groups serve it alone. Then the revolutionary work it accomplishes will have an intrinsic value.
In this historically limited sense, there will be, in fact there already is, a militant proletarian culture.
 



SINCE I wrote my article on 50 years of Tribune (February SWR), Tribune itself has produced its own anniversary issue.
This contains an interesting article by Chris Mullin (editor from 1982 to 1984) which makes far more explicitly, and on the basis of first-hand experience, the point I tried to make in my article, namely that Tribune is financially and thus politically dependent on the trade union bureaucracy.
Tribune’s front cover carries the slogan “Labour’s Independent Weekly”. Mullin (and he should know) denies this; he writes:
“Tribune is not an independent newspaper. It is heavily dependent on the goodwill of trade union leaders for advertising and other support ... More than once during my editorship trade union general secretaries explained to me the direct relationship between their advertising and editorial views of which they approved. One or two even cut off advertising without bothering to explain.”
The point is clear. We shall not be able to count on Tribune in any struggle in which the union bureaucrats are on the wrong side (and that’s likely to be most of them). The only independent newspaper is one based on the finance and activities of its own supporters.



 


Ian Birchall
Enfield SWP



 



IT IS, as the song says, a long way from May to December, and between May 1968 and December 1986 a long distance has indeed been travelled. Ever since 1848 revolutionaries have fallen into the trap of seeing new struggles as if they were reruns of old ones. Marx’s reminder that when history repeats itself it does so the first time as tragedy, the second as farce, stands as a permanent warning.
Yet it is scarcely surprising that the recent student struggles in France have been compared, by friend and foe alike, to the events of May 1968. Many of the same elements seemed to be present – the spontaneous eruption of struggle, mass street demonstrations, a government forced to retreat by popular action. Even if it was clear that this time round things would not go so far, something of the same spirit was aroused. Lutte Ouvrière quoted a car-worker from Renault Billancourt who remembered the May events as saying: “It’s not 68, but it’s not bad.”
It is therefore useful to compare the recent events with May 68, to see both the crucial differences and the underlying similarities. It is now fashionable among many on the left to downgrade May 68. Often those who at the time were most swallowed up by ultra-left euphoria are now the quickest to write off the whole thing.
So it is important to begin by recalling the sheer scale of the events. In 1968 the students provided the detonator – but the mini explosive charge came from the working class. Between nine and ten million workers were involved, in all branches of French industry and in every reach of society, from astronomers to footballers. They did not simply withdraw their labour but challenged bourgeois property rights by occupying their factories and workplaces.
By so doing they brought the regime to the brink of overthrow. The government of General de Gaulle tried to resolve the crisis by calling a referendum, but ran up against the problem that not a single printshop in France – nor in Belgium – would print the ballot papers. According to the Memoirs of Prime Minister Pompidou, de Gaulle then suffered an “attack of demoralisation” and took a plane to Germany, intending to abandon political life. He was persuaded to return by one of his generals.
Since May 1968 workers in Portugal and Poland have raised the struggle to even higher levels of initiative and organisation. But Portugal was still a backward country, brought to crisis by a prolonged colonial war; Poland was a state capitalist tyranny where workers lacked basic democratic rights. The argument that the proletariat in advanced capitalist countries can still be a revolutionary class must rest substantially on the experience of May 1968.
Above all May 1968 was a magnificent demonstration of the power of spontaneous action and the ability of workers to take things into their own hands. The very first factory occupation, at Sud-Aviation in Nantes, was sparked off by the demands of a small group of Trotskyists in a local union branch. But as the movement snowballed, it was the spontaneous action of workers which created the dynamic. It took several days before the union apparatuses were able to re-establish their control.
In a few towns, notably Nantes in Western France, something approaching dual power was brought into being. Workers and students set up road blocks and controlled petrol supplies; links were made with local peasants to provide cheap food supplies. Union organisations exercised permanent supervision over prices; teachers and students ran nurseries for strikers’ children.
To understand why recent events have developed differently from 1968, it is necessary to identify a number of key aspects of the situation: the crisis of the
educational system; the role of reformism; the level of politics among the students; and the part played by the revolutionary left.
In 1968 French capitalism was still enjoying the fruits of the post-war boom. De Gaulle had imposed austerity on the working class, but he had done so in the name of modernising French capitalism. State planning and the forced reduction of the agricultural sector were designed to make the French economy more competitive. Unemployment was still low – around half a million, though disproportionately high among young people.
Part of the effort to modernise took the form of a rapid expansion of education. Between 1958 and 1968 the number of students in higher education in France rose from 175,000 to 530,000. In Paris alone the figure rose from 68,800 in 1958 to 130,000 in 1967. In the good old days higher education offered two things: the myth of learning for its own sake, and a passport to privileged career possibilities.
The new mass production universities could offer neither. Overcrowding, inadequate facilities and poor employment prospects for graduates produced simmering revolt, which finally exploded at the beginning of May.
The educational crisis of the sixties was a crisis of growth; the crisis of the eighties was rather different. French higher education was still irrational and inefficient, with enclaves of gross privilege existing alongside squalor and penury. But if reform was needed, it had to be carried out in the framework of economic recession, and hence could not draw on any additional resources. As a result the government produced proposals which were seen as a threat by students who already faced the difficult task of qualifying themselves for a job in a period of mass unemployment.
The government faced another problem. University education no longer guarantees a passport to a successful career, but graduates nonetheless constitute a social layer that has some small relative privileges in comparison with the rest of the population. As such they are an important element for the stability of any regime. No government could risk estranging the entire student population. Hence, faced with the revolt of the universities and the lycees, Chirac had no option but to step back.
In 1968 students were fighting to change the world, even if the change they aspired to might seem Utopian and ill-defined. In 1986 they were fighting to defend a not very satisfactory status quo, and their victory, although very real, was a defensive one.
The political situation too was very different in 1968. De Gaulle had been in power for ten years and seemed to be immovable. The only speculation about change concerned what would happen when he died. The last time the left – in the broadest sense of the term – had been in power was in the mid-fifties, when a coalition led by Socialist Guy Mollet had presided over torture in Algeria and the Suez, invasion.
By 1968 the Socialist Party was politically discredited and in electoral decline. When the great march of 13 May passed Socialist Party headquarters, there were chants of “Guy Mollet to the museum”. The dominant party of the established left was still the Communist Party, with five million voters and a tight grip on the biggest union federation, the CGT. The Communist Party was still resolutely Stalinist. Stalinism was conceived in struggle against the left opposition, and its political evolution was deeply marked by the Popular Front. Thus the CP found it easy to make concessions to its right, but very hard to accept any alliances to its left. In 1968 it was trying desperately to make an electoral deal with the Socialist Party. As a result it was anxious to draw a very clear line between itself and the radical leftists of the student movement, who were denounced as “false revolutionaries ... serving the interests of the bourgeoisie and of big capital.”
The student leaders of 1968 thus had little choice other than to act politically independently of both Socialists and Communists. In 1986 the picture was very different. After five years in power the Socialist Party retains strong support; above all it has succeeded in marginalising the CP and eroding its electoral backing. And ever since the early 1970s Mitterrand and friends have shown themselves to be adept at co-opting and absorbing radical currents to their left. As a result the Socialist Party could show itself to be far more friendly to the protesting students. Lionel Jospin, the Party’s first secretary, could declare: “As the Socialist Party, our relation with this movement is one of respect ... we are in full solidarity.” It is in this context that we have to see the allegedly “non-political” nature of the 1986 student movement, summed up by the placards which ironically proclaimed: “We’re manipulating ourselves”. On 20 November, just before the movement erupted, Le Monde published the results of a survey of student attitudes, and concluded that the students of 1986 prefer practice to theory, reject prophets and gurus, and are independent but not rebels.
Certainly students who have lived through five years of Socialist government and seen the failure of even a programme of mild reforms, are unlikely to have great faith in the possibilities of rapid social change. And living in a period of “cohabitation” between a Socialist president and a conservative cabinet, they are unlikely to identify with the rhetoric of either left or right.
But though the distrust of politics is evident, the picture is not completely clear. In the Le Monde survey students were asked which philosopher or political thinker had had the greatest influence on them. The most frequently named was Freud (14 percent), second came Marxist existentialist Jean-Paul Sartre (8 percent) and third Marx (7 percent). Clearly there is a small but not insignificant minority who are open to left-wing ideas. More generally, the anti-racist campaigns of SOS-Racisme had clearly had an impact on many students.
Beyond this, it is important to remember that “politics” does not consist in paying lip-service to verbal formulae, but in the experience of realities. Over the last few weeks many tens of thousands of students have learnt that mass action is more powerful than individual action; that strikes and demonstrations are more effective than voting and passing resolutions; that the state apparatus is not neutral in social struggles. Whether or not they express these truths in the language of the traditional left is, for the moment, a secondary matter.
It is in this context that we must see the position of the revolutionary left. Certainly it would be wrong to romanticise the role of the revolutionaries in 1968 – it is not true that every second student was an articulate Marxist agitator. The revolutionary left at the beginning of 1968 was considerably smaller, in terms of numbers and influence, than it is now. Certainly individual revolutionaries played a role in initiating occupations. But it is also true that the 1968 left was politically fragmented and incoherent.
Many were attracted to the ideas of anarchism, pleasingly libertarian, but volatile and quite devoid of strategy. Even more were drawn to adulation of Chairman Mao – this produced an ultra-left voluntarism decked out with odds and ends picked up from the history of Stalinism. The Maoists of 1968 lurched from the Third Period to the Popular Front and back again, and some even extended their hero-worship to Joe Stalin himself. Above all the 1968 left showed itself unwilling and unable to make any effective use of the United Front strategy in order to win away any section of workers influenced by the Communist Party.
In the 1969 presidential election Alain Krivine of the Fourth International took just over 1 percent of the poll – a fantastic result compared with anything Trotskyists had gained over the previous 20 years, but still an indication that the revolutionary left was only a tiny minority.
If the revolutionary left was better rooted by 1986, it was still far too small to manipulate the movement as some on the right claimed it was doing. But if the 1968 revolutionaries had been guilty of ultra-leftism, the problem was now the very opposite, with revolutionaries making concessions to the non-political attitudes of the bulk of the students.
Thus revolutionaries have taken positions in the movement without clearly proclaiming to those who elected them that they stand on a revolutionary programme. This has been accompanied by a reluctance on the part of revolutionaries to push their press on the large demonstrations. The UNEF-ID (Independent Democratic French Students Union) has in its leadership former members of the POI (France’s most right-wing Trotskyist grouping) who have now joined the Socialist Party. Whether they still have the Transitional Programme hidden in their back pockets is impossible to tell. And when Lutte Ouvrière announce that “the problem is not to politicise” the movement, “it is political in its essence”, they are hiding behind a half truth to opt out of their responsibility to fight for their political line.
There are thus many differences between 1968 and 1986. But behind them one fundamental similarity remains: the example of successful struggle can be infectious. In 1968 Prime Minister Pompidou decided, faced with student demonstrations, to reopen the closed Sorbonne. He had little choice as he writes in his memoirs: “I preferred to give the Sorbonne to the students than to see them take it by force.” In many situations it is confidence, not consciousness, that determines workers’ actions. It is not that they like or approve the system, rather that they lack any faith that they could change it. Once Pompidou was publicly shown to be not invincible, workers rapidly gained the confidence to act for themselves.
In 1986 the process has been slower and more fragmentary, but there is some evidence that it has taken place. Lutte Ouvrière in a recent issue reports workers’ reactions to the student movement, showing not only expressions of sympathy but a recognition that they had given an example to be followed. At a post office in Dijon canteen workers had complained to a union representative about working conditions. He told them: “Do like the students. Go on strike.” They promptly decided to do so.
Moreover, capitalism is now in a far more fragile state than in 1968. Then it could ride out the storm and give concessions. The substantial wage increases granted were fairly rapidly swallowed up by rising prices. And some larger employers welcomed the wage rises as they would drive smaller firms out of business. A spreading wave of militancy now would be a very different matter. It is interesting to compare the reactions of a perceptive organ of the British ruling class, able to look at French events with a degree of detachment. In May 1968 The Economist greeted the French student movement with cheerful tones:
“Student protest should be encouraged, to preach, to march, to diagnose, to throw stones, to be absurd. That is what we pay students for.”
In December 1986 the tone was very different. Now The Economist warned that giving in to the students was like doing deals with terrorists – an encouragement to more demands:
“... across much of Europe it is the unemployed young and blacks who could be most tinder dry. France has provided no Christmas present to its neighbours by advertising that some objectives can be secured by murder and mild rioting on the streets, especially by those who have a juvenile vision of what their objectives are.”
Their fears are our hopes. In the words of the old 1968 slogans: “It’s only a beginning; continue the fight.”
 



War, Peace and Revolution: International Socialism at the Crossroads 1914 1918
David Kirby
Gower (no price given)
1914 REMAINS an enigma for socialists. The failure of the European labour movement to prevent the war, the apparent complicity of the working class in its own butchery, are still powerful arguments for those who claim that internationalism is a doomed Utopia, that the force of nationalism will always be stronger than the power of solidarity.
David Kirby’s book does not solve the problem, but it is a serious and scholarly contribution to the argument. It traces the strengths and weaknesses of European socialism during the four years of carnage. What is clear is that the capitulation was not inevitable. In the days before hostilities broke out there were mass demonstrations of workers against the war throughout Europe. Workers did not volunteer to fight out of inborn patriotic enthusiasm, but were the victims of a massive ideological offensive and direct intimidation by employers.
Above all, the war could not have been fought without the active assistance of the right wing socialists who mobilised their members behind the national flag. Kirby quotes German Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg as saying in 1917:
“The trade unions complain that they no longer control their people, who are incited by the radicals who say that the Imperial social democrats have done nothing for them. It is absolutely essential that the right wing of the social democrats are strengthened once more. For what is to be done if the government can no longer count on the help of the trade unions in combating the strike movement?”
Kirby traces in meticulous detail the various attempts to hold international conferences during the war. But he quotes Trotsky as saying in December 1917 that the Bolsheviks were not really interested in conferences. For them the key issue was mass struggle by workers in the various nations at war.
1917 saw a massive wave of strikes and mutinies. In Germany workers struck against food shortages, in France against falling wages. Mutinies swept through the French and Italian armies and there were hunger riots even in neutral Sweden.
Kirby attributes this activity to “deteriorating material conditions.” Certainly workers were initially driven to action by economic conditions, but the movement had the potential to be mobilised against the whole social structure that had produced the war. The real tragedy, which Kirby in his preoccupation with conferences neglects, was the failure of the left to take a lead in these struggles. In Britain many of the best militants were conscientious objectors or deserters; in France even the supporters of Zimmerwald took a conscious decision not to try to organise among serving soldiers. So when revolt erupted there was no leadership to guide it towards revolutionary action.
Yet the real problem lay even further back. Alfred Rosmer began his great history of the labour movement in World War by noting that “when war begins, the working class has already been defeated.” The various peace campaigns and manoeuvres that Kirby chronicles were all too late. What really mattered was the failure of the left to organise to stop war before August 1914. Even the strident anti-militarism of the French revolutionary syndicalists had failed to grip the rank and file. As Pierre Monatte noted in 1913, the mass of workers were “tired and fed up with the futility of insurrectionism.”
After four years of war millions of workers were ready to rally to the banner of the Russian Revolution – but millions more did not live to see that day. In the past revolution has come after war – we shall not have that possibility. The nuclear holocaust permits no mutinies, no food riots. All the more reason to study the lessons of what went wrong before 1914.
 



DURING the election campaign Kinnock was asked his views on religion; he replied that he wasn’t sure whether he was an agnostic. I have a certain sympathy with this sort of double-strength agnosticism, as I have similar feelings about the current debate as to whether Labour Weekly should be closed down.
I know the arguments. It is the left in the Labour Party which wants to keep Labour Weekly; Kinnock is trying to close it because he wants to stifle any possible criticism from the left. It’s a fairly straightforward question of principle, and if I had a vote on the matter I could be relied on to use it the right way.
But against this I have to balance the powerful argument that if Labour Weekly were shut down I should not have to read it any longer. I have always believed that, alongside the pleasures of belonging to a revolutionary organisation (like selling papers in the snow and reading Internal Bulletins) a true Bolshevik should do one really unpleasant job for the party. For some years now my contribution has been reading Tribune and Labour Weekly every Saturday. Somebody has to do it.
Labour Weekly has, throughout its 16 years, set a consistent standard of journalistic drabness. New Socialist (also for the chop) does from time to time carry intriguing, if obscure, debates on such topics as whether you should let the au pair breast-feed the baby. Labour Weekly keeps its feet firmly on the ground with reports of regional Labour Party Conferences, a view of the world in which all evil is the fault of the Tories, and lots of details about internal organisation.
The front page of the 11 September issue carries not only a large picture of Norman Willis, but also the stirring banner headline: Unions Have Doubts On The College: Opinion Moving Towards OMOV.
Not, you might feel, a good front page to sell in your local shopping centre. But then nobody much sells Labour Weekly. The circulation is around 19,000, while the Labour Party has some 300,000 members.
Some years ago at a CND conference I saw a Labour Weekly seller. One of my comrades, whose style I must admit is sometimes a little abrasive, accosted him, commenting that he was the only Labour Weekly seller he had ever seen. A few weeks later I was on a demonstration in Liverpool and saw someone selling Labour Weekly. So my sectarian comrade had been wrong, I thought. I looked again and realised it was the same man.
But soon even that valiant salesperson will become redundant. If Kinnock has his way, the drab Labour Weekly will be replaced by the vacuous Labour Party News. Labour Party News isn’t sold, so you can’t buy it. It is mailed direct to 110,000 Labour Party members.
Or so they think. In fact the tight security of Walworth Road has been breached, and one copy of Labour Party News is being sent to an SWP member, heavily disguised under an implausible pseudonym.
So we can reveal something of the mind-numbing contents of Labour Party News. There is useful information, ranging from how to plug a 30-watt amplifier into your car cigarette lighter to how to get a bone china “Roses for Socialism” plate for just £25. There are pictures – many in full colour. Issue number three has seven pictures of Kinnock, number four has five. Almost like Pravda in the golden days.
And then there are advertisements. The back page carries full page adverts for the Daily Mirror. These used to appear in New Socialist until that journal carried a mildly impolite interview with Robert Maxwell, whereupon they promptly disappeared. There is little danger that Labour Party News will insult Robert Maxwell – or anyone else with advertising revenue to dispose of.
With all these delights it is surprising to read that “there are still almost 200,000 members who are entitled to a copy, but aren’t getting one. We can’t help unless we know who they are and where they are.” This despite the fact that Labour Party News is free and can be obtained by returning a reply-paid card.
As Oscar Wilde’s Lady Bracknell said: “To lose a parent may be considered as a misfortune; to lose both looks like carelessness.” It must be a very careless party that loses two-thirds of its membership.
Except for the fact that this is just the sort of party Kinnock wants. For reformist parties are based on passivity, and a membership that is so passive that it can’t be bothered ordering a free magazine won’t give the leadership much trouble.
The bitterest insult in the Labour vocabulary is now “activist”. Of course, one or two people are allowed to be active. Neil Kinnock and Roy Hattersley can attend 15 meetings a week, alternatively bullying and arselicking to advance their careers. That’s called “dedication”. But if the rest of us prefer to attend meetings instead of watching the television, we become “unrepresentative activists”.
The Labour Party has the press it deserves. And remember, only 24 years ago the Labour Party had its own daily paper. That paper was sold to become the Sun. And now Labour can’t – or daren’t – even produce a weekly. Remember that next time someone tells you the Labour Party is the mass organisation of the working class.
 



Jay Woolrich is quite wrong to read my obituary of Pierre Naville
as an attack on André Breton. Breton’s record, as a poet and
theoretician of revolutionary art, is an admirable one. But
admiration for Breton should not lead us to ignore the problems posed
by his political evolution.
It was not Breton who led the surrealists towards Communism; it
was Naville who pointed the way. And Breton was much slower than
Naville to recognise the rise of Stalinism. Breton was never a member
of any Trotskyist organisation. The real issue was not the
independence of surrealism, but the fact that Breton tried to make
the surrealist group into a political organisation in its own right.
There is no simple formula, in Trotsky’s works or elsewhere, for
the relation of artists to revolutionary politics. Artists who
involve themselves in revolutionary politics will necessarily be torn
by a contradiction between competing obligations – a contradiction
that cannot be resolved this side of the revolution. Such figures as
Sartre, Serge, Brecht and Gorky show different – but partial –
responses to the contradiction. Once that is understood we can learn
from both Naville and Breton.



 


Ian Birchall
Enfield



 



Pierre Naville, who died recently, was one of the last surviving pioneers of both surrealism and the early Trotskyist movement.
Born in 1904, Naville, a painter, joined the Paris surrealist group in 1924. The surrealists were a group of poets and artists who sought to challenge all existing conventions in the field of art and to discover new sources of inspiration in the unconscious mind. They rapidly concluded that they could not revolutionise art without also making a revolution in society. As their declaration of January 1925 put it: ‘Surrealism is not a poetic form. It is a cry of the spirit ... determined to smash its fetters. If necessary with material hammers.’
But where were these ‘material hammers’ to be found? The surrealists remained confined to gesture politics – for example, writing open letters to hated authority figures, like Artaud’s magnificent denunciation of the Pope: ‘We don’t give a damn for your canons, index, sin, confessional, clergy – we are thinking of another war – war on you, Pope, dog.’ In 1925 Naville was called up for military service, and while in the army he took the risky decision to become a Communist, distributing leaflets in the barracks opposing France’s colonial war in Morocco. In this context he began to look for a way forward from surrealist revolt. His influential pamphlet The Revolution and Intellectuals posed the question:
’Do the surrealists believe in the liberation of the spirit prior to the abolition of bourgeois conditions of material life, or do they consider that a revolutionary spirit can be created only after the revolution has been accomplished?’
As a Communist, Naville became a key figure in the journal Clarté founded in 1919 in support of the Russian Revolution. But he also became an activist: in his autobiography he describes his work in the cell attached to the Farman factory at Billancourt in Paris – distributing leaflets, holding factory gate meetings, selling papers at tube stations.
It is interesting to compare Naville’s political evolution with that of other surrealists such as André Breton and Louis Aragon. Breton briefly joined the Communist Party, but found himself ‘unable’ to give a report on the economic situation in Italy to a gasworkers’ cell. Aragon became a lifelong Communist, but as a loyal Stalinist abandoned all surrealist principles (his later poetry even rhymes!).
Naville’s revolutionary principles soon brought him into conflict with the increasingly Stalinist Communist Party. He visited Russia in 1927, at the time when Adolf Ioffe killed himself in protest at Trotsky’s expulsion from the party. There he met Trotsky and Victor Serge. Largely under his influence, Clarté became a journal of the Left Opposition, changing its name to Lutte de Classes (Class Struggle), where he published a section of Serge’s Year One of the Russian Revolution. Naville was expelled from the Communist Party in 1928.
He also broke with the surrealist group, which Breton increasingly ran as though it were a revolutionary sect. Breton denounced Naville for the rather bizarre reason that he was taking money from his rich father to finance revolutionary publications – surely a wholly laudable activity. It was some time before Breton also made a clean break with Stalinism.
In 1929 Naville and his wife Denise visited the exiled Trotsky in Turkey. They discussed an abortive plan whereby Trotsky would escape to France by yacht.
In the early years of the Trotskyist movement Naville worked closely with Alfred Rosmer, former revolutionary syndicalist and veteran of the Communist International. Trotsky distrusted Naville as being too much an intellectual, preferring the youthful enthusiasm of Molinier (who ran a rather dubious debt-collecting business). Rosmer’s wife Marguerite wrote to Trotsky defending Pierre and Denise Naville: ‘They sell papers at 6.00 a.m., leaflet factory gates – that’s deintellectualising them, I assure you.’
Naville opposed the French Trotskyists’ entry into the Socialist Party in 1934, but remained active in the Trotskyist movement. In 1938 Rudolf Klement, responsible for organising the founding conference of the Trotskyist Fourth International, was kidnapped by Russian agents, beheaded and thrown in the river Seine. As a result much of the secretarial work involved in founding the Fourth International fell on Naville.
The outbreak of the Second World War threw the French left into confusion. Naville abandoned his links with organised Trotskyism, but remained committed to Marxism. Under the German occupation he published two books. One was a study of the 18th century philosopher d’Holbach, in which Naville claimed that Marx’s ideas owed more to Enlightenment materialism than to Hegel. The other was a study of the behaviourist psychology of J.B. Watson. Both were intended as a defence of materialism against the religious ideas sponsored by the pro-German Vichy regime.
For the rest of his life Naville wrote copiously, publishing books on psychology, sociology and military strategy. He contributed widely to the left press, polemicising with Sartre and others in defence of his view of Marxism.
Though many criticisms could be made of particular intellectual and political stances, it is clear he remained faithful to his starting point. In a preface to a book on surrealism published shortly before his death he wrote:
’It is not simply a question of keeping alive memories: it is also highly necessary to draw on these memories as a source of combative action that is capable of resisting oppression of all kinds. We are still, and for a long time to come, the rebellious victims of this oppression.’
 



JEAN GENET died in April on the day the bombers went into Libya. Reagan’s murderous act would have angered him, but it would scarcely have surprised him. He had long learnt to know and hate the brutality of the system.
From birth, Genet was one of those whom society classifies as ‘worthless’. Illegitimate and abandoned, he was placed by the Public Assistance in a peasant family; the peasants took children for the money, and the foster-children wore special uniforms.
In infant school Genet wrote an essay about his home; all the other children turned on him and jeered at him because he didn’t have a real ‘home’.
At ten, Genet was publicly denounced as a thief; at fifteen he was sent to a reformatory for travelling on a train without paying his fare. He joined the army to collect a bonus, then deserted.
He recorded that ‘for a time I lived by theft, but prostitution was better suited to my indolence’. Genet’s life was now spent among criminals and homosexuals, frequently interrupted by arrest; he spent a total of fourteen years in jail.
Genet thus found himself among the lowest depths of society, among those to whom the existing order denies any right to culture or beauty. But Genet refused this denial; for him revolt began with his assertion of his right to beauty.
He began to write, in prison, on the white sheets of paper with which he was supposed to make paper bags. And since society denied him access to its beauty, he sought his own beauty amid the squalor and misery of his condition, inventing an amazing poetic prose:
‘There is a close relationship between flowers and convicts. The fragility and delicacy of the former are of the same nature as the brutal insensitivity of the latter. Should I have to portray a convict – or a criminal – I shall so bedeck him with flowers that, as he disappears beneath them, he will himself become a flower, a gigantic and new one.’
From a recognition of his own oppression – as an abandoned child, a convict and a homosexual – Genet came to understand and oppose oppressions of other kinds, and especially to side with the victims of racism and imperialism. He described himself as being perhaps ‘a black man who happens to have white or pink skin’. Of his own play The Blacks he said:
‘Sixty years ago, a Public Assistance child was a negro, and when this child was sent to prison, he was like a black whom people have the right to lynch. The difference is that I was alone and without hope. They are together and they have the hope of revolution.’
Genet was fascinated by the relations between sexuality and power. In his play The Balcony he shows a brothel where clients act out the fantasies of power, dressing up as bishops, judges and generals. But while in modern society a police chief has more power than a bishop, he is still a grey figure, lacking colourful costume and sexual pull; so at the end of the play the police chief announces that he has been advised ‘to appear in the form of a gigantic phallus, a prick of great stature ...’
By the sixties Genet’s novels and plays had made him famous and wealthy; he had become a commodity for publishers. Such a process is inevitable under capitalism; what is remarkable is how far Genet managed to resist the process.
Till his death he had no fixed address, collecting his royalties in cash from his publisher and moving from one small hotel to another, giving much of his money away.
Yet while Genet’s work centres on power and oppression, he never committed himself to regular political activity. There could be no place for him in the Stalinist left that dominated French politics until the sixties. Indeed, when Sartre’s journal Les Temps Modernes serialised The Thief’s Journal he was publicly denounced by no less than Zhdanov, Stalin’s cultural hitman. For Zhdanov, Genet’s praise of homosexuality was enough to label him a symptom of bourgeois depravity.
Above all Genet feared the puritanism which characterised the Stalinist left (and which has sometimes resurfaced in modern feminism).
Irma, in The Balcony, organising her brothel fantasies while revolution rages in the streets outside, speaks for Genet when she says: ‘If the rebels win, I’m a goner. They’re workers. Without imagination. Prudish and maybe chaste.’
For Genet, a revolution that rejected joy, sexuality and ritual was one he could not oppose, but would not commit himself too wholeheartedly. As he told an interviewer in 1976.
‘To be honest, I don’t really want a revolution to take place. The situation at this moment, the present regime, allow me to revolt ... if a real revolution were to take place, I couldn’t be against it. I would become a follower of this revolution. But a man like myself is never a follower of anything. I am a man of revolt. My standpoint is very egoistical. I don’t want the world to change in order to permit myself to be against the world.’
Genet had no illusions that he could substitute himself for the real struggles of the oppressed. Talking of his own plays The Maids and The Blacks he said:
‘I think action, the direct struggle against colonialism does more for the blacks than a play. I think the domestic workers’ trade union does more for servants than a play. I’ve tried to win a hearing for a voice from the depths ...’
Hence Genet’s political alignments have been spasmodic and emotional. His deep hatred of French society led him to rejoice at the fall of France in 1940. He supported the Black Panthers and caused an outcry by his sympathy for the Baader-Meinhof gang.
But he also supported the Russians in Afghanistan, and expressed indifference to the situation in Poland and to poverty in France, on the grounds that they were nothing by the side of the suffering in the Third World.
One of his deepest commitments was to the cause of the Palestinians; in 1982 he visited the scene of the Beirut massacres and wrote a searing indictment of them (published in English in City Limits).
In his last interview (on BBC television in November 1985) Genet contrasted the student revolutionaries of May 1968 to ‘true revolutionaries’ like Lenin, and concluded: ‘I’m really on Lenin’s side’. That that alignment did not go all the way to a commitment to the revolutionary left was Genet’s loss; it was also the left’s.
 



THE LAST of the old Bolsheviks is dead. Viacheslav Molotov, born in 1890, joined the party as a 16-year-old student at Kazan University. He was deported for two years, but continued to be a party militant, and worked on the daily Pravda in 1912. During the war he helped Shlyapnikov reorganise the party in Petrograd.
Molotov’s finest hour came in 1917. When the Tsar was overthrown and a Provisional Government set up, many Bolsheviks wanted to give it ‘critical support’. Molotov, now editing Pravda, denounced the Provisional Government as counter-revolutionary, and called for all power to go to the Soviets, thus preparing the way for the line Lenin would take on his return from exile.
But being right once does not guarantee one will be right again. When the revolution was in the ascendant Molotov would opt for workers’ power, but when the revolutionary tide ebbed he failed to stand firm.
As the bureaucracy closed its grip on Russian society, Molotov rose in the party machine. Elected to the Central Committee in 1921, he got a higher vote than Trotsky or Bukharin. In 1922 he became assistant to Stalin, the general secretary of the party, and in 1926 he joined the Politburo. He had particular responsibility for reorganising the party during the twenties. After Lenin’s death he was one of the first to publicly attack Trotsky, in a Pravda article of December 1924.
By now Molotov seemed to have lost the vision of socialism that had inspired him during the illegal struggle. In 1924 he wrote: “Our path to socialism lies through the increased productivity of labour on the basis of electrification.” Whereas Lenin had defined socialism as “Soviets plus electrification”, Molotov dropped workers’ democracy in favour of productivity – a definition easily acceptable to a Wilson or a Kinnock.
Unlike Lenin and Trotsky, Molotov had no knowledge of the labour movement outside Russia, and he seems to have lacked any imagination. Isaac Deutscher describes his character as follows:
“His narrowness and slow-mindedness were already bywords in Bolshevik circles; he appeared to be devoid of any political talent and incapable of any initiative. He usually spoke at party conferences as rapporteur on a second- or third-rate point; and his speech was always as dull as dishwater.”
It is therefore hardly surprising that he was an active supporter of the purges of the 1930s, being one of the main advocates of a firm hand against all opposition.
Even more disastrously, he turned his hand to international matters. Replacing Bukharin as President of the Communist International, he was a leading advocate of the Third Period line, which saw social democrats as no different from fascists – a line which greatly eased Hitler’s rise to power. In 1929 he actually argued that the main attack should be on the left wing of Socialist Parties, since they were the most subtle deceivers of the workers.
In 1939 Molotov became Foreign Minister. His predecessor was Litvinov, a Jew; since Stalin was now planning a deal with the Nazis, he had to be replaced. Molotov played a key role in negotiating the Hitler-Stalin pact of August 1939, becoming the only Russian leader to actually shake hands with Hitler. Having done the dirty work, Molotov had to pick up the pieces. In June 1941 he broadcast the news that Russia’s erstwhile Nazi allies were launching an invasion; Stalin was keeping his head down.
After the war he continued to serve as Foreign Minister, being praised by US Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, for his diplomatic skill. At the Geneva Conference of 1954, which ended the first Vietnam war, he put pressure on the Vietnamese leaders to agree to the partitioning of the country – a compromise which paved the way for the second Vietnam war of the 1960s.
Molotov had been a loyal agent of Stalin for 30 years, but the old butcher showed no gratitude. On the contary, in his last years he grew increasingly suspicious of his closest collaborators. As Isaac Deutscher points out, they had consented to the murder of their associates. If they didn’t mind this, then they must be scoundrels and wholly unreliable. If they did mind, then they were probably plotting against Stalin.
In the autumn of 1952 Stalin violently denounced Molotov in a Central Committee meeting. Molotov’s wife was arrested and deported. It was only Stalin’s death in 1953 that saved Molotov from going down a road he had helped to send so many others along.
Molotov might have seemed, on the grounds of seniority, to be Stalin’s natural successor, but he soon lost out to Krushchev. Molotov had been too deeply complicit in Stalinism to carry through the process of de-Stalinisation. Krushchev too had blood on his hands, but he had not been so senior in the apparatus, and he had more room for manoeuvre. Molotov was sacked as Foreign Minister in 1956, and though he and Kaganovich came near to overthrowing Krushchev in June 1957, they failed.
The loyal hack had now become an oppositionist, arguing against Krushchev’s decentralisation of economic management. Krushchev could not publicly purge Molotov – that would have meant washing his own dirty linen in public. But Molotov was slowly squeezed out and finally expelled from the party in 1962, as a member of the so-called anti-party group.
Molotov did not suffer the brutalities he had inflicted on others, but his final years were a long humiliation. He was sent as ambassador to Outer Mongolia, but then Krushchev realised this was too close to China. Fearing Molotov might plot with Mao, he recalled him. It was then proposed to make him ambassador to Holland, but the Dutch government refused to accept a man who, they said, obviously lacked the confidence of his own leaders.
In his earlier years, Molotov had seen towns, factories and mountains called after him – in old age he saw them renamed again. In 1984, on his 94th birthday, he was readmitted to the party. But now he was a pathetic, forgotten hack, a man with nothing left but memories – memories of fascists embraced and comrades sent to their death.
 





 


The Freud Scenario
Jean-Paul Sartre
Verso £16.95
ONE OF my students recently compared the late Jean-Paul Sartre to Jim Reeves: both have produced a string of major works since their deaths. Since Sartre died in 1980 six substantial volumes have appeared; the Freud Scenario – a film script which was never used – is the most recent in English and the most exciting. It tells of Freud’s early years, when he was still developing and perfecting his theories.
The encounter between Sartre and Freud raises issues of prime importance. The core of Sartre’s philosophy is freedom: we choose our own lives, consciously; any attempt to push our responsibility off onto external or ‘unconscious forces’ is rejected as ‘bad faith’. Freud, by contrast, was a determinist. ‘Nothing’, he declares in Sartre’s script, ‘is accidental’. Every slip of the tongue, every nervous gesture has a cause, a cause which lies out of our control in a part of the mind inaccessible to consciousness.
The positions are starkly juxtaposed; the philosophical – and political – implications are profound. Sartre sums this up in the vivid image with which the film opens. An old woman, blind and paralysed, is being carried round a hospital on a stretcher. But the medical personnel will not accept her into any of the wards. For she is suffering from hysteria, and medical opinion of the time judged that victims of hysteria were not ill but malingering, ‘putting on an act’.
With acute irony Sartre is here exploring the contradictions of his own position. For the logic of the philosophy of individual freedom can lead straight to the pathological Toryism of a Tebbit – the unemployed are to blame for their own fate. Yet Sartre cannot renounce freedom; for if we are not free to choose, then we abandon all hope of revolt, of changing the world. It was in an attempt to resolve this dilemma that Sartre, in the fifties, tested his own philosophy against the work of Marx and Freud.
Marx’s solution is expressed in the famous: ‘Men make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please; they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but under circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted from the past.’ Human freedom is real, but located in concrete historical circumstances. Only collective action can change the world.
For Freud the problem remains within the individual skull, and as a result has no solution. But Sartre is always at his best when he is asking questions, not answering them, and his treatment of Freud points above all to the thinker’s unresolved paradoxes. As Sartre shows, knowledge of others is inseparable from knowledge of oneself. Freud is looking for a therapy to cure patients, but we are constantly reminded how much he has in common with those patients. Freud has his own neurotic habits – a recurring phallic cigar – and above all he is hung up about his father. The climax of the scenario is Freud’s slow, reluctant discovery that he himself has an Oepidus complex. Yet however much Freud invokes determination to deal with his patients, he believes passionately and incorrigibly in his own freedom. How, then, can his patients be mere objects?
Moreover, Sartre shows that the question of freedom cannot be detached from the question of oppression. The principle of individual responsibility could make sense only in a world of freedom and equality. Freud’s life, however, is rooted in a complex tissue of oppressions. We see the rigid hierarchy of the medical profession, the crude domination of doctors over patients. The poverty of Freud’s family is vividly portrayed – Sartre actually gives Freud (the great discoverer of childhood sexuality) the line: ‘Poor people have no youth.’
Above all, Sartre focusses on sexism and racism. He shows us Freud the victim of racism, the Jew in a city where anti-Semitic pamphlets are sold openly on the street. But he also shows us Freud the dominating male, whose reluctance to recognise female sexuality is mirrored in his authoritarian and uncomprehending attitude to his own wife.
The two themes come together in one of the film’s most effective scenes. Freud gives a lecture in which he argues that sexual assault on daughters by fathers is commonplace; at the end he is mobbed by angry doctors chanting: ‘Filthy yid! Back to the ghetto!’ Later Freud backs off from this theory, and claims that the daughters subconsciously want to be raped by their fathers. But Sartre leaves us wondering if Freud wasn’t right first time round.
This account only scratches the surface of an amazingly rich text. Ironies and paradoxes constantly provoke thought, while dream images are skilfully and subtly interwoven with the narrative. Above all, the film is supremely optimistic. Freud stands for the spirit of scientific truth; around him, ‘Vienna is rotten! Everywhere hypocrisy, perversion, neurosis!’ Yet Freud greets persecution with the comment: ‘All this proves to me that we are on the right track.’ (He thus echoes Sartre’s own comment years before, when he was being simultaneously denounced in Washington and Moscow.)
As we read of Freud’s lone struggle we remember that Sartre was writing at a time when the French left was hopelessly isolated in the worst days of the Algerian war. The great determinist is thus transmuted into a symbol of freedom.
So why, you may ask, was the movie never actually made? Why do we have to read it in an impossibly expensive hardback instead of seeing it on our Christmas TV screens alongside Moonraker and Son of Lassie? Sartre in fact abandoned the script after hostility and demands for changes from the American director, John Huston, who originally commissioned it. Admittedly Sartre’s script was on the long side – something like seven hours. (Sartre did have problems writing to length – a couple of years as a hack on Socialist Worker Review would have done him a world of good). But other long films have been made – for instance Bertolucci’s trashy and pretentious 1900.
In the end Sartre’s scenario was just too good and too honest for a cinema industry founded on power, corruption and lies.
 



I WAS mystified by Martin Driscoll’s letter (January SWR) accusing me of chauvinism. Having carefully reread my piece on the Rainbow Warrior affair (October SWR) I am even more mystified.
1. I claimed that the affair showed a degree of anti-British feeling in sections of the French population. My immediate reason for noting this was that in listening to various phone-in programmes on French radio and reading the French papers I had noticed the recurrence of the following line of argument:
‘France has legitimate national interests in the South Pacific (New Caledonia, the Mururoa test site). The English-speaking Commonwealth countries in the Pacific (Australia, New Zealand) are hostile to the French presence in the region. Britain supports them in this and Greenpeace (based in Canada) is probably a tool of the British secret services.’
Admittedly the evidence is rather impressionistic, and I can’t supply comrade Driscoll with statistical information as to exactly how many French people believe these propositions, but I thought that the fact that such arguments were in circulation was of some significance.
2. I am certainly convinced (by thirty years of reading French books and newspapers and visiting France) that anti-British feeling does exist in sections of the French population.
3. I did not claim that the French cannot distinguish between Canadians, British and New Zealanders. I noted a tendency to consider that the various English-speaking countries have certain common interests that may be in opposition to the French ‘national interest’.
4. The political point of mentioning this question at all was to argue that the Rainbow Warrior affair might not be as harmful to the Mitterrand government as most people at the time were predicting. In this I think I have been proved right. Six months after this act of gross international terrorism (organised by a so-called ‘socialist’ government) the affair is largely forgotten, and Mitterrand, Fabius and the rest of the gang (except for the scapegoat Hernu) are all still in office.
5. I did not draw the cartoon that accompanied my article. However, it seems absolutely clear to me that this was a satire of national stereotypes. If comrade Driscoll cannot grasp humour of this sort perhaps he should stick to reading the Sun.
6. Finally, I would point out that in my original article I passed no judgment on French anti-British feeling – I simply noted its existence. How that makes me a ‘chauvinist’ I fail to see.
Politically, of course, hostility on the part of the citizens of one imperialist country towards those of another is something that must be opposed. But speaking personally as one who happens to have been born an inhabitant of the oldest and most vicious imperialist power in the world, I must add that my gut feeling is that anyone who hates Brits can’t be all bad.



 


Ian Birchall
Enfield



 



THE ANGLO-FRENCH invasion of Egypt in October 1956 was the last frantic but farcical attempt by Britain and France to assert themselves as major imperialist powers. In July 1956 the Egyptian government, led by nationalist Gamal Abdel Nasser, had nationalised the Suez Canal, built with the sweat and blood of Egyptians, but regarded by the European powers as their private property.
The invasion was launched in close cooperation with Israel, imperialism’s main ally in the Middle East. But within a week, combined pressure from Russia and the USA brought the declining European powers to heel and a ceasefire was called.
The main inspiration behind the invasion came from French ‘socialist’ prime minister Guy Mollet, who saw the adventure as a second front in his bitter war to keep Algeria part of French territory. Nasser was suspected of aiding the Algerian nationalist forces.
Mollet was a prime hypocrite, who cited Marx and Engels in justification of his policy. The role of the British Labour Party, being in opposition to Anthony Eden’s Tory government, was more complex.
The Labour leaders had little sympathy with Nasser. Gaitskell compared him with Hitler, while from the left Aneurin Bevan denounced him for “stirring the pot of nationalist passion”. But as loyal supporters of NATO they were unhappy at Eden leading Britain into a war not backed by the USA.
When the invasion came Labour ran a campaign under the slogan ‘Law Not War’. Gaitskell was apparently furious he had not been consulted. But as always the Labour leaders insisted that everything should be kept within strictly legal and parliamentary channels.
The National Council of Labour issued a statement urging the British people to “refrain from taking industrial action as a means of influencing national policy in the present crisis”.
On 1 November the chairman of the TUC, Sir Thomas Williamson, declared: “We will not countenance unofficial industrial action, and we call on all trade unionists to oppose it.”
The fact that such warnings were repeated shows that there was some pressure in the Labour movement for direct action. One group of people who voted with their feet were the reservists, recalled to fight the war. When the troopship Asturias sailed from Southampton on 28 October, 381 out of 1,295 reservists failed to turn up.
The Daily Herald reported that “the War Office was too shocked to hush it up”, and claimed that it was “the longest absentee list in army history”.
Military absenteeism was too hot a potato for the Labour leaders to handle. But demands for strike action were nearly as bad.
The first call for “all steps (not excluding a general strike)” came from the Socialist Medical Association. In itself this posed little threat, but the idea soon spread.
On 1 November a meeting of tally clerks in the Royal group of docks called on the TGWU executive to call a token one-day strike against the war. The bureaucracy sent Tim O’Leary, National Dock Group Secretary, to tell workers:
“Many of your colleagues are in the Middle East. Don’t let them come back and say, ‘We were short of tanks – we were short of food.’ If you don’t keep them supplied they will die quicker.”
Within the next few days the strike calls spread. The executive of the Fire Brigades Union urged the TUC to call a general strike to make Eden resign. The Sheffield District Committee of the Amalgamated Engineering Union called for a total stoppage of the engineering industry.
On 3 November the Dally Worker reported a whole string of calls for industrial action – the Paisley districts of the AEU, workers at. Firth Brown and Shardlows Sheffield, Sutton Trades Council, maintenance men at a Salford bus depot, and many more.
By 6 November the list had been joined by Selby Trades Council, Sheffield painters, Merseyside woodworkers, Lewisham electricians and others. A one-day strike of Afro-Asian students throughout Britain was called.
A delegate conference of South Wales miners rejected industrial action after a four-and-a-half hour debate. Dagenham Labour Party also took up the call for strike action.
In fact the only strike action that actually took place was at Crawley in Sussex. (If any SWR reader knows of other strikes I would be interested to hear from them.) At 3 p.m. on 6 November hundreds of workers at the APV and Edwards factories on the Manor Royal estate walked out to join an anti-war demonstration. They were joined by a contingent of building workers. The demonstration was limited in size – the organisers alleged intimidation by employers – but it showed the potential that was there.
The ceasefire came almost immediately after the Crawley strike, so there was no time for the example to be taken up. Had the war gone on longer there might have been more token stoppages. Certainly it would be wrong to overstate the impact of workers’ actions. It undoubtedly made little or no impact on the course of events.
As always it is difficult to know how representative were the meetings which issued calls for action. Most groups of workers confined themselves to asking the TUC to give a lead rather than taking the riskier, but more desirable, path of giving a lead and seeing who would follow.
While the right wing aimed to stamp on any direct action, the Labour left kept very quiet on the issue. The Communist Party put its weight behind calls for industrial action but was obviously seriously distracted by its own internal upheavals resulting from the events in Hungary.
But this page from our history is worth remembering. Though the actual achievements were modest, it is clear that the working class was not carried away by a wave of jingoism.
Those who wanted to oppose the war were able to organise and win support for their ideas. If even a section of the Labour left had given a clear lead, the results could have been much more impressive.
Proletarian internationalism is not a utopia or a meaningless abstraction. It can and must be fought for in the movement.
 



The Artful Albanian: The Memoirs of Enver Hoxha
Edited by Jon Halliday
Chatto & Windus, £5.95
I FEEL about Enver Hoxha, the late Albanian leader, much as I do about Frank Sinatra: I deplore what he stood for, but it is impossible to deny that the man had style.
Hoxha was not the sort of mealy-mouthed Stalinist who dressed up his crimes as ‘tragic necessities’; he was a thug and made no attempt to hide it.
His comment on the Hungarian revolution was simple: “Have some of the leaders of these counter-revolutionaries shot to teach them what the dictatorship of the proletariat is.”
When Hoxha’s delegation in Moscow found their rooms were bugged, they recorded a message calling their hosts ‘traitors’.
So when Hoxha came to write his memoirs (from which Jon Halliday has edited a selection) he gave us lies on a grand scale. Thus the first edition of Hoxha’s volume With Stalin contains fulsome praise of Mehmet Shehu, his prime minister from 1954 to 1981.
But in 1981 Shehu was killed and it was claimed he had been an American agent since the 1930s. A new version of With Stalin was rushed through the presses.
For Hoxha the only function of the past is to justify the present. So we learn with some surprise in his account of Albania’s relations with China that Mao Zedong was “never a Marxist”.
For those of us who remember the years in the sixties and seventies when China and Albania swore undying friendship, this is a bit like Morecambe and Wise claiming they never did a double act.
Even in his own terms, Hoxha’s account is riddled with contradictions. He complains bitterly that the Russians tried to suppress his viewpoint – but opponents within the Albanian CP got little right of free speech; in the words of Mehmet Shehu at the Fourth Party Congress:
“For those who stand in the way of party unity: a spit in the face, a sock in the jaw, and, if necessary, a bullet in the head ...”
And Hoxha’s professions of internationalism look pretty thin when he himself tells how, at the end of the Greek civil war, Greek Communist refugees were deported from Albania and their arms confiscated.
As a result the documentary value of these memoirs is negligible. Thus Hoxha presents the Russian leaders (after Stalin) whom he had dealings with as being not only bullies, but degenerates preoccupied with food and drink. This may well be true, but since it is what we expect Hoxha to say, his evidence is worthless.
Often, indeed, the memoirs seem to be pure Women’s Own material; thus Hoxha tells us that:
“Stalin has taken me by the arm and walked with me in his garden, tired himself on my behalf many times, taking the greatest care of me, even over the hat I should wear to avoid getting a cold, and going so far as ... to show me where the toilets were if I needed them.”
What are a few million purge victims beside this avuncular solicitude for Enver’s bladder?
Jon Halliday’s commentary and notes are scrupulous and helpful; he never hesitates to point out Hoxha’s dishonesties. Yet he clearly retains a liking for Hoxha, paying tribute to his “vigilant Balkan wiliness and his hard schooling in post-Leninist methodology and ritual.” Why this admiration for a man who would be more at home in the Mafia than in a Marxist organisation? To understand that we have to look at Halliday’s own political evolution.
For Halliday is a former editorial board member of New Left Review, and was concerned to present the intellectually respectable face of British Maoism.
The bright-eyed young Maoists of 1968 wanted a superman, a Chairman Mao of Marxist infallibility.
Now, middle-aged and cynical, they prefer those who are corruptible and corrupted, a consoling reminder that revolutionary change is impossible.
 



From Munich to the Liberation
J.P. Azéma
Cambridge University Press
THE SHADOW of the German occupation still lies heavy on the French political scene. The Gaullists trace their legitimacy from the war-time leader of the Free French. François Mitterrand began his political career in a resistance organisation for escaped prisoners. Even Le Pen’s organisation, the National Front, bears the same name as the body set up by the French Communist Party to fight for the ‘independence of France’.
Azéma’s history of France from 1938 to 1944 contains some illuminating insights into the period and its implications. One can only write really good history by taking sides, and although Azéma clearly believes, like Albert Camus, that ‘one cannot be on the side of concentration camps’, he generally retreats into a stance of academic objectivity. Nonetheless, his scrupulously documented account contains much of the raw material for an analysis.
World War II was a conflict between rival imperialisms which the allied side succeeded in passing off as an anti-fascist struggle. The situation that enabled them to sell that swindle has deep and complex roots. Azéma shows how, by 1938, the traditional left/right line-up on war had become thoroughly confused.
The Communist Party was invoking the spirit of Joan of Arc in its call for military resistance to Hitler, while the nationalist extreme right – the sort who chanted ‘Death to the Jews’ in the chamber of deputies – had adopted a ‘pacifist’ line on the grounds that war would help the Communists. As a result, when the war came, it was seen, quite falsely, as a ‘left wing’ cause.
The contradictions continued with the defeat of France in 1940 and the establishment of the Vichy state under Marshal Pétain. Azéma shows in some detail that Vichy enjoyed considerable independence from its Nazi patrons. All its crimes cannot simply be blamed on the foreign invader. For example, the Vichy measures against Jews were taken entirely on the initiative of home-grown French anti-semites, without any pressure from the German occupiers.
The classic French right rallied to Vichy. The traditional nationalists became the most fervent apologists for the Germans. But Vichy also drew on many other sources. A whole group of technocrats believed Vichy offered the opportunity for economic modernisation without any worries about democracy. Others simply believed that the ‘enemy within’ (the working class) was a greater threat to their interests that Hitler. And Vichy did not lack ‘left-wing’ support. Three quarters of the Socialist Party deputies voted for Pétain in 1940, and numerous ex-Communists and ex-syndicalists offered their services to the marshal. Azéma reminds us just how many so-called ‘democrats’ will flock to the banner of fascism if it suits their book.
The resistance was, equally, a contradictory body. Many individual right-wing nationalists joined it out of commitment to French patriotism. But when they turned to those of their own class for financial support, they got short shrift. And it was, of course, the working class who suffered the main burdens of the war – hunger and cuts in real wages.
It was above all the politics of the French Communist Party that ensured that the resistance did not become a class-based movement, but was harnessed to the cause of military victory for the allies. In so doing, they produced the final paradox. The left’s war against fascism paved the way for Charles de Gaulle to take over at the war’s end, guaranteeing the survival of French capitalism. Yet de Gaulle had more in common with the classic right, even though he could on occasion adopt a bit of radical rhetoric.
In World War I the organisations of the left betrayed the workers openly and callously. In World War II they did it more subtly but no less disastrously.
 



D. WidgeryBeating TimeLondon 1986
The revolutionary left is, in general, not very good at writing
its own history. Much of what is written is self-justifying
sectarianism, while those who have a proper recognition that their
own group is not the centre of the universe often see no point in
doing historical work. David Widgery’s Beating Time [1]
– a history of the Anti-Nazi League and in particular of Rock
Against Racism – is therefore to be welcomed. Widgery’s
book is not a scholarly treatise  [2], but a committed and passionate
account by a participant. Widgery has been savagely attacked from the
right  [3] and must be defended; if some of his judgments inspire
reservations, they at least have the merit of initiating a useful
debate.
Beating Time has two enormous merits. Firstly, it reminds
us that revolutionaries have been capable of mass mobilisation and of
affecting the course of events. The collapse of the National Front in
1979 was not inevitable; Widgery rightly makes the comparison with
the rise of Le Pen in France, where the left’s response was
weak and belated. Certainly we must share the credit with Margaret
Thatcher, whose notorious ‘swamping’ speech won many NF
votes back to the Tories. But the ANL’s role cannot be denied.
Undoubtedly the SWP made mistakes during the ANL period, and they
must be analysed and studied. But if we had avoided the mistakes by
not taking the initiative, we should have quite simply condemned
ourselves to irrelevance.
Secondly, Widgery makes some perceptive comments about the
relation of form to content in political propaganda. The ANL did not
succeed simply because it had the ‘right line’ on
fighting racism, but rather because of how that line was presented.
And that point has a wider relevance for the question of socialist
propaganda; as Widgery argues:
If socialism is transmitted in a deliberately doleful,
pre-electronic idiom, if its emotional appeal is to working-class
sacrifice and middle-class guilt and if its dominant medium is the
ill-printed word and the drab public procession, it will simply
bounce off people who have grown up on this side of the sixties
watershed and leave barely a dent behind. (p. 84)
Widgery reminds us what we learnt in that period – and have
perhaps too lightly forgotten since. For if it is one hundred per
cent correct that in the downturn a revolutionary newspaper needs to
concentrate more on basic propaganda, to contain ‘longer, more
analytical articles’  [4], it is also true that good propaganda
need not be boring; indeed, one would suppose, almost by definition,
that it should not. Widgery reminds us what imagination and lively
presentation can do for the propagation of socialist ideas.
These are the book’s merits, and for them alone it deserves
to be read and discussed. But behind them lie certain ambivalences,
certain questions which Widgery does not answer and which require
further clarification.
What was the nature of the ANL operation? We need not waste much
time on the political illiteracy current among some sectarian
opponents that the ANL was a Popular Front. The essence of the
Popular Front is unity with the political representatives of a
section of the bourgeoisie. Thus the French Popular Front was a
political alliance between the workers’ parties and the
Radicals, described by Trotsky as the ‘democratic party of
French imperialism’.  [5] ANL sponsors like Keith Waterhouse and
Glenda Jackson were not short of a bob or two, but no-one could
seriously describe them as the political representatives of a wing of
the British ruling class. Indeed, the majority of ANL sponsors were
probably trade unionists (with the NUJ, Equity and the Musicians’
Union in a preponderance).
Nor was the ANL a united front in the classic sense. The Labour
MPs, like Neil Kinnock and Gwyneth Dunwoody (yes really! Remember?)
helped the ANL’s credibility, but it was Joe Strummer and Elvis
Costello who pulled the crowds. It was in many ways a unique
historical experience, one which, in Widgery’s words,
‘genuinely brought culture and politics into each other’s
arms and set them dancing’. (p. 52)
But if Widgery’s strength lies in his ability to recreate a
concrete historical situation, his weakness lies in the absence of an
adequate theoretical framework. Widgery stresses, quite rightly, the
dimension of spontaneity. Revolutionaries have to know when to ‘learn
from the masses’.  [6] But as Lenin pointed out, the process is
a two-way one: ‘Undoubtedly, the revolution will teach us, and
will teach the masses of the people. But the question that now
confronts a militant political party is: shall we be able to teach
the revolution anything?’  [7]
In 1977 Paul Weller, in a classic punk affirmation, told the world
that ‘the kids know where it’s at’.  [8] (Weller was
not yet nineteen and in that Jubilee year believed that the Queen was
‘the best diplomat we’ve got’.  [9]) The following
year a somewhat older Widgery echoed Weller in a letter to Socialist
Review.  [10] ‘... "Youth" ... have ten times more
idea of what’s going down than your pretty average Marxist
Editor ... working class kids NOW are political and fun without
having to make 5 minute speeches to prove it.’
Widgery does not quote this in Beating Time – but he
does not seem to have broken clearly with the conceptions that lie
behind it. For what is missing here is a concept of ideology. If the
kids do know ‘where it’s at’ by the simple device
of being biologically young and bopping to the right music, then
ideology poses no problems – we can simply step outside of it.
This is simply the other side of the coin of the Althusserian notion
that ‘ideology ... is indispensable in any society’.  [11]
Both concepts encourage passivity and deny the need for politics. If
ideology can be cast aside without effort, or if it is totally
inescapable, then there is not much that should, and can, be done.
Marx and Engels had a more demanding formulation: ‘The ideas
of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas’.  [12]
Ruling-class ideas will dominate (otherwise the system would
collapse), but they are not the only ideas; there is ground for
ideological struggle.
Widgery’s underestimation of ideology becomes clear in his
assessment of culture. Writing of himself and the generation of 1968
he states:
When we were finding our way to Marxism in the 1960s our
common influences were not only Mayakovsky, El Lissitzky, Tallin,
Brecht, Grosz and Heartfield but surrealism, the cinema, Tamla
Motown, the Village Voice, Cadillac fins and American pop art.
(p. 54)
Now personally, I’m not very sure whether I would get
Cadillac fins at a garage or a fish shop. But Widgery undoubtedly
does have an important point here. The items he lists were part of
the sensibility of the left in the sixties, and any history that
leaves them out in favour of a unique focus on Wilson’s
anti-union laws or why Workers’ Fight split from Militant will
quite simply miss the point.
Yet whenever Widgery starts producing his rather breathless lists
of cultural heroes and influences (which he does repeatedly
throughout the book) I am reminded of T.S. Eliot’s famous
definition of ‘culture’: ‘Culture ... includes all
the characteristic activities and interests of a people: Derby Day,
Henley Regatta, Cowes, the twelfth of August, a cup final, the dog
races, the pin table, the dart board, Wensleydale cheese, boiled
cabbage cut into sections, beetroot in vinegar, nineteenth-century
Gothic churches, and the music of Elgar.’  [13]
Like Eliot, Widgery underestimates the extent to which ‘culture’
is an embodiment and expression of ideology. This underestimation
undoubtedly springs from a generous impulse; Widgery wants to have
all the angels on his side. Unlike Leavis, he wants a ‘great
tradition’ that is elastically all-inclusive. Unfortunately,
Widgery’s reluctance to draw ideological lines leads to some
serious problems in both political and cultural analysis.
The period of the ANL was one of deep crisis for reformism in
Britain and around the world. In Portugal a working class which after
more than four decades of dictatorship, had not developed’ mass
reformist organisations, seemed, in 1975, to be moving towards
revolution. In Britain the Labour government’s fraudulent
‘Social Contract’ had won the support of the trade union
bureaucracy, including the ‘Lefts’ like Scanlon and
Jones, and thereby of the layer of established militants who looked
to the left bureaucrats. Apart from the defeated firefighters’
strike of 1977–78 there were few national confrontations; what
did happen was a series of small but courageous and tenacious
struggles – Trico, Grunwicks, Garners – involving workers
– often black and/or female – who were relatively
untouched by reformist influences. The IS/SWP strategy in the period
was therefore to relate to the minority who wanted to fight. Hence
the Right to Work Campaign, the rather less successful by-election
candidacies and the street confrontations with the Nazis.
In such a situation it was all too easy to underestimate the
resilience of reformism, its ability to co-opt and recuperate the new
militants. In January 1977, Duncan Hallas (a comrade not unduly
swayed by the strains of punk rock) made the prediction (rash but not
yet falsified) that ‘it may well be the case that Callaghan’s
is the last majority Labour government’.  [14] And in
1978 Tony Cliff wrote an article called Why Socialists must
support gays, which warned the left not to believe that ‘the
lieutenants of the revolution will all be forty-year-old white male
shop stewards’, and declared that ‘we should look forward
now to the first leader of the London workers’ council being a
19-year-old black gay woman!’  [15] The image of quadruple
oppression (by race, sex, sexuality and age) was a powerful one; but
eight years on Cliff’s black Lesbian is probably a 27-year-old
Labour councillor somewhere in inner London. Mario Soares succeeded
in containing the Portuguese Revolution, and many of the
revolutionaries of the mid-seventies have been sucked into the Labour
Party to tail first Benn and then Kinnock.
Widgery accepts (p. 8) that the ANL’s victory was
temporary; what he fails to explain is how it happened that so much
that seemed possible in the late seventies failed to come about. Thus
Widgery notes that it was possible for the SWP and the Labour Party
to ally in the ANL, despite their divergent interests; he quotes Neil
Kinnock as saying: ‘As far as I’m concerned the ANL
performs a very important function for the Labour Party.’
(p. 113) Indeed it did; the Labour Party probably recruited
rather more members via the ANL than the SWP did. Kinnock might have
added that the ANL played a ‘very important function’ for
Neil Kinnock MP. For Kinnock, like so many reformist leaders before
him, was elected by the left in order to lead from the right; his
past with the ANL was undoubtedly one of the factors that helped to
create his left image in 1983.
Because Widgery doesn’t have a theory of ideology he is
unable to explain the mechanisms of that ideological recuperation by
reformism. Why did the kids cease to know ‘where it was at’?
Was it simply old age? And as a result Widgery simply fails to pose
the problem of how revolutionaries should operate in a movement like
the ANL.
Widgery does draw out the key role of the SWP – and notably
of Jim Nichol and Paul Holborow – in initiating the ANL
(pp. 49–50). Without that SWP initiative the ANL would
simply not have happened – and the far right would have grown
much stronger. But because Widgery sees everything from the
standpoint of the mass movement, nothing from the standpoint of the
party, he ducks the real problems. This issue is not one of
manipulation (’Sinister Trotskyists mislead bright-eyed
youth’); would that it were so easy for a revolutionary group
of some 3,000 to ‘manipulate’ demonstrations of up to a
hundred thousand. Widgery’s cataloguing of the spontaneity and
local initiative which lay behind RAR and the ANL makes it easy to
answer such smears.
The more difficult question, which Widgery does not even raise, is
as follows: the ANL was a broad-front, single-issue campaign. As such
the vast majority of its members remained recuperable by reformism.
Yet such a campaign could only exist through the initiative of the
revolutionary minority. So how do the revolutionaries act to build a
successful broad front, but at the same time recruit to their own
organisation, the only effective way of constructing a barrier
against reformist influence?
Of course there is no easy answer to this dilemma. The
contradiction, as Tony Cliff often remarks, is in ‘life
itself’. In the 1966–68 period the International Marxist
Group took the initiative in launching the Vietnam Solidarity
Campaign. The International Socialists let the IMG carry the
administrative leadership of the VSC; we concentrated on building the
campaign on the ground – and on fighting for our own politics.
As a result we recruited far more members from the VSC than the IMG
did. At the time of the ANL that solution was not available; if we
had not launched the campaign no-one would have. To have abstained
would have been both criminal and suicidal. And it was no solution to
make some SWP members into ANL apparatchiks, others into SWP
propagandists – such a division of labour could only import
conflict into the party.
Undoubtedly, however, we did make some serious mistakes. All too
often we assumed that anyone who bought a Clash album was already a
revolutionary (rather than someone with whom it was very much
worthwhile arguing revolutionary politics). And Socialist Worker
– despite its lively and imaginative presentation, made some
serious concessions in terms of carrying socialist arguments. The
same kind of spontaneism that underlies Widgery’s analysis made
it possible for Socialist Worker to fight shy of defending
Marxist theory. Thus one Garry Bushell (now with The Sun)
attacked
... fossilised theoreticians who want to write skins and
punks in on the page that says ‘the proletarian youth flocked
to the party’s leadership’.
As for the other sanitised slide-rule socialists –
you can sit there with your logarithms writing theses on the perfect
revolution until they’re ready to fumigate your cell at the
next Belsen.  [16]
The underestimation of ideology that makes Widgery unable to
confront these problems also mars his treatment of what is the main
focus of his book, the specific role of rock music – in
particular Rock Against Racism – in the anti-Nazi struggle. As
Widgery points out, there were teachers, miners, railway workers,
drunks and left-handed vegetarians Against the Nazis’. The
ANL’s sponsors included film-actors, university professors and
classical musicians. But it was the Rock Against Racism carnivals
which gave the ANL its biggest mobilisations and gave the campaign
its real mass penetration. Why?
There have been two conceptions of rock music current on the left.
The protagonists of the former claim that rock is in some sense
inherently revolutionary; they base their case on the roots of the
music in black oppression, on the selective quotation of allegedly
subversive lyrics, and on the equally selective quotation of
expressions of outrage by ageing clergymen and right-wing
politicians.
The proponents of the opposing case deny any specifically
progressive qualities to the music. They point to the conservative
and often sexist nature of many of the songs; to the competitive and
individualist nature of the star system; and above all to the way the
music becomes a commodity and a source of huge profits, something
totally integrated within the capitalist system.
Both accounts are true; both, taken in isolation, are patent
nonsense. What is needed is some way of understanding the
contradictions that riddle the history and practice of rock music.
We have to begin by recognising that as yet no historical
materialist theory of music exists. It may be hypothetically possible
to show that rhythms and musical structures are the expression of
ideologies, but as yet it has not been done. True Plato wanted to ban
‘relaxing modes’ and ‘drinking songs’ from
his ideal authoritarian state  [17], and J.S. Bach argued that all
music’s ‘finis and final cause should never be
anything else but the glory of God and the recreation of the mind.
When this is not heeded, there really is no music, but a hellish howl
and clatter.’  [18] We may deduce that neither Plato nor Bach
would have much liked the Sex Pistols and that their dislike would
not have been a question of personal ‘taste’ but
something to do with their (conservative) world-views. But this is no
more than a hint of the existence of a musical ideology; to identify
such a thing will require an immense labour in the study of complex
mediations and we may well not get it this side of the revolution. So
we shall have to make do with some more instrumental criteria.
Widgery stresses the black origins of the music. This was a
powerful agitational theme for denouncing white racist musicians who
ripped off black music and for exploiting the contradiction of white
racist youth who liked black music. And undoubtedly the blues and
jazz that Widgery looks back to was a profound expression of racial
and social oppression. But just as Widgery ignores the capacity of
reformism for ideological recuperation, so too he ignores the ability
of the music industry to co-opt and tame. Capitalism can certainly
live with Michael Jackson’s Thriller (the
biggest-selling album ever) and Lionel Richie does not seem set to
bring the system crashing down.
So should we simply pack in contemporary music and concentrate on
rare blues records from the forties? Not, I would argue, while the
Redskins (with Tony Cliff on backing vocals) can make No. 31 in
the album charts. For if the ruling ideas of the music industry are
deeply reactionary, there is still ground for ideological struggle.
Popular music – much more than the cinema, television or the
press – is still permeable and its permeability is rooted in
its structure.
Popular music is inherently committed to innovation; it markets by
constantly promising to replace the old by the new. This is embodied
in the institution of the weekly chart, and above all in the concept
of the ‘climber’ on which radio and television chart
presentation is based. It doesn’t matter how well a record is
selling; if it is doing less well than last week it is on the way
out.
In order to satisfy the thirst for innovation which it has itself
created, the industry needs a reserve army of new talent. Of course
the easiest way to do this is to manufacture the new band
synthetically (a task made much easier by computers, which make
musical ability largely obsolete). The only problem is that it
doesn’t always work. Sigue Sigue Sputnik were launched as the
Sex Pistols of the mid-eighties, complete with ‘designer
violence’, racist jokes and a half-sympathetic plug in New
Socialist.  [19] Unfortunately nobody much wanted to buy the
records. With luck someone lost a lot of money on the exercise.
So the industry still has to rely for its reserve army on those
weird unknown bands you hear on the John Peel programme. And those
bands – because some of them are young, poor and actually enjoy
music – are just sometimes radical, not only musically but
politically. Of course Peel may disappear when Radio One is
privatised, but the contradiction remains. The music industry has
colossal powers of recuperation, but it can never quite close the
gap.
As a result ruling class hegemony over popular music is less than
total. Despite money, despite hyping, it cannot be wholly relied
upon. The really interesting thing about popular music during the
Falklands War is not that Elvis Costello wrote an excellent (but not
terribly successful) song opposing it but that there were no
pro-war records. Presumably few bands supported the war and those
that did were not going to stick their necks out and risk their
reputation. Those of us old enough to remember being assailed by Anne
Shelton’s Lay Down Your Arms (despite its title a
pro-militarist song) in the run up to Suez (let alone Petula Clark
being promoted as ‘forces’ favourite’ in the Korean
War) were both surprised and thankful.
On this account Widgery is right to stress the political potential
of rock music; but wrong to underestimate the industry’s powers
of ideological recuperation. This leads him to overstate the
achievements of the RAR period, and to distort what has happened
since.
Thus Widgery argues that by 1977 ‘punk was clearly a mass
movement’. Indeed, by the standards of small revolutionary
groups; but in terms of the popular music market it remained a
minority current. Apart from the Sex Pistols’ seven top ten
entries there were few major punk hits. The Clash never made the top
ten at all, and performers like Aswad and Carol Grimes, who feature
prominently in Widgery’s account, never made the chart at all.
During the year of the two carnivals, 1978, the Number One position
was occupied for sixteen weeks by John Travolta and Olivia
Newton-John, and for another nine by the black but banal Boney M. The
only chart-toppers remotely akin to RAR interests were Althea and
Donna’s Up Town Top Ranking and the Boomtown Rats’
Rat Trap.  [20]
More seriously, Widgery fails to explain – or apparently to
understand – what has happened since the golden days of RAR. In
the early eighties the Jam and the Specials did take overtly
political songs all the way to Number One, but since then the picture
has indeed been bleak. Widgery’s optimism is thus surprising:
The potent idea that pop music can be about something
more than mere entertainment has remained and deepened. Live Aid
above all but even Wham! miming for the miners, Bruce Springsteen’s
hefty donation to the Women Against Pit Closures campaign, and the
joint version of You’ll Never Walk Alone to raise money
for the victims of the Bradford football stadium fire in June 1985,
all represent a wider recognition of the social power popular music
can have which goes back to RAR and the early days of punk. The music
is often tinsel-weight but the projects represent a huge advance on
the take-the-money-and-run mentality. (p. 116)
Here Widgery’s desire to have all the angels on his side
seems to have taken him right out of reality. The reference to
‘mentality’ seems to place the whole thing on the level
of personal morality, ignoring the pressures of material interest and
ideology. Did Widgery not notice that while the Live Aid and Bradford
fire records were cheerfully hyped to Number One, the only
pro-miner record that made any impact on the charts was the Council
Collective’s Soul Deep; and that became a quite minor
hit only after the performers had been panicked into donating some of
the proceeds to a scab taxi-driver’s widow? As for Live Aid,
its role for 1980s rock stars is what ‘buying my mum and dad a
big house’ was for their predecessors in the fifties –
confirmation that they are nice boys and girls at heart.
On the contrary, what has happened in the mid-eighties is that in
a period with no social movements to exercise a pull in the opposite
direction, the profit-makers have tightened their grip and succeeded
in making virtually everything they touch anodyne, diluted music for
a demoralised public. The industry has even solved the old problem of
what to do with those who are too old to rock and roll but too young
to die – it sells them Bruce Springsteen and Dire Straits.
What is needed in this situation is not a vague ‘mentality’
of good-will, but hard politics. And that politics has to be backed
up by organisation. But just as Widgery underplayed the role of the
revolutionary party in fighting reformism, so he fails to point to
the role of the party in cultural struggle. One of the very few bands
that has preserved its political and musical integrity over the
recent period is the Redskins. Firstly, because membership of the SWP
has given them a clear political framework. And secondly, because
every time they appear on stage or television, they know they are
being watched by SWP members muttering: ‘Beware of your
deviations and faux-pas, we shall not miss a single one.’
 [21]
Of course other musicians have fought against the pressure, and
felt the need of party organisation. Since the SWP could not offer it
to them in the present period, they turned to the Labour Party. Hence
Red Wedge was formed. Now Widgery’s book was completed last
December, and he makes no mention of Red Wedge; but its existence
puts his methodology to the test. Widgery’s failure is that he
doesn’t draw the ideological lines – between politics and
charity between Live Aid and the miners’ strike. It is only
when we have drawn the lines that we can deal with those troublesome
cases that straddle across them.
For Red Wedge are centrists, vacillating elements with one foot in
the camp of class struggle and the other in Kinnock’s election
machine. And as with all centrists, our job is to pursue, not woolly
compromise, but political clarification and polarisation. Our aim,
pursued firmly but fraternally, is to draw the dividing line between
the reformists and the revolutionaries among them, and above all
among their followers.
To do so would be a small but worthwhile task, a task which would
require the party to take cultural intervention seriously. In the
period after the demise of the ANL and RAR, there was a tendency to
‘bend the stick’ away from what were perceived as the
excesses of the period. Between 1982 and 1984 there was a virtual
embargo on the discussion of popular music in the pages of Socialist
Worker. Happily this state of affairs is now over, thanks largely
to the efforts of the Redskins, who kept on keeping on when they were
getting little support or encouragement from the party machine. The
time is now ripe to make a sober assessment of the achievements and
limitations of one of the most important phases in the party’s
history. Widgery’s book is a valuable starting-point in that
task.

Notes
1. London, 1986. Page references given in brackets in the text.
2. Indeed, it is a little too unscholarly; like Widgery’s
earlier The Left in Britain (Harmondsworth 1986) the work is
marred by minor errors: thus Ken Worpole becomes Ken Walpole, the
Leyton Buzzards become the Leighton Buzzards, Anarchy in the UK,
which peaked at No. 38, is said to have topped the charts, and
the chronology contains some wild inaccuracies.
3. Cf. his comments in City Limits, 26 June 1986.
4. C. Harman, The Revolutionary Press, International
Socialism 2:24, p. 42.
5. Cited in J. Danos and M. Gibelin, June ’36, London
1986, p. 251.
6. T. Cliff, Lenin, volume I, London 1975, p. 232.
7. V.I. Lenin, Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the
Democratic Revolution, Moscow n.d., p.10.
8. The Jam, In the City, Polydor 2058 866,1977.
9. P. Hewitt, The Jam: A Beat Concerto, London 1983, p. 40.
10. July–August 1978, jointly with Ruth Gregory, Syd Shelton
and Roger (Dub) Huddle.
11. L. Althusser, Pour Marx, Paris 1967, p. 93.
12. K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology, London
1965, p. 60.
13. Notes Towards the Definition of Culture; cited in R.
Williams, Culture and Society, Harmondsworth 1963, p. 230.
14. Some Prospects for 1977, International Socialism
1:94.
15. Socialist Worker, 26 August 1978.
16. Socialist Worker, 7 October 1978.
17. The Republic, Harmondsworth 1955, p. 139.
18. Cited in K. Popper, Unended Quest, London 1976, p: 63.
19. April 1986.
20. All statistics come from the standard source book, The
Guinness Book of British Hit Singles (Enfield 1983). I am, of
course, aware that the charts are rigged and hyped, but I am using
them as a very crude indicator – i.e. a top ten record gets
bought and heard quite a lot. Chart placings are more easily
accessible than sales figures, which may also be rigged and distorted
by lying and home-taping. The chart was a Top Fifty until 29 April
1978, and a Top Seventy-Five thereafter. Unfortunately on these
charts the Sex Pistols’ God Save the Queen never got
higher than Number Two.
21. Surrealist declaration of 27 January 1925.
 



GOETZ: Charlatan! Will you make them wait till the Day of Judgment? I tell you Good is possible, every day, at every hour, at this very moment. [1]
More books and articles have probably been written about Jean-Paul Sartre than any other living writer, and some justification is needed for an addition to the total. Sartre has had his cliques of admirers – from the disoriented middle-class youth of Saint-Germain-des-Pres in the late forties to the editorial board of New Left Review in the mid-sixties. He has equally had his enemies – from the 5,000 ex-servicemen who marched down the Champs Elysees in 1961 chanting ‘shoot Sartre’ to Roger Garaudy of the French Communist Party who described Sartre as a ‘gravedigger’. [2]
The aim of this article is not to make a moral judgment on Sartre – to question his sincerity would be a speculation of small interest. He has frequently shown political and personal integrity; he virtually abandoned a career as novelist and dramatist in favour of the less glamorous and rewarding pursuits of philosophy and political polemic. His personal history in the post-war period was a succession of breaks with close friends – Raymond Aron, Camus, Koestler, Merleau-Ponty – because he found their anti-Communist politics unacceptable. His farewell to Koestler was typical – ‘When people have such different opinions, they can’t even go to the pictures together.’ [3]
Yet Sartre’s politics and his whole world view are radically different from those of International Socialism, and there is little point in pretending that they are not, though equally the common view of Sartre as a naive fellow-traveller with Stalinism must be challenged.
Sartre has been a witness to a historical period. The Popular Front and factory occupations of 1936, the German Occupation and the Resistance, the Algerian war, Gaullism, the May events of 1968, the twin themes of fascism and Stalinism – these have been the very substance of Sartre’s work. To understand him is to attempt an understanding of them. In his preface to Nizan’s Aden Arabie in 1960 [4] Sartre summed up the experience of the French Left:
But we have nothing more to say to the young: 50 years of life in this backward province that France has become, it is degrading. We have shouted, protested, signed, countersigned; we have, according to our various ways of thought, declared “it is not acceptable” or “the proletariat will not accept ...” And in the end here we are; so we have accepted everything. Can we communicate to the unknown young our wisdom and the fine fruits of our experience? From defeat to defeat we have learnt only one thing: our complete impotence.’
But it is precisely from this impotence, and a study of its causes, that the new revolutionary movement must learn.
Moreover, Sartre has made a serious contribution to modern Marxism. There is no need to accept the grotesque claim that Sartre’s Critique of Dialectical Reason ‘has dispensed with the theoretical paraphernalia of the Stalin-Trotsky debate and thus is able to comprehend both positions’ [5]; no need even to pose the theological question whether Sartre is a Marxist. His works have confronted many of the central problems of Marxist theory and practice; their failures are as interesting as their successes.
Thirdly, Sartre has had most influence as a creative writer, as a novelist and dramatist. He has been not only an original thinker, but an effective populariser of his own ideas. Sartre, whose concept of commitment has often been misunderstood or wilfully distorted, has shown, like Brecht, Orwell and Serge, that revolutionary politics need not necessarily lead to a renunciation of literature, but rather to a specifically revolutionary literature.
Sartre’s work is of an extraordinary richness. Philosopher, psychologist, novelist, dramatist, politician, journalist: there seems to be a full lifetime in each of these fields. This article will not try to cover every stage and aspect; in particular there will be no treatment in depth of the more strictly philosophical aspects of Sartre’s work. But it will attempt to show the essential unity of his work, the nature of the preoccupations that run through all his actions – including his writings, for to Sartre writing is always an act.
 
Sartre the Existentialist
The popular image identifies Sartre as an ‘existentialist’, a title shared with the Nazi Heidegger and the Moral Rearmer Gabriel Marcel. But the view of the world developed in Being and Nothingness, in the novel Nausea and the short stories in the collection Intimacy, has themes in common, not only with other so-called existentialists, but with writers as varied as Kafka, Malraux, Camus, Gide and Beckett.
The ideology of any ruling group involves a theory not just of man and society, but of the natural order. The prevailing state of affairs in society is justified as deriving from eternal facts of nature; inequality is a fact of human nature, competition is sanctified as part of the process of the survival of the fittest among all forms of life.
In this justification of society from nature, the idea of God has a key role to play. God guarantees the values which preserve the social order; God designs man with a certain nature and a certain purpose, just as, Sartre says, a manufacturer designs a paper-knife. Previous versions of atheism had acted as though God’s non-existence changed nothing; the existentialist, on the other hand, takes the consequences of God’s non-existence to their logical conclusion. If God does not exist, there is no rationality, no intelligible values, implicit in the universe. Man is alone and anguished, in the face of a meaningless universe. [6]
This view of the world is a response to the development of European capitalism after the First World War. Two distinct and to some extent opposite processes were taking place. On the one hand war and revolution were showing that the existing social order was not eternally established, but fragile and temporary. But at the same time monopoly capitalism was replacing competition; the old vision of the harmonious interplay of competing individuals was replaced by a world in which the individual became insignificant.
In his autobiography Words, Sartre tells how, as a child, he became aware of the irrationality of the universe.
‘Mademoiselle Marie-Louise (his teacher) was sapping my morale. I believed that wages were in proportion to merit and I was told that she was deserving: why then was she so badly paid? ... When I passed on her complaints, my grandfather burst out laughing; she was far too ugly for any man to want her. I didn’t laugh: could you be born condemned? In that case, I had been told lies: the order of the world concealed intolerable chaos.’
This recognition of the contradictions in bourgeois ideology contains already the seeds of a socialist critique. Similarly in Nausea, Roquentin’s recognition of the absurdity of the world shows him just how vain are the pretentions of the bourgeois of Bouville, who believe their status in society is rooted in the very order of nature. But they are only seeds; Sartre’s early existentialism is still ambiguous.
Existentialism does not lead naturally on to socialism. Many Marxists have preferred to draw outjts links with the irrationalism and individualism of fascism. Lukacs, in his Existentialism or Marxism? [7] sees fascism and existentialism as having the same starting-point in the crisis of imperialism. Sartre’s friend, the Communist novelist Paul Nizan, wrote a novel in 1935 called The Trojan Horse, where a character apparently based on Sartre developed from anarchism to fascism. But Sartre did not take that path.
What Sartre’s existentialism presents is the world-view of the bourgeoisie of late capitalism, stripped of the mystifications that are normally attached to it. It is a view of society founded on the competition between individuals, where no individual is able to see and comprehend the social process as a whole.
The view of society is a brutal and pessimistic one. Since the bourgeoisie does not like to look at itself in an honest manner, Sartre’s philosophy was denounced by the right-thinking bourgeois, and found a home only among the disenchanted elements |on the fringe of the class. Among such people we find, on the one hand, those who break with the bourgeoisie to adopt Marxism; on the other hand, those who develop irrational and terroristic philosophies that the bourgeoisie may adopt under extreme threat.
Sartre claims, in the Critique of Dialectical Reason, that ‘the very concepts used by Marxist science to describe our historical society – exploitation, alienation, fetishisation, reification, etc. – are precisely those which refer most directly to existential structures’. These concepts are already present in his early work, but in a form which is far from Marxist. Sartre’s world-view still starts with the individual – and often finishes there too. The most vivid expression is the play In Camera, where three dead people find that for them Hell is simply to be confined together for all eternity: each seeks to absorb the others into his plans, to realise his freedom by denying theirs.
Sartre’s main concern in his early work is to describe the human situation, to analyse the common features of the situation which every individual finds himself in.
For Sartre, the essential fact of the human condition is freedom of choice. Previous philosophies had tied themselves in knots over the question of free-will – does man have freedom of choice or are his actions predetermined by external factors? Sartre cuts through all the speculations and starts from the experience of the individual; we are free because we feel we are free. When we are faced with a choice we feel anguish at the knowledge that the choice is ours and no one else’s; after we lave taken the decision we have a sense of responsibility for our own acts.
This freedom of choice is not destroyed by external circumstances; in fact it may be made more real by them. For the option of death always remains. Even if we are ordered to do something at gun-point, we can choose to die rather than to obey. If we obey to save our life, the responsibility is still ours.
Sartre has himself criticised his early affirmations of absolute human freedom as being naive [8], and his later work has aimed at a clearer and more concrete view of the scope of human freedom. But the central theme of Sartre’s philosophy, its belief in the possibility of action under any conditions, was already settled. It was to affect the whole of his political and intellectual development.
Even in his early work, Sartre is aware of the ways free choice is distorted, and he attempts to analyse these, though he is still more concerned with the human condition in general than with the features of a particular society.
Thus in Being and Nothingness Sartre is very interested in the way in which the social process tends to turn people into things, to destroy their human qualities. This is a feature, for example, of sexual relations. A girl experiences the ambiguous nature of a man’s desire for her. On the one hand she requires to be recognised as a person, as having freedom; yet the desire must be for her body as an object. So, when the man tries to hold her hand, she cannot decide what to do. She may let him take her hand, yet feel her hand to be merely a physical object, not part of her real self.
A similar form of dehumanisation arises from the way human beings play roles in society. Sartre describes a cafe waiter’s behaviour; his gestures and manners appear exaggerated. Why? Because he is acting, he is ‘playing at’ being a waiter. He is being what he knows he is supposed to be. He defines himself as others define him, thereby losing part of his freedom – ‘A grocer who indulges in day-dreams is offensive to the customer because he is no longer wholly a grocer.’
Similarly, the writer Genet was, as a child, told he was a thief. He decided his elders and betters must be right, and embarked on a life of crime.
Sartre’s insights here have much in common with ideas developed by Marx and later Marxists (the theory of ‘reification’ – transformation of men into things). But in general Sartre does not locate the basis of the problem in specific social factors – the increasing specialisation in the division of labour, the gearing of industry to the production of commodities for exchange on the market rather than for human use.
Another important theme in the early Sartre is ‘bad faith’.Essentially ‘bad faith’ is the making of excuses, the evasion of freedom. To have freedom of choice means the experience of anguish and responsibility. Therefore men try to deny their own freedom by inventing theories which exclude human freedom.
One is guilty of bad faith if one uses an argument of the form: I could not do otherwise because I am female, black, homosexual, stupid, alcoholic, etc.
Bad faith takes many forms. At one extreme is Freudian psychology, which tries to explain the conscious action by the unconscious mental process. Our conscious experience of freedom is seen as merely the effect of a cause which is outside the grasp of our consciousness.
At the other extreme is the respectable bourgeois who believes in absolute and eternal moral standards, or in a God-given purpose to his life. He hides from the essential uniqueness of every human situation, and takes refuge in truths and values for which he is not responsible, which existed before he was born.
This concept of ‘bad faith’ offers the foundation for a critique of ideology. Class society tries to conceal the fact that oppression and exploitation are the result of human action, and attributes them to non-human forces. The oppressed are told they have no freedom, and as long as they believe this they continue to be unfree. Sartre’s recognition of freedom offers the basis for a revolutionary critique of society. But from the recognition of freedom to its realisation there is a long way to go.
 
The Discovery of Politics
For if Sartre’s philosophy was always a philosophy of action, political action was not one of his major preoccupations in the pre-war period. In 1936, the year of the Popular Front Government, he neither voted in the elections nor participated in any of the demonstrations – though he went to watch them.
If Sartre was already of the left, it was in a rather indeterminate anarchistic manner. Stalinism had no great attraction for him; he supported the CP as an anticapitalist force only in a negative sense; and his view of Russia already in 1929 was to dismiss it as a ‘civilisation of engineers’.
Trotskyism offered more of an intellectual appeal, and he read with interest the works of Trotsky. But French Trotskyism offered little hope of practical results; his closest contact, Simone de Beauvoir’s friend Colette Audry, belonged to a tendency with five members.
The most important Marxist influence on Sartre in the prewar period was from the members of a group of intellectuals who had joined the CP in the late twenties – including Paul Nizan and Georges Politzer. Politzer had given up the attempt to develop a ‘concrete psychology’ compatible with Marxism to devote himself to the study of economics as required by the Party. Nizan, a novelist and essayist, broke with the Party over the Hitler-Stalin pact; after his death the CP denounced him as a police spy.
But political preoccupations make themselves felt only indirectly in Sartre’s pre-war writing. His early fiction studies a variety of cases in which individuals seek a personal escape from the absurdity of existence. In Nausea, for example, the Autodidact seeks a sense to his life through the acquisition of knowledge – but in a culture in which knowledge has no accepted order, he has to pursue it by reading all the books in the library in alphabetical order.
In the collection Intimacy a number of cases of political psychology are treated. In the story The Wall it is the sceptical element of existentialism that prevails; prisoners in the Spanish Civil War find that in the face of imminent death any values that go beyond the individual seem absurd. In The Childhood of a Leader, Lucien Fleurier, a young bourgeois, is unable to understand what he is. He constantly seeks definition of himself in terms external to himself – he discovers with joy that he has complexes, that he is a homosexual, finally that he is a racialist who is quite unable to stand the sight of a Jew. As a study of ‘bad faith’, the story is a brilliant satire of racialism – but as a psychological, not a political phenomenon.
Intimacy belongs to a period when it was still possible to have a ‘take it or leave it’ attitude to politics. But Sartre was rapidly thrust into a world where it was no longer possible to leave it. Sartre went into the Army, was taken prisoner by the Germans, released after the capitulation of France. Fascism was now no longer a personal aberration, but the dominant fact of history. Sartre, still far from having a political perspective of any coherent sort, was concerned to fight it.
In an essay published in 1944 Sartre wrote: ‘We have never been so free as under the German Occupation.’ This is not just a literary paradox; it sums up what Sartre learned from the German Occupation. The existentialist abstraction that man is always free became the concrete experience that political action is always available.
The Resistance gave Sartre his acquaintance with extreme situations, the moments of anguish that haunt his post-war work – the threat of torture, the need to assassinate, the knock at the door with someone hidden in the back-room. But it also showed him that writing itself was not an intellectual exercise but a political act. While still in the prisoner-of-war camp Sartre wrote his first play – Bariona – ostensibly about the birth of Christ. The fact that it dealt with the Roman occupation of Palestine was not lost on the audience. Later on, Sartre managed to get The Flies, which despite its use of Greek myth and allusions to German philosophy was overtly pro-Resistance, performed under the very nose of the German censors.
Early in 1941, when the CP was still unwilling to support the Resistance because of the Hitler-Stalin pact, Sartre, together with Merleau-Ponty, Simone de Beauvoir, and other intellectuals, founded a group called Socialism and Liberty. Sartre’s attempts to persuade other intellectuals to co-operate were, however, limited. Malraux assured him that Russia and the USA would win the war and there was little to be done in France; Daniel Mayer proposed sending a letter to congratulate Leon Blum, leader of the Socialist Party, on his birthday. The Communist Party saw fit, however, to denounce Sartre as an ‘agent provocateur’. But when Russia entered the war, the CP entered the Resistance; Sartre dissolved his group, and worked closely with the Communists in the CNE (National Council of Writers). He had neither undue affection for the Communists, nor any real analysis of their line. The first task was to fight fascism.
Sartre was still in a state of confusion, torn between his preoccupation with individual choice and his concern for social questions. But this tension helped to produce a major work of literature, the three novels of the Roads to Freedom trilogy (a fourth volume was planned, but only fragments produced).
Roads to Freedom occupies a unique place in Sartre’s work. It is one of his finest and most profound works, yet it was something he could never repeat – indeed he never again wrote a novel. The three volumes trace the fortunes of a group of individuals in the period just before and after the outbreak of the Second World War. Sartre is looking back on his own past, seeing the convergence of individual development and social evolution.
The first volume, The Age of Reason, deals with a whole group of people, mainly middle class, students, etc., all guilty of various forms of ‘bad faith’. The main plot hinges around Mathieu, who is trying to get an abortion for his mistress, in order to preserve his own freedom – a freedom which in fact is the evasion of action.
Politics intrude only rarely into this volume; the Spanish war, the heightening European crises are mentioned, but nothing that any character does relates meaningfully to them. One character, however, is ambiguous – Brunet, the Communist, probably based on Nizan. He criticises Mathieu’s pseudo-freedom, claiming that CP membership gives a meaning to life. Yet the language he uses is almost religious in its tone; the Party is not an instrument of collective action, but a means of personal salvation. He tells Mathieu: ‘And let us get this quite clear: the Party doesn’t need you. To the Party you represent nothing but a little capital of intelligence – and we’ve got all the intellectuals we want.’ Foreseeing his own death, Brunet says: ‘Nothing can now deprive my life of its meaning, nothing can prevent its being a destiny.’ In one sense he is a satirical figure, another example of ‘bad faith’; but he also embodies Sartre’s preoccupation with the possibility of meaningful action.
The second volume, The Reprieve, deals with the Munich crisis. The threat of war impinges on every individual; projects are diverted; relationships broken; people, who would otherwise never have known, learn that they are cowards or heroes. In the third volume, Iron in the Soul, the focus narrows to Mathieu and Brunet; Mathieu reaches the final form of ‘bad faith’ in the belief that he has found freedom in the face of imminent death; Brunet is left alive to cope with the more difficult problems of the Hitler-Stalin pact and the turns in the CP line.
Roads to Freedom is a historical novel, which illuminates historical events through the experience of individuals. Sartre is here confronting the same problem as the great realists of the 19th century, Balzac, Tolstoy or Zola – the interweaving of individual and social destiny. Yet the form he adopts is very different; The Reprieve in particular adopts a fragmentary effect borrowed from Dos Passos where a number of separate narratives are mixed together – sometimes with the transition in mid-sentence – without any link between them. As in a disjointed film we cut from the politicians at Munich to a private love-making and back.
The form of the 19th century novel presupposed a commonly accepted framework within which meaningful historical action was possible. Sartre, unlike the ‘socialist realists’, recognised that to imitate 19th century forms was futile in a society in which the possibility of meaningful historical action was problematical. The fragmentation of Roads to Freedom evokes precisely the sense of individual impotence in face of the uncontrollable forces of history. Sartre now sought to solve this problem, not just on the level of literary technique, but on the level of political practice.
 
Action and Pragmatism
Sartre never accepted the kind of view of the Occupation suggested by Camus’s allegorical novel The Plague. For Camus, fascism was comparable to bubonic plague – an extraordinary challenge of non-human origin, in face of which solidarity was required. Sartre knew the political struggle must go on; but he had to come to terms with its changing forms.
At the Liberation, in 1944, there was a large Resistance movement, armed, and with substantial CP influence; workers were occupying factories in the liberated areas; American soldiers were demonstrating in support of the demand for immediate return home. The possibility that the defeat of fascism could be the beginning of a rapid process of social revolution was clearly present. But J.V. Stalin decreed otherwise; in return for his share of Eastern Europe he sent the French Communist Party into the Government to play a vital role in the re-establishment of French capitalism. The CP was willingly abetted by the French Socialist Party. [9]
Sartre, a committed socialist, but still rejecting Marxism, had no analysis for this period; on the one hand, his sympathy for the us shows that he did not recognise its imperialist ambitions at this stage; on the other hand he told Aron as early as June 1945 that he would support Russia against America in the event of a new war.
Sartre has given several different accounts of what were the available choices at the Liberation; but the most radical self-criticism appears in the obituary of Merleau-Ponty written in 1961 [10]:
In 1945 it was possible to choose between two positions. Two, and no more. The first and the better one, was to turn to the Marxists and to them alone, and to denounce the aborted revolution, the murdered Resistance, the disintegration of the Left. Some periodicals bravely adopted this position and disappeared; those were the happy days when people had ears so as not to hear and eyes so as not to see. Far from thinking that their failure damned their attempts, I claim that we could have imitated them without collapsing: the strength and the weakness of these reviews was that they concentrated on politics; ours published novels, literary essays, eye-witness reports and documents: these floats would have kept it going. But to denounce the betrayed revolution, one would first have had to be a revolutionary: Merleau was not one, and nor was I as yet. We did not have the right to proclaim ourselves as Marxists, despite our sympathies for Marx. Now revolution is not a state of mind: it is an everyday practice illuminated by a theory. And if it is not enough to have read Marx in order to be a revolutionary, one converges with him sooner or later if one militates for the revolution. The result is clear: only men formed by this discipline could effectively criticise the Left; so at this time, they had to be more or less closely linked to Trotskyist circles; but, at the same time, this connection disqualified them, though it was not their fault: to this deluded Left dreaming of unity, they appeared as ‘splitters’.
... The other attitude remained. We had no choice, it was forced on us. Coming from the middle classes, we tried to make a link between the intellectual petty-bourgeoisie and the Communist intellectuals. This bourgeoisie had begotten us: we had received as a heritage its culture and its values; but the Occupation and Marxism had taught us that neither one nor the other was automatic. We asked our friends in the Communist Party for the necessary tools to take humanism out of the hands of the bourgeoisie.
Without what he aptly described as an ‘everyday practice illuminated by a theory’, but with the conviction that political action was always possible, Sartre’s political development over the second half of the forties was necessarily erratic. The concern for action was healthy in comparison with the complete divorce between long-term objectives and short-term practice that existed in the Communist Party – and even more so in the still professedly Marxist Socialist Party. But the dangers of pragmatism and reformism were clearly large.
Sartre made no full-scale revision of his philosophy at this time; his promised sequel to Being and Nothingness, which would deal with moral questions, never appeared; all we have are two essays, Existentialism and Humanism and Portrait of the Anti-Semite (both 1946). [11] Here he developed a more concrete theory of freedom.
Firstly the concept of commitment becomes more prominent. For Sartre commitment is both a fact of life and a desirable value. We cannot choose except to choose – we are ‘condemned to be free’ – but we can choose to accept our responsibility and to make meaningful choices.
Secondly, he tries to elaborate the nature of this responsibility. His position is essentially that of Kant. We must act in such a way that our actions can be the basis for a universal principle. By exercising my freedom I am by implication willing the freedom of every other man. Though Sartre makes reference to the role of the working class, this universalism is basically a liberal position; it does not start from the fact that men are divided into social classes.
Sartre’s philosophy is a philosophy of abstract humanism. The practice that flows from it will therefore tend to be reformist. Sartre’s reformism was summarised thus in Saint Genêt:
‘To refuse is not to say no, it is to modify by work. One should not believe that the revolutionary rejects capitalist society as a whole: how could he since he is inside it? On the contrary, he accepts it as a fact which justifies his revolutionary action. “Change the world,” says Marx. “Change life,” says Rimbaud. Very well, change them if you can. That means that you will accept many things in order to change a few.’
Sartre was concerned to act at all costs; but what means of action was open to him? He was only too well aware that he was an intellectual, and as such had a particular relation to the political movements of the left. For the French Communist Party, there were two possible roles for intellectuals. One was as Party hack, ever ready to turn out a pseudo-intellectual justification for a tactical change in line (though the recent Garaudy affair has shown that even the most abject worm can turn); the other as an independent figure, whose purely intellectual work may be quite irrelevant to the Party, but who will give his name to any cause publicly supported by the Party.
Sartre accepted neither of these roles; he constantly criticised the CP for its dogmatism and lack of intellectual life, and though he signed many petitions in his time, he never accepted that this was the main use for a writer’s pen. But Sartre’s concept of a Party is always conditioned by his experience of French Stalinism. Nowhere is there a vision of what a Marxist party might be – an organisation in which workers and intellectuals are both taken out of their own milieu into the practical and intellectual life of the Party, in which a genuine internal theoretical debate can exist together with disciplined action.
Without a Marxist theory of the Party, Sartre could have no analysis of Stalinism; without an analysis of Stalinism he could have no strategy towards the CP; without a strategy towards the CP he could engage only in pressure-group politics.
In the late forties, Sartre made two attempts at pressure-group politics. The first was the founding of the magazine Les Temps Modernes. In one sense this was a success; for nearly 25 years the magazine has maintained a standard of serious theoretical debate that has certainly never been equalled in Britain.
But would-be imitators should be warned that such a venture is necessarily parasitic. An ‘independent’ journal can only exist in relation to a movement which offers it not only readers but positions to criticise. Sartre can scarcely have hoped to convert the leaders or change the leadership of a Stalinist party, but he did not offer the perspective, in the long or short term, of building an alternative to the CP. The positions of the Temps Modernes took each issue in isolation; they were both moralistic – for they offered no means of achieving their aims – and reformist – since they offered concrete policies at every point. The positions of Sartre and his friends were certainly better than those of the CP – they opposed the Indo-Chinese war long before the CP left the pro-imperialist Government – but they were not part of a revolutionary strategy.
On one important point, however, the record should be put straight in Sartre’s favour – the question of the disclosures about the Russian labour camps. The account of the affair in Simone de Beauvoir’s The Mandarins and the criticisms of Camus and others have suggested that Sartre was in some way soft on Stalinism in this matter. In fact Sartre had arranged an article denouncing the Soviet camps before the right-wing Figaro took up the matter. Sartre insisted, however, that the condemnation of Russian atrocities should in no way be used to justify French atrocities in Indo-China, Madagascar, etc.; the main enemy was at home. Sartre’s attitude was a perfectly principled one compared with the sickening hypocrisy of Camus (who astoundingly has a reputation for integrity even on the left) who wept crocodile tears over the Russian camps, but refused to sign a petition for negotiations in Indo-China because it was ‘playing the Communist game’. [12]
Sartre’s desire for effective action could scarcely be fulfilled by the Temps Modernes. Early in 1948, therefore, he took the more adventurous step of participating in the founding of a political movement, the RDR (Rassemblement Démocratique Révolutionnaire – Democratic Revolutionary Alliance). The movement was explicitly not a party; it sought members from those who were already active in the Communist and Socialist parties. Sartre’s pragmatism led him to think that regroupment could come first and theoretical clarity later. Nothing could have been more illusory at the very moment when the Cold War was causing catastrophic splits in the French labour movement. By accepting a minimum practical basis for unity Sartre found himself co-operating with some very curious elements – notably the ex-Trotskyist and future Gaullist David Rousset. For Rousset the anti-Stalinism of the RDR provided a convenient point of transition in his journey to the right. By late 1949 Rousset was conducting an openly pro-American campaign, and the RDR had collapsed.
The failure of the RDR challenged the very basis of Sartre’s political philosophy. In an unpublished note quoted by Simone de Beauvoir in Force of Circumstance he summed up the experience as follows:
My fundamental idea at the time: one can do nothing but bear witness to a way of life that is condemned to disappear but which will be reborn; and perhaps the best works will in the future bear witness to this way of life and allow it to be saved. Therefore, fluctuate between a taking of ideological positions and action. But if I advocate an ideological position, at once people incite me to action. What is Literature? brought me to the RDR ... But if I’m wrong, then my situation is one where synthesis is impossible. Even transcendence of it is distorted. In this case I must renounce the optimistic idea that in any situation one can be a man. An idea inspired by the Resistance: even under torture one could be a man. But that was not the problem: it lay rather in the fact that certain situations are perfectly livable but unbearably distorted by objective contradictions.
 



The defence of the material and moral interests of the working class dees not stop at the gates of the factories where workers are exploited. It involves every aspect of exploitation, and the scandal of public transport – indispensable to this exploitation – is not the least of these. (Lutte Ouvrière, January 13.)
Paris today suffers from the transport problems common to all great cities – plus a few extra ones deriving from Government incompetence and inaction over the last 50 years. There have been no substantial changes in the Paris transport system since 1920, though the population of the suburbs has increased by well over 1,000,000. Less than three miles of track have been added to the Underground since 1945.
Recent attempts to improve the system have been halfhearted, apart from cases where the clientele is largely bourgeois, like the new Metro line to Orly Airport. Other pseudo-solutions are one-man-operated buses, and tube carriages specially designed for maximum crowding (the main feature of the design is the absence of straps to hang on to). On one suburban railway line the number of coaches in trains is actually cut during the rush-hour – as the coaches have been transferred to a new ‘modern’ line. The general inefficiency means that any minor mishap causes massive disruption and delay.
The authorities have, however, seen fit to increase prices – increases planned for June mean that tube fares will have more than doubled and bus fares more than quadrupled over the last three years.
The inadequacies of public transport mean that many people resort to using private cars. There are some 3,000,000 vehicles in the Paris region – and only 100,000 can circulate freely in Paris at any one time. The result is catastrophic congestion.
The authorities have only two answers. Firstly, repression. In the first 10 months of 1969 there were 4,500300 charges for parking offences. Secondly, the introduction of parking meters. This solves nothing, but it drives the poorest car-owners back onto the overcrowded public transport system – and raises revenue into the bargain.
Transport raises a whole number of other issues. For example, the use of private vehicles causes far greater pollution than an efficient public transport. Inefficient transport causes many workers to be late for work, and lose money.
It is in this context that the comrades around the French revolutionary paper Lutte Ouvrière launched a campaign on the issue of public transport in Paris. This campaign was run in conjunction with the PSU (left social-democrats), and culminated in a public meeting on February 20, attended by over 4,000 people, and addressed by transport workers as well as speakers from LO and the PSU.
The slogan of the campaign was ‘L’Etat nous route’ (a play on words best rendered as ‘The State is taking us for a ride’). The basic demands raised were:

A single fare for all journeys by bus, tube and railway (so that workers should not be penalised for living at a distance from their work), with the perspective of abolition of payment;
Immediate improvement of bus services, and work to begin on extending the railway network;
More frequent bus services and more carriages on trains;
Shorter working hours to compensate for time lost in travel.

The campaign allowed the possibility of a range of imaginative ventures in propaganda and direct action. Impromptu meetings were held in railway and tube stations during the rush-hour, and in some cases attracted crowds of over 100. At the Montparnasse tube station, a LO sympathiser got access to the public address system and spoke to passengers over the loudspeakers in denunciation of increased fares. At a number of stations groups of workers refused to pay and forced their way through the barriers, getting tacit support from ticket-collectors.
The police attempted to stamp on this direct action as brutally as possible, but while some arrests were made, they had relatively little success. This was partly due to the very fact of congestion which enabled militants to escape rapidly; but also to the general sympathy of the travelling public towards the leftists.
LO are now calling for a continuation of the campaign by raising demands for action by the trade unions and the creation of transport users’ committees.
The political importance of the campaign is considerable. Firstly, it has opened up a new area of political activity. Previously revolutionaries seemed to have only two alternatives: long-term systematic work in the factories, requiring enormous dedication, or adventurist confrontations on issues which won little sympathy outside the student milieu. The transport agitation revived a little of the energy and practical activity of May 1968.
Secondly, the campaign had an effect on the entire constellation of the French left. LO have now achieved some basis for joint action with the PSU, which has both reformist and revolutionary currents within it. This united action has not impeded LO from making a critical analysis of the PSU – or from attacking the PSU councillor Claude Bourdet who supported the introduction of parking meters.
While no formal agreements were made, a number of Maoist groups (Humanité Rouge, Gauche Proletarienne, etc.) also participated in agitation on the issue of public transport, in particular organising refusals to pay fares. A group of Paris transport workers produced and distributed a leaflet on the question. The CFDT was active in campaigning and leaf-letting, and about 80 of its militants were arrested in one day for leafletting. Even the Paris Federation of the Socialist Party organised a demonstration – bringing out their red flags for the first time in years.
The PCF and the CGT have taken an ambiguous position. They have been unable to ignore the agitation and forced to support it verbally, by calls for ‘mass action’. But though they have the only organisation capable at present of launching mass action, they have scrupulously refrained from doing so. Instead, they have devoted their energies to denouncing revolutionary militants for attacks on transport workers – thereby grossly exaggerating a few incidents where inspectors clashed with demonstrators – and ignoring the general sympathy of transport workers for the campaign.
In short, the agitation marks a modest but significant step forward for the revolutionary forces in France.
 



Georg Lukács: The man, his work and his ideas
Edited by G.H.R. Parkinson
Weidenfeld & Nicholson, £3.15
Socialism and American Art
D.D. Egbert
Princeton University Press, $2.45
The Sound of Our Time
Dave Laing
Sheed & Ward, £1.75
Can there be a Marxist theory of art? If so, what theoretical problems will it have to overcome?
In the first place, it will have to transcend the dichotomy of fact and value. Marxist science is neither objective description, nor moralistic exhortation to action. Marxist theories of literature in the past have fallen into two categories: Zhdanovite recipes laying down the rules for creation, and sociological interpretations of established works. The latter may be less offensive to the sensitive intellect, but they are no less one-sided. Secondly, such a theory will have to determine its own object. Will it be an aesthetic – concerned to define the beautiful – or a semiology – a science of all the forms of symbolic communication (television, rock music etc.) which have a greater role in our culture than in any previous one? A whole tradition of Marxist criticism has been concerned to demonstrate the legitimacy of its method by testing it on accepted great works. The need to comprehend a much wider range of symbolic communication may explain why even such arid and static classifications as those of Barthes are enjoying a vogue in some sections of the left.
The theory will then have to examine the dynamics of all the components of the artistic process: the experience and commitment of the individual artist; the particular form and mode of expression of the work; the world-view of the social group embodied in the work; and the audience.
These criteria may be used as a basis for examining three recent books that contribute to the discussion in this field. Georg Lukács: the man, his work and his ideas is a set of essays covering the whole range of Lukács’ work. G.H.R. Parkinson’s ‘biographical introduction, and Istvan Meszaros’ study of Lukács’ Concept of Dialectic provide a good basis for an overall view of Lukács’ work, and an evaluation of the continuities and discontinuities between the early and later work. Other essays deal with Lukács’ debt to Dilthey, and the concept of totality in his work. These will provide a contribution to an appreciation of Lukács’ major philosophical work. History and Class Consciousness, due to appear in English shortly.
The other four essays deal specifically with Lukács’ literary and aesthetic theories, and in particular with the massive and as yet untranslated Aesthetics (1963). These essays throw more clearly into relief the ambiguities of Lukács’ work. Only A.G. Lehmann deals with Lukács primarily as a Marxist, and sees his weaknesses as being inherent in the Marxist method. For the others, the emphasis is on Lukács’ contribution to aesthetics as a discipline, rather than on the location of aesthetics within a Marxist totality.
Thus G.H.R. Parkinson concludes with the embrace of eclecticism:
‘His aesthetics provides us with a certain way of looking at what are generally regarded as works of art, and the evaluative sense. It would be wrong to regard this as the only way, but equally wrong to say that it is not a way, and an important one.’
Stanley Mitchell starts off in similar vein:
‘Lukács takes his stand with the central humanist traditions of Marxism which look back to Greece and the Renaissance.’
Indeed. But it also looks forward to quite different things. Mitchell concludes by finding a contradiction in Lukács between the ‘revolutionary’ and ‘the Heidelberg don’. The fact that Lukács’ aesthetics can be detached from his Marxism derives precisely from his own concessions to the Stalinist mystification of a progressive bourgeoisie.
Lukács’ strength is his theory of form, and his grasp of broad general historical tendencies. His weaknesses spring from that strength. Parkinson shows the ambiguities in his use of the term ‘reflections’, which impede his appreciation both of the revolutionary artist, concerned to change reality as well as interpret it, and of the less ‘realistic’ types of art. David Craig shows, through a reading of Walter Scott that is sensitive to Scottish history, that the Scott of The Historical Novel is more an ideal type of the genre than an account of what actually appears on the pages of the Waverley Novels.
D.D. Egbert’s Socialism and American Art poses an interesting problem. The only pity is that the author is quite incapable of dealing with it, for want of any theoretical framework at all. His aim is a comparison of the artistic production influenced by religious utopian communities, secular Utopianism and Marxism. Some interesting ideas emerge. One common theme is a rejection of the bourgeois emphasis on the outstanding individual. The revivalist Shakers, for instance, required that no one should sign his name to any artefact, and invented a new simplified musical notation to enable all members to participate equally in communal singing.
Another common theme is the breakdown of the separation of art and life. Egbert, however, cannot even distinguish between a world view that sees art as an integral part of the total human existence, and functionalism or utilitarianism.
The book collapses, therefore, into a collection of anecdotes, including many which expose the opportunism of the CPUSA – for example, its changes of line on Negro art according to its particular line on the Negro question.
The anecdotes do testify, however, to a substantial revolutionary tradition in American art, refuting Egbert’s own claim that ‘as everyone knows, there are fundamental differences between Marxism and the American tradition’. Perhaps the best of the anecdotes deals with the painter Rockwell Kent, who received a Treasury Department grant for a mural depicting delivery of airmail to Puerto Rico. The picture contained an inscription in a strange language. Eventually this was discovered to be Eskimo, and contained a call to revolt to the Puerto Rican people.
Dave Laing’s The Sound of Our Time is more modest in scope, but offers a serious yet unpretentious treatment of modern pop music. Laing is highly conscious of the need for a comprehensive theoretical framework. This may account for the rather hectic eclecticism that marks parts of the book. Laing invokes Lukács and Adorno, Sartre and Barthes, even McLuhan and Althusser, without showing whether or not their methods are compatible. And it seems hardly necessary to quote Barthes, and such concepts as metalanguage and isologic systems, merely to point out that songs consist of both words and music.
Nonetheless, Laing succeeds in locating pop music in the society of our time. He begins with a consideration of the dual nature of pop music; its popular origins and its status as commodity. He shows how the song in pre-industrial society was an experience, orally transmitted, but has now become an object to be acquired (record or sheet-music). The existence of the charts seems to establish a relationship in which the consumer exercises power; yet as Laing points out, such action is limited to the sum of the consumers’ individual choices – the consumers cannot act as a collective; if they could, they would doubtless get record prices reduced.
He then goes on to show the influence of the commodity status on the actual quality of the music – the constant pressure to repetition and standardisation. But at the same time, the whole book can be seen as a polemic against Adorno’s essay On Popular Music, which sees only this side of the process. Laing insists on the possibility of energy, imagination and truth to experience despite the pressures of the market. The argument is backed up by detailed studies of Buddy Holly, the Beatles, Dylan and others.
The sensitivity to the particular work is wholesome. But it has its compensating defects. The ‘refusal of sentimentality’ is seen largely as a result of individual effort. The Beatles’ ability to survive and stay innovating is attributed to ‘craftsmanlike integrity’. There is a tendency to see the music as having its own history, rather than being part of a historical process. Why did the great rock and roll breakthrough come in the mid-fifties? What was the particular stage of British society that made the Beatles possible? Yet even if Laing does not answer all the questions, he does achieve a balance between text and theory, which offers a model for the kind of detailed study needed in a wide range of fields.
 



Robert Stuart
Marxism and National Identity
SUNY, 2006, $29.95
Today Jules Guesde is remembered, if at all, for the treachery at the end of his life – he joined the French wartime government in 1914 and remained in it till the end of 1916. Leon Trotsky, on being expelled from France in 1916, addressed a letter of bitter contempt to his former comrade (www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1914/war/part3.htm).
But 30 years earlier Guesde was leader of a Marxist party, the POF (Parti Ouvrier Français – French Workers’ Party), and was accused of being in the pay of the German government because of his anti-war line. The POF later fused with other groups to form the French Socialist Party (SFIO), in which Guesde upheld the left against the right wing of the much overrated Jean Jaurès, who would undoubtedly have backed the war in 1914 had he not been assassinated just before it started.
People like Guesde and his followers are often written off as “Second International Marxists”, defined by their ultimate failure in 1914 and generally characterised by a crudely determinist version of historical materialism. But the Second International contained a rich variety of Marxisms (Lenin, Trotsky and Rosa Luxemburg were all leading members). Robert Stuart has made a thorough and detailed study of the POF, and in this book examines the internationalism of the POF, giving a picture that is a good deal more positive than one might have expected.
Guesde himself was not much of a theoretician. The real brains of the POF were Paul Lafargue and his wife Laura, Karl Marx’s daughter. Lafargue was the author of the splendid The Right to be Lazy, an eminently relevant work today. He was a living embodiment of internationalism, combining in his own person African-Caribbean, Jewish and Indigenous American blood. He took particular pride in his black roots. He and Laura committed suicide in 1911; otherwise they might well have been at the centre of opposition to the war.
The Guesdists took as their starting point Marx’s writings in the Communist Manifesto on the essentially international nature of capital. Capital constantly crossed national frontiers in search of profits, and in so doing it undermined the nation and created an international working class. The Guesdists can be accused of excessive optimism in believing that the nation-state and nationalist consciousness were withering away, but their analysis ensured that they made no compromise with nationalism.
The Guesdists had a clear Marxist view of the state, and therefore recognised the nation-state as embodying ruling class interests. They saw clearly that the main function of state primary education was to “poison the population with patriotism”. They thus firmly distinguished themselves from the republican tradition, which, to this day, sees secular state education as a great achievement.
For the Guesdists there was nothing natural about the nation. Force alone had established “the transient unity that carries the name French nation”. They had no sympathy for the desire to reconquer Alsace-Lorraine, removed from France at the end of the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1). They advocated self-determination for Alsace-Lorraine, and showed that French industrialists had greatly profited from the fact that the lost provinces were now behind a tariff wall. So hostile was the party to nationalism that one branch expelled members for celebrating Bastille Day.
Likewise they were quite perceptive as to what a future European war would mean: “slaughterhouses many kilometres square where hundreds of thousands of men will be massacred without glory and without heroism”. Their only error was to believe that such a prospect would be enough to prevent the ruling class from launching a war. They condemned the arms trade and believed that capitalism was producing arms for a war that would never happen in order to counteract the falling rate of profit. They were firmly anti-militarist, pointing to the way that the army was used both for conquest abroad and to repress the working class at home.
The POF also had to face the question of immigrant labour. In the 1890s 10 percent of the French workforce was foreign. The POF took a positive attitude, pointing out that immigrants often did “the most repugnant and dangerous of jobs”. The POF advocated full legal rights for immigrant workers, so that they could not be used to weaken class organisation or depress wages. The POF organised in the West Indian colonies of Guadeloupe and Martinique, so it had many black members.
The POF could perhaps be accused of complacency in the face of racism. As Stuart points out, there were often good relations between French and immigrants among skilled workers, where the POF had its main base; among the unskilled things were not always so harmonious.
Frequently the POF found itself in conflict with the anti-Semitic far right. Stuart demolishes the claims of those who, like the buffoon Bernard-Henri Lévy, have claimed that the POF was marked by anti-Semitism. The POF showed unqualified opposition to anti-Semitism, and its street fighters frequently came into conflict with the French Anti-Semitic League. When anti-Semites attacked a Jewish shop in Nantes, POF militants were among local inhabitants who defended the shopkeeper. (The police arrested the defenders – some things never change.)
The POF did set out to win over “left anti-Semites”, and held public debates with the anti-Semites (as the German Communist Party were to do three decades later). But it would be quite wrong to project back the “no platform” policy of the present day onto a very different situation.
The POF could be accused of underestimating anti-Semitism, arguing that it could have no influence on workers. While it is easy with hindsight to criticise such complacency, it should be remembered that the anti-Semitic movements of the late 19th century were very different from modern fascism. Drumont, the leading anti-Semitic propagandist, was an extreme conservative, who believed that electric light was a dangerous modernising innovation. There was indeed little future for such backward looking thought. Adolf Hitler, subsidised by Henry Ford and a fervent promoter of the motor car, was a very different matter.
It is true that the Guesdists, like all the currents of the French left, failed the crucial test of the Dreyfus case, leaving it to unaligned individuals such as Emile Zola to save the honour of the left. But the POF’s abstentionism (about which Lafargue had severe reservations) sprang not from anti-Semitism, but from an oversimplified notion of class. Dreyfus, it was argued, was an army officer and hence a class enemy; therefore it was not incumbent on workers to defend him against anti-Semitism.
Yet the overall balance sheet is very positive. Stuart scrupulously documents the fairly rare lapses by the POF, such as the article which expressed the fear that the French labour market would be flooded with “Chinese sodomites”. He notes that some Guesdists moved to the far right, but every movement has its renegades.
Stuart claims that Guesde did not betray the left in 1914 and that he had always taken the position of defending France against German aggression. This does not adequately explain how far the rather pathetic Guesde of 1914 had moved from his earlier revolutionary principles. A full explanation of 1914 would require examination of the SFIO’s development up to that year, and a study of the analyses offered by Lenin, Alfred Rosmer and others.
If 1914 is seen as the end of the story, then the POF, and the whole Second International, must be accounted a failure. But after the catastrophe of 1914 France saw a rapidly growing anti-war movement and then, in 1920, the founding of a mass Communist Party which, in its first five years at least, had a very creditable record of internationalism. (For a fresh angle on this, see George Paizis’s excellent new book Marcel Martinet: Poet of the Revolution.) All this undoubtedly drew on the memories and experiences of an earlier phase of internationalism.
Stuart’s narrative is sometimes irritating. In his insistence to show Marxism’s weakness in face of the “enduring vitality” of nationalism, he often makes parallels with 20th century history that are out of context and insufficiently developed. All too often he engages in nitpicking linguistic analysis of Guesdist texts. Nevertheless, for reviving a largely forgotten period of socialist history, he deserves our thanks.
 



Revolutionaries do not determine events, nor do they predict them.
[1] Lenin was surprised by both 1905 and
1917. What revolutionaries can do is understand events and develop a
strategy to take advantage of them. “All revolutions in history
have begun spontaneously. None have ended so.” [2]
At a time when the momentous events of 1968 are being commemorated,
it is interesting to look at how a revolutionary socialist, Tony
Cliff, the founder of the Socialist Workers Party (SWP) and its
predecessors, responded to them.
The events of 1968 developed at a hectic pace. For the
revolutionary left it was the most important turning point since
1945. The Tet offensive in Vietnam showed that the world’s biggest
military power was vulnerable, producing a political crisis in the US
in which Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy were killed. The
Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia marked the end of a monolithic
international Communist movement. Student revolts erupted around the
world. The Ford sewing machinists’ strike for equal pay launched
the women’s movement in Britain, and in Northern Ireland the civil
rights movement was born. [3]
In Britain possibilities for the far left had been improving for
some time. A Labour government, elected with high hopes in 1964 and
re-elected with a massive majority in 1966, had alienated much of its
support with policies that attacked the working class, and slavish
support for the Americans in Vietnam.
In October 1967 and March 1968 there were two large, militant
demonstrations against the Vietnam War. Many of those involved were
students, and as the Labour government rapidly expanded higher
education to modernise British capitalism, many students were drawn
towards a radical critique of society. A long occupation at the
London School of Economics (LSE) in 1967, protesting at the
appointment as director of an active supporter of the racist regime
in Rhodesia (Zimbabwe), marked the beginning of the student movement
in Britain. There were various student actions in the first months of
1968.
Another symptom of the growing ferment on the left was the
publication in 1967 of the May Day Manifesto in the names of
Stuart Hall, Raymond Williams and Edward Thompson. [4]
This reflected a real revulsion towards the Labour government’s
policies. Its contradictions were neatly summed up by Peter Sedgwick:
So far the manifesto campaign does not appear to be on
its way to selecting revolutionaries, or possible revolutionaries.
Several of the sponsors I know to be zombies or faint-hearts who have
no intention whatsoever of carrying through the manifesto’s
purported aims. Whatever the future of its ambitions, however, the
manifesto will remain the most readily available and on the whole
best written summary of Wilsonism’s crimes. It deserves its
excellent sale. [5]
But the milieu open to serious socialist ideas was expanding.
For socialists in Britain two events in 1968 were paramount. In
April Tory MP Enoch Powell made a viciously racist speech predicting
violence – a river “foaming with much blood”. Various groups of
workers, including traditionally militant London dockers, took strike
action in his support. This was a tremendous blow to left wing
activists; as one wrote at the time:
I remember Nigel walking into the room with this Evening
Standard headline ... We were just completely shocked numb ...
You suddenly realised how little influence the left really had, how
the roots of the political organisations like the Communist Party had
been rotting in the soil. How pathetic the squabbling between groups
all was. Just how urgent things had become ... I seemed to spend the
next few days leafleting solidly and I’ll never forget the look on
the faces of the Pakistani postmen when they read the leaflets and
found out they weren’t fascist. For those few days after Powell,
they were petrified. But so was I. [6]
This alarming prospect was followed almost immediately by the news
that just over the channel in France some ten million workers had
stopped work, many of them occupying their workplaces. For a
generation to whom even the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 was no more
than a childhood memory, this created an unprecedented situation, in
which ideas like “revolution” and “working class power”
stopped being items of abstract debate and became realities on their
television screens.
It was also the occasion of the re-emergence of the revolutionary
left. Within the French student milieu there were a number of
revolutionary groupings – Maoists, Trotskyists and anarchists. They
were small in size (what the Communist Party dismissively referred to
as groupuscules), with a total membership of at best a few
thousand. But in a situation of rising struggle they set differences
aside, and were sufficiently strong to attract public attention. In
June the government banned 11 of the groups.
The stark juxtaposition of these two events showed enormous
dangers and great possibilities.
Tony Cliff (Ygael Gluckstein) was born in Palestine, and spent
years trying, without much success, to build an internationalist,
anti-Zionist organisation there. He came to Britain in 1946 and in
1950 formed the Socialist Review Group. In the 1950s he wrote books
on state capitalism in Russia, China and Eastern Europe. In the early
1960s the organisation, now renamed the International Socialism (IS)
group, grew through entry work in the Labour Party Young Socialists,
and counted its members in hundreds rather than tens. When the Labour
government’s policies produced a rising level of industrial
struggle, Cliff and Colin Barker wrote a book called Incomes
Policy, Legislation and Shop Stewards [7],
which looked to the emergence of a socialist movement out of the
localised struggles of trade unionists.
Cliff quickly grasped the importance of the emerging student
movement. As John Rose, an LSE student in 1967, recalls, Cliff “began
spending a lot of time talking to student activists” and spoke at a
teach-in about the 1967 Middle East war. Rose, a Zionist, was
convinced and joined IS, as did a number of other LSE students. [8]
At the beginning of 1968 Cliff had just turned 50, an age at which
many tend to become less energetic and more set in their ways. IS had
some 447 members. It was the biggest organisation Cliff had ever
belonged to. [9] It was a tiny group, yet
without the base and the orientation established before 1968, the
breakthrough could not have taken place – if IS had begun the year
with only 200 members, it might have ended up with few more.
It is highly unlikely that Cliff had any inkling of the events
that would shake the world in the coming 12 months. But the central
commitment that united his work on state capitalism to his more
recent writings on shop stewards was an unswerving belief in the
self-emancipation of the working class. It was this that enabled him
to orientate himself amid the flood of unexpected events.
The response to the Powell speech revealed the weakness of the
British left, what an editorial in International Socialism
described as “the vacuum on the left”. [10]
The Labour Party had made so many concessions over the question of
immigration that when racism began to get out of control it had no
response. For a fortnight after the Powell speech Wilson and other
Labour leaders remained silent, offering no answer to Powell. The
only comments came from David Ennals, a junior minister at the Home
Office. The Communist Party, which had some influence in the docks,
failed to use it to fight Powellism. Danny Lyons, a leading CP
militant, brought along two clergymen, one Catholic and one
Protestant, to try and dissuade dockers from striking.
IS, which had been active in support of the 1967 dock strike, had
just one docker, Terry Barrett, in membership, but he made every
effort to argue the point in class terms. Cliff recalled discussing
with Barrett late into the night as to the best way to respond to the
situation. [11] Barrett distributed a
leaflet to dockers putting the class case against Powell:
Who is Enoch Powell? He is a right wing Tory opportunist
who will stop at nothing to help his party and his class ... What
does he believe in? ... Mass Sackings in the Docks. Again
and again he has argued that the docks are “grossly overmanned”.
The Powell speech led to a series of new initiatives on the part
of IS. The first was an appeal for left unity. A leaflet distributed
with the May issue of Labour Worker was headed The Urgent
Challenge of Fascism. [12] This
called for the establishment of a united organisation on the basis of
four points of principle:

Opposition to imperialism; for the victory of all genuine
national liberation movements.
 
Opposition to racism in all its forms and to controls on
immigration.
 
Opposition to state control of trade unions; support for
all progressive strikes.
 
Workers’ control of society and industry as the only
alternative to fascism.

The context of the unity proposals was well summed up a few years
later by Duncan Hallas, a veteran Trotskyist who himself rejoined IS
in 1968:
The situation in 1968 was that there was a big movement
of youth, especially student youth, towards socialist politics and
this was given organisational form by the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign
(VSC). There was a reasonable possibility that if a united
revolutionary socialist organisation could be established it would be
possible to draw in some thousands of anti-Vietnam War demonstrators.
In particular, it was hoped that the IMG [13]
(then only two years old) would agree to unite with IS. These two
organisations had between them the dominant position in the VSC and,
if united, could probably have converted it into a revolutionary
socialist organisation of some substance. There were also prospects
that, given the impetus generated by such a unification, various New
Left May Day Manifesto elements and unaffiliated left wingers
could be drawn in.
Such a unified organisation, overwhelmingly student in
composition and “libertarian” and voluntaristic in sentiment,
would have had powerful ultra-left tendencies. The perspective was of
a long, hard fight inside it for marxist politics and a working class
orientation. Splits would have been inevitable. These costs were
considered acceptable in the circumstances, given the opportunity and
the urgent need to break out of small group politics. [14]
The IMG did not agree to unity [15],
and in terms of organisations the appeal achieved little. [16]
But it was of great importance in the development of the IS group. It
established IS as the group which recognised the urgency of the
situation, which wanted a united, non-sectarian, interventionist
organisation, and which therefore became a pole of attraction for
many activists looking for a political alternative, and to whom the
debates which had divided the Trotskyist movement over the previous
20 years seemed relatively unimportant. It was undoubtedly a major
factor in IS’s rapid recruitment during the year.
Cliff realised that opportunities had to be grasped, and grasped
very quickly. He travelled tirelessly, speaking at meeting after
meeting, trying to convey to his audiences the urgency of the
situation. At some meetings he spoke together with Chris Pallis, the
leading figure in the Solidarity grouping, who had published a
remarkable eyewitness account of the events in Paris. [17]
At a meeting in Hornsey in north London on 29 May (the day after
the start of a six-week occupation at Hornsey College of Art) Cliff
told a large audience that capitalism and trade unions could no
longer coexist. Perhaps it would be five years, perhaps it would be
seven, before the final confrontation. He concluded, “If I am
wrong, I see you in the concentration camps.” [18]
Over the next weeks, as the French Communist Party and the trade
union leaders succeeded in liquidating the strike movement, he
modified his analysis somewhat. Yet we should not dismiss Cliff’s
warning with the complacent wisdom of hindsight. Concentration camps
were not on the agenda for Hornsey, but just three years later, in
1971, internment would be introduced in Northern Ireland. In five
years time the Chilean coup would show just how ruthless a threatened
capitalism could be.
Cliff also seems to have gone through a philosophical conversion,
though with his distaste for philosophical argument he did not make
it explicit. Previously he had tended to stress the deterministic
nature of Marxism. Now there was a shift to voluntarism. As he put
it, “History, that old horse, does nothing”. [19]
Change depended on human action. He wrote, “If the study of history
– even the most recent – were enough by itself to solve political
questions, social democracy would have died a long time ago, and so
would Stalinism. Alas, this is not how history works. And there is
nothing more foreign to socialism than fatalism.” [20]
Recognising that a more interventionist approach needed a
different form of organisation, Cliff proposed that IS should adopt a
democratic centralist structure. He argued the point in a short
document entitled Notes on Democratic Centralism circulated in
June 1968. [21] He began by observing
that IS had moved in recent years from being a purely propaganda
organisation, which sought to win a small audience for its ideas, to
an agitational organisation, able to intervene in the class struggle.
“A revolutionary combat organisation – especially if it becomes a
party – needs a democratic centralist structure.” Cliff justified
this with historical references to the First International and the
Bolshevik Party. A federal structure was “unstable and
inefficient”, since “a revolutionary combat organisation faces
the need for tactical decisions – daily and hourly – hence the
need for great centralisation”.
The actual organisational proposals were modest. The most
controversial element was the insistence on tighter discipline: “All
decisions of conferences and between conferences of the executive are
binding on all members of the organisation.”
The IS group had traditionally been fairly lax organisationally.
In the 18 years since the founding of the Socialist Review Group
there had been just three expulsions. Where there was little
intervention, and hence no experience to be evaluated, there was no
value in a centralised structure. There was a legitimate reaction
against the vanguardism and hyperactivism of IS’s main rival on the
far left, the Socialist Labour League.
The document was short – just over 1,000 words. Jim Higgins, at
that time one of Cliff’s closest allies, later argued that it was
inadequate for its purpose in introducing such a radical change. [22]
There is some truth in this. Cliff had, quite justifiably, a
considerable faith in his own ability to convince the organisation,
but perhaps he underestimated the difficulties. Among the older
membership libertarian ideas were quite deeply implanted, and most of
the new members had come from the anti-authoritarian milieu of
student struggles. Undoubtedly Cliff was impatient. He was quite
right to be so, for the opportunities offered by the unfolding
situation were immense, and there was no time to waste. Yet as Cliff
himself later noted, even amid the dramatic events of 1917 Lenin
stressed the need for patient explanation. [23]
Cliff’s main contribution to the understanding of 1968 and the
reorientation of the organisation came in the pamphlet he wrote with
myself during the summer of 1968, France: The Struggle Goes On.
[24] It was written from afar. In the
heated atmosphere of 1968, Cliff, not having British citizenship,
could not travel abroad for fear that he might not be permitted to
return. [25] But he had long
discussions with various French activists who visited London,
including two leading members of the French Trotskyist organisation
Lutte Ouvrière.
The pamphlet gave a narrative account of the French events,
stressing the centrality of working class struggle and the
development of the factory occupations. It thus contrasted with other
analyses then available in English. Chris Pallis’s eyewitness
account gave a vivid description of the rising movement, but ended
too soon to show how the bureaucrats had regained control. The
Penguin book by Seale and McConville [26]
focused largely on the student movement. [27]
For Cliff the main lesson of the French experience was clear:
None of the capitalist powers of our era is stable enough
to be immune from proletarian revolution ... France has shown, more
clearly even than Hungary or the Belgian general strike, that the
working class of the advanced countries has not been bribed or
integrated into complacency, but retains enormous revolutionary potential.
He examined the history of working class grievances before 1968,
the “dry tinder” before the conflagration. Above all he stressed
the need for “strike committees democratically elected by all
workers, union or non-union”. In a situation where perhaps only a
quarter of the ten million strikers were unionised, fetishising the
union structure could only be a brake on the movement. If such
committees had existed, “they would have been basically the same as
the soviets of 1917 or the workers’ councils of Hungary in 1956”.
He showed the difficulties the union bureaucracy had in bringing the
strike to an end, and the various ways in which they manipulated the
ballots. The strike broke down barriers between economic and
political struggle, and he judged that the situation in May had been
“pre-revolutionary, potentially revolutionary”.
Beyond this Cliff set out to confront a number of more general
issues raised by the French events. First, there was the question of
the new student movement, something of great strategic importance for
building a revolutionary organisation in Britain. In France students
had acted as the “detonator” for a mass working class struggle,
but in Britain the left was divided as to what attitude to take to
student struggles. On the one hand there were those who still saw
students as the small privileged minority who had scabbed on the
General Strike of 1926. On the other there were those who saw
students as a replacement for the traditional role of the working
class. The new radical newspaper Black Dwarf had just appeared
with the slogan “Students: The New Revolutionary Vanguard”. [28]
An ultra-left current in the student movement thought that provoking
clashes with the police, or building barricades in Hyde Park [29],
would be sufficient to “detonate” mass struggles in Britain,
forgetting that detonators without explosives are singularly useless.
In seeking to avoid both extremes, Cliff noted that traditionally
students had identified with bourgeois values. But over recent years
student numbers in Britain and throughout the world had increased
massively: “The majority of students are not being trained any more
as future members of the ruling class ... but as white-collar
employees of state and industry, and thus are destined to be part and
parcel of the proletariat.”
Cliff located the upheaval in higher education in terms of
contradictions within capitalism:
The central contradiction of capitalism is that between
the production of what Marx called use-values, and the production of
value. The first are natural. The second are specific to the
capitalist order of society. In the university this is reflected as a
contradiction between the ideal of unlimited intellectual
development, free from social, political and ideological restraint,
and the tight intellectual reins imposed by capitalism. The liberal
mystique of education clashes with its social content.
Cliff argued that, whereas workers’ militancy began from trade
union consciousness, students tended to think in abstracts: “Behind
the complaint about the tangible reality of low grants, bad food,
strict rules and overcrowded amenities, the student feels the
intangible manipulation of his mind.” As a result, “students at
present rebel more readily than workers because they are less
shackled mentally by the traditional ... organisations ... The
rootlessness of the student acts as oil to the wheels of revolt.”
(Whatever else had changed, Cliff had not lost his taste for mixed metaphor.)
Cliff’s observations here were no more than a first
approximation. Much more could and would be said about the political
role of students in the coming years. [30]
But Cliff’s analysis provided the crucial argument that student
struggles were of immense importance, but could only succeed if
linked to the working class movement.
He warned, “We must expect many zigzags in the struggle, from
economic strikes to political battles and vice versa.” As a counter
to the optimism of those who believed that the French struggle would
revive in the autumn, he stressed, “The long haul ahead will be the
work of years, rather than of months.”
In political terms he predicted the decline of the French
Communist Party, which would find it increasingly difficult “to
retain custody of the working class”, since “Moscow has lost its
magical influence in the world”. [31]
In the short term he was wrong – the French Communist Party grew
considerably in the 1970s. In the longer term his prediction was
fully justified.
Comparing the British movement to the French, he argued that
Britain had certain advantages: the Labour Party was less able to
hold back struggle than the French CP, and the British shop stewards’
organisation made the class much stronger. His conclusion was optimistic:
France today, Britain tomorrow! We cannot be sure of the
rhythm of events, but there can be no doubt that there will be an
acceleration ... We cannot gauge the timing, duration and sweep of
the coming revolutionary crisis in British capitalism, but it is not
far off.
Within less than six years industrial action would bring down a
Tory government.
Cliff’s main aim in the pamphlet was to argue for an immediate
strategy of building a revolutionary party, a sharp shift in the
orientation of IS. The need for such a party was argued concretely,
on the basis of the experience of the French struggle. Describing how
the bureaucracy manipulated the return to work, Cliff commented,
“What a difference would have been made by a revolutionary party
with a daily newspaper and possibly even a radio transmitter!”
Without such a party, French students and workers had built action
committees to fill the gap: “As a substitute soviet that did not
exist and a substitute revolutionary party that did not exist, arose
the action committees! What a magnificent improvisation!”
Without a “credible revolutionary alternative”, he warned, the
betrayals of the bureaucracies could be repeated. He concluded with
the classic arguments for the revolutionary party:
The revolutionary party is, so to say, the memory of the
class, the store of experience of the class struggle internationally,
the university of the class. Facing the strictly centralised and
disciplined power of the capitalists there must be no less
centralised and disciplined a combat organisation of the proletariat.
Production of the pamphlet strained the resources of a tiny group
already preparing to produce a weekly paper. [32]
Nonetheless it was widely read and created a certain amount of
interest in student circles. It received a recommendation in the
austere pages of New Left Review [33]
and was rapidly translated and published in Japanese. [34]
Despite the cogency of the pamphlet Cliff underestimated the
difficulties of persuading the membership to accept a new
constitution based on democratic centralist principles. He later
admitted, “I myself was panicked by the situation.” [35]
Even Mike Kidron, his long term ally in the organisation, had
reservations about Cliff’s position on democratic centralism,
believing there should be a balance between a centrally elected
political committee and a delegate executive. He wrote a document
arguing this entitled We are Not Peasants. [36]
A stormy conference in September proved unable to resolve the
situation. It was agreed that there would be a recall conference in
December. This led to the most heated internal discussion the
organisation had ever seen. Finally the December conference agreed a
new constitution. A national committee of 40 was elected by
conference, which in turn elected a London-based executive.
The constitution had been changed, but as Cliff, always opposed to
formalism, well knew, the constitution was the least important thing.
It merely opened the way for the real task, transforming and building
the organisation. This would have to be done in a situation where the
pace of events was accelerating.
At the end of 1968 IS had perhaps a thousand members. The task of
building an independent revolutionary organisation had only just
begun (until 1968 most IS members were still in the Labour Party,
though activity in the Labour Party had declined sharply over the
previous couple of years).
Central to IS’s new orientation was the weekly Socialist
Worker, produced with a staff of three from a tiny printshop near
the Tottenham Hotspur football ground. The new paper was something of
a gamble (a few years earlier a fortnightly paper had been
unsuccessful), but it aimed to relate the international mood to the
industrial struggle at home. The first issue, dated 7 September 1968,
led with an article by engineering worker Roger Cox: “No Retreat!
Engineers Can Smash Pay Freeze”, next to a picture of Czech
students climbing onto a Russian tank. Many years later Jim Nichol,
the paper’s first business manager, recalled:
We needed a paper that workers would engage with. It
couldn’t afford to be filled with worthy tracts that militants
never read. And it had to be sold by workers, not just IS members. We
needed shop stewards and other militants to see it as their paper.
[37]
The paper was rather scruffy, had just four pages – and was very
cheap, costing two pence. [38] From the
second issue it bore the slogan “The 2d paper that fights for YOU”.
The initial print run was 8,000. It was sold at factory gates and on
high streets. Each issue contained contact details for IS’s 47
branches, under the heading “Join International Socialism – For a
Real Alternative to Capitalism and Stalinism”. Although Cliff did
not contribute to the early issues of the paper (he was busy
elsewhere, notably fundraising), he took a keen interest in its progress.
Early in 1969 Cliff wrote a document with the mundane title On
Perspectives. [39] It was one of
his most thoughtful and perceptive articles. He assessed the
situation after 1968, and set out the tasks for IS in the coming
years. He stressed that what was now needed was “not a euphoric
generalisation ... but a sober analysis”. The French pamphlet had
aimed to show the possibilities; now he stressed the harsh realities.
The French strike had ended in stalemate, and it was necessary to
recognise both the weakness of the revolutionary left and the
resilience of the Communist Party.
This led to a discussion of class consciousness. The long post-war
boom had seen an increasing alienation of workers from their
traditional organisations. “It is true that the Labour Party has
six million members, but it is doubtful if 10 percent of these know
they are members.” Whereas the Russian Revolution had sprung from a
growing politicisation of the working class, the French events had
“followed years of depoliticisation”. Formerly class
consciousness could be deduced from “institutional barometers”
such as party membership, newspaper readership, etc. But now “the
deep alienation of workers from traditional organisations smashed all
such barometers to pieces”.
So class struggle became much more unpredictable: “When the path
of individual reforms is being narrowed, or closed – apathy can
transform into its opposite, swift mass action.” The consequences
were not necessarily progressive: “A declining interest in the
traditional reformist organisations ... does not mean the overcoming
of reformist ideology.”
He went on to examine the current economic perspectives. The
permanent arms economy had not reached its end, but it was past its peak:
The stability of Western capitalism is beginning to
falter. This does not mean that Western capitalism is faced with
collapse, as in the thirties. In the coming years we can expect an
unevenness in the rate of economic growth, and intermittent expansions.
In this he was to be proved right. The 1973 oil crisis would mark
the end of the boom, with a rapid rise in unemployment, but it was
not a collapse on the 1929 scale, and it did not end working class
resistance. Ahead lay increasing instability and a situation in which
independent shopfloor organisation would be less tolerated.
The overall situation was uneven and contradictory: “The picture
is mosaic, patchy and inelegant.” It was necessary to find ways of
overcoming fragmentation: “We cannot follow the syndicalists in
idolising fragmented militancy”. [40]
Sectional militancy did not automatically produce an understanding of
the general situation; hence the same workers could be militant
industrially but also racist. He pointed to ways in which the
fragmentation of resistance could be overcome. A government incomes
policy meant that workers had to confront the state. The new trend to
productivity deals (in which workers negotiated on working conditions
and traditional working practices as well as wages) would directly
raise the question of workers’ control.
Cliff also drew attention to the way the French events had
highlighted the division between young workers and older workers.
Young workers were more self-confident, less bound by trade union
traditions than their older workmates. However, they could not
sustain their struggle except in unity with older workers in their workplace.
He argued that “transitional programmes of demands connecting
the particular with the general are needed”. This was not a revival
of Trotsky’s abstract and outdated Transitional Programme of
1938, but programmes geared to “the specific conditions of
different industries, different plants, etc.”
Cliff also pointed to the facts that shopfloor organisation was
under ever-increasing threat and that the trade union bureaucracy was
“both reformist and cowardly”. The struggle for trade union
democracy, for “workers’ control of the trade unions”, would
become important.
As Cliff noted, “The old forest of reformism is withering away.”
In particular the Communist Party was becoming increasingly
irrelevant and divided. In 1969 the Communist Party still had a much
larger organisation and much deeper roots in the working class than
all the revolutionary groups combined. But Cliff was quite right to
foresee that the next two decades would be a time of bitter splits
and remorseless decline for the Communist Party until it finally
liquidated itself in 1991. [41] Cliff
could foresee the very real possibility that IS could replace the
Communists as the main militant force in the trade union movement.
Before 1968 such a prospect would have seemed very distant.
In concluding, Cliff made a point he would repeat throughout his
life, that change in consciousness can come only through struggle:
“Reformism can never be defeated by programmes. It can only be
defeated by deeds ... Only struggle discloses to the workers the
magnitude of the struggle, widens their horizons, and clarifies their mind.”
Hence revolutionaries had to be always ready to learn and to
experiment, making mistakes and correcting them. They must not
retreat into purely theoretical activity. On the contrary, in a
phrase he would use again and again, it was necessary to “raise
theory to the level of practice”. The “do-it-yourself reformism”
of recent years had meant increased self-confidence, but at the price
of a decline in more general class consciousness. Cliff rarely
resorted to dialectical terminology, but here he made a cogent
summary of the new possibilities:
The third stage the British working class has entered is
a “negation of the negation”, synthesising elements of the first
stage (the 1920s and 1930s) – class identification – and of the
second stage (1945–65) – self-confidence. The synthesis is higher
than the individual elements joined in it and pregnant of great
revolutionary possibilities.
1968 saw a major change in IS and in Cliff himself. But it is
important to be clear as to what the nature of the change was. It is
often alleged that in 1968 he switched from Luxemburgism to Leninism.
This is a misleading oversimplification. There is no such clearly
defined doctrine as “Luxemburgism”. Rosa Luxemburg gave great
importance to spontaneity, but she also spent most of her life in a
Marxist party. “Leninism” is also a rather slippery concept, and
Cliff’s interpretation of Lenin was far from a conventional one.
Cliff had always been a great admirer of Lenin. His 1947 document
on state capitalism had been Leninist (unlike some versions of state
capitalism), because it regarded Stalinism as a negation of what
Bolshevism had stood for in 1917. One of the great weaknesses of the
orthodox Trotskyist analysis was that it claimed workers’ states
could be established without a revolutionary party. In his 1959 book
on Rosa Luxemburg the references to Lenin are frequently positive.
In 1968 he turned back to Lenin because he thought there were new
things to be learnt. In the summer of 1968, while working on the
French pamphlet, he was rereading his way through the complete works
of Lenin, piled up on the floor of the front room of his Stoke
Newington home. [42] The shifts in his
position were a response to the changes in the real world rather than
a radical reconsideration of his political philosophy. In particular
Cliff did not make a dichotomy between spontaneity and organisation.
Like Luxemburg he attributed great value to spontaneous working class
action, and insisted that revolutionaries had to learn from the
working class. He also gave enormous importance to conscious
organisation, but believed that the form of organisation must be
flexible according to circumstances. In real life spontaneity and
organisation are always closely intertwined. [43]
The myth of a Luxemburgism-Leninism transition has been greatly
encouraged by the story of the new edition of his 1959 book on Rosa
Luxemburg, which was produced early in 1969. This story has been much
misused by Cliff’s opponents. The new edition contained two
alterations. These amounted to no more than a few lines out of 80
pages of text. Cliff saw no reason to amend the vast majority of what
he had written ten years earlier. One alteration concerned the 1959
formulation, “For Marxists, in advanced industrial countries,
Lenin’s original position can serve much less as a guide than Rosa
Luxemburg’s, notwithstanding her overstatements on the question of
spontaneity.” This now became, “However, whatever the historical
circumstances moulding Rosa’s thought regarding organisation, these
thoughts showed a great weakness in the German Revolution of 1918–9”. [44]
The changes were significant, and reflected the way Cliff had
rethought his position in the light of the events of 1968 (it would
be a strange revolutionary who did not engage in some rethinking in
the light of the biggest strike in history). But they did not show
any deviation in his concern, in 1969 as in 1959, to assess the
contributions of two great revolutionaries and show how their thought
could be applied in the present. [45]
Through his writing, speaking and arguments with comrades, Cliff
played a major role in reorienting the organisation in the course of
1968. The coming decade was to justify him. The years from 1968 to
1980 were to be the most favourable for revolutionaries since the
1920s. In Chile, Portugal, Iran and Poland there were “revolutionary
rehearsals”. [46] Massive strike
waves rocked Italy and Spain. In Britain 1972 saw the Saltley picket,
where miners and engineering workers united to win a pit strike by
mass picketing. Later that year the threat of general strike action
forced the release of dockers imprisoned under the government’s
anti-union laws. In 1974 another miners’ strike brought down the
Tory government and put Labour back in power – the only time in
British history that strike action has brought down a government.
Throughout Europe the revolutionary left grew rapidly, showing the
great possibilities that were available. But by the end of the decade
much of the left was in crisis. [47]
Many swung to the right, while some turned to terrorism. The relative
success of the SWP in holding together since 1980 cannot be
attributed to any individual, but undeniably Cliff played an
important part. 1968 showed both his clarity of analysis and his
capacity to enthuse. A study of his role can help us face the
problems of the future.

Notes
1. This article is based on material
for a forthcoming biography of Tony Cliff. Thanks to Chris Harman for
some acute criticisms of a first draft.
2. Cliff and Birchall, 2001, p. 210.
3. For the events of 1968 see Harman,
1988. For the mood of the time see Widgery, 1976.
4. A revised and enlarged version was
issued during the following year: Williams, 1968.
5. Sedgwick, 1967.
6. Quoted by Dave Widgery as an
extract from an unattributed diary, possibly his own. Widgery, 1976, p. 407.
7. Cliff and Barker, 2002.
8. Rose, 2007.
9. The membership of the Revolutionary
Communist Party in 1947 was 336. Figures from RCP Conference
Documents 1947, cited in Bornstein and Richardson, 1986, p. 207.
10. International Socialism 33, first series, www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1968/no033/editorial1.html
11. Cliff, 2000, p. 91.
12. The IS’s paper was renamed
Socialist Worker in June 1968, indicating a break with activity in
the Labour Party.
13. The International Marxist Group
was the British section of the Fourth International. Its best known
activist was Tariq Ali. It had played a major role in initiating and
building the VSC.
14. Document On Unity,
adopted by the January 1972 IS national committee, and published in
the IS Bulletin, January 1972.
15. The other main Trotskyist group,
the Socialist Labour League (SLL), was incurably sectarian. In
October 1968, when 100,000 people marched against the Vietnam war,
SLL members turned up to give out a leaflet headed Why The
Socialist Labour League Is Not Marching. For the text of this
amazing piece of sectarian stupidity, see Widgery, 1976, p. 349.
16. The only “success” was the
entry into IS of Workers’ Fight, a small group which was the
forerunner of today’s Alliance for Workers’ Liberty, though it
had rather mechanical orthodox Trotskyist politics then. It was never
a real fusion: WF retained its own probationary membership,
subscriptions and disciplinary structures. The fusion was terminated
by a special conference in 1971.
17. Brinton, 1968. Maurice Brinton
was the pseudonym of Chris Pallis. Solidarity was a small,
libertarian split from Trotskyism.
18. Author’s recollection.
19. Author’s recollection.
20. Cliff and Birchall, 2001, p. 192.
21. Cliff, 1982, pp. 215–217.
22. Higgins, 1997, p. 81.
23. Cliff, 1976, pp. 140–143.
The reference was to Lenin, 1960.
24. I should clarify my own role in
the pamphlet. I wrote most of the three chapters on the Communist
Party and the non-Communist left, and provided material on the
strikes and occupations. All the theoretical analysis was Cliff’s.
I had been asked to provide Cliff with “background” notes. When I
next saw my notes, Cliff had cut up the typescript and stapled pieces
of it onto sheets of paper, interspersed with his own handwritten
commentary. The pamphlet contained some rather inflammatory passages,
for example, “In our epoch not a single serious issue can be
decided by ballot. In the decisive class battles bullets will
decide.” Since Cliff did not have British citizenship, he was
concerned about possible reprisals, so it was agreed that I would
take responsibility for such formulations, saying that Cliff had
contributed only historical material.
25. I visited France in July,
conducted interviews and collected published material.
26. Seale and McConville, 1968.
27. The excellent analysis of the
factory occupations by Andrée Hoyles, Imagination in Power
(1973), first appeared as an article in Coates, Topham and Barratt
Brown (eds.), 1969.
28. Though some of those involved
claimed that a question mark had been inadvertently omitted. See
Widgery, 1976, p. 313.
29. As occurred on one demonstration
in the summer of 1968.
30. See for example Harman, Kuper,
Clark, Sayers and Shaw, 1968; Cockburn and Blackburn, 1969.
31. In a public meeting he put it
more dramatically: “For many years I have argued against the danger
of capitulating to Stalinism. But now that danger does not exist.
They are moving to the right so rapidly you cannot catch them up in
order to capitulate” (author’s recollection).
32. I recall reading the proofs in
what was reputed to be the cheapest printshop in London, sitting on
the edge of the printing press under a naked light bulb. The printer,
whose command of English was limited, responded to my proposed
corrections by waving a dictionary at me.
33. New Left Review 52, 1968, p. 8.
34. Gendaishichosha, 1968.
35. Cliff, 2000, p. 101.
36. Document in the name of Hull IS,
October 1968. Reproduced in Higgins, 1997, pp. 145–146.
37. Socialist Worker, 13 May
2006, www.socialistworker.co.uk/art.php?id=8828
38. This was two pence in old
money – equivalent to 0.83 of a modern penny. One could buy 12 copies
of Socialist Worker for the price of a pint of beer.
39. Cliff, 1969, reprinted in Cliff,
2002, pp. 129–143.
40. Cliff tended to use the term
syndicalism to mean unpolitical trade union militancy. Whether this
was what syndicalism had meant in working class history is debatable.
41. The CP did enjoy a slight
recovery in the 1970s, but mainly as the organisation of the
moderate, non-revolutionary currents in the National Union of
Students. This influx of members actually aggravated the divisions
with the party.
42. Author’s recollection.
43. He would probably have agreed
with Daniel Guérin, who argued that “pure” spontaneity was a
myth, since spontaneous action is a product of conscious
interventions. “There’s always someone pushing for spontaneity”
– Guérin, 1971, p. 13.
44. Cliff, 2001, pp. 59–116
(the changes are listed on p. 113).
45. There was no intention of
suggesting that Cliff had always held the same view. In the new
edition the changes were inserted in a different typeface so that
they were visible at a glance. Unfortunately in a meeting, perhaps
flustered or impatient, Cliff denied that he had made any
alterations. It was a foolish action which caused more trouble than
it was worth.
46. See Barker, 1987.
47. See Harman, 1979.


References
Barker, Colin (ed.), 1987, Revolutionary Rehearsals (Bookmarks).
Bornstein, Sam, and Al Richardson, 1986, War and the
International (Socialist Platform).
Brinton, Maurice, 1968, Paris May 1968 (Solidarity), http://libcom.org/library/May-68-Solidarity
Cliff, Tony, 1969, On Perspectives, International Socialism 36, first series (April–May 1969), www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1969/04/perspectives.htm.
Cliff, Tony, 1976, Lenin Volume Two, All Power to the Soviets (Pluto), www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1976/lenin2/.
Cliff, Tony, 1982 [1968], Notes on Democratic Centralism, IS internal document, June 1968, in Tony Cliff, Neither Washington nor Moscow (Bookmarks). Available online: www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1968/06/democent.htm.
Cliff, Tony, 2000, A World to Win (Bookmarks).
Cliff, Tony, 2001 [1959/1969], Rosa Luxemburg, in Tony Cliff, Selected Writings Volume One: International Struggle and the Marxist Tradition (Bookmarks). Available online: www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1959/rosalux/ and www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1959/rosalux/note.htm.
Cliff, Tony, 2002, Selected Writings Volume Two: In the Thick of Workers’ Struggle (Bookmarks).
Cliff, Tony and Colin Barker, 2002 [1966], Incomes Policy, Legislation and Shop Stewards, in Tony Cliff, Selected Writings Volume Two: In the Thick of Workers’ Struggle (Bookmarks). Available online: www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1966/incomespol/.
Cliff, Tony and Ian Birchall, 2001 [1968], France – the Struggle Goes On, in Tony Cliff, Selected Writings Volume One: International Struggle and the Marxist Tradition (Bookmarks). Available online: www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1968/france/.
Coates, Ken, Tony Topham and Michael Barratt Brown (eds.), 1969, Trade Union Register 1969.
Cockburn, Alex, and Robin Blackburn (eds.), 1969, Student Power (Penguin).
Guérin, Daniel, 1971, Rosa Luxemburg et la Spontanéité Révolutionnaire (Flammarion).
Harman, Chris, 1979, The Crisis of the European Revolutionary Left, International Socialism 2 : 4 (spring 1979).
Harman, Chris, 1988, The Fire Last Time (Bookmarks).
Harman, Chris, Richard Kuper, Dave Clark, Andrew Sayers and Martin Shaw, 1968, Education, Capitalism and the Student Revolt (International Socialism).
Higgins, Jim, 1997, More Years for the Locust (IS Group), www.marxists.org/archive/higgins/1997/locust/
Hoyles, Andrée, 1973, Imagination in Power (Spokesman).
Lenin, Vladimir, 1960 [1917], The Tasks of the Proletariat in Our Revolution, in Collected Works (Moscow), www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1917/tasks/
Rose, John, 2007, Debate Sparked By Six Day War 1967 Transformed A Generation, Socialist Worker, 9 June 2007, www.socialistworker.org.uk/art.php?id=11874
Seale, Patrick, and Maureen McConville, 1968, French Revolution 1968 (Penguin).
Sedgwick, Peter, 1967, Thoughts in a Dry Season, International Socialism 31, first series (winter 1967/1968), www.marxists.org/archive/sedgwick/1967/xx/thoughts.htm
Widgery, David, 1976, The Left in Britain 1956–1968 (Penguin).
Williams, Raymond (ed.), 1968, May Day Manifesto (Penguin).
 



September 1958 saw the first issue of a journal called
International Socialism. It was in duplicated form and
undoubtedly had a very limited circulation, being produced and
distributed by the tiny Socialist Review Group which counted its
members in tens rather than hundreds. Even in the small world of
1950s British Marxism it was marginal in comparison to the Communist
Party’s monumentally tedious Marxism Today, [1]
to the New Reasoner and Universities and Left Review,
which in 1960 would merge to form New Left Review, and, on the
Trotskyist fringe, to the Socialist Labour League’s Labour
Review, which in the late 1950s was a lively journal with such
contributors as Peter Fryer, Brian Pearce and Alasdair MacIntyre. [2]
But for the far left it was a time of new opportunities. The
ferment of debate provoked by the Hungarian Revolution of 1956
continued. At Easter 1958 the first Aldermaston march for unilateral
nuclear disarmament had taken place. In the summer and autumn there
was a minor wave of industrial struggle involving bus crews, dockers
and building workers. There were also threats: over the Channel in
France the Fourth Republic had collapsed and been replaced by a more
authoritarian regime under General de Gaulle. The presentation of the
new journal was, in a modest and highly realistic manner, optimistic:
The decline in Western capitalism – however protracted
– is steadily undermining the stranglehold of reformism, its
servant, over the working class. Stalinism – the ideological
expression of the state capitalist world – is losing its potency as
an alternative. Once again the international working class is looking
to its own resources for strength and inspiration.
The two main articles were by the main theoreticians of the group
Tony Cliff and Mike Kidron. Cliff’s article, Changes in
Stalinist Russia, examined changes in industrial management in
the Khrushchev period and the attempts to deal with lagging labour
productivity. [3] Despite developments
since Joseph Stalin’s death Russia remained a repressive,
irrational society. Kidron’s The Economic Background of the
Recent Strikes took up two themes that would be developed in his
later contributions to the journal: the decline in Britain’s
imperial role and the significance of the arms budget. [4]
In a sense the launch of the journal was a false start. In 1959
what purported to be a double issue of the journal was in fact a
small book by Cliff on Rosa Luxemburg. [5]
Then, in the autumn of 1960, the journal was relaunched as a
quarterly. This time its editorial board was not limited to the
Socialist Review Group but included supporters of the Fourth
International (including two who were to become followers of Juan
Posadas [6]) and others who would become
members of the Solidarity grouping. [7]
As so often this effort at left unity collapsed, and from 1963 the
journal was simply the organ of the International Socialism group (as
the Socialist Review Group was now known). [8]
It appeared quarterly and then monthly until 1977 when it was
replaced by a new quarterly series in book format which has continued
to the present.
Fifty years for a theoretical journal is a substantial
achievement. [9] There are close on 1,000
articles plus editorials, reviews and letters. Obviously the quality
is uneven. There are mediocre, boring and obscure articles, and
polemics that seemed terribly important at the time but are now of
little interest. There are also some historical curiosities of
particular interest to students of renegacy. These include youthful
efforts by Christopher Hitchens, [10]
actually more intelligent and better written than his current output,
and some industrial commentaries by Roger Rosewell, [11]
later unofficial spokesperson for Dame Shirley Porter and more
recently author of a tome on medieval wall paintings. There are also
some dubious predictions such as Duncan Hallas’s claim in 1977 that
“it may well be the case that Callaghan’s is the last
majority Labour government”. [12]
However, overall a collection of the two series provides a rich
store of political analysis and commentary. In comparison with its
main rival, New Left Review, which for long periods produced
relatively little that was directly relevant to contemporary
struggle, [13] International
Socialism was always geared to practice, to an interpretation of
the current world in the perspective of changing it.
But if the journal has always been a party journal, geared to the
priorities of the organisation, it has been alive to the various
debates on the British and international left. It has published
contributions from all parts of the spectrum of the left on both
directly political and broader cultural questions. Thus the journal
has carried pieces by Tariq Ali and others on the Fourth
International (IS2/6), Robin Blackburn on Cuba (IS2/9),
John Saville on the Marshall Plan and the Cold War (IS2/46),
Dan Atkinson and Larry Elliot on Keynes and the economic crisis, [14]
John Berger on mass demonstrations [15]
and Picasso (IS2/40), Terry Eagleton on Shakespeare (IS2/49)
and Steven Rose on animal rights (IS2/54).
From the international left there have been contributions from
Jean-Jacques Marie on Gaullism (IS1/3), Ellen Wood on
alternatives to reformism (IS2/35), Ernest Mandel on the
analysis of Russian society (IS2/49, IS2/56), and Susan
George, [16] Walden Bello [17]
and Boris Kagarlitsky [18] on
perspectives for the anti-capitalist movement.
Until recently comrades who wished to consult material from back
issues had to hunt it down in libraries or beg, steal or borrow it
from older comrades who had kept files. Now, thanks to the wonders of
modern technology, [19] a great many
articles from the past 50 years are available at the click of a
mouse. In particular comrades can consult three valuable websites.
The Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism OnLine has a complete index
of the first series of International Socialism with the full
text of many articles and reviews. [20]
It is worth checking this site regularly as new material is being
added all the time. The Socialist Review and International Socialism
Journal Index has an index arranged by subject covering the first 108
issues of the second series with the full text of articles from issue
61 onwards. [21] And the International
Socialism website has the full text of all issues from 100 onwards
together with a small archive of items from earlier issues. [22]
Again it is worth checking for updates. [23]
What follows is intended simply as a guide to a small selection of
articles that comrades may find of interest. It will be no more than
a brief survey of International Socialism over the past 50
years. This is not a greatest hits compilation. The decision of what
to include has been largely subjective. My sincere apologies to
comrades whose late night labours and cherished brainchildren do not
get a name-check. I hope it will encourage readers to explore the
resources available and make their own discoveries. If I have devoted
more space to the earlier period, it is because it is probably less
familiar to most readers.
In many ways the years before 1968 were the golden age of the
journal. Doubtless that claim contains an element of nostalgia on my
part (as anyone from my age group will tell you, music and sex were
better in those days too). But it was also a question of the
journal’s role in relation to the organisation. Membership was very
small – well under 100 in 1960, just over 400 by the start of 1968.
Comrades were active in campaigns – nuclear disarmament and
anti-apartheid, then in the mid-1960s tenants’ movements and some
industrial struggles – but the organisation was far too small to
intervene in its own name. In the early 1960s most activity took
place in the sectarian hothouse of the Labour Party Young Socialists.
As a result the struggle for ideas was vital, and the fact that in
1962 the Socialist Review Group was renamed the International
Socialism group was a clear indication of just how central the role
of the journal was. The Marxism of the journal in those years was
confident and flexible. Confident because unlike those who saw Russia
as socialist or even a “degenerated workers’ state” we had
nothing to make contorted apologies for. Confident too because first
Harold Macmillan’s Tories and then Harold Wilson’s Labour
government showed themselves utterly inept at solving the problems of
British society. Meanwhile a rising level of industrial struggle
showed that the class struggle was far from dead, as it had been
pronounced by Labour politicians. Marxism was clearly relevant to the
world we lived in.
But because the Marxism of International Socialism was
confident it was also adaptable. Tony Cliff was quite happy to
describe his work as “revisionist”. [24]
Some of the central tenets of orthodox Trotskyism were called into
question. Mike Kidron showed that Lenin’s Imperialism:
the Highest Stage of Capitalism was
“supremely good theory in its day” but in a radically changed
world “no more the complete manual”. [25]
Cliff showed that the theory of permanent revolution needed updating
in the light of the Chinese and Cuban revolutions. [26]
The work of Cliff and Kidron provided the theoretical core of the
journal. Cliff had spent most of the 1950s developing the theory of
state capitalism with books on Russia, China and the Eastern European
satellites. Now he was pursuing the implications of this into a more
general attempt to develop and revise Marxism for the modern epoch.
In Trotsky on Substitutionism he discussed what form of
organisation was appropriate for revolutionary socialists in the
modern period. [27] In so doing he was
polemicising against both the ultra-Bolshevism of the Socialist
Labour League and the anti-Leninists of the Solidarity current. In
The Labour Party in Perspective he made some important
observations on the nature of class consciousness, though his
conclusion was that Marxists would continue working within the Labour
Party for the foreseeable future. [28]
There was also a savage polemic entitled The End of the Road
against Isaac Deutscher, [29] who had
just published the final volume of his biographical trilogy on
Trotsky. Cliff claimed that “under Deutscher’s pen, Stalinism is
the legitimate child of the revolution”. The article should be read
alongside Peter Sedgwick’s Tragedy of the Tragedian [30]
which recalls Deutscher’s very real merits, neglected by Cliff in
his polemical zeal.
Meanwhile Mike Kidron was developing his work on the “permanent
arms economy” – an explanation of the very real but impermanent
boom in post-war capitalism. [31]
Kidron’s work was an important corrective to the Third Worldism
widespread on the left. Amid the relative tranquillity of British
society many were tempted to believe that the real action was in
Algeria, Vietnam and Cuba. In International Capitalism Kidron
sternly reminded them that the main struggle was at home:
To believe nowadays that the short route to revolution in
London, New York or Paris lies through Calcutta, Havana or Algiers,
is to pass the buck to where it has no currency. To act on this
belief is to rob the revolutionary socialist movement of the few
dollars it still possesses. [32]
Cliff and Kidron had gathered around themselves a talented team of
writers. For a few years Alasdair MacIntyre, later a world renowned
philosopher, was a regular contributor to the journal. [33]
One of his more controversial offerings was Prediction and
Politics [34] which argued that the
overthrow of capitalism depended on a “long-term mass change in
consciousness; and there are no conditions which can make such a
change either inevitable or impossible”. Cliff and Kidron, feeling
that this made too many concessions to voluntarism, insisted on
reprinting Hal Draper’s The ‘Inevitability of Socialism’
which argued for “strict determinism” and “the historic
inevitability of man’s ascent to humanity”. [35]
Belief in the inevitability of socialism is not much of a problem
today as the spectre of barbarism looms ever larger, but the debate
is well worth reading to see two powerful minds exploring the logic
of Marxism.
Peter Sedgwick was a remarkable and original writer who had the
rare gift of being very funny and profoundly serious at the same
time. He will be remembered among other things for his translations
of Victor Serge. [36] His essay on
Victor Serge and Socialism introduced a writer who was
virtually unknown to the British left. [37]
Serge was a dissident even among dissidents and Sedgwick’s
fascination with Serge reflected his own unease at accepting any
orthodoxy. [38] Sedgwick also
contributed an article on The Two New Lefts, a perceptive
critique of the strengths and weaknesses of the post-1956 British
left. [39] A complement to this was
Sedgwick’s Pseud Left Review, a caustic scatological parody
of the convoluted style which characterised Perry Anderson’s New
Left Review: “Nowhere has the archaic insularity and
parochialism of the British intelligentsia been more suffocating than
in its failure to render a totalising synthesis of the means of
excretion in our society”. [40] It
was an important reminder to International Socialism
contributors to keep their writing concrete and accessible.
Labour historian Ray Challinor’s Zigzag: The Communist Party
and the Bomb (IS1/3) provided useful ammunition for
comrades in the nuclear disarmament movement faced with a Communist
Party which was enjoying a brief revival. Jim Higgins’s Ten
Years for the Locust gave a pioneering account of British
Trotskyism during and after the Second World War (“a history of
failure but ... also a history of struggle and high endeavour”)
providing valuable background to current disputes in the Young
Socialists. [41]
By the mid-1960s some of the new generation recruited as students
around 1960 were contributing to the journal. Nigel Harris, who took
over as editor in 1965, wrote among other things on the rise of
Maoism, now a significant current on the left following the
Sino-Soviet split of the early 1960s. In Marxism:
Leninism-Stalinism-Maoism he concluded that “Stalin and Mao ...
have revised Marxism sufficiently to render it a contradiction of its
original purposes”. [42] China:
What Price Culture? dismissed the Cultural Revolution (which was
provoking great enthusiasm on some parts of the left) as “irrelevant
to the poverty of the mass of the population” and a “battle ...
between different factions of an embryonic ruling class”. [43]
Chris Harman’s Tribune of the People (a history of the
Labour left’s weekly newspaper) provided a valuable critique of the
mainstream Labour left which after the years of Bevanism was now
largely capitulating to Harold Wilson. [44]
He concluded sourly, “When the working class itself begins to solve
its own problems, Tribune will no doubt ... be looking the
other way.” For the 50th anniversary of the Russian Revolution in
1967 Harman wrote the much republished How the Revolution was
Lost, [45] which provided a
historical complement to Cliff’s work on state capitalism and
answered frequently raised questions as to when and how Russia became
state capitalist.
It is often claimed that New Left Review introduced the
British left to a range of hitherto unknown foreign Marxists. This
contribution was a real one, though some of its discoveries might
have been better left undisturbed. But International Socialism
also played a part. A proposal to translate Georg LukÃ¡cs’s History
and Class Consciousness had to be abandoned for copyright
reasons. [46] Erich Gerlach’s essay
on Karl Korsch’s Undogmatic Marxism introduced an unknown
thinker to a new generation [47] and
Chris Harman’s enthusiastic review article on Antonio Gramsci
appeared at a time when the Italian communist was still little known
in Britain. [48]
For those who have heard International Socialism derided as
“workerist” and “economistic” it may come as a surprise to
learn that in the Kidron-Harris years the journal often published
poetry. There were poems by Hugh MacDiarmid (IS1/1), Adrian
Mitchell [49] and Roger McGough
(IS1/29) before they achieved their present eminence. More
directly rooted in struggle were a selection of Songs with Teeth,
[50] several of them from the Scottish
anti-nuclear movement and including Eric Morse’s legendary Worker’s
Bomb. An obituary of the surrealist poet André Breton [51]
apparently persuaded the young David Widgery to join the
organisation. [52] And one good reason
to seek out the originals, despite availability on-line, is the
magnificent series of covers designed by Reuben Fior. [53]
With the advent of the Labour government there was a rising level
of industrial struggle and the group was able to make some small
interventions especially around the 1966 book Incomes Policy,
Legislation and Shop Stewards by Cliff and Colin Barker. The
journal reflected this development with Barker’s article The
British Labour Movement – Aspects of Current Experience [54]
and an analysis by Joyce Rosser and Barker of A Working Class
Defeat: The ENV Story [55] telling
the story of the organisation’s first factory branch in north west
London and drawing the lessons of the way trade union organisation
there was eventually smashed.
The period after 1968 saw major changes in the organisation. [56]
The membership grew amid a rising wave of industrial struggle that
lasted until 1975. The role of the journal necessarily changed but
its main aim was to provide a strategic framework for the
organisation’s activity. Chris Harman took over as editor; there
would be no more poetry but a number of articles related to the tasks
of the new period. Cliff’s On Perspectives set out the
economic analysis and political priorities for the coming years [57]
while Harman’s Party and Class provided a retrospective
assessment of issues emerging from the fierce internal debate on
internal organisation. [58]
At the beginning of the 1970s the journal published two major
analyses of international perspectives for the coming decade, which
were discussed at the International Socialism conference in spring
1970, and later that year at an international conference the group
sponsored along with the French organisation Lutte Ouvrière
and the American International Socialists. Chris Harman wrote on The
Stalinist States, observing that Russia and its satellites were
facing “a chronic crisis of slowing growth rates” and predicting
that “the chronic crises of state capitalism will inevitably reach
a nodal point at which the whole system is threatened”. [59]
Nigel Harris examined The Third World and concluded:
What is centrally lacking in the backward countries today
is a clearly expressed strategy to establish the dictatorship of the
proletariat. Without this aim the sporadic involvement of workers in
broader movements has no specific political implications except as a
possible prelude to proletarian independence. [60]
In 1973 the journal moved to monthly publication under the
editorship of Duncan Hallas. Initially this was not a success.
Articles were limited to a maximum of two pages and the journal
became an uneasy halfway house between a theoretical journal and a
current affairs magazine. The only memorable contribution was a piece
by Hallas, Fourth International in decline, which broke the
length rules and provided an account of the post-war degeneration of
the Fourth International. [61] As the
euphoria of 1968 faded some comrades were tempted by the formulations
of “orthodox” Trotskyism. Hallas’s article was a stern warning
against any such reversion.
After an abortive attempt to bring Kidron back as editor Chris
Harman resumed the editorship in the autumn of 1973. It was a stormy
period for the left. The Chilean coup was followed by the 1974
British general election, where working class action brought down a
Tory government. Central to the organisation’s aims was the
building of a rank and file movement in the unions. The general
perspective on which such a strategy was based was set out in Andreas
Nagliati’s article Towards a Rank and File Movement. [62]
This began from the assumption that “we are at the beginning of a
period of growing sharp conflict” and argued that revolutionaries
must take “the greatest care ... to involve broad support” but
also “to put their more general political ideas across”. In the
following years a number of articles addressed the question of rank
and file organisation and the history of such movements. Pete
Glatter, a working busman, contributed a piece on the London busmen’s
rank and file movement of the 1930s [63]
drawing on rank and file papers from the period and recalling a bus
workers’ song to the tune of Clementine that asked, “What’s the
use of having a pension unless you are still alive?”
Another important piece from this period was Duncan Hallas’s
White Collar Workers. [64] There
had been a tendency in the International Socialists to identify the
working class with manual workers but in the 1970s there was a rise
in militancy from groups of workers with few previous traditions of
struggle. By 1974 white collar workers constituted “around 42
percent of the workforce in Britain”. Hallas concluded with a
long-standing theme of the International Socialist tradition: the
insistence that the main struggle is always that on one’s own
doorstep. “It is no use looking with vicarious pleasure at members
working in a big car plant or a steelworks if you work in a civil
service office. The job is to build in that office.”
These years also saw a sharp internal struggle in the organisation
about strategy and perspectives and a number of articles in the
journal were thinly veiled polemics. Cliff’s Lenin’s Pravda
(based on material for his later biography of Lenin) was part of his
campaign to change the orientation and style of Socialist Worker.
[65] Jim Higgins’s Now Let Us
Praise Leon Trotsky was a parting shot from a veteran comrade
soon to be excluded from the organisation and can be read as a veiled
polemic against Cliff’s version of Leninism. [66]
In 1975 a special issue written by Cliff was devoted to Portugal
at the Crossroads. [67] This was
rapidly translated into six languages. While the history of 1968 has
been travestied and distorted the Portuguese Revolution of 1974–5,
the biggest and most potentially revolutionary explosion of working
class self-activity that Europe has seen since 1945, has been simply
written out of history, and nowadays few people are aware of the
events. Cliff’s analysis is open to retrospective criticisms – he
focused too much on the choice between socialist revolution and
“extreme reaction” on the Chilean model and underestimated the
threat posed by social democracy. But as a record of a memorable
period of working class struggle it deserves to be read and remembered.
Harman was succeeded as editor by Duncan Hallas and then Alex
Callinicos. In 1977, to celebrate the journal’s hundredth issue,
Callinicos published contributions from all four former editors.
Kidron’s piece, Two Insights Don’t Make a Theory, [68]
made a sharp critique of his own earlier work. It was effectively a
farewell from the man who had once so brilliantly edited the journal.
[69] Chris Harman’s Better a Valid
Insight Than a Wrong Theory was a valiant defence of the young
Kidron against his later self. [70]
The year 1977 also saw the Lewisham demonstration against the
National Front following which the Socialist Workers Party (as the
organisation had now become) was widely vilified. [71]
The journal made no concessions but sought to arm comrades for the
inevitable arguments with an article by Callinicos and Alistair
Hatchett, brazenly entitled In Defence of Violence, which
concluded that “the only real answer to the violence of ruling
class power is the organised power of the working class”. [72]
At the beginning of 1978 the first series of International
Socialism came to an end and was replaced by the monthly
Socialist Review which in its early issues aimed to relate to
the new milieu around the Anti Nazi League. The initiative to launch
a new series of International Socialism came initially from a
group of comrades outside the Central Committee but the new
quarterly, edited for its first ten years by Peter Binns, rapidly
took its place in the Socialist Workers Party’s range of publications.
The new journal reflected many of the crucial arguments going on
within the party. One heated debate concerned the relation of Marxism
to feminism and in particular the role of the Women’s Voice
magazine in the party. Tony Cliff presented articles on Clara Zetkin
(IS2/13) and Alexandra Kollontai (IS2/14), first drafts
of chapters from his 1984 book Class Struggle and Women’s
Liberation, but containing additional material not in the book.
There were sharp criticisms of his treatment of Zetkin from Lin James
and Anna Paczuska, Juliet Ash and Janet Vaux (IS2/14). Irene
Bruegel (IS2/1), Floya Anthias (IS2/2), Joan Smith
(IS2/3), Barbara Winslow (IS2/4) and Lin James (IS2/7)
presented a range of positions on the question of the family and
women’s oppression. Lindsey German’s Theories of Patriarchy
challenged ideas widespread in the women’s movement by setting out
to “show that it is not men who ‘benefit’ from the oppression
of women but capital”. [73] The
continuing threat from the far right was covered in two articles by
Colin Sparks on fascism and the working class: The German
Experience (IS2/2) and The National Front Today (IS2/3).
There was also a broader debate about perspectives for the current
period as the Labour government collapsed and Margaret Thatcher came
to power. Chris Harman’s Crisis of the European revolutionary
left (IS2/4) was an informative survey of developments on
the far left in Europe and also raised questions relevant to the
difficulties which the SWP faced in this period. Steve Jeffreys’
article Striking into the Eighties (IS2/5), which
looked to a continuation of the current level of industrial struggle,
drew a swift rejoinder from Cliff who, in The Balance of Class
Forces in Recent Years, set out his argument that the movement
was now entering a period of “downturn”. [74]
This was Cliff at his best. His argument did not rely simply on
statistics but contained extensive quotations from industrial
militants speaking in their own voice about the changing situation in
the workplace. Alex Callinicos’s The Rank and File Movement
Today (IS2/17) marked the abandonment of the rank and file
strategy while insisting that such a perspective was “essentially
correct – in the appropriate conditions”.
The journal continued to respond quickly to events. When
Jaruzelski’s coup crushed the Solidarity movement in Poland in
December 1981 a book length special issue, Solidarnosc: From
Gdansk to Military Repression, was produced within weeks by Colin
Barker and Kara Weber (IS2/15).
The Great Miners’ Strike of 1984–5 was central to the
Socialist Workers Party’s activity for a year. The story of the
strike was told in another special book length issue, The Great
Strike by Alex Callinicos and Mike Simons (IS2/27 &
IS2/28), and Cliff analysed Patterns of Mass Strike from
1905 to 1985. [75] The strike also gave
rise to an interesting covert polemic. Early in 1986 Paul Foot
published a short pamphlet on the miners’ leader of the 1920s A.J.
Cook. [76] Cliff responded with an
article entitled The Tragedy of A.J. Cook, which never named
Foot but was a direct attack on what Cliff saw as Foot’s excessive
sympathy for Cook (IS2/31). Cliff and Foot greatly liked and
respected each other but there were real tensions between the two
men. The polemic was doubly veiled for though the name was never
mentioned by Cliff it was clear that the real subject of debate was
not Cook but Scargill.
There were also lively exchanges on philosophical and cultural
questions. Alex Callinicos’s 1982 book Is There A Future for
Marxism? provoked a debate between Binns (IS2/17),
Callinicos (IS2/19) and Harman (IS2/21) showing that
the party leadership was far from monolithic on philosophical
questions. A critical review of Dave Widgery’s 1986 work Beating
Time, a history of Rock Against Racism (IS2/33) by myself
drew a vigorous response from Widgery (IS2/35) in which I was
categorised among “the sniffer dogs of Orthodox Trotskyism”.
In 1988 John Rees replaced Binns as editor. The journal continued
to produced a wide range of material on political and theoretical
questions. There were special issues on the French Revolution
(IS2/43) and the Frederick Engels centenary. [77]
Rees’s In Defence of October (IS2/52) provoked a wide
ranging debate about Leninism and Stalinism eliciting responses from,
among others, Samuel Farber, Robert Service and Robin Blackburn (IS2/55).
The collapse of “Communism” in the Eastern bloc was in some
ways a confirmation of analyses developed by Cliff and others many
years earlier but it also required further elucidation. In particular
Chris Harman’s article The Storm Breaks (IS2/46)
attempted to show at considerable length how the state capitalist
theory could explain the “contradictory development” in Eastern
Europe. Despite dramatic political changes, he argued, “the central
power of the ruling class was untouched”. What had happened was
that “the pygmy state capitalisms of Eastern Europe have cracked
apart in the face of competition from the new giants of the world order”.
The rise of New Labour during the 1990s produced a number of
commentaries. Chris Harman’s From Bernstein to Blair: One
Hundred Years of Revisionism showed that while Bernstein and
Anthony Crosland had tried to offer a “reformism of hope”, all
that Blair could promise was a “reformism of despair”. [78]
Lindsey German’s The Blair Project Cracks [79]
made a devastating critique of Tony Blair’s record in power before
his entanglement in foreign wars and her How Labour Lost Its Roots
described “disillusion and despair” among Labour Party activists.
[80]
The Seattle demonstrations of November 1999 gave rise to a new
international anti-capitalist movement which in the post-9/11 world
merged into a massive anti-war movement. The new challenges of the
period were covered extensively in the journal. Chris Harman’s
Anti-capitalism: Theory and Practice stressed that “it is up
to all of us to help build the new movement” but warned that
“clarity of ideas is not a luxury in such cases”. [81]
Several other articles in the same spirit followed.
John Rees’s The Broad Party, the Revolutionary Party and the
United Front confronted some of the problems posed by united
fronts and electoral alliances in a new phase of activity noting that
“the most difficult struggles and the toughest decisions still lie
ahead”. [82] Paul McGarr’s Why
Green is Red: Marxism and the Threat to the Environment provided
a valuable introduction to the emerging issues of environmental
politics deploying extensive scientific knowledge in terms easily
grasped by the lay reader. [83] His
Capitalism and Climate Change gave an equally lucid account of
21st century barbarism’s most menacing face. [84]
He concluded grimly:
The record of human history is that those who control
societies have often been prepared to see the whole of society plunge
into disastrous chaos and collapse rather than accept change which
undermined their power. I see no reason to suppose the most powerful
ruling class in human history, those who today head the giant global
corporations at whose centre stand the fossil fuel corporations, will
behave any differently to their predecessors whose societies’ fate
is witnessed only by ruined monuments.
When Socialist Review celebrated its 200th issue in 1996
Tony Cliff stated that he hoped there would not be another 200
issues, for he expected the revolution would come by then. Whether
there will be another 50 years of International Socialism we
do not know, and I for one am unlikely to find out. But at a time
when capitalism is “an unconscionable time a-dying” and the
prospect of what Marx called the “common ruin of the contending
classes” is ever more likely, we need a Marxism like that of Cliff
and Kidron that is unafraid to confront new and changing realities.
As the founders of this journal wrote 50 years ago in words still
relevant today:
Marxism has a crucial role to play. A science of action,
constantly assimilating and formulating the experiences of the
international working class, it is the most biting weapon in the
struggle against class society ...
We present International Socialism as a small
contribution to Marxist thought. Its function is to bring the
traditions of scientific socialism to bear on the constantly changing
pattern of class struggle, to help clarify its nature and,
conversely, to keep the science of working class action a living one
and not the compendium of quotations to which it is so often and so
tragically reduced.
1 September 1958

Notes
1. This was drably orthodox in its Stalinism, quite unlike the Eurocommunist Marxism Today of the 1980s, which impaled itself on its own trendiness.
2. See www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/lr/ for Labour Review.
3. www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1958/xx/changes.htm
4. www.marxists.org/archive/kidron/works/1958/xx/strikes.htm
5. www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1959/rosalux/
6. Posadas advocated a pre-emptive nuclear strike by Russia against the West.
7. Solidarity was a “libertarian” (i.e. anti-Leninist) group, inspired by the French organisation Socialisme ou Barbarie, which opposed activity in the Labour Party and focused on workplace struggle.
8. See my obituary of Mike Kidron, Birchall 2003a, and my account of Kidron’s editorship, Birchall, 2003b.
9. References to articles from the two series are indicated by IS1/ and IS2/ plus the issue number. Wherever there is an online version available at the time of writing I have given a URL.
10. In 1972 Hitchens was joint reviews editor of the journal. See IS1/50 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1972/no050/hitchens.htm and IS1/51 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1972/no051/hitchens.htm.
11. IS1/50 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1972/no050/rosewall.htm
and IS1/57 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1973/no057/rosewell.htm.
12. IS1/94 www.marxists.org/archive/hallas/works/1977/01/prospects.htm
13. See Birchall, 1980.
14. IS2/82 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj82/elliot.htm
15. IS1/34 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1968/no034/berger.htm
16. IS2/91 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj91/george.htm
17. IS2/90 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj90/bello.htm and IS2/91 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj91/bello.htm
18. IS2/89 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj89/kagarlitsky.htm and IS2/92 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj92/kagarlitsky.htm
19. As any Marxist knows, “wonders” always derive from human labour. Einde O’Callaghan, Bob Cox, Edward Crawford and several other comrades are to be warmly thanked for their efforts in making this material available.
20. 1958–68: www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/index.html, 1969–74: www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/index2.html and 1974–78: www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/index3.html.
21. www.socialistreviewindex.org.uk.
22. www.isj.org.uk.
23. It is also worth checking the collections on the Marxist Internet Archive (www.marxists.org) for Cliff, Kidron, Hallas, Jim Higgins, Peter Sedgwick, David Widgery and Paul Foot. These archives contain articles from International Socialism and from other publications.
24. See his Marxism and the Collectivisation of Agriculture, IS1/19 www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1964/xx/.
25. IS1/9 www.marxists.org/archive/kidron/works/1962/xx/imperial.htm.
26. IS1/12 www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1963/xx/permrev.htm.
27. IS1/2 www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1960/xx/trotsub.htm.
28. After 15 years in Britain this was Cliff’s first article on the British labour movement: IS1/9 www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1962/xx/labour.htm.
29. IS1/15 www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1963/xx/deutscher.htm.
30. IS1/31 www.marxists.org/archive/sedgwick/1967/xx/deutscher.htm.
31. IS1/28 www.marxists.org/archive/kidron/works/1967/xx/permarms.htm.
32. IS1/20 www.marxists.org/archive/kidron/works/1965/xx/intercap.htm.
33. A collection of MacIntyre’s Marxist writings has recently been published. See Blackledge and Davidson, 2008.
34. IS1/13 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1963/no013/macintyre.htm.
35. IS1/15 www.marxists.org/archive/draper/1947/12/inevitsoc.htm.
36. Serge, 1963, and Serge 1972.
37. IS1/14 www.marxists.org/archive/sedgwick/1963/xx/serge.htm
38. Mike Kidron’s comment on the article was: “This isn’t a portrait of Serge, it’s a portrait of Sedge.”
39. IS1/17 www.marxists.org/archive/sedgwick/1964/08/2newlefts.htm.
40. IS1/25 www.marxists.org/archive/sedgwick/1966/xx/pseudlr.htm.
41. IS1/14 www.marxists.org/archive/higgins/1963/xx/10years.htm.
42. IS1/26 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/harris/1966/xx/marxism.htm.
43. IS1/28 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/harris/1967/xx/culture.htm.
44. IS1/21 & IS1/24 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/harman/1965/xx/tribune.htm and www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/harman/1966/xx/tribune2.htm.
45. IS1/30 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/harman/1967/xx/revlost.htm.
46. IS1/24 & IS1/25 www.marxists.org/archive/lukacs/works/hcc-alt/orthmarx.htm.
47. IS1/19 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1964/no019/gerlach.htm.
48. IS1/32 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/harman/1968/xx/gramsci.htm.
49. IS1/5 & IS1/28 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1967/no028/mitchell.htm and www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1967/no028/mitchell2.htm.
50. IS1/10 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1962/no010/campbell.htm.
51. IS1/27 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/birchall/1966/xx/breton.htm.
52. Widgery, 1989, p. xiii.
53. As I write, I learn that the indefatigable Einde O’Callaghan is now adding reproductions of the covers to the archive.
54. IS1/28 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/barker-c/1967/xx/labmvmt.htm.
55. IS1/31 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/barker-c/1967/xx/env.htm.
56. See Birchall, 2008.
57. IS1/36 www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1969/04/perspectives.htm.
58. IS1/35 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/harman/1968/xx/partyclass.htm.
59. IS1/42 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/harman/1970/02/stalstates.htm.
60. IS1/42 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/harris/1970/02/3rdworld.htm.
61. IS1/60 www.marxists.org/archive/hallas/works/1973/xx/fidecline.htm.
62. IS1/66 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1974/no066/nagliati.htm.
63. IS1/74 www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/isj/1975/no074/glatter.htm.
64. IS1/72 www.marxists.org/archive/hallas/works/1974/10/whitecoll.htm.
65. IS1/67 www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1974/03/pravda.htm.
66. IS1/80 www.marxists.org/archive/higgins/1975/06/trotsky.htm.
67. IS1/81 & IS1/82 www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1975/portugal/.
68. IS1/100 www.marxists.org/archive/kidron/works/1977/07/insights.htm.
69. Shortly before his death Kidron published one further article in International Socialism: Failing Growth and Rampant Costs: Two Ghosts in the Machine of Modern Capitalism. It was marked with his customary wit and perceptiveness. IS2/96 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj96/kidron.htm.
70. IS1/100 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/harman/1977/07/insight.htm.
71. For details see Renton, 2006, pp. 69–70.
72. IS1/101 www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/callinicos/1977/09/violence.htm.
73. IS2/12 www.isj.org.uk/?id=240.
74. IS2/6 www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1979/xx/balance1.htm.
75. IS2/29 www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1985/patterns/.
76. Foot, 1986.
77. IS2/65 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj65/.
78. IS2/67 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj67/harman.htm.
79. IS2/82 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj82/german.htm.
80. IS2/87 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj87/german.htm.
81. IS2/88 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj88/harman.htm.
82. IS2/97 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj97/rees.htm.
83. IS2/88 pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj88/mcgarr.htm.
84. IS2/107 www.isj.org.uk/?id=119.


References
Birchall, Ian, 1980, The Autonomy of Theory: A Short History of New Left Review, International Socialism 10, second series (Winter 1980).
Birchall, Ian, 2003a, Obituary: Michael Kidron, Revolutionary History, Vol. 8, No. 3.
Birchall, Ian, 2003b, Michael Kidron 1930–2003, International Socialism 2 : 99, second series (Summer 2003), http://pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj99/birchall.htm.
Birchall, Ian, 2008, Seizing the Time: Tony Cliff and 1968, International Socialism 118, second series (Spring 2008), www.isj.org.uk/?id=426.
Blackledge, Paul, and Neil Davidson (eds.), 2008, Alasdair MacIntyre’s Engagement with Marxism: Selected Writings, 1953–1974 (Brill).
Foot, Paul, 1986, An Agitator of the Worst Type (Socialist Workers Party) www.marxists.org/archive/foot-paul/1986/01/ajcook.htm.
Renton, Dave, 2006, When We Touched the Sky: The Anti Nazi League, 1977–1981 (New Clarion).
Serge, Victor, 1963 [1951], Memoirs of a Revolutionary, translated by Peter Sedgwick (Oxford University)
Serge, Victor, 1972 [1930], Year One of the Russian Revolution, translated by Peter Sedgwick (Holt, Reinhart and Winston), www.marxists.org/archive/serge/1930/year-one/.
Widgery, David, 1989, Preserving Disorder (Pluto).
 



Jean-René Chauvin
Un Trotskiste dans l’enfer nazi
Editions Syllepse, Paris 2006, pp. 245, €20
JEAN-René Chauvin became a Trotskyist in 1937. For seventy years he has remained true to his original commitment. In the 1940s he was a leading activist in Sartre and Rousset’s Rassemblement Démocratique Révolutionnaire. During the Algerian war he was active in the Voie Communiste, and in the 1960s in the Parti socialiste unifié, after which he joined the Ligue communiste révolutionnaire. When I met him in Paris a few years ago he was, aged nearly eighty, visiting schools in Paris to tell of his experiences in the Nazi camps and to warn of the danger of the far right.
Now at the age of eighty-eight he has published an account of the most remarkable time of his life, his two years as a prisoner of the Nazis. He must be one of the few people alive who could write the staggering sentence about arriving in Buchenwald: “After being in Auschwitz and Mauthausen, the atmosphere there seemed to me to be much more relaxed.” Chauvin evokes vividly the nature of everyday life in the camps – the squalor, the lice, the hunger, the backbreaking work. He recalls how prisoners were awakened at 5.00 a.m. to go to work by a guard banging a hammer on a piece of rail. He cites an account of a Chinese concentration camp where prisoners were awakened in the same fashion – but at 4.00 a.m.
Food rations were determined strictly by the work done by a particular prisoner. The Nazis had taken Marx’s notion of the reproduction of labour power to its logical conclusion. At one point Chauvin was assigned to a more strenuous task without an increase in his ration. He had to confront a foreman and demand an increase.
As a true internationalist, he was able to establish relations of solidarity with fellow-prisoners of many nationalities, and even, on occasion, establish some sort of human relationships with those supervising him. But as a Trotskyist he also faced particular dangers. On one occasion he was attacked by two Stalinists, who screamed at him that he was a “Hitlero-Trotskyist” and began to beat him. Fortunately he was rescued when two other Communist Party members came to his rescue. The Stalinists in the camp were by no means a monolithic body – for some the Moscow line predominated, for others their sense of class solidarity. But as he notes, in other cases Trotskyists were put to death by Stalinists in the camps.
In January 1945 Auschwitz was evacuated and Chauvin took part in the notorious “march of death” when thousands of prisoners were moved out on foot. One prisoner cut off his finger with an axe in the hope of avoiding the evacuation, but he was forced to march with the others. Many did not survive the journey.
Later he was evacuated from Buchenwald by train. Chauvin’s neighbour was leaning heavily on him, with his head on Chauvin’s shoulder, so he tried to wake the man, but realised that “he would never wake again”.
In retrospect it seems near miraculous that Chauvin should have lived to tell his story. He attributes his survival in some situations to the fact that he was fit and agile, having been a boxer and rugby player – a useful reminder to socialists who are disdainful of sport.
Chauvin has added one more to the set of Trotskyist autobiographies, of which a good number have appeared in France in recent years. [See my review of some of them in Historical Materialism, Vol. 13, No. 4. ] But the book is much more than just a personal memoir. Over the years Chauvin has found time to read and research widely on the question of concentration camps, and alongside his own story he gives a fascinating account of the history of this barbaric institution.
The earliest camps seem to have been set up by the Spanish general Weyler y Nicolau in Cuba, but much of the credit for developing them goes to the British (something not often recalled by those anxious to defend the “achievements” of the British Empire). He describes the use of the camps in the Boer War, and notes that Emily Hobhouse, who did so much to document the atrocious conditions in the camps where Boer prisoners were held, was not even allowed to visit the camps for black prisoners.
He gives an account of the Russian camps, from their origin in the late 1920s to the more brutal form they took under Stalin. He stresses the similarities between the Nazi and Stalinist camps and recalls the work done by such writers as Serge, Ciliga and Marcel Guiheneuf (Yvon) in publicising the camps when their very existence was denied by most of the left.
But as a revolutionary Chauvin knows the main enemy is at home, and he devotes some fascinating pages to the history of concentration camps in France. While the crimes of the Nazis on French soil are well documented, the camps set up in France before the German invasion have largely been written out of history. The first camps were those set up at the end of the Spanish civil war for the half million refugees who came over the Pyrenees, and who were less than welcome to the French government (still based on the Popular Front National Assembly elected with such hopes in 1936).They were initially simply herded onto the beaches, where some died of hunger and exhaustion; then they were redistributed to a number of camps in Southern France. At the outbreak of war, the government rounded up Germans, making the crude xenophobic assumption that all Germans (even German refugees who had fought against fascism in Spain) were on the side of Hitler. He notes in particular the internment of a group of nuns (obviously a serious threat to public order) on the grounds that they had been born in Alsace before 1919 when it was still ruled by Germany, and therefore were classified as German nationals! As he notes, there was much indignation in France when Pinochet used sporting stadiums for political prisoners, but France had done exactly the same in 1939.
Chauvin’s account is both depressing and inspiring, but perhaps the saddest chapter is the concluding one. Quite unbroken by his suffering, Chauvin immediately rejoined his Trotskyist comrades. The Second World War had been Trotskyism’s finest hour, when a small but courageous group of comrades had preserved the principles of proletarian internationalism.
Now there were new possibilities. Chauvin reproduces a document showing the precise membership figures for the Parti communiste internationaliste. In 1948 it had just 626 members, about one quarter of whom were industrial workers. Yet the press raised the spectre of “120,000 Trotskyists”. There was a real chance of the PCI uniting with the Socialist Party youth, who had been expelled from the party, and the ASR [Action socialiste et révolutionnaire], another split from the Socialist Party; the fused organisation could have several thousand members and made a real impact on French political life. But the majority of the organisation turned its back on the opportunities; there were two debilitating splits, one in 1948 (when Chauvin was expelled), and another in 1952. At the start of the Algerian war French Trotskyism was reduced to a bunch of tiny squabbling sects.
Chauvin’s concluding sentence is a melancholy one. But it is the fruit of tireless activism over eight decades, and may serve as a warning to the rest of us:
In my humble opinion it [the failure to unite] was due to the difference between the weakness of our forces and the exaggerated picture that both sides had of the extent of our opportunities, as well as to the passion for polemic, whereas all political decisions should be taken coolly.
 



The View from Inside
Jane Jenson & George Ross
University of California Press $25.50
TWO North American social scientists – funded by the German Marshall Fund, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, and Carleton and Brandeis Universities – spend a year working as members of a Communist Party cell in Paris.
A clandestine operation, you may imagine, with our heroes risking exposure as CIA agents at any moment. Such would indeed have been the case in the good old days, but Jenson and Ross came in the late seventies, as ‘participant observers’, and were received openly by a ‘Eurocommunist’ cell anxious to prove that it had rid itself of all that Stalinist nonsense about ‘security’ and ‘infiltration’.
The book is the story, in 350 pages of painful detail, of the day-to-day life of the cell. In their concern to merge the personal and the political they often seem to be dredging up material for a soap opera – ‘The Euros – an everyday story of left reformist folk’? But petty quarrels, low attendances and demoralisation are not much of a good read. The response of any SWP reader will be that our poorer branches are immeasurably livelier, better organised, more active and above all more political than this. It cannot be said that the book adds very much to our knowledge of the long-term decline of the French CP, but a few interesting points emerge. Firstly, the base of the cell studied, in southern Paris, was almost entirely non-working class – intellectuals, professionals, self-employed, with only one industrial worker. The following gives a taste of the life-style:
‘Christmas and New Year, like the summer, bring French politics to a halt. Along with much of the Parisian population, our friends (from the cell) dispersed in all directions for the holidays. Janine and Gerard went to their country house near Marseilles; Alexandre and Nicole went to their retreat in the Rhone valley; and others went to their own residences secondaires (second homes), to those of friends, or off to ski in a resort.’
Small wonder that cell members felt the party put too much stress on a ‘soak the rich’ line.
Secondly, the essential undemocratic nature of the party comes out clearly. Certainly there is free discussion in the cell. Members are openly abusive about the party leadership and all kinds of weird and non-Marxist notions are aired. Virtually no discipline of any kind seems to exist. But all this discussion has nothing to do with the decisions, which are imposed from above in traditional Stalinist fashion. One member compares the CP’s ‘democratic centralism’ to a tall house in which the leadership have the right to pour buckets of water down the staircase – and the membership have an equal right to pour water back up again.
 
Backwardness
Sexual questions consumed a lot of the cell’s time. Here what comes out is the amazing backwardness of the discussion. One argument began with a letter to L’Humanité from a woman who had been raped at a fête organised by the CP! A worker member of the cell immediately commented that all rape victims were asking for it. The cell apparently never gave any consideration to any form of child-minding arrangements for meetings. In this climate it is hardly surprising that many women members were attracted by various forms of abstract and unpolitical feminism.
But behind the anecdotes lies the problem of the decline of the French CP – and this neither of the ‘participant observers’ really understand. They declare sympathy for the ‘Eurocommunist’ current in the Party, and seem to believe that if it had been able to exercise more influence the Party’s decline could have been halted. But the Eurocommunist project was to turn the CP into an openly reformist party – and France had one of those already. Why vote for a wolf in sheep’s clothing when there were real sheep on the ballot?
One member particularly admired by Jenson and Ross speaks of the ‘sensible’ attitude of the Italian CP – but the Italian Party has failed to get even as far as the French in its quest for governmental office. The decline of the French CP is historic and inevitable – to understand that one needs, not ‘participant observation’ but politics.
 



FOR NEARLY a century one of the most stirring moments of any socialist demonstration or rally has been the singing of the Internationale. Yet how many of us know the story of the poet and militant who wrote that great song?
Eugene Pottier was born in Paris in 1816. His father was an artisan, and when he left school, at the age of 12, Eugene went to work as an apprentice for his father, making packing cases. He took other jobs, none well-paid, and by 1840 had become a socialist, a follower of the Utopian Charles Fourier. He got involved with a socialist paper called L’Atelier (The Workshop), whose editorial board consisted entirely of manual workers.
But from his earliest years, Pottier was also a poet. He wrote his first poem at the age of 14, inspired by the revolution of 1830, when King Charles X was overthrown. He would sit up till midnight writing poetry, and then be up by five the next morning making packing cases.
Before 1848 the natural outlet for a working class poet was in the goguettes of Paris. These were clubs where workers could drink, sing and listen to well-known singers. Often these singers were highly political, and the revolutionary secret societies used to work through the goguettes. One product of these clubs was the great song-writer Pierre Dupont, whose songs were an inspiration to the revolutionaries of 1848. Following in his footsteps Pottier became a writer of political songs.
After the revolution of February 1848, Pottier was actively involved in working class politics, and he narrowly escaped being shot during the Paris workers’ rising in June 1848.
By 1870 Pottier had become a prosperous artisan, but when the workers of Paris established the Commune in 1871, he did not hesitate. He played a leading role in the Commune from the beginning, and on 16 April was elected to the Council of the Commune. He was active in a broad range of practical tasks, for example organising the requisition of meat, firewood and beds for ambulances. He helped to institute a system of half-price railway travel for the poor, and his signature is found on posters announcing the closure of brothels and calling for educational reform. He helped the painter Courbet to organise an assembly of Paris artists.
At the end of May 1871 came the bloody defeat of the Commune. Pottier participated in the workers’ desperate defence and was lucky to escape with his life. One newspaper actually announced that he had been executed. It was in June 1871, hiding in a cellar in Paris and still fearing for his life, that Pottier wrote the song by which he will always be remembered, the Internationale.
Pottier was a member of the First International, and the song was a tribute to his own organisation. But beyond that it was inspired by the internationalism of the Commune itself, in which for example, the Hungarian Frankel and the Pole Dombrowski had held leading positions.
In July 1871 Pottier at last managed to escape from Paris, first to Belgium, then to Gravesend in England. His health was beginning to decline and on a visit to Scotland he caught a chill which led to partial paralysis. He clearly had no future in France. In 1873 he was condemned to death in his absence. So, that same year, he went to Boston in the USA, where he worked as a draughtsman and as a French teacher. He continued to be politically active, working with French exiles and with what was left of the First International. In 1877 he was involved in the founding of the Socialistic Labor Party, and held office in one of its local sections.
In 1880 there was an amnesty for supporters of the Commune, and Pottier returned to Paris, where, ill and poor, he spent the last years of his life. While he did not join any organisation; he remained active in politics, trying to help a regroupment of the fragmented forces of French socialism. When in 1886 the miners of Decazeville struck for 108 days, Pottier, though nearly 70, was quick to back them. Despite his poverty he contributed financially, and wrote two songs in their support.
Still a poor man, Pottier died in 1887. But even his death was a political act. Ten thousand people attended the funeral – and the police brutally attacked the procession to grab a red flag carried by one of the demonstrators. Several people were seriously injured and a protest meeting was attended by 2,000 people. Some years later there was a move to erect a monument to Pottier. The Paris Municipal Council voted to contribute a substantial sum of money – but was promptly forbidden to do so by the Minister of the Interior.
Pottier had written the words of the Internationale, but the tune that was to make it famous was composed only after his death, by a Belgian worker, Pierre Degeyter.
Degeyter was born in 1848, one of a family of eight children, and at the age of eight went to work as a piecer in a textile factory. Degeyter studied music in the evenings and became a socialist activist. One day in 1888, after a day’s work in the factory, he took some fellow-workers into the pub, and pulled from his pocket a draft of the tune of the Internationale. They were the first to hear it sung, and after their approving comments he made some minor changes.
Up until this time French workers on political demonstrations still sang the Marseillaise, the song of the bourgeois revolution of 1789 – a magnificent tune, but with bloodthirsty and nationalistic words. In the 1890s the Internationale became popular among the miners of north-eastern France and gradually it ousted the Marseillaise and began to spread around the world. It was sung by Russian sailors on the Potemkin in 1905 and by French mutineers in the Black Sea in 1919. Eventually it was universally recognised as the song of the workers’ movement.
From Pierre Dupont and Eugene Pottier to the Redskins and the Style Council there is a great tradition of socialist song. It must be mobilised to build and inspire our movement.

Most of the information in this article is taken from Maurice Dommanget, Eugene Pottier, Paris 1971.
 



Albanian Communism, it cannot be denied, has a certain sectarian charm. When the Russian Communist Party sent condolences on the recent death of Enver Hoxha, the Albanians promptly sent them back – a pleasing contrast to the hypocrisy which usually attends the funerals of world leaders.


 


A Party that can describe the late Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev [1] as ‘the greatest counter-revolutionary charlatan and clown the world has ever known’ cannot, one instinctively feels, be all bad.
But rhetoric butters no parsnips, and, as the western press has hastened to point out, after forty years of Hoxha’s leadership, Albania remains the poorest country in Europe. GNP per head is not much over £600 a year.
Albania has natural assets. It is self-sufficient in food, has some oil, and is the world’s third largest producer of chrome. But its efforts to industrialise have been painfully slow, and it is in great need of foreign technology.
But if Albania is poor, the fault lies with those powers which have repeatedly threatened its independence. In the Second World War Albania was occupied by Italy, and at the war’s end Yugoslavia had plans to annex it. Britain, too, is very much a guilty party. Britain still holds Albanian gold, now worth over fifteen million pounds, grabbed at the end of the Second World War. The pretext for this theft is the fact that in 1946 two British destroyers hit mines while within Albanian territorial waters. Albania has always refused to pay compensation.
Between 1949 and 1953 Britain and the US launched a series of clandestine operations to overthrow the Hoxha regime. Fortunately these were betrayed to Albania by Kim Philby.
It is against this background of poverty, underdevelopment and foreign threat that Albania’s bizarre history of political alignment must be understood. While Stalin was alive the Albanians had little to be grateful to him for. Albania was liberated from fascist occupation without Russian help. And Stalin seems to have felt little respect for the tiny Balkan satellite.
When the Communist Information Bureau (the Cominform) was set up in 1947, Albania, alone among East European countries where a Communist Party was in power, was excluded from membership. But when Stalin split with Tito’s Yugoslavia the following year, Albania lined up with Russia, hoping this was the best way to protect itself against a possible Yugoslav take over.
After Stalin’s death Albania initially followed Khrushchev. In 1956, after Khrushchev’s ‘secret speech’ denouncing Stalin, Hoxha addressed the Russian CP Congress, praising Khrushchev and not mentioning Stalin’s name. But in the early 1960s, China split with Russia. One of the issues at stake was China’s argument that Russia should give more aid to poorer countries in the Communist bloc, rather than spend it on unaligned countries. As the poorest country in the Eastern bloc, Albania had most to gain from such a line, and sided vociferously with the Chinese.
The pro-Chinese line meant the development of a grotesque cult of the memory of Stalin. But this was only the icing on the cake. Over the next 15 years Albania picked up something like four thousand million pounds worth of Chinese aid. But by the late seventies Albania was developing differences with China. The Chinese policy of loving up to the United states had nothing in it for Albania.
 
Towards Stalinism
The final straw came in 1977, when China renewed relations with Albania’s arch enemy Yugoslavia. Since then Albania has refused any political alignment, covering itself in doctrinal purity and total dedication to the memory of Joe Stalin.
It is not hard to see why Hoxha fostered the Stalin cult. At the cost of enormous brutality, exercised against the Russian working class, Stalin succeeded in industrialising Russia. Hoxha would have dearly loved to do the same thing – but Albania was too small and too backward for it ever to be possible.
So the rhetoric lived on in a vacuum. Radio Tirana and the party paper Zëri i Populitt churned out their endless clichés about ‘revisionism’ and ‘Marxism-Leninism’. For those who like their Marxism real, real simple this had a certain appeal, and for many Maoists in the sixties and seventies Albania was a second motherland.
But the rhetoric had no roots in practice. For all its talk of ‘internationalism’ Albania spread no revolution: it merely cultivated the rag tag and bobtail of a handful of irrelevant Maoist sects. On the one occasion when Hoxha had a real struggle in his own back yard he did little to help.
When Yugoslavia split with Russia in 1948, Tito’s government cut off aid to the Communists in the Greek Civil War and closed the border. Defeated Greek communists who took refuge in Albania were promptly interned by Hoxha.
For despite the rhetoric about ‘fortress Albania’ Hoxha could not keep his country outside the world economy. In recent years trade has increased, notably with Greece and Italy. A railway link is to be established with Yugoslavia, and a French ministerial visit is expected shortly.
Throughout his forty years in power Hoxha was impotent to achieve the world revolution he may or may not have believed in; impotent to achieve the national economic development he certainly aspired to. Behind the language of Leninism lay a squalid struggle for survival.
Of the forty members of the first central committee of the Albanian Communist Party in 1944, Hoxha was the only one to die in bed; all the others were purged and liquidated. One of his most recent victims was Mehmet Shehu, formerly his Prime Minister for 27 years. In 1981 Shehu was said to have committed suicide, but the Albanian press has subsequently revealed that he was a ‘secret agent of the Americans, the Soviets and the Yugoslavs’ – a heavy work load indeed. But we are assured that during 30 years as a member of the Party Politbureau he never succeeded in ‘distorting or modifying the Marxist-Leninist line’. Clearly Enver took all the decisions himself.
Now Hoxha is dead, but power stays in the family as his brother-in-law Ramiz Alia succeeds him. There may be more policy zigzags in store, but Albanian workers and peasants will continue to suffer from poverty and underdevelopment. The clichés may be ‘Marxist-Leninist’ or ‘revisionist’, but the reality will remain.

Note by ETOL
1. In the printed version the spelling is “Kruschev” – we have replaced it by the more common transliteration.
 



Ordinary Stalinism
Ronald Tiersky
Allen & Unwin (no price given)
SINCE 1945 the United States government has spent vast sums of money paying academics to study communism. One of the problems they are concerned with is changes in communism, both in the East European states and in the mass CPs of Western Europe. Are they still the enemy they used to be?
Tiersky’s answer is to distinguish ‘high Stalinism’ (the period of the old butcher himself) from ‘ordinary Stalinism’ (destalinised Russia and Western Eurocommunism). Now an interesting book could be written on change and continuity in Stalinist states and parties, but it would have to start with the global crisis, showing the constraints of the arms race and international banking on the Eastern ruling class. Tiersky can’t do this, as it would mean calling into question his own paymasters and their system.
Instead he opts for the study of an idea – ‘democratic centralism’ – which he sees as the unifying feature of all Stalinist organisations. This enables him to study texts instead of studying the real world – a far more comfortable alternative. He thus manages to get it wrong on both counts. He misunderstands both the real world and the texts.
For example, he gives an account of the Italian Communist Party, based entirely on its organisational shift from Stalinism and without any consideration of the economic and political crisis in Italy, and ends up prophesying a ‘serious political future’ for the PCI. In fact the PCI has spent the last twenty years trying to get into the government and is now further than ever from its goal.
Likewise on texts. Tiersky tells us that the ‘main point’ of Lenin’s What is to be Done? is that ‘the trade unions had to be subordinated to the revolutionary will of party leadership.’ Lenin in fact was concerned with a quite different question, the relation of socialist consciousness to trade unionism, and explicitly urged that trade unions should be ‘very broad organisations’. It comes as no surprise, therefore, to discover that though Tiersky makes many references to Lenin, no work by Lenin appears in his bibliography – all quotations are second hand from other academics.
In fact, ‘democratic centralism’ is nothing like the mystery Tiersky makes it out to be. The principle that a group of people discuss a course of action, agree on it, and unite to implement it, is fairly basic to human organisation. It is, for example, the basis of ‘cabinet responsibility’ in British government. Indeed, it would be impossible for two people to carry a table downstairs without some form of ‘democratic centralism’.
What makes ‘democratic centralism’ different for a revolutionary organisation is that all members are activists, and therefore involved in making and implementing decisions. When a party like the Labour Party is in government there is ‘democratic centralism’ at leadership level (left leaders like Benn must accept cabinet responsibility) but ‘freedom’ at rank and file level (ordinary members can say what they like, but the government will ignore conference decisions).
When Stalinist parties were still mass parties of activists, they needed a form of centralism, albeit highly undemocratic; how that their membership is largely passive (in the Italian CP only ten per cent of members attend section meetings) the myth of ‘democratic centralism’ can be dropped.
More generally, the question of revolutionary discipline cannot be understood simply in terms of organisation. Anyone who has done a Socialist Worker sale will know that the Bolshevik paper sellers may – occasionally – arrive late or oversleep altogether. But workers will actually run down the street to get into the factory on time. Revolutionary discipline is a response to, and a means of fighting against, the labour discipline imposed by capitalism. But someone who spends their life wandering into libraries at their own chosen time must find this hard to understand.
During the McCarthy period, all the American experts on Asia who knew anything about the subject were purged as being ‘soft on Communism’. So, when the Vietnam war began, the only ‘experts’ left were hacks and timeservers who gave rotten advice. As a result the US escalated the war and lost it. If it relies on slipshods and blinkered experts like Tiersky, the US government will also lose its war against the working class.
 



SINCE I seem to have failed to get my point across to Chris Glenn (September, SWR) at Marxism 85, maybe I can have another try. I will do so briefly because I largely agree with Chris Nineham’s article in the same issue and will not repeat points made there.
When I urged comrades to listen to the Style Council’s album Our Favourite Shop, it was not because I thought it would make a major contribution to their political education, nor even because I hoped they would enjoy it. I commended it to their attention because it seemed to me to be an excellent example of socialist propaganda in a genuinely popular (Number One on the album chart) form, and therefore worthy of study by revolutionary activists.
In a period when significant possibilities are opening up for revolutionary socialists, the ability to make and use a wide variety of imaginative and popular forms of propaganda is an important task. In the period of the Anti-Nazi League, the SWP discovered and exploited a variety of forms of mass propaganda. Unfortunately this on occasion led to a dilution of politics – it was sometimes assumed that anyone who bought a Clash album was already a 100 per cent revolutionary. Quite rightly in the last few years we have put greater stress on political clarity, but sometimes at the price of losing liveliness and imagination. Hopefully we have now reached a point where we can afford to experiment a little.
Now good propaganda doesn’t automatically flow from correct politics – otherwise Tony Cliff would draw the cartoons in Socialist Worker. There are also questions of style and technique. The great merit of Our Favourite Shop is the way it starts from individual experience (of unemployment, YTS, police violence, Milton Keynes, etc.). Now politically this has the danger of leading to a succession of single issue campaigns for good causes (a trap that Weller in fact seems to have fallen into). But at the same time the Style Council’s songs can appeal to people who are not yet at the point of wanting to bring down the whole insane system with the Redskins.
The need to discuss such issues seriously is quite separate from the question of the ‘musical preference’ of individual SWP members. One of the leading apparatchiks of the Ami-Nazi League actually likes opera. Fortunately he didn’t try to organise Wagnerian carnivals.
At the same time, musical preference does not exist in a social vacuum. What people like relates to their values, their experience and their social situation. For instance, I have never met a revolutionary socialist who likes Duran Duran. Maybe there is one out there somewhere. Or maybe not. Again, the Economist (17 August) reports that in order to improve its image with young voters the SDP is hoping to sign up rock stars – if it can find any takers, which so far it hasn’t! Surely more than just taste is at stake here.



 


Ian Birchall
Enfield



 





 


AS THE French Socialist Party slides downhill towards electoral defeat, problems are accumulating for President Mitterrand. One of the biggest may prove to be the affair of the Rainbow Warrior, the Greenpeace ship blown up in Auckland harbour in July as it was preparing to monitor French nuclear tests at the Pacific island of Mururoa.
In the face of a flood of accusations that the French secret services (the DGSE) were involved, the French government set up a special enquiry under one Bernard Tricot, a long-time Gaullist who was deeply involved with the secret services at the time of the Algerian war. His report whitewashed everyone, and for a few days the affair seemed to have died down.
Then the newspaper Le Monde produced a report showing that no less than three separate teams of French secret service agents had been involved in the attack. In the face of these revelations the Socialist government are going to find it very hard to get off the hook. As many as possible of those involved will save their skins by looking for scapegoats. Defence Minister Hernu has been forced to resign. Mitterrand, a long-time survivor, will doubtless display clean hands.
The facts of the affair seem to be as follows. Firstly, two French secret service agents with false passports have been arrested in New Zealand, but the full case against them will not become public till their trial begins in November.
Secondly, a boat called the Ouvea (which has now conveniently disappeared) was also in the South Pacific at the time with three DGSE members on board. It is claimed they were simply there to observe Greenpeace activities. But all three of them came from France’s Training Centre for Combat Swimmers and all three were highly trained for underwater sabotage. It is unlikely that such people were merely looking through binoculars.
 
Who and why?
Thirdly, according to Le Monde, there were two frogmen who actually planted the bomb. Tricot’s report admits the presence of the first two groups of agents and says that the French secret services had official instructions to ‘anticipate’ Greenpeace action in relation to the Mururoa tests. While French officials insist that this meant no more than surveillance, the word is clearly ambiguous.
What remains unclear is who exactly gave the orders for the attack and, even more unclear, why they did so. The bombing seems to have had no obvious motive; the result has been mainly to give Greenpeace good publicity and to embarrass the French government.
The events do not cast great credit on the competence of the French secret service. So many clues point to French involvement that one observer has said that those responsible left everything ‘except a beret and a bottle of Beaujolais’.
As a result the French government seems to be caught in a cleft stick. If it accepts responsibility, it must take the rap; but if it denies any involvement then it seems to be admitting that it cannot control its own secret services.
Such an admission would be no surprise. Since coming to power Mitterrand has left the state machine well alone.
Nor would it be unprecedented for the French secret service to act independently of the government – especially one of the left.
In October 1956 leaders of the Algerian National Liberation Front were preparing to negotiate a possible peace with a French government led by Socialist Guy Mollet. But before negotiations could take place the Algerian leaders’ plane was diverted by French military intelligence and they were arrested. No talks took place and the war went on. Neither Mollet nor any member of his cabinet knew anything of the kidnapping in advance, but Mollet covered up for it. Mitterrand probably remembers the episode well; he should do – he was Minister of Justice at the time.
Another possibility is the involvement of the extreme right, trying to discredit the French government.
However, all is not lost for Mitterrand. He has two things going for him. One is the widespread anti-English feeling that simmers below the surface in France – and for the purposes of the argument Canadian Greenpeace supporters and the New Zealand government all count as ‘Anglo-Saxons’. Greenpeace is also widely alleged to have links with the British secret services.
The view that the attack on Greenpeace was a quite legitimate act of self-defence to protect France’s nuclear tests is one that has a great deal of currency.
Governments in trouble often turn to nationalism, and Mitterrand doubtless remembers what the Falklands did for Thatcher. While he is unlikely to send a task force to New Zealand, his style has been brazen.
He has expressed no regret at the death of the Greenpeace photographer killed in the explosion, and continues to insist that France will exclude foreign ships from the nuclear test zone. Indeed, he ordered the navy to protect the tests ‘by force if necessary’.
 
‘My country’
Secondly, there has been the role of the opposition. Six months before an election, the right has obviously taken the opportunity to embarrass the government and call for resignations. But among senior leaders of the right, the response has been remarkably restrained. Giscard d’Estaing’s sole comment has been ‘my country right or wrong’, and Chirac has told his followers to keep quiet about the affair because he does not want to put at risk the secret service or French nuclear policy. Raymond Barre has approved the government’s handling of the affair, saying: ‘We must defend France’s interests as a nuclear power and as a Pacific power.’
Whatever the exact degree of government complicity, the Rainbow Warrior incident has brought out the relation of the Socialist government to the French state. In terms of the secret service apparatus, nuclear policy and colonial interests, Mitterrand has accepted the framework inherited from his predecessors – indeed, he clearly recognises that he is powerless to change it.
Mitterrand has come a long way from the man who said in July 1973 that ‘the Socialist Party has always considered French nuclear tests to be useless and dangerous’. France has been testing nuclear weapons in the Pacific since the days of General de Gaulle in 1966.
The Socialist government resumed nuclear testing as early as November 1981 and Mitterrand has increased France’s fleet of nuclear submarines. France has still not signed the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, now signed by some 130 states. Mitterrand has also gone back on his pre-election promise to cut back on France’s nuclear power programme, and France leads the world in fast-breeder reactors.
The French Communist Party has backed Mitterrand’s nuclear policy, and support for Mitterrand on the left has meant that France has been virtually alone in Western Europe in not developing a mass peace movement.
Doubtless there will be further cover ups, and the full truth may never emerge. But at least the world has had the spectacle of the revolting hypocrisy of a ‘socialist’ government which whimpers about terrorism, but stages nuclear tests and employs teams of trained naval saboteurs.
 



The split in The British Communist Party now seems irreversible. While the exact course of events remains to be seen, the Party apparatus and its erstwhile daily paper the Morning Star are now heading in quite different directions. The disintegration of what was, for half a century, the most significant organisation of the British left outside the Labour Party has necessarily provoked much discussion on the left. For some ‘the argument is crucial to the Inline of Left politics in Britain’ because ‘if the Eurocommunist-dominated Communist party wins control of the Morning Star we will have lost Britain’s only daily newspaper arguing orthodox Marxist politics and have gained a pink Guardian.’ [1] For others the ‘Eurocommunists’ can be assimilated to the emergent soft left backing Kinnock in the Labour Party, the so-called ‘new left’ or ‘new revisionism’. [2] Others again have seen the split as undesirable and unnecessary: ‘... as a Marxist outside the CPGB I share the feelings of many comrades who watch, horrified, the tragic deterioration of internal relations within the party and the crippling of its national political influence. Yet it seems to me to be essential that this polarisation within the CPGB be contained, rather than encouraged to spill out and engulf the left in general.’ [3]
It is therefore important to be quite clear as to what the debate is about, in particular to insist on certain principles in analysing the dispute:

Contrary to the views of some protagonists and commentators, the issue at stake is not reform versus revolution. The CPGB has not been a revolutionary organisation since 1926. The available options no Stalinism or social democracy. It is therefore not particularly meaningful or useful to describe the split in terms of ‘left’ and ‘right’.
 
The split is not the product of accident, or of the mistakes or misjudgements of any of the protagonists; it is the inevitable culmination of a long process rooted in the very nature of Stalinism as a historical phenomenon.
 
What needs to be understood is not programme but political practice; the various programmatic analyses put forward by the party from the British Road to Socialism onwards are simply rationalisations of a political practice rooted in the nature of the party as an organisation.

To demonstrate these points a historical sketch of the CPGB’s development may be useful. [4]
 
From Leninism to Stalinism
The Communist Party of Great Britain was founded at a Unity Convention held in London on 31 July 1920. The 159 delegates present unanimously passed a resolution establishing the CPGB on the basis of the Soviet system, the dictatorship of the proletariat and affiliation to the Third International. [5]
The party was the product of a revolutionary environment and a revolutionary tradition. The Russian Revolution threw all Europe into upheaval, and Britain was not left unscathed. Aneurin Bevan recalled that in South Wales, miners rushed ‘to meet one another in the streets with tears streaming down their cheeks, shaking hands and saying “At last it has happened”.’ [6] And the post-war economic crisis produced deep anger among British workers; Harry McShane recalls that as late as 1921 jobless ex-servicemen would carry hand grenades and guns on demonstrations. [7]
The gravity of the revolutionary moment brought together groupings previously divided by sharp political antagonisms. The main components of the new party were the British Socialist Party and a section of the Socialist Labour Party, plus some smaller groupings. The party thus combined the traditions of pre-1914 propagandist Marxism and of industrially oriented syndicalism, and though the mix was not perfect, it was potentially an effective one.
Yet the formation of the Communist Party from these relatively small groupings (the original membership was 4,000) left one problem that was to remain throughout the party’s history – its relation to the Labour Party. In many European countries – France, Germany, Italy, etc – Communist Parties had been formed from splits in the main working-class parties, but in Britain the Independent Labour Party had withdrawn from unity talks with the BSP and SLP, and the formation of the CPGB left the Labour Party more or less untouched. On Lenin’s advice the CPGB campaigned for affiliation to the Labour Party on an open revolutionary basis, but never succeeded in this aim, although until the mid-twenties many Communists were also individual members of the Labour Party. [8]
Despite its small size the youthful CP was an unambiguously revolutionary organisation. In 1924 it published an Appeal to Soldiers, urging them to ‘let it be known that neither in the class nor in a military war will you turn your guns on your fellow workers, but instead will line up with your fellow workers in an attack upon the exploiters and capitalists and will use your arms on the side of your class.’ [9] Trade union members, however lofty their office, were kept under firm discipline. On Black Friday (15 April 1921) the Transport Workers’ Federation withdrew strike notices previously issued in support of the miners’ struggle against wage cuts; Robert Williams, secretary of the Transport Workers’ Federation, was promptly expelled from membership of the CP. [10]
In numbers the early CP was comparable to the SWP today, but its industrial impact was immeasurably greater. This was shown by the establishment in 1924 of the Minority Movement, a body aiming to unite the militant rank and file within the unions around a fight for both economic demands and the overthrow of capitalism. The Third Conference of the Minority Movement in August 1926 was attended by 802 delegates representing 956,000 workers. [11]
There are other indications that the party had a real base in the working class. The Sunday Worker, launched in 1925 as a CP-controlled paper open to a range of opinions in the labour movement, achieved a circulation of 85,000 copies a week by early 1926. [12] Between 1921 and 1928 twenty-six CP members stood for parliament (some on a Communist label, some as Labour candidates). None got less than 2,000 votes and only four came below the 5,000 mark, while two, S. Saklatvala and J.T. Walton Newbold, were elected – the former on two occasions. [13]
The first five or six years of the CPGB, despite mistakes and limitations, provide a standard against which the later history of the party can be measured. But the revolutionary period was short-lived. The crucial turning-point was the General Strike of 1926. The dedication of the CP in this period cannot be doubted – its top leadership were jailed for sedition in October 1925, and during the General Strike itself about one quarter of its members were arrested, in many cases getting convictions that would make it impossible for them to get a job again. But under pressure from the Russian leaders the party adopted the dangerous call for All Power to the General Council of the TUC, and tailed uncritically behind the left union bureaucrats. [14] This was the first step on a very slippery slope towards a totally Stalinised party. Ten years later Harry Pollitt, the party’s General Secretary, was calling the Moscow Trials ‘a new triumph in the history of progress’. [15]
The first openly Stalinist phase of the party’s history came with the disastrous ‘Third Period’, during which the Labour Party was characterised as ‘Social Fascist’ [16], and experiments were made with breakaway unions. Membership slumped to around 2,500.
This ultra-left lurch was followed by a swing to the right. The ‘Popular Front’ was just as much a tactic ordered by Moscow as the ‘Third Period’. (Anyone who doubts this should simply observe the way that Communist Parties all round the world made the same turns at exactly the same time.) But the Popular Front offered much greater opportunities for political activity and organisational growth. The party was now committed to unity with individuals or political forces that could be described variously as ‘progressive’, ‘anti-fascist’ or ‘friendly to the Soviet Union’. The various grotesque manoeuvres and alliances of the period cannot be listed here [17], but it is important to note one crucial theme that emerged at this time. The CPGB now stressed in all its propaganda the ideas of ‘national interest’ and ‘national tradition’. Thus R. Page Arnot, after listing British poets, philosophers and scientists, declared that ‘The Communists have claimed their rightful place in the great tradition, the heritage which is theirs.’ [18] Such nationalism was to prove remarkably tenacious in the party’s subsequent evolution.
But if the CPGB had ceased to be a revolutionary party, it had not become reformist in the normal sense. Despite its Popular Frontist contortions, its most significant activity in the thirties was on terrain left untouched by other political forces. The National Unemployed Workers’ Movement organised a vigorous programme of activities on jobs, notably the famous Hunger Marches, which the Labour Party and TUC were unable to initiate because of their electoralist and bureaucratic politics. Communist Party members were central to the physical confrontations with Moseley’s Fascists in the East End of London, and many Communists fought and died heroically in Spain in the war against Franco. One can note reservations about these struggles (the CP’s embarrassed silence about the first volunteers in Spain, the foot-dragging over Cable Street) [19], but it was the party’s militancy on jobs and anti-fascism that enabled it to raise its membership from 2,555 in 1930 to 17,756 in 1939, and gave it a real legitimacy in the labour movement. That the party could attract women and men of the dedication and integrity of Harry McShane and Joe Jacobs [20] was its strength; that it employed them for such opportunist policies was its tragedy.
 
The patriot game
It was the Second World War that sowed the seeds of much that was to happen in the next forty years of the CPGB’s evolution. The war began unpropitiously; the Hitler-Stalin pact necessitated a sharp change of line, as a result of which Pollitt was removed from the General Secretaryship. Pollitt worked his way back with statements like: ‘... whenever Churchill speaks or acts, suffering and death are the result; exactly the same as when Hitler speaks or acts.’ [21] The party picked up on a certain level of working-class hostility to the war by launching the ‘People’s Convention’, which combined economic demands with a pro-Russian, anti-war policy. A meeting in January 1941 attracted 2,234 delegates, and was perceived as enough of a threat for the government to ban the Daily Worker the same month. The anti-war line also enabled the party to agitate around the very legitimate demand for better air-raid shelter provision in the East End. On one occasion Stepney workers invaded the luxury shelters in the Savoy Hotel and demanded tea at Lyons’ restaurant prices. [22]
But it was the German invasion of Russia, forcing Stalin into an alliance with Britain and the US, that gave the CPGB an unprecedented opportunity to increase its membership and influence. The Russian alliance was undoubtedly popular in many parts of the working class: ‘ ... in one factory where labour relations were unusually bad, a big order from the Soviet Union transformed them overnight; the job cards were stamped “GOODS FOR RUSSIA” and the trick was done. A railway works in Kent finished an order of a thousand freight wagons for Russia in less than ten weeks, in spite of seventy-six air raid warnings.’ [23] It was in this climate that the CP was able to grow rapidly; by December 1942 membership reached an all-time peak of 56,000. The base of the party’s post-war strength was laid at this time. In Glasgow, for example, membership rose from a few hundred to several thousand, and numerous factory branches were built. [24]
It is a curious paradox that the party’s period of maximum growth was one in which it had no electoral identity and opposed industrial militancy. The Communist Party accepted the wartime electoral truce, whereby the condition parties did not contest by-elections, but allowed the sitting party to retain the seat. On occasion this led to the CP supporting Conservative candidates against minority left parties like the Independent Labour Party or Common Wealth; thus in Cardiff East the CP issued leaflets supporting Tory Sir James Grigg (said to be ‘for friendship with the Soviet Union’) against Fenner Brockway of the ILP. [25]
In industry the CP line was that winning the war against Hitler was the overriding priority. The party therefore opposed strikes, and campaigned for the establishment of Joint Production Committees which would directly involve shop-floor representatives in the organisation of higher productivity. At the 1942 Conference of the CP, Pollitt singled out a scab for especial praise:
I salute our comrade, a docker from Hull, who was on a job unloading a ship with a cargo urgently wanted ... When the rest of the dockers struck work, he fought against it because he believed that the course of action he recommended would get what was wanted without a strike. What courage, what a sacred spirit of real class consciousness, to walk on the ship’s gangway and resume his job ...
[26]
Of course the party was not simply a pro-management tool; if its line had been in no way different from that of the Conservative Party it could not have recruited. Party shop stewards picked up many grievances about old-fashioned and authoritarian management practices carried on from the thirties. For example, at the Standard Motor Company in Coventry, the firm doctor refused to treat a CP steward because he was wearing a hammer and sickle badge on his apron. Shop meetings were held and within hours management agreed to dismiss the doctor. [27] The CP attracted those who were strongly anti-fascist and pro-Russian, but who were discontented with the way the existing political establishment was prosecuting the war effort.
It is however crucial to understand that the period in which many of the now veteran members of the party were recruited and developed was one in which class struggle was quite explicitly relegated to a secondary status. At the same time the nationalist theme was consciously promoted. The party journal World News and Views carried a regular forum called Our National Traditions, in which one reader complained of the use of foreign words like ‘comrade’, and another saw the CP as the heir of ‘Queen Elizabeth and her pirates’. These attitudes were also adopted by CP members in the armed forces, as an eyewitness recalls: ‘I remember ... Laurie Jones. He joined up the very same day with me in my company, and he was always in trouble. Well then, of course – as I say – suddenly the directive came through that they should be good soldiers and I think that for the first time since he joined the army, Laurie Jones cleaned his boots, and cleaned his webbing, and all this kind of stuff. People couldn’t believe it was the same bloke!’ [28] The CP line also called for the mobilisation of the colonial populations in the anti-fascist struggle. As a party statement put it: ‘The 50 million negroes of the British Empire, in Africa and the West Indian islands represent a substantial force available for the fight for the complete destruction of Fascism and the ending of all manifestations of imperialist oppression.’ [29] While the statement went on to call for measures favourable to the colonial populations, it stopped short of a demand for unconditional independence. [30]
And when the leaders of Russia, Britain and the USA agreed at Yalta to carve up the world between them into ‘spheres of influence’, the CP enthusiastically joined in, advocating a ‘New National Government’ which ‘should include representatives of all parties supporting the decisions of the Crimea Conference.’ [31] A London District Committee pamphlet in April expanded on this: ‘The Labour Party should then form a new National Government and invite others, including Tories like Churchill and Eden, to participate.’ So, on the eve of the biggest Labour victory in British history, the CP was sufficiently out of touch with its base – or in touch with Moscow – to call for a continuation of the war-time coalition.
 
Stalinism in crisis
In the late forties and early fifties, The British Communist Party was still firmly a Stalinist party. [32] The Moscow line – whether that of the war-time alliance of of the Cold War – was obeyed swiftly and unquestioningly; no internal dissent was permitted. Intellectual life was held in the dulling grip of orthodoxy; when Stalin published his monumentally banal Concerning Marxism in Linguistics, the party’s main intellectual journal published a note to the effect that ‘Modern Quarterly Groups or other organisations requiring speakers on Stalin’s article or other aspects of linguistics should write to Linguistics Speakers, c/o The Editor, Modern Quarterly.’ [33]
But below the surface, the dynamic of change was already well-established. By about 1950 it was possible to identify three long-term factors which were to undermine the whole edifice of British – and international – Stalinism.

The establishment of a nuclear balance of terror between East and West meant a radical change in the international role of the world’s Communist Parties. In 1945 Stalin’s ability to instruct French and Italian Communists to refuse any bid for power was an important bargaining counter in his deals with the West. But the development of Russian nuclear rocketry made the CPs far less important in terms of the Russian bureaucracy’s global strategy. It is unlikely that Mr Gorbachev is now spending sleepless nights over the crisis in the British CP (although some minor bureaucrat with a budget in the Russian equivalent of the British Council is probably nursing the problem).
 
Major developments were taking place inside the so-called ‘socialist bloc’. For a Communist in the thirties the world had a stark simplicity – Russia versus the rest. The establishment of a whole set of new ‘People’s Democracies’ in the post-1945 period was initially a boost to morale; but political and economic competition soon reasserted itself. The Russian break with Yugoslavia was followed, some fifteen years later, by the more far-reaching split between Russia and China. Fragmentation advanced apace, leading to the fratricidal struggles between the Communists of Cambodia, Vietnam and China in the late seventies. Revelations of the reality of life in Communist society – from the Kruschev ‘secret speech’ of 1956 to the exodus of the Vietnamese ‘boat-people’ – made the task of identifying with the ‘socialist camp’ an increasingly thankless one.
 
Moreover, it must be understood that Stalinism was the product of an epoch of defeat. Stalinism was established on the defeats of the British General Strike and the Chinese Revolution, and gained its original base in the era of mass unemployment and the rise of fascism. When workers felt powerless the attraction of a socialist paradise over the seas was enormous.

The long post-war boom, generated by the arms economy, changed all that. Full employment meant that workers were able to win real improvements in their conditions by localised militancy; but this very strength meant that they were less and less interested in political generalisation. The CP had no analysis of the long boom, being tied to a rag-bag of economic cliches from an earlier epoch, but it suffered from its effects. Communists were indeed often elected to represent their fellow-workers on the shop-floor; but they were increasingly unable to convey their general political outlook to those they worked with.
This situation left two options for a Communist Party. One was to continue along the Stalinist road, to become in effect a public relations annex of the Russian Embassy. This path had a certain charm; you might be isolated in your own workplace, but you had two hundred million Russians on your side. It even had a material base of sorts; politics of this sort led to cheap foreign holidays in Eastern Europe, where you would be welcomed as a representative of the British masses.
The alternative was to develop a tendency already present since the days of the Popular Front and the Second World War, to stress the national nature of the Communist Party, and to try to reintegrate the CP into the framework of national political life – in other words, to make the CP into an openly reformist party.
But the second option raised in an acute form a problem that had been with the party since its birth – its relation to the Labour Party. For if Britain had one reformist party already, why should it need another? Why eat margarine from a very small dish when there was a much bigger one full of butter? Already in the forties and early fifties the CP’s strategy was geared to the Labour Party. Its declared aim was not to split or destroy the Labour Party, but to influence it in a leftward direction. CP influence in the unions – notably the Electrical Trades Union – was used in order to put Communist inspired resolutions on the agenda of the Labour Party Conference Increasingly, simple souls were led to enquire whether, if the main aim was to assist the left-wing trend in the Labour Party, this might not be done more effectively by simply joining the Labour Party.
As usual, reality came first and programme followed. The CP Congress in 1952 adopted the text of a programmatic statement called The British Road to Socialism. This made quite explicit the party’s reformism, containing among much else the clear statement:
The enemies of Communism accuse the Communist Party of aiming to introduce Soviet power in Britain and abolish Parliament. This is a slanderous misrepresentation of our policy ... British Communists declare that the people of Britain can transform capitalist democracy into a real People’s Democracy, transforming Parliament, the product of Britain’s historical struggle for democracy, into the democratic instrument of the will of the vast majority of her people.
The British Road has subsequently been through various rewritings, each more openly reformist than the last. But in each case it merely reflected a movement already in process. The original British Road (published in Stalin’s lifetime, and printed in full in Pravda with his approval) was not only already reformist, but simply took up and made explicit trends already present in CP policy during the Popular Front and the Second World War.
 
The 1956 explosion
In 1953 Stalin, mourned effusively by the British CP, died. In February 1956 his successor, Kruschev, made his so-called ‘secret speech’ – a very unsecret affair, soon to be published in full in The Observer. As an explanation of Stalinism the speech was limited indeed, revealing – selectively – atrocities known to Trotskyists and others for decades, and putting most of the blame on Stalin’s personal psychology. But monoliths are of their nature brittle, and the shock of Kruschev’s speech caused a deep crack in the British party. And in the autumn of the same year came a second, and deeper, shock – the Russian intervention in Hungary to crush a workers’ rising. The party leadership fully backed the Russian action, declaring that ‘the choice was the defence of Socialism or the restoration of capitalism and fascism.’ [34] This produced turmoil in the party. [35] Many members resigned; others stayed to try and fight, but came up against the machine and were disciplined for writing to the bourgeois press or for launching the oppositional bulletin The Reasoner. A special Congress was held in 1957 at which the leadership held the line, but between February 1956 and February 1958 membership slumped from 33,095 to 24,670. Some of those who left, and who often achieved most publicity, were intellectuals. While bourgeois commentators naturally noticed these first, it also suited the party bureaucracy to try and draw lines between workers and intellectuals, blaming the latter for everything. Brian Behan (a building worker and the only member of the Executive to leave over Hungary) attacked this notion early in 1957 in a letter to World News: ‘The myth of a rock-like working class and the wobbly intellectuals should be thrown out once and for all. Many industrial comrades are worried about Hungary. Some very good ones have left.’ When the dust settled it became clear that the party’s industrial base had indeed been seriously damaged by the events.
The 1956–57 debate centred not only on the events in the ‘socialist’ countries, but on the internal working of the party. In order to contain internal criticism a Commission on Inner-Party Democracy was established in July 1956. This consisted of ten full-time officials, plus three teachers (Joe Cheek, Christopher Hill, Peter Cadogan), a Daily Worker journalist (Malcolm MacEwen) and one industrial worker (Kevin Halpin). The result was a shambles. The majority report was signed by the ten full-timers, while Cheek and Halpin endorsed it with significant reservations. Hill, Cadogan and MacEwen – all of whom left the party – produced a minority report. [36] The wider debate – which for some months prior to the Congress raged in the columns of the party discussion journal World News – was highly confused. The leadership defended, in the name of ‘democratic centralism’, an authoritarian structure in which the right to dissent was minimised. Their opponents responded, for the most part, in terms of liberal categories – the right to argument for its own sake, and the rejection of the necessity to accept majority decisions. Only a very few contributions to the debate attempted to defend a Leninist model of democratic centralism while rejecting the Stalinist version of it. [37]
The membership loss was actually made up over the next few years – the 1964 figure (34,281) was higher than that for 1955. But the new members – many of them picked up from activity in CND in the early sixties – were on a different style from the old guard schooled by years of Stalinism. Slowly but irresistibly the pressures of the crisis were changing the nature of the party.
One symptom of this was the increasing importance given to electoral activity. The party had always contested elections (and had had two MPs in 1945), but now elections were to become more and more important in its perspective. A characteristic sign was the decision in 1964 that the National Congresses of the Party, which since the early fifties had been held at Easter, should henceforth be held in the autumn so as not to interfere with work in the municipal elections. At times the electoral perspective produced a quite unrealistic triumphalism. During the 1964 General Election the Daily Worker reported: ‘Nothing has hit West Perthshire like Hugh MacDiarmid’s campaign has done since the forays of Rob Roy ... People who sneered at the idea of a Communist campaign in this “safe” Tory seat and even those who considered it a brave but useless gesture are amazed at the growing support and the crowded lively meetings.’ [38] MacDiarmid, however, got just 127 votes.
 
The deindustrialisation of the CPGB
Until the 1960s the main significance of The British Communist Party was as an organisation of industrial militants. The basic unit of organisation was, where possible, the factory branch, and priority was given to industrial and trade union activity. Over the period 1944 to 1963 on average 43 per cent of all Congress delegates were workers in engineering, building, mining and transport and railways. The very fact that the party was marginal in electoral terms and was excluded from the mainstream of national political life led it to see industrial activity as its chosen terrain. Hundreds of thousands of workers who would never have voted Communist or read the Daily Worker willingly accepted the leadership of Communist shop stewards and union officials.
But the party’s industrial base was not immune from the contradictions that were sapping its very existence. The increasingly overt reformism of the party’s politics was translated into trade union electoralism; increasingly what counted was not mobilising workers on the shop-floor, but getting the right people elected to the right positions. And despite the party’s professions of democratic centralism, it was increasingly unable to discipline leading members who occupied high-ranking union positions. [39] Two examples will help to illustrate this. In 1968 Will Paynter, a long-standing member of the CP Executive, retired as General Secretary of the National Union of Mineworkers. Throughout his period of office there had not been a single official miners’ strike; shortly after retirement he resigned from the CP and joined the government’s Commission on Industrial Relations for £6,500 a year. [40] In 1972 Eddy Marsden, CP Executive member and General Secretary of the Constructional Section of the AUEW signed a letter, jointly with the construction manager of Simon Litwin Ltd, stating that Simon Litwin’s Llandarcy site was ‘now open for recruitment for AUEW construction section riggers and erectors’, while 57 construction workers were locked out by management. [41]
Even more fraught with danger was the party strategy of giving great importance to the election of non-party left-wingers to senior union positions. The party attached a great part of its credibility to strengthening left trends in the trade union movement, notably by supporting such figures as Hugh Scanlon of the AUEW and Jack Jones of the TGWU. Yet Scanlon and Jones, despite their ‘leftism’ on a range of abstract or non-immediate issues, both ended up supporting the ‘Social Contract’ (wage restraint) of the Wilson- Callaghan Labour government. Lower down in the union machine CP militants were increasingly caught up in the process whereby convenors and senior stewards came to occupy full-time positions, ever more remote from the experience of the shop-floor workers they were supposed to represent. Growing entanglement in the union machine accounted for the party’s highly ambiguous attitude towards productivity dealing in the 1960s. While productivity deals were a long-term weapon to weaken shop-floor organisation, many union officials saw them as a short-term means of winning wage rises without a fight; being unable to alienate itself from such officials, the CP was unable to offer any concrete strategy to fight the productivity offensive.
A few landmarks may serve to chart the inexorable decline of the CPGB as a focus of industrial militancy.
In 1961 came the witchhunt in the Electrical Trades Union. The CP had effectively controlled the ETU since the end of the war, but after Hungary two ex-CPers, Les Cannon and Frank Chapple, aligned themselves with the right wing in the union. The CP had not used their period of control to democratise the union, and as their influence began to wane, certain prominent CPers indulged in ballot-rigging to preserve their power. This led to a notorious High Court case as a result of which the CP were ousted and the right took over. The ex-Communists now turned the union apparatus against their erstwhile comrades. In 1964 the Executive moved to ban CP members from holding office in the union. When this was implemented, the CP decided that its full-time officials should resign and return to the rank and file. In fact all but one resigned from the CP and held on to their full-time posts.
In 1966 came the first major industrial confrontation with the Wilson government, a national seamen’s strike. Wilson sought to embarrass and demoralise the strikers by alleging manipulation by the CPGB, which he called ‘this tightly knit group of politically motivated men’. Wilson’s attempts to prove his charges fell miserably flat. While it was true that the CP’s industrial organiser, Bert Ramelson, kept in close touch with strike leaders such as Jack Coward, who were CP members, it was the case, as Paul Foot reported, that ‘when Ramelson visited Coward’s flat, he surprised his hosts by advocating an immediate return to work’. [42] Jack Dash, CP dockers’ leader, made it clear that ‘there is no question of our striking’ in support of the seamen [43]; and when the Executive finally called the strike off, CP militants found themselves pleading with the rank and file to return to work. [44]
In 1971, in a context of rising unemployment, came the decision to close Upper Clyde Shipbuilders. Shop stewards, many of them CP members (including one Jimmy Reid) initiated a ‘work-in’ which won massive popular support. But the CP leaders backed off from the confrontation involved in an all-out occupation, and the Morning Star actually boasted of the high level of labour discipline achieved during the ‘work-in’:
All UCS workers are determined to do the best for THEIR yard. Now it really is teamwork. The feeling ‘you are letting the side down’ is one experienced by the very few latecomers – yes, even timekeeping has clocked new records of precision. It is summed up by the fact that the traditional lunchtime pint is downed minutes before the horn goes and the time-clock bell rings every second.
[45]
By June 1972 only fourteen per cent of redundant workers were still ‘working-in’, and the UCS stewards were placing their hopes, not in rank-and-file struggle, but in an American take-over of the yards.
In 1979 came the sacking of Derek Robinson, convenor at British Leyland’s Longbridge plant, and long-standing CP member. Robinson might well have felt his dismissal was unjust, for his record in the company had scarcely been that of an ‘extremist’. As one Leyland worker describes it:
Robinson more than any other man was responsible for hammering participation home. When it came to individuals, he bears more responsibility than even Lord Ryder probably.
... Considering he was supposed to be a Red Revolutionary, his arguments were really pretty pathetic. Usually when we heard them they were just bucket loads of patriotism – ‘the absolute necessity to maintain a British motor producing firm as against the foreign multinationals’.
[46]
Robinson described his own strategy in the following terms:
It’s a political battle ... If we are able to make Leyland successful as a publicly owned company, then it is self-evident that that will be a major political victory. It will prove to working people, millions of them, that ordinary working people have got a contribution to make, that they’ve got sufficient intelligence, determination and level of understanding to do whatever is necessary.
[47]
The fact that management could sack a man like Robinson – and get away with it – was an indication of the deep downturn in working-class struggle; but it also revealed the bankruptcy and ineffectiveness of the CP’s industrial strategy.
Since the 1960s the main form of CP intervention in industry has been the creation of ‘Broad Lefts’, that is, alliances with Labour lefts (but generally not with revolutionary socialists) to build left currents within the trade unions. But while the Broad Lefts had some electoral successes, the general picture has been one of decline. The ETU witchhunt had pushed the CP away from open campaigning into more secretive and manipulative politics, and in line with its parliamentarism, the main activity became organising resolutions and trade union elections, rather than orienting to struggle. Furthermore the declining level of activism and discipline in the CP led to many sections of the Broad Lefts becoming moribund, and where the national leadership was in the hands of the Broad Left, the CP was unwilling to organise any independent rank-and-file activity. The logic of the development was well summed up by a member of AUEW-TASS: ‘... the Broad Left has become broader and at the same time less left – the Communist Party preferring the company of Labour Party not-so-lefts who can be relied on to defend the unity of the “progressive movement” – at any price.’ [48]
The same logic affected the CP’s attempt to build a cross-industrial rank-and-file organisation, the Liaison Committee for the Defence of Trade Unions. The LCDTU was formed in 1966 to oppose the Wilson government’s incomes policy and plans for anti-union laws. Under Wilson and Heath it succeeded in organising some large demonstrations and one-day stoppages, culminating on 8 December 1970, when 600,000 struck despite TUC opposition. But the LCDTU faced a problem. It had the potential to grow into a mass rank-and-file organisation with local action committees during the big industrial struggles against the Heath government. But to do so would have meant coming into conflict with the left trade union leaders whose friendship the CP was desperately anxious to cultivate.
The crunch came in 1972. On 10 June the LCDTU held a conference attended by twelve hundred delegates which called for industrial action against the Tory union laws. But when five dockers were imprisoned for ‘illegal picketing’ the following month, the LCDTU took no action. As four dock shop stewards wrote to Socialist Worker: ‘If the average docker who took part in this struggle was asked what the LCDTU did, they would not even know who they were.’ [49] Thereafter the LCDTU was little more than a rump. It could still call sizeable conferences of the party faithful, but these were no more than rallies, tightly chaired and manipulated by the LCDTU’s self-appointed leadership, and not leading to any action.
 
The challenge to the party from the left
For thirty years and more after its foundation the CPGB monopolised the left flank of British politics. Despite its frequently rightist politics it was able to marginalise any grouping to its left. The small groups of Trotskyists or anarchists that did emerge were never able to have more than a purely local influence.
After 1956 this began to change. Campaigns and movements began to emerge on the left that were independent of, and more radical than, the CP. The first of these was the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, launched in the late fifties by some old-time pacifists, ex-CP members who had quit over Hungary and above all by members of a new generation of leftists who had not known the defeats of the thirties and forties. The CP had made ‘peace’ a major campaigning issue in the fifties, but had never raised the demand for unilateral disarmament. Its initial comment on CND was that ‘the most disastrous aspect of the present situation is not that there is no campaign by Labour for unilateral renunciation of the Bomb but that there is no campaign for Summit talks’. [50] The following year John Gollan told the CP Congress that ‘Experience has shown that unilateralism only divides the movement, and diverts attention from the real issue, namely, international agreement to ban nuclear weapons. This is the only way to banish the menace of nuclear war and also the issue on which the greatest number of people agree.’ [51]
As pressure mounted for unilateralist policies in the Labour Party, trade union block votes under CP influence continued to line up with the right-wing call for multilateral disarmament. But at Easter 1960 the CND March from Aldermaston mobilised some hundred thousand people (far more than the call for Summit Conferences had ever put on the streets) and the CP was obliged to change its line. It moved into CND and as the campaign declined succeeded not only in winning a degree of influence but in recruiting members.
A similar story marked the rise of the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign, founded in 1966 by the International Socialists, the International Marxist Group and others. The CP opposed the VSC’s slogans of ‘Victory to the NLF’ and even ‘US Troops Out Now’, preferring the bland call for a negotiated peace. But although CP stewards on occasion tried to physically remove from demonstrations those who advocated an NLF victory, the VSC grew much faster than the CP’s front, the British Council for Peace in Vietnam. The VSC even survived being lectured by Betty Reid about the need for unity:
We believe that what is required is a movement of hundreds of thousands that will make a real political impact in Britain. It is here that the attitude and activities of the VSC are obstacles to the building of such a movement, since they express continuous hostility to all whom they consider have not passed their test of full commitment, and constantly endeavour to narrow down, and indeed attack, genuine efforts for the broadest unity around realisable immediate demands such as we have already outlined.
[52]
In October 1968 the VSC succeeded in mobilising a hundred thousand people against the war, and again the CP were forced to join in. But this time round they had missed the boat; they recruited virtually no-one from the radicalised generation of 1968, while the International Socialists and other ‘ultra-left’ groups grew rapidly.
By the time of the Anti Nazi League in 1978 the CP had effectively been pushed to the margins. Individual CP members undoubtedly played a positive role in the ANL, but the party as a whole shifted from suspicious hostility [53] to a rather passive support.
It was not only broad movements that outflanked the CPGB. From the early sixties the CP began to find that it had rivals to its left. Maoism was never a serious force in Britain; the Committee to Defeat Revisionism, for Community Unity, led by old Etonian Michael McCreery, never had more than thirty members, and the Communist Party of Britain Marxist-Leninist, which for a time had a base among London AUEW members, switched its loyalties from China through Albania back to Russia. Trotskyism was a different matter. The growth of the Socialist Labour League in the early sixties, and then of the International Socialists later in the decade made it impossible for the CP to continue dismissing Trotskyists as ‘Hitler’s Agents’. [54] In 1968 the Young Communist League journal Cogito published a special issue on Trotsky which, while highly critical, did maintain some standards of historical honesty and recognised that the Moscow Trials had been less than a model of judicial propriety. As the revolutionary groups grew after 1968, and then, in the 1970s, as many Trotskyists and ex-Trotskyists entered the Labour Party, the CP was to find increasingly that a pro-Russian stance was a barrier to work with many sections of the labour movement.
 
The rise of Eurocommunism
It was 1968, too, which saw the beginning of the deep split that was to emerge in the CPGB. When Russian troops invaded Czechoslovakia in August 1968, the CP’s Executive Committee issued a statement to the effect that it ‘deeply deplores the military intervention’. [55] For the first time in its history the CPGB had openly and sharply criticised the Russian leaders. Many members did not like this, and veteran leader Palme Dutt wrote an article in Labour Monthly
[56], which, while cautious and verbose in its formulations, clearly dissociated itself from the CP Executive and warned against the dangers of a ‘grandiose anti-Soviet offensive’.
Over the following decade the CP leadership gradually distanced itself further from its Russian mentors. In 1976 former General Secretary John Gollan published an article entitled Socialist Democracy: Some Problems
[57], which rather gingerly attempted to develop a critique of Stalinism; and two years later Comment
[58] provoked outrage among party stalwarts with a cover cartoon showing Stalin swallowing human bodies. The party condemned the Russian invasion of Afghanistan and Jaruzelski’s coup in Poland, but in both cases a significant minority of the party sharply and publicly dissented.
In some ways this evolution away from dependence on Russia can be compared to the so-called ‘Eurocommunism’ which developed in the Communist Parties of Spain, Italy and France in the 1970s. (The term is imprecise, and embraces a variety of positions; it is a label rather than an explanation.) [59] And the evolution involved far more than a shifting attitude to Russia; it also reflected a change in the whole nature of the party. While the CP was failing to renew its traditional and now declining industrial base, it was recruiting from among those radicalised by the student struggles of the sixties (often from the more moderate elements who rejected the militancy of the revolutionary left).
As a result intellectuals – particularly professional intellectuals, notably teachers in higher education – came to have an increasing weight in the party. Now, of course, intellectuals have a crucial role in any socialist organisation, providing that role is conceived in the context of working-class struggle and the perspective of working-class power. [60] In a CP where organisational discipline and political coherence were in decline, the intellectuals began to tilt the party in the direction of their own preoccupations – ‘ideological struggle’ and theory for its own sake.
Of course in any party members – whether intellectuals or trade unionists – will be subject to heavy pressures drawing them to the right. In a revolutionary party this means some members will break with the organisation; in the case of the CPGB the rightward-moving members took the party with them. One notable manifestation of this move was the attack on ‘economism’ (often in the form of prosperous intellectuals lecturing workers on the inadequacies of struggles to defend wages and jobs). Thus Eric Hobsbawm sought to belittle the struggles of the early seventies by arguing that ‘... economist trade union consciousness may at times actually set workers against each other rather than establish wider patterns of solidarity.’ [61]
Dave Purdy went so far as to argue that the CP should not oppose incomes policies in principle:
The issue for socialists is not whether, but how and on what terms to enter the process of debate and negotiation surrounding policies for pay ... The current tendency to climb aboard the bandwagon of disillusionment with the social contract, and to identify progress with every fresh pay dispute, is sadly mistaken. It is leading away from a coherent socialist strategy for Britain. The main reason for this assertion is that the key to contemporary socialist strategy lies in the unification of diverse areas of struggle and the creation of a broad social and political alliance around consensus over at least the main directions of social and economic policy.
[62]
‘Anti-economism’ did produce certain tangible rewards for the CP. Marxism Today, for many years an unreadably dreary theoretical organ, was transformed into a lively discussion magazine open to a range of contributors from the left and not-so-left. In the late seventies the Communist University of London (a week-long educational and cultural event) [63] attracted widespread support. The CUL was axed in the early eighties, as was the post of National Student Organiser, but Marxism Today survived and saw its prestige and circulation rise. However, the link to the Communist Party is now little more than an embarrassment to Marxism Today in its aim to become the journal of Kinnock’s intellectual fan club. The CP needs Marxism Today – its only success story – much more than Marxism Today needs the party.
Another product of ‘anti-economism’ within the CP has been the growing influence of feminism. In the late sixties the CP was perhaps even less prepared than other sections of the left to encounter the new wave of feminism. [64] But feminists within the party, first around the unofficial journal Red Rag, then the official party journal Link, rapidly established themselves as an important component of the party. Feminist arguments – the importance of struggle away from the workplace, the need for an alliance of different oppressed groups, the importance of ideology – became central to the armoury of the Eurocommunist wing of the party.
Of course the new ideas were not adopted in all quarters of the party. The 1970s saw a collapse of the CP’s former monolithic centralism; the party now became a loose federation of currents in which diverse and often contradictory ideas flourished. Discipline was virtually non-existent in the seventies; it is only recently that a hardening factionalism has brought expulsions back into fashion. For discipline is not a product of rules and constitutions; it derives from the position of the party in the real world. In the classic Stalinist period discipline could be imposed because comrades saw the party – in Arthur Koestler’s words – as ‘the incarnation of the will of History itself. [65] Whatever the CPGB of today incarnates, it is not the will of History.
So the recent history of the CPGB has been a history of splits and divisions. In 1977 some – but far from all – of the pro-Russians split to form the New Communist Party. And in the late seventies a major strategic division emerged within the party; as Steve Jeffreys described it:
The strategy of the CPGB has traditionally centred on the notion of an ‘anti-monopoly alliance’ uniting the working class with all those social strata (including sections of the capitalist class) exploited by the big monopolies.
The broad democratic alliance, by contrast, is less a class alliance than an attempt to bring together a variety of different struggles – those of trade unionists, of ‘the various movements against oppression, women, youth, black peoples, etc. ’ The objective of this strategy is to ‘transform the political understanding of the majority of people in Britain’, winning their support for a ‘left government’ that will ‘democratise’ British society.
[66]
Both the Anti-Monopoly Alliance and the Broad Democratic Alliance stood in the tradition of the Popular Front; yet the divergence between the different wings of the party got ever sharper. For a time in the early eighties the party lined up into three currents – on the one hand the ‘Eurocommunists’ who were well on their way to writing off the working class altogether, on the other the ‘tankies’ who combined Mother Russia with an industrial strategy based more on nostalgia than reality – and in between a centre committed more to preserving the apparatus than to any set of coherent policies. Eventually the centre split and all was ready for the current terminal faction fight.
 
Nowhere to run
The CPGB’s crisis is now inevitable and inescapable. No amount of effort, no degree of willingness to conciliate, no brilliant new strategy spun from an intellectual’s head can save it. The party’s membership has fallen remorselessly – from 29,900 in 1973 to 15,691 in 1983, to about 12,000 in 1985. And only a minority of those members are active in any meaningful sense: as long ago as 1973 the party set itself the – apparently hopeless – task of ‘seeing that every member is a reader [of the Morning Star]’. [67] Despite the party’s continuing commitment to electoral politics, its electoral performance has declined from the dismal to the abject. In 1945 the CP had 21 General Election candidates with an average vote of 4,894 (and two MPs); in 1964 36 candidates with an average of 1,237 votes; in 1983 35 candidates averaged 331 votes each.
A declining party is frantically seeking allies – and since it cannot and will not unite with the revolutionary left it can look only to its right. Some CP members want alliances with the SDP and even ‘progressive’ Tories (nothing new, of course – that idea was around in 1945). A couple of years back Marxism Today carried an article called Powell the Unilateralist, which described the disgusting old racist as ‘a patriot rather than a nationalist’. [68] At the time of the People’s March for Jobs there was actually criticism of the ‘tendency by some Labour Party speakers to interpret the march as an anti-Tory affair’. [69]
The split is not in any sense a right-left division (though of course individuals or small groups within the increasingly fragmentary CP may develop a left critique of both sides). Both factions are united in their parliamentarism [70], their support for the left trade union bureaucracy, their claiming of the heritage of the Popular Front. Neither side has any way forward to offer. The Russian model has little charm for anyone under the age of seventy [71], if you want to push the Labour Party leftwards the logical place to do so is in the Labour Party; while the most appropriate fulcrum for an alliance with ‘progressive’ Tories is probably the SDP.
At the end of the day the left will acquire two more small groups, two more sets of paper-sellers on the demonstration circuit. In itself the demise of the CPGB will bring no profit to the revolutionary left; but at least a confusing diversion has been removed from the political scene. At the end of Balzac’s novel Old Goriot the ambitious young Rastignac gazes down at the vast city of Paris and pledges: ‘It’s between the two of us now!’ With the CP out of the way, the SWP can address the Labour Party in similar terms.
* * *
Notes
I should like to thank Peter Goodwin for a number of helpful comments.
1..Charles Lomas in Tribune, 17 May 1985.
2..Cf. P. Seyd, Bennism without Benn, New Socialist, May 1985; R. Miliband, The New Revisionism in Britain, New Left Review 150.
3. Michele Barratt, Weir and Wilson on Feminist Politics, New Left Review, 150.
4. Both sides in the argument have recognised the need to try to appropriate the party’s history for their factional standpoint. Thus the Morning Star has published a series entitled Our Marxist Heritage, containing such items as an extract from Willie Gallacher, denouncing ‘glib-tongued tricksters’ and ‘lackeys of capitalism’ who dared to criticise the Russian regime. (Morning Star, 24 June 1985.)
A much more serious contribution is Noreen Branson’s History of the Communist Party of Great Britain 1927–1941 (London 1985). Branson’s book contains much interesting material (for instance Chapter Five on Conspiracy and Incitement to Mutiny) and is largely free from the dogmatic and sectarian tone of much Communist historiography. In many ways Branson’s reading of party history can be seen to support the Eurocommunist case. She clearly labels the ‘Third Period’ as a ‘disaster’ (p. 17), and says that, by 1943, ‘there had been two major occasions when the Comintern had overturned policies decided on by its British section. One was in 1928 when the politics of Class-against-Class had been introduced with devastating results. The other was in 1939, when the initial line of a ‘war on two fronts’ was changed on the insistence of the Comintern to one which characterised the war as ‘imperialist’ ... At last, in 1943, the Communist Party of Great Britain was no longer to function as a section of a world party ... it was finally to emerge as an independent political party, responsible to itself alone for its decisions, its policies, its strategy and tactics in the battles that lay ahead.’ (p. 336)
Yet Branson not only fails to offer any real explanation for these disastrous policies but devotes much time to showing why they were considered justified at the time.
The whole question of Stalinism is fudged. Stalin, we are told, did not initiate the Third Period (p. 29) and ‘was persuaded only with very great difficulty’ of the need for the Popular Front (p. 241). Just who was responsible for the zigzags is not explained. Likewise Branson judges that ‘it was hardly surprising that the POUM should be regarded as traitors, and that the behaviour of the ILP in supporting the POUM should be looked on with disgust’ (p. 238). And she gives no less than six reasons why Communists swallowed the falsifications of the Moscow Trials, concluding that ‘they could not accept the idea that a socialist system could be so deeply flawed. Some twenty years later, in 1956, they were to be forced to reconsider. But that day was still a long way ahead.’ (p 248) We all make mistakes; but a party that takes twenty years to recognise its mistake cannot expect to have much trust placed in it.
5. L.J. MacFarlane, The British Communist Party, London 1966, p. 56.
6. Speech to 1951 Labour Party Conference.
7. H. McShane, No Mean Fighter, London 1978, p. 128.
8. ‘At the end of 1926, out of the Communist Party’s membership of 7,900, as many as 1,544 still belonged to the Labour Party as individuals, and another 242 were trade union delegates to Labour organisations.’ (Branson, op. cit., p. 5).
9.
Workers’ Weekly, 25 July 1924, cited MacFarlane, op. cit., p. 106.
10.
Ibid., p. 118.
11.
Ibid., p. 171. The figure is undoubtedly exaggerated, as many workers would be counted twice – say as branch members and as trades council affiliates. None the less it was a striking achievement for a party of 6,000 members.
12.
Ibid., p. 143.
13.
Ibid., pp. 294-7.
14. Cf. D. Hallas, The Communist Party and the General Strike, International Socialism (first series) 88.
15. Cited in D. Hallas, Communism and Stalinism, International Socialism (first series) 87.
16.
Resolutions of Eleventh Congress, November–December 1929.
17. Cf. H. Dewar, Communist Politics in Britain, London 1976, chapters 8–10.
18. R. Page Arnot, The English Tradition, Labour Monthly, November 1936.
19. Cf. J. Jacobs, Out of the Ghetto, London 1978, pp. 220, 232, 238–43.
20. I name these two because their autobiographies (No Mean Fighter and Out of the Ghetto) are remarkable testimonies to the contradictions of British Stalinism in the thirties. They may serve as representatives of hundreds of others who never had the opportunity to leave a record.
21.
Labour Monthly, December 1940.
22. P. Piratin, Our Flag Stays Red, London 1948, pp. 73–74.
23. A. Calder, The People’s War, London 1971, pp. 302–3.
24. McShane, op. cit., p. 235.
25. S. Bornstein & A. Richardson, Two Steps Back, Ilford 1982, p. 66; the one exception was the West Derbyshire by-election in February 1944; cf. Calder, op. cit., p. 639.
26. Bornstein & Richardson, op. cit., p. 89.
27. R. Croucher, Engineers at War, London 1982, p. 214.
28. Bornstein & Richardson, op. cit., p. 78.
29.
World News and Views, 27 February 1943.
30. In at least one ‘colony’, the native CP echoed this line; in 1945 the Congress of the Communist Party of Northern Ireland called for ‘a prosperous Ulster allied and united with a prosperous Britain.’
31.
World News and Views, 24 March 1945.
32. It is a sign of the disintegration of classic Stalinism that many on the left do not know what the term means. The post-1968 libertarian left often identify Stalinism with any kind of discipline, even firm chairing. I recall at Marxism ’83 being told by a bright-eyed youth after one meeting that the chairperson had behaved in a ‘Stalinist’ fashion because she allowed only three RCP speakers to intervene.
33.
Modern Quarterly, Summer 1952.
34.
Daily Worker, 5 November 1956.
35. For accounts by three participants with varying standpoints (John Saville, Malcolm MacEwen, Margot Heinemann) see R. Miliband & J. Saville (eds.). The Socialist Register
1976, London 1976.
36. Cf. article of MacEwen in The Socialist Register
1976.
37. Cf. pieces in World News by Eric Hobsbawm and Cliff Slaughter.
38.
Daily Worker, 3 October 1964.
39. At the 1974 TUC the first communist for some years was elected to the General Council – Ken Gill of TASS. Within hours of being elected he had withdrawn his union’s resolution against the Social Contract ‘in the interests of the broadest unity’. While the Morning Star criticised him for this the party did not attempt to discipline him. That Gill should now be expelled for internal factionalism after escaping unscathed on the occasion of a far more serious concession is an indication of the party’s priorities.
40. J. Townsend, Communist Party in Decline, International Socialism (first series) 62.
41.
Socialist Worker, 25 March 1972.
42. P. Foot, The Seamen’s Struggle, in R. Blackburn & A. Cockburn (eds.). The Incompatibles, Harmondsworth 1967, p. 192.
43.
Daily Telegraph. 16 May 1966.
44. Foot, art. cit., p. 193.
45.
Morning Star, 3 September 1971.
46.
Socialist Review, January 1980.
47.
Comment, August 1978. The politics of a bureaucrat like Robinson were aptly summed up by Eric Hobsbawm many years ago: ‘The point about an aristocracy of labour is that it believes its prospects of improvement to stand or fall with the prosperity of its employers, individually or as a class.’ (The Taming of Parliamentary Democracy in Britain, Modern Quarterly, Autumn 1951)
48. B. Parkin, The Broad Left in TASS, International Socialism 74.
49.
Socialist Worker, 14 April 1973.
50.
World News, 15 March 1958.
51.
Marxism Today, May 1959.
52.
Comment, 17 February 1968.
53. I recall early in 1978 moving a motion for affiliation to the ANL at a meeting of the Greater London Association of Trades Councils (effectively controlled by the ‘tankie’ wing of the CP) and getting precisely three votes in favour.
54. In 1942 the CP published a pamphlet on Trotskyism by one William Wainwright under the title Clear Out Hitler’s Agents.
55.
Marxism Today, October 1968.
56. October 1968.
57.
Marxism Today, January 1976.
58. 25 November 1978.
59. Thus the British CP has produced no adequate explanation of the disastrous decline and collapse of the once admired Eurocommunist Spanish CP.
60. Cf. Gramsci: ‘Who do you think is more qualified to be classed as an intellectual: a lecturer, or even a professor, who has stored up a certain number of more or less disconnected notions and ideas, who knows nothing except his own job; or a worker, even not a very cultured worker, but one who has a clear idea of what the progress and future of the world should be and who coherently organises and co-ordinates those modest and elementary notions he has been able to acquire around this idea?’ (Reminiscence of F. Platone, quoted by L. Marks in his introduction to The Modern Prince, London 1957.)
61. M. Jacques & F. Mulhem, The Forward March of Labour Halted? London 1981, p. 18.
62.
The Leveller, February 1979
63. The SWP’s annual Marxism was shamelessly copied from the CUL. The copy has now outlived and outshone the original.
64. Thus the January 1968 issue of the YCL magazine Challenge carried a debate – against and for miniskirts. The latter contribution concluded: ‘But, as I said before boys, don’t lose that masculine charm – if you’ve got any – by wearing pansy clothes ... And girls – keep those skirts up!’
65. In R. Crossman (ed.). The God that Failed, London 1965, p. 58.
66.
Socialist Review 14. Jeffery’s two-part article The Communist Party in 1979 (Socialist Review 13 & 14) is in general perceptive and well-informed and is worth reading. It is marred only by the fact that the author views the CP’s crisis in terms of his own refusal to recognise the ‘downturn’ in class struggle.
67. John Gollan’s report to the Executive, Comment, 27 June 1981.
68.
Marxism Today, January 1983.
69. Martin Jacques in Comment, 27 June 1981.
70. Thus a prominent pro-Russian, John Tarver, writes: ‘Qualitatively new functions must be acquired by the House of Commons, such as controlling foreign trade and banking.’ Comment, 15 May 1977.
71. I recently heard a radio broadcast in which a member of the US security forces lamented the fact that while in the thirties spies betrayed their country for ideological reasons, now they simply do it for the money.
 



SIMON JOYCE’S account of Labour’s Shameful Past (February SWR) is quite correct, but only tells half the story. Labour’s record has always been bad – but it has got much worse.
Take a couple of examples. Ramsey MacDonald’s record on the First World War was one of shameful wavering – but at least he did waver. He appeared enough of an opponent of the war to be vilified by the bourgeois press.
Fenner Brockway, a consistent opponent of the war recalls: ‘The fury of the attack on him by all sections of the capitalist press compelled us to rally to him.’
Kinnock, on the other hand, has taken good care not to waver; the bourgeois press can find no excuse to attack him. A few years back it was common the compare Kinnock to Ramsey MacDonald. It must now be clear that this was a disgraceful slander ... to MacDonald.
In 1956, at the time of Suez, Labour was led by perhaps the most aggressively right wing leader it has ever had. But Gaitskell defied the government pressure and broadcast a demand for the Tory prime minister’s resignation.
Only one Labour MP, Stanley Evans, supported the Suez invasion, and he was promptly forced to resign by his constituency party (Wednesbury), a solidly working class party dominated by the engineering union.
It is sometimes said that Gaitskell opposed Suez because he was pro-American rather than anti-imperialist. But Guy Mollet, the French ‘Socialist’ architect of the Suez adventure, was at least as pro-American as Gaitskell.
The difference was that the French Socialist Party had largely withered at the base, while the British Labour Party was still close to its peak of membership and electoral support in the post-war period.
As Labour’s working class base has rotted away, so too has any pressure on its leaders to even make a pretence of opposition to war.
Those Labour Party members I meet in the anti-war movement generally seem to be rather ashamed of their party membership. During the Vietnam War Labour Party members used to burn their party cards on demonstrations; perhaps we should encourage Labour supporters to do the same today.
But the main lesson of Labour’s continuing decline is that the responsibilities – and the opportunities – for revolutionaries get even greater.



 


Ian Birchall
North London



 






The response of the average Socialist Review reader to any discussion to the Common Market, and especially of this month’s European elections, is certainly one of total boredom. In this, at least, we are at one with the masses, as Curtis McNally explains.



* * *
Only thirty percent of the electorate bothered to vote in the 1979 European elections. Even the Economist, a dedicated advocate of the EEC if ever there was one, has said that the European election ‘threatens to be the bore of the year’.
Yet behind the boredom one fact remains: the ruling class and its representatives take the EEC very seriously indeed. At the time of the parliamentary debates on British membership of the Common Market in 1971, or again at the time of the referendum in 1975, the main political parties in Britain were split down the middle. MPs who normally trooped through the lobbies like zombies in mindless loyalty to the party line saw the EEC as the supreme issue of ‘conscience’. As ardent a place-seeker as Shirley Williams threatened to give up her political career if Britain withdrew from the EEC. If they take the Market so seriously, we can’t afford to wholly ignore it.
The Common Market is a product of the contradictions of capitalism. The particular contradiction in this case is that a modern capitalist state can be neither consistently nationalist nor consistently internationalist.
Modern capitalism is a highly integrated international system. Production is organised across national boundaries, trade and finance operate on a world scale, and the arms race gives a unifying dynamic to the world economy. No single unit of capitalist society can jump outside of this system.
Contrary to the Utopian dreams of some on the extreme right and the reformist left, there is no way that Britain can simply put up the shutters and pursue its own economic destiny within its own frontiers. The only state in recent years that has seriously tried to put up the shutters in this way was Cambodia after 1975. The results were scarcely encouraging.
Thus the capitalist ruling class are compelled to think in terms of international cooperation and even planning. Hence the various ‘economic summits’ and similar charades. Indeed, many national states are now too small to function adequately in terms of the needs and pressures of modern capitalism.
In terms of pure logic it would make good sense for them to merge. Nothing could be more rational than the various nation states of Western Europe should merge into a single political and economic unit able to stand on a level with Russia and the USA.
But capitalism does not operate by logic and rationality, and such a merger remains in practical terms impossible. In the last two hundred years in Europe there has been no significant merger or division of national states without violent upheaval.
The unification of Germany and Italy, the break-up of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the redivision of Germany – all resulted from war. The fact that Europe is still full of such anomalous enclaves as Andorra, Monaco, San Marino, the Channel Islands or the Vatican shows just how difficult it is to adjust national frontiers.
The reason is obvious. The modern state is a powerful and weighty piece of machinery. It employs hundreds of thousands of people, and is closely intertwined with the economic mechanisms of society.
 
Military
The political legitimacy of the ruling class – especially its ability to suck out millions of pounds in taxation to pay for ‘national defence’ – is tightly bound up with the preservation of the national state and national boundaries. Only a very powerful military or revolutionary upheaval could break the grip of such national states.
Certainly the EEC today is not in any sense a potential substitute for the existing national state machines. For every hundred thousand citizens of the EEC countries, there are 4,200 national government officials, but only seven ‘Eurocrats’ or functionaries employed directly by the institutions of the European Community. To shift that balance a very substantial war would be needed – and at the end of it there would be very little left to merge.
It is against the background of this contradiction that the emergence of the EEC must be seen. The second world war was a disastrous internal conflict between European powers. The post-war economy was smashed and devastated. Industrial output in 1947 was only 27 percent of the pre-war total in Germany, 66 percent in Austria, Italy and Greece, and below pre-war levels in France and the Netherlands.
The various European ruling classes recognised that to get back on their feet they needed a greater degree of co-operation. The United States, concerned at the ‘Communist threat’ (around 20 percent of votes in France and Italy were going to the CPs) was thinking on similar lines. By the end of the 40s the various European states introduced a series of measures to facilitate trade between them. Tariffs were cut, quota restrictions reduced and the beginnings of a multilateral trade system built up.
As early as 1946 Winston Churchill had declared:
‘We must build a kind of United States of Europe ... The first step in the re-creation of the European family must be a partnership between France and Germany ... the first practical step is to form a Council of Europe ...’
A flood of similar nonsense about the ‘European spirit’ issued from the mouths of European politicians of various ideological hues during the next decade. By the end of the fifties the Treaty of Rome had been signed and the original Common Market of six (France, West Germany, Italy, Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg) was set up.
To begin with Britain, still obsessed with its disintegrating Empire and its ‘special relationship’ with the United States, stayed aloof from developments in Europe. When the European Steel and Coal Community (a trial run for the Common Market) was established in the early fifties, Harold MacMillan (a future Tory Prime Minister) declared: ‘One thing is certain, and we may as well face it. Our people will not hand over to any supernational authority the right to close down our pits or our steelworks.’ The brave words sound ironic today, in the light of the achievements of subsequent Tory – and Labour – administrations in doing the job all by themselves.
During the sixties British capitalism had to think again. First MacMillan, then Harold Wilson made bids to join the EEC, but were thwarted by the opposition of French nationalism.
It was only in the early seventies that Edward Heath was able to implement a policy that had been ‘logical’ for British capitalism since the fifties. Britain, together with Ireland, Denmark, and later Greece, became members of the new augmented Community.
The EEC, then, represents an uneasy compromise between nationalism and internationalism. This compromise is reflected in the political institutions of the EEC – the Council, the Commission and the European Parliament.
The Council is made up of representatives of the governments of the member states. All ten member states send one or more representatives – usually, though not necessarily, the minister or secretary of state responsible for the matters under consideration, such as the minister for foreign affairs, agriculture, transport etc. Each member state assumes the presidency of the Council in turn for a period of six months.
 
Member


 


The Commission consists of a number of Commissioners who work full-time on EEC business. They are appointed by ‘common accord’ of the governments of member states. At present there are fourteen Commissioners, with at least one from each of the ten member states. Larger states like Britain normally have two Commissioners. Each Commissioner has responsibility for coordinating work in a particular field, but the Commission can only act collectively.
What emerges clearly from the constitutional complexities of the EEC is that the Commission is subordinate to the Council. The Commission submits proposals and drafts for Community rules to the Council, obeys Council instructions and is subject to a Council veto. In other words, the ‘European bureaucracy’ is firmly subordinated to the will of the component national states.
According to the rules of the Community, voting in the Council should take place on the basis of what is called a ‘qualified majority’, that is, the larger states have more votes than the smaller ones. Britain, France, Germany and Italy have ten votes apiece, the other states between two and five.
In fact, since 1965 – that is for two-thirds of the time the EEC has existed – this system has not worked. Following a French boycott of Council meetings, it has been accepted in practice that all decisions on significant matters must be unanimous. The will of national states prevails over the ‘will’ of the Community. In February of this year the European Parliament introduced a measure to restore majority voting. This will, however, take ten years to phase in, and may never amount to anything.
To sum up, it is scarcely possible to better the description given by an editorial in International Socialism in 1975:
‘The EEC is a customs union plus a dear-food agricultural protection scheme plus a super-national bureaucracy with considerable formal regulatory powers but no guns.’
The European Parliament is icing on this not very well baked cake. Initially the Parliament consisted of members of national parliaments nominated to serve in Strasbourg. But since 1979 an attempt has been made to enhance the tattered prestige of the Parliament – and of the EEC – by instituting direct elections.
In fact the Parliament is largely a meaningless charade. The normal role of a Parliament is to ratify or overthrow a government. But the EEC does not have a government in the normal sense. The Council, which as we have seen, is the supreme body, is not answerable to the Parliament, but only to the national states that compose it. The Commission does have to report to the parliament, and technically the Parliament can make the Commission resign. This would, however, be a futile gesture as it has no control over the composition of the Commission, and the member states could appoint the same old Commission all over again. The only area where the Parliament has even minimal teeth is in the establishment of the budget, and even here it can do little when there is a head-on clash between national interests.
A symptom of the Parliament’s insignificance is the bizarre voting arrangements. Four quite distinct voting methods (simple plurality, single transferable vote, proportional representation with national or with regional lists) are used in the ten countries. No body claiming a serious representative legitimacy could allow such an anomaly.
 
Ideal
The list of candidates for the European elections shows just how seriously the Parliament is taken by British politicians. Those aiming to go to Strasbourg are generally either young aspirants who haven’t managed to get a Westminster seat, or political has-beens, who have been bounced out of Westminster and prefer Strasbourg to working for a living. There is no evidence that anyone who could get a Westminster seal would actually prefer to serve the ‘European ideal’.
In times of stability such a ramshackle constitution can hold together. But a period of crisis means an intensification of competition and subjects the EEC structures to intolerable strains. At the end of last year, Gaston Thorn, president of the EEC Commission, declared:
‘We are agreed that Europe is in a state of crisis and that the Community has been seriously weakened. Paralysed by its internal contradictions and by its inability to make decisions, the Community no longer seems to be the expression of Europe’s shared aspirations.’
Symptoms of the crisis are not hard to find. The EEC now has thirteen million out of work. The lorry drivers’ blockades earlier this year drew attention to the fact that a so-called ‘customs union’ still has well-developed and inefficient – customs. In March, while the EEC discussed Spain’s application to join, a French naval patrol opened fire on Spanish trawlers ‘poaching’ in French fishing waters. Next year is supposed to see the phasing out of national passports in favour of EEC passports, but France has just withdrawn the right of British day-trippers to visit Channel ports without passports.
But the crisis appears most visibly in the disputes about the EEC budget. The problem is obvious from the division of funds in the 1984 budget. Sixty-five percent of the total goes to the Common Agricultural Policy, 5.7 percent to the regional fund, 6.4 percent to the social fund, and 6.8 percent to research and industry. A planned reform of the CAP will cut support prices and impose quotas on milk production. But the reform is timid and will not save money for at least two years.
 
Fraud
The complex regulations of the CAP make it an easy prey to rule-bending and open fraud. Indeed, the whole system preserves agricultural inefficiency, Common Market farmers get £365 a tonne for sugar, while the world market price is £110 (meanwhile a Third World country like Jamaica has to close half its state-owned sugar mills because it cannot compete). And last year Eton College profited to the sum of £10,000 by getting cheap surplus EEC butter due to its status as a ‘charity’.
The dispute over British contributions to the EEC budget fits into this context. Thatcher, arguing that Britain is subsidising agricultural inefficiency, wants Britain’s contribution cut by three-quarters, from £1200 million to £300 million. Mitterrand, on the other hand, knows that any sharp cut in the agricultural part of the budget would provoke the anger of French peasants and lead to yet more loss of votes for the Socialist Party. The problem is compounded by the fact that agricultural spending this year will probably be well over £ 1000 million in excess of the maximum fixed in the budget.
The EEC may simply run out of money altogether by about the middle of November. The whole dispute has simply been shelved until the elections are over. In fact some compromise will probably be dredged up; the British Tories have already backtracked on threats to simply hold back Britain’s contributions.
Given the ramshackle state of the Market – and the total irrelevance of the European Parliament – it is hard to understand the importance given to the European elections by the Labour Party and especially the Labour Left. In February the Labour Coordinating Committee held a conference called ‘Fighting the European Elections’, and in March Tribune carried a piece by Michael Barratt Brown, Ken Coates and Tony Topham called This is the way to fight the Euro-Elections, which describes the 14 June vote as a ‘general election’ and calls for ‘an enthusiastic search for a new internationalism.’
Now it is true that a good performance for Labour in the Euro-elections would be a setback for Thatcher. But it is also clear that a victory for the miners would be a ten thousand times greater blow against Thatcher than the biggest Labour landslide. For the Labour movement to put energy into Euro-elections at this time is more than a diversion, it is a betrayal.
Socialists should undoubtedly wish for the demise of the Common Market. It is a fraudulent abuse of the name of internationalism, a desperate alliance of ruling classes striving to preserve their own squalid privileges. But we must be clear as to how such a demise might be achieved.
To campaign for British withdrawal – as even sections of the Labour Left are now recognising – is a nonsense. Opinion polls may show 55 percent of the British population in favour of British withdrawal – but few of those are likely to take to the streets on this issue. And the reformist left have no viable alternative for the British economy.
It will be quite a different matter if the Common Market collapses as a by-product of working class struggle. German engineering workers are fighting for the thirty-five hour week, French steel workers and British miners are fighting to save jobs. If they can win, they lessen their own ruling classes’ margins for manoeuvre. National states will be driven into more and more intense competition and will be less and less able to make concessions in order to help Europe hold together.
Such a situation could start to rekindle the flames of true working class internationalism, and commit the shabby rhetoric of the European ideal to the scrapheap of history.
 






When the Pope, a fascist and Eric Heffer all sing the praises of a dead communist something must be wrong. Ian Birchall looks at the life of Enrico Berlinguer.



* * *
Socialist Review is not in the habit of mourning the passing of Stalinist bureaucrats, and Enrico Berlinguer, the recently departed Secretary General of the Italian Communist Party, is no exception.
Berlinguer, after all, had friends enough without us. He has been described as a ‘great man, a good socialist’ by Eric Heffer, and as ‘a good Communist’ by the Economist. Among the million and a half people who attended his funeral was the Chinese Prime Minister, and tributes came from Mario Soares, Willy Brandt, the Vatican and Almirante, head of the fascist MSI. With admirers like that, he must have been somebody’s enemy.
But despite the wreath from a group of priests and nuns dedicated to the ‘new Saint Francis’, Enrico Berlinguer was no feeble-minded preacher; he was a tough, unscrupulous bureaucrat who had a major influence on the recent history of the Italian Communist Party, now virtually the only CP in Western ‘Europe not showing obvious symptoms of terminal decline.
Born in 1922, Berlinguer became a Communist at the age of 21, towards the end of the Mussolini period. As one of his rivals in the party leadership, Giancarlo Pajetta, put it: ‘As a very young man Berlinguer joined the party ... leadership.’ For Berlinguer was immediately groomed for stardom. As soon as the war ended, he became Secretary General of the Communist Youth, and in 1948 entered the party leadership.
1948 was a tough year for Italian Communists. In the general election held in March the Communist-Socialist joint list appeared to have a good hope of winning. The US State Department announced that no Italian who had voted Communist would be allowed to emigrate to America, and the Vatican cut off all escape routes by announcing that CP voters would be denied absolution. British and American warships anchored off Italian ports during the campaign.
The CP lost the election, but it faced up to its opponents by remaining resolutely Stalinist. No breath of criticism of Russia or of Stalin was permitted. In 1951 two CP deputies were expelled from the party for declaring that Communists had an overriding duty to defend the national territory against aggression from any source (a position that Berlinguer himself, who supported Italy’s continuing membership of NATO, might well have put forward by the seventies).
And in 1956, despite some internal opposition, the CP line was that the Russians had been right to invade Hungary to prevent ‘the restoration of a new fascist regime’. Despite his much vaunted honesty and integrity, there is no indication that Berlinguer had any reservations about these positions.
But by the 1960s the Italian CP was entering into a deep crisis. Destalinisation, the end of the first Cold War, the split between Russia and China and the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia all cast the traditional certainties into question. The CP’s former allies in the Socialist Party had done a deal with the ruling Christian Democrats, leaving the CP more isolated than ever, despite its massive electoral support.
 
Traditions
More and more it became clear that if the party was to improve its parliamentary situation, it would have to break, at least in part, with its Stalinist traditions. The problem was exactly how to do this, and several different currents emerged.
It was in this context that Berlinguer became deputy to the ailing leader Luigi Longo in 1969, and in 1972 assumed the position of Secretary General. In a party which was increasingly bitterly divided, Berlinguer led from the ‘centre’. On the one hand was a right wing which wanted to make the party more and more openly reformist (some even wanted to liquidate the CP altogether and join up with the Socialists); on the other hand was a ‘left’ current which clung to the old dogmas and friendship with Mother Russia. Berlinguer won his popularity – and his power – by tacking skilfully between the two.
A year later came Berlinguer’s main contribution to political strategy. He was deeply impressed by the catastrophic defeat of the Chilean working class in the coup of September 1973. While some people drew the lesson that the Chilean workers should have moved forward faster and more resolutely, Berlinguer came to exactly thf opposite conclusion. From the inadequacy of the parliamentary road, he deduced, not the necessity for armed insurrection, but the need to cut back on one’s aims.
‘It’s not by obtaining 51 percent of the votes that the left wing parties can be sure of governing and achieving their work of renewal because a vertical split down the middle of our country would not be in the interests of the country and would ruin the experiment of renewing our society. That is what happened in Chile.’
This was the theory of the ‘Historic Compromise’. The Communists not only could not, but should not, govern on their own, or in alliance with the Socialists only. On the contrary, they should seek to rule in coalition with the Christian Democrats, the corrupt bourgeois clique who have dominated every Italian government since the Second World War, and who bear the main responsibility for Italy’s political and economic crisis.
The theory is abject. In essence it is a rerun of the Popular Frontism of the Thirties – with this difference: the Popular Front at least had the minimal plausibility of being offered as an alternative to fascism. The Historic Compromise wasn’t an alternative to anything – for the only alternative was precisely those Christian Democrats that Berlinguer was so anxious to ally with. The practice was equally abject. After the 1976 elections, the Christian Democrats accepted the CP’s support, but offered them no places in government. The CP loyally delivered their part of the bargain – a restraining hand on working class militancy, Precisely because they were so loyal, the Christian Democrats used their assistance to tide themselves over a bad patch, and then calmly ditched their erstwhile allies. This was not even a ‘sell-out’ – the CP gave its services free of charge.
Incidentally, Berlinguer had his own little domestic ‘historic compromise’ – his wife is a devout Catholic, and he used to take her to church each Sunday, though he didn’t stay for mass. If a self-professed Marxist can’t convince the person he or she lives with, who can they convince?
But Berlinguer’s defence of a reactionary Christian Democratic government was not merely tactical; he erected it into a theory. In January 1977 Berlinguer gave two speeches that were subsequently published as a booklet with the bizarre title Austerity, An Opportunity to Transform Italy.
Berlinguer begins with the spurious analysis that it is the growing strength of the Third World that has produced the world crisis. Profit, for him, is part of the system to be defended, not part of the problem:
‘We affirm that the market, private enterprise, and profit can and must retain a function even in the framework of an economy that develops under the democratic public will and is oriented by this will.’
Austerity, in this context, offers the possibility of improving Italian society:
‘Austerity, depending on its content and on the forces which govern its application, can be used either as an instrument of economic depression, political repression, and perpetuation of social injustice or as an opportunity for new economic and social development, rigorous pruning of the state, profound transformation of the basis of society, and defence and expansion of society.’
Such a defence of austerity, not as a necessary evil, but as a positive virtue, must be unprecedented from any self-styled Marxist. In practice it came to mean what Berlinguer calls ‘a new model of consumption’ (that is, a reduction of the consumption of the less well-off) and a recognition that public spending is ‘excessive’ and should be reduced.
One of the aspects of Berlinguer’s career which has been most commended inside and outside the Communist movement has been his open criticism of Russia and the Russian model of ‘socialism’. After the coup in Poland, Berlinguer declared on Italian television that ‘the dynamic created by the October Revolution is now exhausted’.
Yet his criticism was often rather vague. In his report to the Central Committee on the Polish coup he talked about ‘the difficulties and the sclerosis’ – scarcely rigorous Marxist categories. He did criticise the regimes of the Eastern bloc for the ‘identification of the party with the state’; but he also blamed the Polish regime for the ‘incapacity to isolate ... politically ... the extremist demands’.
 
Pathetic
But what is most striking about such criticisms is their pathetic ineffectiveness. Pravda may accuse the Italian CP of ‘sacrilege’, but the Russian leaders are scarcely worried by the likes of Berlinguer. In 1968 Brezhnev told the Czech leaders after the Russian invasion that the Western CPs were going to ‘sound off – but so what? ... For 50 years now they have not mattered one way or the other.’
In 1976 the Polish oppositionist Jacek Kuron appealed to Berlinguer to intervene on behalf of arrested Polish workers. The Italian CP sent a strongly-worded message – which the Polish regime treated with contempt.
In fact, Berlinguer’s criticisms of the East were nothing to do with a love of ‘democracy’, and everything to do with his own opportunist political strategy. The ‘Historic Compromise’ meant that the CP must accept
Italian membership of NATO. In 1976 Berlinguer told a reporter that he felt that NATO safeguarded ‘the Italian road to socialism’, as Russia could not intervene as it had done in Czechoslovakia. ‘I feel safer being on this side of the fence.’
Secondly, Berlinguer’s claim that the present period has shown the limitations of both reformism and Leninism, and therefore opens a ‘third phase’ allowed him to accommodate to a range of swampish ‘movements’:
‘There exist, and are developing, movements, associations, organisations, groups, particularly of women, youths and intellectual workers, that are expressing in hundreds of ways outside working class parties also and beyond the traditional forms of politics, demands that are being pressed, aspirations, willpower that collides and enters into conflict with economic mechanisms, with the social set up, and with contemporary capitalism’s cultural output.’
In particular, Berlinguer was anxious to set himself up as middleman between the Eastern bloc and Western social democracy:
‘We today are in a position to help communications between social democratic and other movements on the one side and parties and states whose beginnings related directly and indirectly to the October Revolution of 1917, on the other.’
Thus shortly after the Union of the Left in France broke up in 1977, Berlinguer had a formal meeting with Francois Mitterrand – to the great annoyance of the French Communist Party.
Certainly Berlinguer’s policy has not been devoid of success in the short term. While the Spanish CP crumbles and the French party faces irreversible decline, the Italian CP has increased its representation in the European parliament, while both Socialists and Christian Democrats have lost out.
But while Communists troop off in triumph to the toothless assembly’ at Strasbourg, Prime Minister Craxi has got parliamentary support for his plan tOj cut guaranteed cost-of-living increases in wages. The CP cannot protest too vigorously without upsetting all its reformist ambitions, yet if it fails to protest the initiative stays with Craxi.
All around the world former Stalinist parties are trying to turn themselves into openly reformist parties. For most the attempt has led to disaster; the Italian party has gone far further down the road than any other. But it still has a long way to go, and the death of Berlinguer, its most skilful opportunist, will not help it. Time is still on Signor Craxi’s side.
 






In the mid-seventies the Mediterranean fringe of western European capitalism was at risk. Portugal, Spain and Italy all saw a huge working class upsurge. In all three countries the revolutionary left was numbered in thousands.
Ian Birchall looks at a legacy they all share from the seventies – all three have Socialist governments.



* * *
Today there is little left of that revolutionary euphoria that shook the Mediterranean in the seventies. In Spain, Italy and Portugal workers are facing the downturn with bitter defensive struggles. In Spain Felipe Gonzalez heads a Socialist government, elected in 1982; last April Mario Soares bounced back to head a coalition of Socialists and Social Democrats in Portugal; and in Italy Bettino Craxi, despite the relatively small size of his own party, has become Italy’s first Socialist prime minister.
In each case the role of Socialists in power is to help carry through a certain modernisation made necesary after decades of fascist or clerical rule. Thus Craxi has triumphantly negotiated a new Concordat with the Catholic Church which makes it clear that Catholicism is not the Italian state religion. Soares has been denounced by the clerical right as a ‘Marxist-Atheist’ for introducing a rather timorous legalisation of abortion (permissible only in cases of rape, possible deformity or risk to the mother’s health), and a somewhat similar measure has been brought in by Gonzalez. Both Gonzalez and Soares intend to lead their countries into EEC membership.
In all this modernisation there is no specifically ‘socialist’ content, and a balance sheet of all three governments will show that their main function is to defend and strengthen capitalist rule.
Little has been heard since the autumn of 1982 of Gonzalez’ pre-election promise to get out of NATO. Gonzalez may have entertained Fidel Castro in Madrid, but he has also become the USA’s biggest arms customer.
On the economic level, Gonzalez has introduced the forty hour week and increased pensions. But on the crucial issue of jobs, his role has been a straightforward defence of capitalist interests. His pre-election pledge of 800,000 new jobs long forgotten, Gonzalez is presiding over 2,300,000 jobless (a rate of 18 percent). In some areas, such as the shipbuilding regions of Galicia, unemployment is up to one third of the active population. And only a quarter of Spain’s jobless receive unemployment benefit. But the government is pushing ahead with plans to cut back further in basic industries (especially steel and shipbuilding) with a further 65,000 redundancies planned by 1986. The Economist (7 January) has praised Gonzalez for deciding not to make unemployment a priority, as Mitterrand had done in France in 1981; it describes his first year in office as ‘a model of responsibility’ compared to Mitterrand’s.
 
Redundancies continue
One part of Franco’s heritage that Gonzalez is particularly keeri to dismantle is the degree of job security which workers received in return for being deprived of trade union rights. The government is anxious to encourage temporary Work contracts; Le Monde (19 November) quotes a ministry of labour official arguing the novel thesis that reducing job security is a weapon against unemployment: ‘We must encourage firms to take on workers at the first signs of an upturn, knowing that they can sack them if the conjuncture changes.’
All this has not gone without resistance from the working class. There were three times as many strikes in the first two months of 1984 as in the same period of the previous year. In February half a million workers struck for two days against cuts in living standards; unions have rejected an attempt to hold wage rises to 6.5 percent (as against predicted inflation of at least 8 percent).
Gonzalez’ reply is repression thus undermining workers’ organisation and their ability to resist a possible threat from the right in the future.
Appeasing the army and the ex-fascists means taking a tough line against the left. In the Basque country rising unemployment in steel and shipbuilding has given a new lease of life to the armed struggle by the nationalists of ETA.
In response Gonzalez has tightened anti-terrorist laws (including one which says that expressing political support for ETA is an offence) and strengthened the police anti-terrorist unit. The government also seems to be giving at least tacit support to the Anti-Terrorist Liberation Group, a set of off-duty police who have been crossing into France to murder Basque refugees. Little wonder that The Economist (4 February) said: ‘Most Spanish generals have a good reason to admire Mr Felipe Gonzalez’s socialists.’
In Portugal, still a bitterly poor country, Soares’ attempt to make workers pay for the crisis has taken on an even more naked form. Thousands of workers in state-run industries have not been paid for several months, in some cases over a year. Once again Soares’ response is repression. When workers demonstrated outside his residence early in April, 285 arrests were made.
 
Confrontation
The United States have got their base in the Azores for another seven years, in return for financial aid to Portugal. Five thousand Lisnave shipyard workers are idle, and in February police attacked a demonstration of four thousand shipyard workers, wounding twelve. The 1975 legislation which forbade the creation of private banks and insurance companies has just been repealed, and various public sector banking firms are being privatised.
In Italy there has been yet another sharp confrontation between a ‘socialist’ government and the organised working class. The crunch issue has been wages. As The Economist enthusiastically put it: ‘One of Europe’s most powerful trade union movements is being pounded to pieces – by a government headed by a Socialist.’ The issue is Craxi’s attempt to smash a fundamental component of Italian workers’ living standards – the automatic wage-indexation system, which guarantees workers 75 percent of any increases in the cost of living. Craxi intends to chop off three percent of any increases, which it is estimated, a loss of over five pounds a month to the average worker.
This has unleashed the fury of Italian workers. A demonstration against the proposed cut mobilised some seven hundred thousand people in what was almost certainly the biggest demonstration in Italy since the end of the second world war.
But Craxi is not without allies, and his position has been bolstered up by the trade union bureaucracy. The two smaller union federations, the CISL and the UIL, are backing his measures. But, breaking a unity of action that has existed ever since 1972, the largest union federation, the Communist-led CGIL, has come out strongly against the measures and helped to organise the mass demonstrations.
However, CGIL opposition is not all that it appears. The CGIL has made it clear that it does not oppose revision of the indexation system in principle, and it has also made it clear that it opposes working for a general strike. The CGIL’s real concern is that the action against Craxi’s decree was originally called by factory councils in Turin and Milan; if the CGIL had not stepped in to take the leadership of the movement, opposition might have developed outside its control. It was crucial that the opposition should not cut across the political ambitions of the Italian Communist Party. As Luciano Lama, secretary general of the CGIL, told the mass demonstration in March: ‘We are not here to oppose Parliament; we respect its powers. We are simply asking the members of parliament to take account of our desire for justice’. With enemies like that, who needs friends?
Craxi’s government has welcomed cruise missiles, and is planning to chop 26,500 steel jobs by 1986. Craxi has also put to death one of the liberal measures of the late seventies – the reform of psychiatric hospitals, a reform which didn’t work because the funds to make it work were never available. (At his inauguration Craxi tastefully observed: ‘We must get the lunatics back in the asylums’).
All three Socialist prime ministers are still in fragile situations. Craxi and Soares preside over coalitions which could collapse at any time; Craxi in particular is constantly at the mercy of votes of confidence. And Gonzalez, who seems to have the firmest base, may also be insecure; February saw the resignations of his finance minister and of the Socialist president of the Andalusian regional government.
Nonetheless, there are reasons to believe that all three may prove resilient. In Spain and Italy, at least, there are signs of economic recovery. Spain is now the world’s tenth industrial power, and is getting increased foreign investment, notably from Arab countries and the American multinational ATT. Italy has seen a marked improvement of exports and the balance of payments. If the ruling class want to continue this recovery without too much working class opposition, the Socialists may be the best people to do the job.
On the left the only alternative force are the Communist Parties, and these too are increasingly bankrupt. The Spanish CP has fallen from quarter of a million members to 40,000 since 1977; its recent conference was bitterly divided between pro-Russian and Eurocommunist wings, and a new pro-Russian party has been launched by Ignacio Gallego. The Portuguese CP still gets 17 percent of the vote, but is trapped in a sterile Stalinist dogmatism. Communism in southern Europe is not dead, but terminally ill. (Of course, between terminal illness and death there can be a great deal of blood and slime).
So for Spain and Portugal Gonzalez and Soares seem set to remain the least unacceptable alternative for the ruling class. Italy is more volatile. For the moment the Christian Democrats (who advocate the free market, spending cuts and a pro-US foreign policy) are very happy to serve under Craxi. There are still some Christian Democrats who would like to do a deal with the CP, but this looks increasingly unlikely. For electorally things are going slowly but surely in Craxi’s direction. The CP is going into electoral decline. This will also weaken the Christian Democrats, who have kept their vote largely by being the only bulwark against Communism; as the threat subsides, so does their claim to be the automatic party of government. Moreover, the Christian Democrats have long suffered from inability to pick up middle class votes, which have increasingly gone to the Socialists. Craxi should be able to fill the electoral vacuum.
Interviewed in March’s Labour Herald, Eric Heffer said of the Labour leadership: ‘At present we have what I call the Felipe Gonzalez syndrome – in other words, image building. Everything is geared to building the image of the movement’s leadership.’ Kinnock is certainly not as good looking as Gonzalez, and probably not as intelligent; but the performance of Socialist prime ministers in southern Europe should be food for thought for anyone who thinks we shall get an easy ride’ from the next Labour government.
 



John Sullivan’s diatribe against the Green movement (New Interventions, Vol. 8 No. 3) was written with his customary wit, and I found it highly entertaining. However, it must be said that the underlying logic of the argument, with its repeated use of ‘guilt by association’, was reminiscent of the worst days of Stalinism, and that the conclusion of the article expresses a dangerously sectarian passivity.
Sullivan begins with the claim that the Nazis attempted to implement a ‘Green programme’. The main evidence seems to be that some Nazis liked animals. Unfortunately, reality does not fit into such neat dichotomies. I understand that Leon Trotsky was quite fond of animals, but surely Sullivan recognises his anti-fascist credentials. I recently read in Searchlight of a character (whom I earnestly hope never to meet) who was not only an active racist, but well-known as a cat-strangler. As a devotee of Enlightenment rationalism, Sullivan should know that an argument of the form:



Some Nazis liked animals
Greens like animals
Therefore Greens are Nazis



is not a viable syllogism. With this methodology, we could achieve some interesting conclusions. For example: Mussolini made the trains run on time,  Virgin Trains are in the forefront of the anti-fascist struggle. I therefore remain to be convinced that the socialist strategy towards Greens is to ‘treat them as you would an open fascist’.
Let me give Sullivan another quotation to ponder:
As long as the automobile remains a means of transport for especially privileged circles, it is with a bitter feeling that millions of obedient, diligent and able fellows, who in any case live lives of limited opportunities, know themselves to be denied a mode of transportation that would open for them, especially on Sundays and holidays, a source of unknown, joyous happiness ... The class-emphasising and therefore socially divisive character that has been attached to the automobile must be removed; the car must not remain an object of luxury but must become an object of use.
The speaker? Adolf Hitler at the 1934 Berlin Automobile Show.
I would suggest that the link between cars and Nazism goes rather deeper than the various Green associations Sullivan digs up. As everybody knows, the Nazis were pretty enthusiastic road-builders. At best, the Nazis used elements of ‘green’ thinking on an ideological level; but the promotion of car ownership was deeply rooted in their social and economic policies. The Nazis, after all, were not anti-capitalist or anti-industrial, despite the odd flourish of rhetoric.
To announce that one is on the side of the Enlightenment, science and progress does not mean that a blind worship of technology solves all problems. Does Sullivan, in his hatred of the ‘idiocy of rural life’, want to pave over every last blade of grass?
It may have escaped Sullivan’s notice that transport in modern capitalism is in a state of profound crisis. Cars in Britain kill more children every month than the Dunblane gunman. Hundreds of thousands suffer illness caused by pollution from motor vehicles. The waste of time and energy resulting from the monstrous traffic jams that exist almost permanently on our streets is a massive drain on economic resources that could be used for human need. If socialists have nothing to say about the problem, they might as well pack up.
Jaguar-driving John Prescott does not begin to see the solution, which contains two main elements. First is an adequate, accessible, cheap public transport system. Ken Livingstone understood that much with his subsidised fares scheme, which is why he is still a popular candidate for mayor of London. What the reformist Livingstone did not understand was the nature of the state; the unelected Lord Denning (who boasted to the Evening Standard that he had only been on a bus once in his life) smashed the scheme. And Livingstone, as a reformist, ran away from any thought of using the industrial strength of bus and tube workers to confront Denning (which is why sections of the bourgeoisie wouldn’t mind having him as mayor).
The second element, which neither Greens nor reformists begin to discuss, is the redeployment of workers in vehicle construction and related occupations into more socially useful work. This, of course, could only take place in the framework of socialist planning and workers’ control.
Organisations like Reclaim the Streets are at least posing these questions. But Sullivan tells us that ‘ordinary people cannot see this as anything but entertainment’. Now I have known John Sullivan for many years, and I am not at all sure I recognise him as an authoritative judge of what constitutes an ‘ordinary’ person. I suspect that Sullivan’s ‘ordinary person’ is a retired engineering shop steward, with a collar and tie, a collection of Edmund Hockridge records, and a strong tendency to homophobia.
As it happens, the day after I read Sullivan’s article, I was returning home from a trade union demonstration (in support of strikers sacked by Islington Council) when I found myself in the middle of a Reclaim the Streets demonstration. Now on Sullivan’s analysis, I would, at best, have gone home to reread Anti-Dühring and feel morally superior, and at worst rallied the local Anti-Nazi League to drive the ‘fascists’ off the streets (something the police had manifestly no stomach for).
Instead, I attempted to do a Socialist Worker sale. I will not claim it was a great success, though I had a few interesting discussions. Sullivan is right that ‘most Greens are not interested in socialism’; perhaps not surprising if most of them identify socialism with Stalin and Blair. But if socialists cannot talk to people involved in Reclaim the Streets and similar organisations, then that is our problem at least as much as it is theirs. I am not talking about ‘liquidating our movement into the Greens’, nor about Red-Green Alliances. I am talking about carrying the socialist argument with a group of people who are fighting against what is objectively one of the most serious evils of modern capitalism. If we cannot meet that challenge, then all that is left is the sterile self-satisfaction of the discussion group.
 



Megan Trudell has written an excellent account of working class opposition to the First World War. [1] Quite rightly, she focuses on the events in the latter part of the war which produced the revolutionary upsurge throughout Europe in the wake of the Russian Revolution. Yet in doing so she perhaps makes too many concessions to the conventional account of the early years of the war, referring to ‘patriotic frenzy’ and the ‘seeming vice-like hold of nationalism’, and observing that the ‘outbreak of the war broke the back of the revolts’ in the period immediately preceding August 1914.
In fact the picture was considerably more complex. Of course it would be naïve to deny that jingoism of the worst sort affected considerable sections of the working class – just as it would be absurd to deny that sections of the working class today are racist. But just as it would be dangerously false to write off the entire working class as racist, so too it would be quite wrong to suggest that jingoism penetrated the entire class.
In September 1914 The Economist, then as now the voice of the more thoughtful layer of the ruling class, reflected on the situation. While in support of the war, The Economist was not concerned to prove its patriotic credentials, but rather to analyse the real difficulties posed by the prosecution of the war:
Few attempts have been made to enlighten us as to the attitudes of the working classes; but it has been freely stated that in the north of England there is still a good deal of apathy. The Yorkshire newspapers, for example, are full of letters complaining bitterly that cricket and football are being continued, and that you may see ‘hundreds of young fellows parading with their girls, whose ages range from 18 to 35, apparently unconcerned about those who are sacrificing everything to go to the front and fight for the honour and safety of our nation’. [2]
The article continued by quoting a letter published earlier that week in the Yorkshire Post:
A few days ago, in passing through one of our larger villages, I stopped to see a dozen or so young men who had joined the colours being drilled in a field. Six times as many were lying up against the fence passively looking on. I enquired of one of them, a well set-up, athletic young fellow, why he was a spectator, and not a participant. He looked at me squarely, and said: ‘Because it isn’t worth while; we could be no use for six months, and by that time there will be no enemy. Germany will be off the map.’
I spoke to another, who said: ‘It’s no business of ours, this foreign war. Austria and Servia [Serbia] should be let fight it out. Germany didn’t want to come in until compelled by Russia, and we should have kept out of it; anyhow, we’re all right; our fleet will keep us safe.’ On the same day I saw 2,000 miners watching a great bowling match on a common. Three out of five were between the ages of 20 and 35. With difficulty I diverted the attention of a few of them from the match to the war. They spoke of it in quite a detached manner. One said we should lick the Germans, but whoever won could not do without the workers, and they would have their job anyhow. Another remarked that Kitchener had got all the men he wanted, and our fleet would starve the Germans like rats in a hole. A third said he was against the war, but now it had started let them fight it out, it made no difference to him, and so on ... [3]
Such apathy was not confined to Yorkshire. In a seaside town a patriotic young woman set out to challenge all the able-bodied men she could find on the streets as to why they were not in the armed forces; she was profoundly distressed by the inadequate responses she received. She reported in a letter:
On leaving the tram-car, I asked the able-bodied young conductor if he intended to serve his country. His reply was, ‘I have three brothers in the army; that’s enough for me.’ A little later, seeing a remarkably fine young man pushing a small laundry-cart, I asked him the same question. He replied insolently, ‘I don’t want to be shot!’
... I encountered a number of young men of all social grades. As I accosted them severally some replied indifferently, ‘The Germans won’t come here, no fear!’ Others, again, replied, ‘What about the Japanese? They will help us.’ And others answered, ‘There are the Russians!’
... The answer of several of the young working men was, ‘The gents should enlist first’. [4]
Those of us who are sometimes distressed by the fact that football seems to mobilise so much more energy than politics may be consoled by the thought that it cuts both ways, as is shown by this observation from the diary of a Times journalist visiting Chelsea football ground for the game against Arsenal in December 1914:
In these days the posters carried by a line of sandwich-men, walking up and down before the gates of the Chelsea football ground, ask the crowd such questions as: ‘Are you forgetting that there’s a war on?’, ‘Your Country Needs You’, ‘Be Ready to Defend your Home and Women from the German Huns’. So far as I could notice, little attention was given to these skeletons at the feast. [5]
Such varied expressions of a sullen and blinkered apathy are a long way removed from proletarian internationalism, but they do show quite clearly that ‘patriotic frenzy’ had not penetrated the working class as deeply as is often believed. If any section of the left had offered a clear internationalist lead, then it would have stood a good chance of winning some of this section of the population to its demands. Indeed, the weakness and confusion of most of the left was a major reason why the ruling class were able, temporarily, to win the battle of ideas. Harry McShane, writing of the situation in Glasgow, notes that the left had not made enough effort to explain the nature of war; recruits did not know what they were letting themselves in for and were lulled by the claims that the war would offer an easy victory and would last only a few weeks. [6]
In addition, despite widespread enthusiasm for the war, anti-war activists were able to agitate in public, as shown by Ken Weller in his excellent book Don’t be a Soldier. The North London Herald League held its first anti-war meeting on 5 August 1914, the day after the declaration of war, at Salisbury Corner, Harringay, and continued to hold regular meetings. [7] Although the NLHL had only around 50 members at the outbreak of war, it was able to grow quite rapidly within the first six months of hostilities. One of its leading participants, R.M. Fox, described the activity:
This anti-war activity in the early days of the war was not without its dangers, for an atmosphere of terrorisation was created. But though we got violent opposition, we had enthusiastic support too. Our membership mounted; from under 50 we reached a total of five or six hundred. From all over London, from the East End, from south and west, came supporters who rallied to the anti-war standard which was raised openly in Finsbury Park. [8]
Megan is quite right to point out that nationalism did not arise spontaneously, but had to be created by indoctrination on the part of the ruling class. But although nationalism had been developed over the preceding decades, the ruling class was still forced to take drastic measures during the first months of the war to create a mood of jingoistic fervour. As Megan notes, the ruling classes were not confident in advance that they could carry workers with them at the outbreak of war. In the period before 1914 there were a number of international crises – Fashoda, Morocco, Trieste – which brought Europe to the brink of war. In each case war was averted, and in each case strong anti-war feelings were manifested by the working class movement. It is true that there were forces built into the capitalist system that were pushing irresistibly towards war; in that sense war was inevitable, but there was no inevitability that war should break out in just the way it did at precisely the time it did. A strong enough response by the working class in August 1914 and war could have been postponed yet again. (Of course capitalist Europe could not achieve a state of perpetual peace, as some reformists in the Second International imagined. Sooner or later there was only one alternative to war and that was revolution.)
Those who argue that jingoism penetrated the great mass of workers have as their most fundamental argument the fact that a million workers did volunteer before the supply was exhausted and conscription was introduced in 1916. Yet the situation is not as clear cut as it might appear. The British ruling class got their volunteers, but they had to work for it. Public sensibility was inflamed by numerous unsubstantiated atrocity stories. In September 1914 the Dumfries Standard carried a story, soon prominently taken up by such London papers as the Globe, The Star and The Evening Standard, of a British nurse in Belgium who was said to have had both breasts cut off by Germans. In fact the nurse in question had never been in Belgium and the whole story had been invented by her 17 year old sister. [9] (There is nothing new under The Sun.) Belgium was presented as being an unfortunate victim of German imperialism, [10] largely on the basis of the fact that it looked a small country on the map. Belgium was in fact a vicious colonial power in 1914. [11]
Intense ideological struggle was conducted at every level. On 2 September a government sponsored meeting of well-known British writers was held, attended by Thomas Hardy, H.G. Wells, Arnold Bennett, Conan Doyle and many others, to produce a manifesto about Britain’s ‘destiny and duty’ in the war. [12] As a result a considerable amount of patriotic prose and verse was turned out over the next four years. Above all the role of the labour leaders was crucial. In all the main combatant countries labour leaders were incorporated into the machine of the state. Their lifelong enemies in the ruling classes would not have made such offers unless they knew that the labour leaders had an indispensable role to play in mobilising their supporters.
The massive numbers of workers who volunteered in the first two years of the war must also be examined with some suspicion. Doubtless many volunteered from sincere patriotism; others from a desire for adventure or the expectation that the war would last only a few months. But many more volunteers were the victims of intimidation which went far beyond ‘peer pressure’ and young ladies with white feathers. Thus when 7,000 London tram workers struck for 19 days in May 1915,
The reaction of the London County Council (LCC), which owned the tramways, was to sack all men of military age, telling them to volunteer for the armed forces, and it issued a statement which read:

Notice is hereby given that since the majority of men above military age have returned to work, men who are eligible for the services will not be taken back.


Those who enlist will receive favourable consideration for re-employment, as far as may be possible, after the war.
Any man of military age unable to enlist may appeal to the Chief Officer and state his reasons, and he will consider whether any circumstances allow any exception in his case ... [13]

In November 1915 the press reported that:
The prime minister’s declaration that all unmarried men must serve their country has had a stimulating effect in the City. Employers who hitherto took no steps to influence the younger members of the staffs have taken action, and in many of the large City offices and warehouses a census is being taken of the eligibles, who are being asked to give to their employers reasons for not enlisting. [14]
At the outbreak of war the Prince of Wales Fund was launched, ostensibly to relieve distress arising from the hostilities. In reality it became another means of exerting pressure to ‘volunteer’. The fund:
… was frequently administered by charity-mongers who ... were sometimes not above instituting, in relation to able bodied men of military age, their own local system of compulsory military service sanctioned by the threat of starvation. [15]
The picture in other countries was similar: substantial support for the war among some workers, but apathy and open resistance among others. In Russia the Bolsheviks, who had grown enormously in strength in the couple of years prior to the war, were able to take open and public action against the war despite the stepping up of repression and the pro-war hysteria which became rampant among the middle classes:
On the day that the army was mobilised the workers of about 20 factories struck in St Petersburg in protest against the war. In some places the workers met the reservists with shouts of, ‘Down with the war’, and with revolutionary songs. But the demonstrations now took place under conditions different from those of a few weeks before. The onlookers, particularly in the centre of the city, were incited by patriotic sentiment and no longer maintained a friendly neutrality, but took an active part in hunting down the demonstrators and helping the police to make arrests.
One such ‘patriotic’ outburst occurred in the Nevsky Prospect on the first day of mobilisation, while a workers’ demonstration was marching past the town Duma. The people in the street, mostly bourgeois loafers, who usually hid themselves or made off through side streets when workers’ demonstrations appeared, now became very active and, with shouts of ‘Traitors’, assisted the police to beat up the demonstrators. The police were able to arrest the workers and take them off to the police station. [16]
For many soldiers ‘patriotic frenzy’ did not survive long when confronted with the reality of the trenches. Certainly the British army authorities felt they could not rely on the innate enthusiasm of their volunteers; it was necessary to use a mixture of indoctrination and terror to make them fight. Executions for desertion were employed from the very beginning of hostilities and were given maximum publicity as a matter of policy. In September 1914 Sir Douglas Haig wrote recommending the death sentence for a soldier who had vanished for six days when suffering shock from a shell explosion:
I am of the opinion that it is necessary to make an example to prevent cowardice in the face of the enemy as far as possible. [17]
Those soldiers who had volunteered were not necessarily fired with a patriotic desire to kill. On the contrary, the army training programmes had to give systematic ideological indoctrination to recruits. British Brigadier-General Crozier wrote of training in 1915:
I, for my part, do what I can to alter completely the outlook, bearing and mentality of over 1,000 men ... blood lust is taught for purposes of war in bayonet fighting itself and by doping the minds of all with propagandic poison. The German atrocities (many of which I doubt in secret), the employment of gas in action, the violation of French women and the ‘official murder’ of Nurse Cavell all help to bring out the brute-like bestiality which is so necessary for victory. The process of ‘seeing red’, which has to be carefully cultured if the effect is to be lasting, is elaborately grafted into the makeup of even the meek and mild... The Christian churches are the finest blood lust creators which we have and of them we make free use ... The British soldier is a kindly fellow ... It is necessary to corrode his mentality ... [18]
The Christmas truce which Megan mentions represented quite a serious threat to military discipline and the continued effective conduct of the war. In some areas the truce lasted well into January and in one section of the front it actually endured until the middle of March 1915, despite the best efforts of the army command to get the slaughter going again. [19] One letter from an army officer makes it clear that the officers on both sides shared a common interest in forcing their reluctant men to fight:
A party of unarmed Saxons continued to wander about between the lines after the prescribed time was up. They were duly warned by our men but took no notice whereupon one of our officers ordered some men to fire over them. This had no effect so a German officer sang out, ‘Fire at them. I can’t get the beggars in.’ The English officer would not do this as they were unarmed but he rang up a battery to put a few shells over the German trench which they did, but the Saxons quite unperturbed sat down just outside our wire line and watched their pals getting shelled. [20]
In all the armed forces engaged in the war the patriotic frenzy seems to have worn off quite quickly. Thus in the German navy, seaman Richard Stumpf wrote in his diary in March 1915:
… a deep gulf has arisen between the officers and the men. The men are filled with undying hatred for the officers and the war. Everyone hopes for the return of peace. We don’t even want to fight any more. We have had enough. Where is that wonderful enthusiasm of the August days? [21]
As for the working class itself, was it in the last resort nationalist or internationalist? The only answer can be: neither. Its consciousness was necessarily contradictory. As H.N. Brailsford noted:
Let a group of labour leaders, English and German, address a mass meeting of British working men. It can be roused to a real sense of the solidarity between the two proletariats; it can be induced to vote a contribution from its own trade union funds to assist German miners on strike; it will leave the meeting with a real desire for peace and fraternity between the two nations ... The same crowd, prepared by the press and artfully stimulated by skilful orators, could also be induced to applaud the speeches of naval scaremongers, and to go away shouting for more dreadnoughts, and looking for German airships in the sky. [22]
Brailsford seems to see the working class in rather too passive terms, but basically he is right. Both alternatives were potentially present; political struggle would decide which came out on top. In 1914 the reformists betrayed and the internationalists were defeated. But, as Brecht once pointed out, the only lesson of defeat is that we should do better next time.
I think, therefore, that Megan has tended to overestimate the grip of nationalism in the first six or nine months of the war. This is not simply a question of historical pedantry. The implications of the argument about the early phase of the war have vital relevance. As Megan shows, it was at the end of the war that the working class was strong enough to build the mass parties of the Comintern. But if world war ever recurs we shall not have the opportunity to wait till the end. In a nuclear world, revolution must precede and not follow war.
The year 1914 was a catastrophic defeat for the left. The capitulation of the reformists had deep roots in their previous history. Even the best of the revolutionary left, the Bolsheviks, despite their political clarity and organisational roots, could not prevent their rulers from plunging into war.
Whether things could have turned out differently can only be a matter of speculation. What is certain is that the working class did not unanimously embrace war with enthusiasm, even in the opening months before the realities of trench warfare became apparent. From the first days there were counter-currents which enabled genuine internationalists to start a fightback. Nationalism is a powerful and poisonous force, but it is not invincible.

Notes
1. M. Trudell, Prelude to Revolution: Class Consciousness and the First World War, International Socialism 76, pp. 67–107.
2. The Economist, 5 September 1914.
3. Yorkshire Post, 2 September 1914.
4. A.M.B. Meakin, Enlistment or Conscription (London 1915), pp. 10–11, cited in D. Hayes, Conscription Conflict (London 1949), pp. 165–166.
5. M. MacDonagh, In London during the Great War (London 1935), p. 44.
6. H. McShane, No Mean Fighter (London 1978), pp. 61–63.
7. K. Weller, Don’t be a Soldier: the Radical Anti-War Movement in North London 1914–1918 (London 1985), p. 37.
8. R.M. Fox, Smoky Crusade (London 1937), cited in K. Weller, op. cit., p. 38.
9. A. Ponsonby, Falsehood in War-Time (London 1928), pp. 67–70.
10. Of course there were genuine atrocities – committed by all sides. Thus the Germans were accused, with some justice, of executing Belgian civilians. The Germans in turn claimed that the ‘civilians’ were in fact guerrilla troops.
11. The Belgian Congo (now Democratic Republic of Congo) was the personal property of King Leopold II until 1908, when he made it over to Belgium. Colonial rule was marked by forced labour, torture and massacre.
12. D.G. Wright, The Great War, Government Propaganda and English “Men of Letters” 1914–16, Literature and History, no. 7 (1978), pp. 70–100.
13. K. Weller, op. cit., p. 29.
14. Enfield Gazette and Observer, 19 November 1915.
15. R. Harrison, The War Emergency Workers’ National Committee 1914–1920, in A. Briggs and J. Saville (eds.), Essays in Labour History 1886–1923 (London 1971), p. 235.
16. A.Y. Badeyev, Bolsheviks in the Tsarist Duma (London 1987), p. 199.
17. A. Babington, For the Sake of Example (London 1983), pp. 7, 29.
18. F.P. Crozier, A Brass Hat in No-Man’s-Land (London 1930), p. 42; cited by T.H. Wintringham, Mutiny (London 1936), pp. 308–309.
19. M. Brown and S. Seaton, Christmas Truce (London 1994), pp. 182–185.
20. Ibid., p. 168.
21. D. Horn (ed.), War, Mutiny and Revolution in the German Navy: The World War I Diary of Richard Stumpf (New Brunswick, NJ 1967), p. 75. Stumpf, a Catholic, nationalist, conservative who served as an ordinary seaman throughout the First World War, kept a diary which is a remarkable document of the ebbs and flows of class consciousness. In June 1917 he wrote: ‘As a good German and as a Catholic, I hope that we might emerge from this war with a total victory... From the opposite point of view everything is different. Then I am not a German but a proletarian, and as such, I hope for a great, but not an annihilating defeat. Why should I feel this way? Past experience tells me that the lower classes stand to benefit from a defeat while the rich stand to lose. I cannot conceive of the achievements of the Young Turk Revolution without the background of the battles of Plevna and Shipka Pass.’ There could be no better proof than the testimony of the good conservative Stumpf that Lenin’s strategy of ‘revolutionary defeatism’ could reach the consciousness of the masses.
22. Cited in H.B. Davis, Nationalism and Socialism (New York 1973), pp. 112–113.
 



DAVID ROUSSET was a veteran of French Trotskyism of the 1930s who became a victim of the political crisis of the late 1940s. Born in 1912, he became active in the Socialist Party students’ organisation in 1931. But he was shocked by the complacency of Léon Blum, who in November 1932 proclaimed that Hitler had been definitively defeated. Attracted by Trotsky’s writings on Germany, he aligned with the French Trotskyists, and transferred his activity from the Socialist students to the SFIO Youth; he was shocked at his first meeting to find young workers reading pornography and telling dirty stories! Initially, he opposed ‘entrism’, but was convinced by a personal meeting with Trotsky. He remained a leading figure in French Trotskyism throughout the decade.
In 1936, Rousset was sent by the Parti Ouvrier Internationaliste to establish a Trotskyist organisation in Morocco. After the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, he was involved in negotiations between the Moroccan nationalists and the Spanish Anarcho-Syndicalists for the former to organise a rising in Spanish Morocco in return for the recognition of independence. Eventually, the deal was quashed by the Madrid government.
After the German occupation of France, he was involved in clandestine activity, but was arrested in October 1943. Initially, he was sent to a jail at Fresnes to the south of Paris. He tells how, to communicate with comrades outside, messages were written on cigarette paper and inserted into the crotch of dirty underpants being sent home for washing; the underpants were encrusted with damp bread to discourage close investigation by guards.
Then he was sent to Buchenwald, and later other Nazi camps. Here, as a Trotskyist, he confronted a double problem – not only the Nazi regime, but the German Stalinists, who, with the complicity of the SS, managed many aspects of camp life.
Rousset survived, but at a terrible cost. Before his arrest, he had weighed nearly 15 stone; on his return he weighed just over eight, and was described as ‘a frail skeleton drifting about in a Japanese bathrobe’. These sufferings did not deter Jean Kanapa of the French Communist Party, from later describing him as a ‘Hitlero-Trotskyist’. Rousset made an important contribution to the understanding of Nazism by his two major books on the camps,L’Univers concentrationnaire and the novelLes Jours de notre mort.
Rousset remained a member of the Parti Communiste Internationaliste. But he was developing a new perspective. In October 1945, he wrote:
‘The Soviet bureaucracy today finds itself constrained ... to pose and carry through the Socialist revolution abroad ... in the new period which we have entered ... the Soviet forces represent the sole effective guarantee in the world for the Socialist revolution. With all its defects, its conservative, reactionary neutrality, the Stalinist bureaucracy represents one of the decisive bastions of the Socialist revolution in the world in the present period. In consequence, we must keep silent about part of our disagreements with Stalinism, and do so consciously and thoroughly.’ [1]
This liquidationist line was unanimously rejected by the PCI Congress in February 1946, and marked Rousset’s break with organised Trotskyism. For a while, Rousset collaborated with Pierre Naville onLa Revue Internationale. Then, in 1948, he played a key rôle in the founding of the Rassemblement Démocratique Révolutionnaire. Although at the time and later, the RDR was generally associated with its most prestigious member, Jean-Paul Sartre, Rousset was in fact the main political driving force in the organisation. An impressive orator, he had great hopes that the RDR could rapidly become a mass organisation.
In its founding statement, the RDR took a ‘neither Washington nor Moscow’ line, proclaiming:
‘Amid the decay of capitalist democracy, the weaknesses and defects of a certain Social Democracy, and the limitation of Communism to its Stalinist form, we believe that an assembly of free men for revolutionary democracy is capable of giving new life to the principles of liberty and human dignity by linking them to the struggle for social revolution.’ [2]
But it was a position based on moral reaction rather than a clear analysis of the nature of Stalinism. Indeed, in 1948, Rousset argued that society had entered a period of crisis in which there were so many unanswered questions that it was impossible to form a party with a homogeneous programme; instead any organisation had to be broad and loose like that of the RDR. [3]
In 1949, Rousset visited the USA to raise money from the American unions for the RDR. In his autobiography, he rather naïvely notes his surprise at the fact that when he went to the AFL-CIO offices in New York, the bureaucrats there immediately put through a call to the State Department. [4]
Rousset’s growing pro-Americanism assisted the disintegration of the RDR; but it was his next move that led to his real break with the French left. In the autumn of 1949, he launched a campaign in theFigaro littéraire on the question of the Russian camps. Here the erstwhile critical supporter of Stalinism argued that the Russian camps were ‘the expression of new social relations based on a new type of exploitation of man’; that they were thus an essential defining feature of the Russian economic order and hence more dangerous than the Nazi camps which were ‘an accident of history’. [5] This caused great consternation amongst the Stalinists, some of whom denied the existence of the camps, whilst others saw them as one of Russia’s most praiseworthy achievements, and a bitter court case against the journalLes Lettres Françaises ensued. It also led to a clean break, not only with Trotskyism, but with such independent leftists as Sartre and Claude Bourdet – not, as Douglas Johnson ignorantly implied in hisGuardian obituary [6], because they supported the camps, but because they opposed a campaign in a right-wing paper which did not also attack the crimes of Western imperialism.
Rousset had now largely lost his bearings. He had links with the CIA-run Congress for Cultural Freedom, though he also opposed French repression in Algeria. In the 1960s, he became a so-called ‘left Gaullist’ – in 1967, whilst standing as a Gaullist candidate, he told a journalist that the political figures of the twentieth century he most admired were Lenin and Trotsky [7] (imagine a British Tory doing the same). He later served as a Gaullist deputy, but by 1981 he was supporting Mitterrand.
David Rousset was a lucid witness to some of the worst atrocities of the twentieth century; as such he deserves our respect. But the period also demanded theoretical clarity, and Rousset failed this test.

Notes
1. Cited by J.-J. Marie,La Vérité, no. 583, September 1978.
2. Published inCombat andFranc-Tireur, 27 February 1948.
3. See Sartre, Rousset and Rosenthal, Entretiens sur la politique, Paris 1949, pp. 11–13.
4. D. Rousset,Une Vie dans le siècle, Paris 1991, p. 109.
5. Le Figaro littéraire, 12 November 1949.
6. Guardian, 17 December 1997.
7. Rousset, op. cit., p. 177.
 



Frantz Fanon: A Critical StudyIrene L.
GendzierWildwood House, £1.75
‘We have seen military doctors, called to the
bedside of an Algerian soldier wounded in combat, refuse to treat
him. The official pretext was that there was no longer a chance to
save the wounded man. After the soldier had died, the doctor would
admit that this solution had appeared to him preferable to a stay in
prison where it would have been necessary to feed him while awaiting
execution. The Algerians of the region of Blida know a certain
hospital director who would kick the bleeding chests of the war
wounded while lying in the corridor of his establishment.’
This account by Frantz Fanon of his experiences at the Blida
hospital in Algeria explains better than anything else in Gendzier’s
book why this young West Indian psychiatrist abandoned medicine for
politics and joined the Algerian National Liberation Front.
Violence lies at the very heart of imperialism, and it was the raw
violence of the French war against the Algerian people that drew
together the threads of Fanon’s thought.
The interest of Gendzier’s book is that it is basically an
intellectual biography, showing how Fanon took his ideas from a
number of sources in order to weld together a critique of the
colonial situation. It is to be hoped this book marks the end of
Fanon as a trendy cult figure and opens the possibility of studying
him as a significant figure whose thought was still in formation at
the time of his early death. Gendzier traces the emergence of Fanon’s
ideas, in particular looking in detail at the influence of Sartre. In
his book Anti-Semite and Jew Sartre had attempted to analyse
the psychology of the Anti-Semite: ‘He is a man who is afraid.
Not of the Jews, to be sure, but of himself, of his own
consciousness, of his liberty, of his instincts, of his
responsibilities, of solitariness, of change, of society, and of the
world – of everything except the Jews ... Anti-Semitism, in
short, is fear of the human condition. The anti-Semite is a man who
wishes to be pitiless stone, a furious torrent, a devastating
thunderbolt – anything except a man.’ (The point is made
without the obscure jargon into which Sartre often lapses in his
short story Childhood of a Leader.)
From this starting point Fanon developed some important insights
into the ideological aspects of racialism and black consciousness:
‘It is the white man who creates the Negro. But it is the Negro
who creates negritude.’ But while Fanon’s strength is in
his concern with consciousness, his weakness derives from his
tendency to see ideas out of a material context.
Hence his approach to the French Left – a moral criticism
for failing to pull their weight, rather than an attempt to
demonstrate the common interests of French workers and Algerian
peasants. Hence his grotesque description of the colonial proletariat
as ‘pampered’. Hence the flight into mysticism that sees
violence as a ‘cleansing force’.
In an interesting final chapter Gendzier discusses Fanon’s
influence in independent Algeria, and quotes an Algerian official who
argues it is necessary to ‘deFanonize Algeria’. Fanon’s
independent and original thought is too much for the men who now rule
Algeria; but it is unlikely to be the main inspiration for those who
will overthrow them.
 



The French Communist Party versus the Students
Richard Johnson
Yale University Press, £0.85
Over the last 20 years, there has been a flood of American historical and sociological studies of the European labour movement. The aim was two-fold – the Cold War struggle against Communist ideas and the need to understand the traditions of working-class organisation in countries where US-based multi-nationals were establishing their plants. Nonetheless, there was a serious standard of scholarship and books like Cammett’s Antonio Gramsci and Wohl’s French Communism in the Making can be read with profit by any socialist.
But bourgeois scholarship thrives on stability; it is allergic to the, sound of workers’ feet on the streets. Though Johnson expresses a debt to the earlier generation of scholars, his book on the French CP, the students and the events of May 1968 is a mish-mash of pretentiousness and ignorance.
The bouregois world-view has two explanations for mass action – ‘outside’ agitators and spontaneous irrationality. Johnson is not even consistent – on p.134 he tells us about the ‘seven types’ of Communist agitator (identified in the Iraqi riots of 1947-48 by one Eugene Methvin), while on p.153 student self-defence against riot police becomes displaced ‘aggression toward the overbearing parent’.
As for the French CP, Johnson sees it as controlled by ‘proletarian apparatchiki’, who stifle the bourgeois intellectuals out of an ‘innate feeling of cultural inferiority’. Johnson’s scrupulous use of class categories is shown by the fact that he lists as a ‘bourgeois intellectual’ the Italian Communist Gramsci, who scarcely had a square meal in his life. It would be churlish to add that the systematic misspelling of French names suggests that Johnson’s knowledge of French isn’t up to reading most of the books in his bibliography.
If you want to know about the French CP and intellectuals, read despite its limitations – David Caute’s Communism and the French Intellectuals, but if you want to know about the decline of American scholarship, read this book.



Ian Birchall writes: The Vietnam war began as a struggle for freedom, and, above all, for land, by the ordinary people of South Vietnam. As such, it was a war quite different in nature from, say, the Korean war, which was a power struggle between the two great blocs of which the Korean people were merely passive victims. Far from being the aggressor, the North Vietnamese regime was in fact scandalously slow in coming to the aid of those fighting in the South. As for Russia and China, their support has always been half-hearted, though the Sino-Soviet dispute made it impossible for either of them to be openly seen to abandon the Vietnamese. The Chinese, who pressured the Vietnamese into the ill-starred compromise of the 1954 Geneva agreements, have always had a minimal participation in the Vietnamese struggle, and it has become a growing embarrassment to them in their new international strategy. And the Russians, faced with internal economic difficulties, are equally anxious to get the war over with.
The Vietnamese National Liberation Front, by its courage, tenacity and success, aroused the justified admiration of socialists throughout the world. Even the recent savage bombing could not break them; the dispersal of population and the large areas of friendly territory in Laos and Cambodia mean they could continue the war for years to come.
It would, however, be quite wrong to accept the rather complacent myths about Vietnam that have had wide currency on the left. The Vietnamese are not ‘invincible’; they are not the spearhead of world revolution, the force that can shatter US imperialism. The North Vietnamese have made very considerable concessions in the negotiations over the last few months. Nor is there any magic quality in guerrilla warfare, as many believed in the late sixties; indeed, as the war has gone on it has been forced increasingly into conventional forms.
The programme of the NLF is not a socialist programme; it is, in the tradition of Mao and the Popular Front, explicitly class-collaborationist. While there are reports of a hard-line opposition to the NLF in South Vietnam, this no more offers a political alternative than, say, the Provisional IRA. And this absence of a class programme is one of the reasons for the almost complete absence of urban working class support for the NLF. Of course the Vietnamese working class is small, ana there are objective social and economic reasons for its passivity. But the working class has grown during the war; it does have traditions of revolutionary struggle; and a decisive move by Saigon workers could have changed the course of the war. Politics count, and in these terms the NLF has failed.
However the negotiations turn out, the future for Vietnam is bleak. For the peasants, poverty and terror will remain. Struggle between pro- and anti-Communists, between Thieu and his rivals, will inevitably intensify. Even if the US withdraw completely, it may not be a permanent farewell.
But the impact of Vietnam extends far beyond South-East Asia. It has taught nationalists throughout the underdeveloped world that US imperialism can be beaten into at least a partial retreat. The war has probed the deep sores of American capitalism; it has taught American blacks the reality of their condition – and many of them it has taught to fire a gun in self-defence. In Europe Vietnam provided one of the first bridgeheads by which revolutionary ideas began to find their way back to the masses. It is the success of these new struggles that will decide the place of the Vietnam war in history.



Romance and Realism
Christopher Caudwell
Princeton University Press (no price given)
Culture and Agitation
Action Books, £0.30
Christopher Caudwell has been hailed in some circles as one of the greatest of English Marxists. Such a claim does no service either to Marxism or to a talented and unfortunate young man. Caudwelj was killed in Spain in 1937, having been a Marxist for little over two years. He left behind him a number of manuscripts on literary and philosophical subjects, of which Romance and Realism is the most recently published.
Caudwell had read a lot in his 30 years of life, as is clearly shown by this 110-page run-through of English literature, from Shakespeare to Auden and Spender. What he has not done, and could not have done, is reread the material as a Marxist, evaluating it afresh and in detail. Instead there is a frantic rush to fit predigested judgments into Marxist pigeon holes. His comments on, for example, Blake’s ‘mysticism which is almost psychotic’ or Scott’s ‘bourgeois daydreams’ are superficial and inaccurate.
All Caudwell succeeds in doing is to bring a few Marxist ideas into contact with a mass of bourgeois thought. There are a few sharp insights, but no consistent success, and he tends to make uncoordinated lunges into psychology and anthropology. Had Caudwell lived, he would probably be in the ranks of those who believe that Marxism has to be ‘supplemented’ by the work of Freud, Levi-Strauss or whoever the latest cult figure may be.
But it is precisely the dominance of milk-and-water academic Marxism that leads those, like the authors of Culture and Agitation, who are genuinely concerned with the problems of revolutionary culture, to lapse into opposite crudities.
The authors are committed to a propagandist view of art. They fall into pure gibberish – as in the case of one author who believes that renaming the police as ‘fuzz’ and ‘pigs’ is a necessary precondition for overthrowing the state. And nearly half the pamphlet is devoted to two self-indulgent articles which make the triumphant discovery that the West End theatre is saturated with bourgeois values. But the most interesting part of the pamphlet is the reprint of texts from Piscator, the Proletcult, etc. Piscator’s essay on the proletarian theatre has the key to the problem when he declares that ‘it must have a clear and unambiguous impact on the emotions of the working-class audience’. Apart from the patronising suggestion that workers are too thick to appreciate subtleties, this disregards the fact that all art (and indeed much propaganda, for example the self-mocking advertisement) is based on ambiguity.
Piscator’s colleague, Brecht, always combines deep commitment with a sense of the ambiguities and paradoxes inherent in it. Or to take a more recent example, the Red Ladder play on the Industrial Relations Act, analysed in the pamphlet and performed on many demonstrations: the one thing that saves this from being an insufferably crude caricature is the ambiguous figure of the trade-union leader Feather, torn between workers and bosses.



It is 15 years this month since the crisis that brought de Gaulle to power in France. For the French Left, they have been 15 wasted years. A series of attempts have been made to regroup ‘the Left’, ‘democrats’, ‘progressives’ or whatever against de Gaulle and his heirs. Each attempt, including March’s general election, has ended in failure.
Though not everyone would share the precise turn of phrase, the strategy of the French Left has effectively been that proposed by Francois Billoux in 1959:
‘The communists and their friends ... will not allow excitable petty-bourgeois to substitute chatter about socialism for what remains the present aim in France: the restoration and renewal of democracy’.
To adopt this view – that it is possible to separate the struggle against Gaullism from the struggle against capitalism – is precisely to surrender to the mystique which the Gaullists themselves have tried to create. An outline of the origins, policies, ideology and evolution of Gaullism may serve to combat some myths.
 
1. Why the French bourgeoisie turned to de Gaulle
In 1958, French capitalism was in a fundamentally healthy state. Industrial productivity had risen rapidly in the early fifties, indeed faster than it was to do under de Gaulle. From 1955 to 1958 the increase in French productivity in manufacturing was eight per cent per year, faster than in any other Western European country. Between 1952 and 1958 price stability was largely achieved.
Nor did the working class offer any serious challenge. From 1944 to 1947 the French Communist Party had mobilised workers for production to restore French capitalism; after 1947 it had launched them into a series of ill-prepared battles. By the late fifties the French working class was demoralised and divided. In May 1958 only a tiny minority of workers followed even the token strike calls of their leaders; the Fourth Republic was not theirs and they felt no need to defend it.
However, the French bourgeoisie faced two chronic political problems. The first was the notorious instability of parliamentary institutions. Between 1945 and 1958 France had 27 governments, of which only two survived more than one year.
The French Right had been unable to unite itself into a single party, partly because of the existence of a large peasantry and petty-bourgeoisie, partly because of the divisions caused by the German occupation.
The various parties of the Right and Centre were agreed only on one thing – that the Communist Party, which in 1956 had gained over one quarter of the national vote and of parliamentary seats, should be excluded from any governmental alliance. As a result a workable coalition could be founded only on a mutual agreement to refrain from taking any decisive action.
In itself this would not have mattered too much. It reflected the general decline in the importance of parliament in Western capitalism. Other countries (for example, Italy) have survived long periods of parliamentary instability. But without a strong government it was impossible to deal with the problem of Algeria. Faced with the challenge of a national liberation movement, French capital could afford to evacuate. But only a strong government could enable it to surmount the opposition of the Army and the European settlers.
 
2. The Gaullists in power
De Gaulle was brought to power to solve the Algerian problem; and by leaning alternately on Right and Left, on the Army and the trade unions, he was able to do so. But at the same time he was able to carry through a range of policies more immediately in the interests of French capitalism.
Gaullist economic policy was clearly designed to attack workers’ living standards. The devaluation of 1958 was followed by a series of austerity programmes. Numerous economy measures were taken, for example cuts in social security benefits and war veterans’ pensions. The results were drastic. Up to 1966 labour costs in France rose less than in any other Common Market country.
De Gaulle’s policy was not one of direct confrontation with the labour movement. In the late forties, when de Gaulle had been in the political wilderness at the head of an extreme right-wing organisation, he had advocated not only the banning of the Communist Party, but the effective abolition of free trade unionism by the creation of a Capital-Labour Association.
By 1958 he was much wiser. On 3 June 1958, two days after he became Prime Minister de Gaulle invited Benoit Franchon, veteran communist general secretary of the CGT to meet him to discuss social problems. It was the first time since 1948 that the CGT had been invited for such consultation.
Though Franchon declined, the way had been opened for a new policy direction which would seek to involve the trade union leadership (especially the CGT, since they carried most weight in the main sectors of industry) in the economic planning machinery which the Gaullists had inherited from the Fourth Republic.
In other respects too, the Gaullists did a tidying-up job for the bourgeoisie. The parliamentary regime of the Fourth Republic, which had depended on the vagaries of inter-party alliances, was replaced by a strong executive power in the hands of the President.
In other countries there was a slow erosion of the powers of parliament; France witnessed a dramatic overnight transformation. The Fourth Republic’s system of proportional representation, comprehensible only to a mathematician, was replaced by the two-ballot system that naturally strengthens the solid centre at the expense of ‘extremists’. Judicious drawing of constituency boundaries helped to cut down the problem of communist representation.
But the aspect of Gaullist policy that gained most notoriety abroad, and caused most confusion among allies and opponents at home, was foreign policy. De Gaulle’s anti-Americanism, support for Vietnamese independence, rapprochement with Russia and China, quest for popularity in the underdeveloped world and attacks on Israel, all stood in sharp contrast both to the Fourth Republic and to the policies of other Western European states.
But despite the nationalist rhetoric and provocative gestures, Gaullist foreign policy never subordinated the needs of French capitalism to abstract ideology. On the contrary. De Gaulle’s regime was capable of sharp twists and turns to adapt to prevailing needs. In 1960 de Gaulle spoke of the ‘wretched yellow multitudes of China’, in 1964 of ‘China’s great and ancient civilisation’, and in 1968 returned to the classic anti-communist rhetoric of the Cold War. From 1959 to 1963 France encouraged US investment, from 1963 to 1966 was hostile to it, and after 1966 again gave it selective encouragement.
One of the problems facing French capitalism in 1958 was that, although its competitive position had considerably improved, two major markets were closed to it. The Atlantic Alliance was an obstacle to trade with Eastern Europe; the Suez adventure and the Algerian war were a barrier to trade with Africa and the Arab world.
Hence de Gaulle’s ‘neutralism’. It was a desire to heal the wounds of the Algerian conflict, rather than any anti-Semitic hangover, that led to de Gaulle’s celebrated attacks on Israel. Such a thorough job of image-building was carried through that, in 1965, when plans were being made for the conference of Afro-Asian countries in Algiers, (in fact never held) it was proposed to invite just three non-Afro-Asian guests of honour – Castro, Tito and de Gaulle.
 
3. Ideology
The policies of the Gaullist regime can all be seen as reflecting the practical needs of the French bourgeoisie. But if the Gaullists were pragmatists, they were pragmatists who understood clearly the importance of using ideological weapons.
In order to carry through the policies of his real backers, to extricate French imperialism from Algeria without too great a right-wing backlash, to avoid direct confrontation with the trade unions, de Gaulle had to manoeuvre in a Bonapartist fashion between Left and Right, seeking support now from the Army, now from the trade unions.
Although Gaullism always drew a considerable part of its support from the electorate of the classic Right, this was never enough to guarantee Gaullism its predominance. Though de Gaulle was by background, inclination and rhetoric a man of the Right, he did his best to dissociate himself from his excursion into Mussolini-style politics of the late forties; his Second World War record, where nationalism and anti-fascism were intertwined, was the strongest part of his image. Indeed, de Gaulle’s most implacable enemies, the only ones who tried to physically liquidate him, were on the Right and not the Left.
More important, de Gaulle was repeatedly able to mobilise sections of the Left in his support. Although it was right-wing rebels in the Army who finally brought him to power in 1958, in the preceding period the most eager advocates of his return had been on the Left, notably the associates of Mendes-France.
At least a million of those who had voted communist in the 1956 general election supported de Gaulle in the 1958 referendum. And later on de Gaulle was able to win the adherence of men like Pierre Le Brun, a former national secretary of the CGT, Andre Philip, Socialist Party stalwart and then member of the PSU, and former Trotskyist David Rousset.
 
4. Post-Gaullism
Already in the mid-sixties the question of de Gaulle’s successor was being discussed in ruling-class circles. First, a section of the bourgeoisie was getting increasingly hostile to de Gaulle’s anti-American policies. A first warning was given by the candidacy of Jean Lecanuet in the 1965 Presidential election, which forced de Gaulle into contesting the second ballot. A survey of 100 chairmen of the biggest private firms showed half of them backing Lecanuet against de Gaulle.
Secondly, a trend towards stagnation in the economy was becoming clearer and by the beginning of 1968 unemployment was approaching half a million; while at the same time working-class militancy was growing. This exploded in the massive general strike of May and June 1968, involving 10 million workers. De Gaulle was saved only by the role of the Communist Party, prepared to sacrifice short-term success in. the interests of proving its total dedication to the parliamentary system.
The struggle ended in stalemate; the potential challenge to the regime was warded off and the Gaullists won a landslide parliamentary victory; but the working class made substantial economic gains and did not feel themselves defeated or demoralised.
French capitalism did not suffer unduly from the strikes; indeed, in many companies profits rose. But a huge trade deficit rapidly appeared, and the flight of capital led to a tempering of the quarrel with the US.
It was in this situation that the French ruling class felt it opportune to jettison de Gaulle. While it is true that the referendum of April 1969 showed de Gaulle getting less working-class votes than at any previous election, it is nonetheless true that the essential factor in his defeat was the loss of support of a significant section of the Right, including, behind the scenes, leading Gaullists.
Pompidou, a former director of the Rothschild Bank, and an unambiguous representative of big capital, replaced him. In order to get himself elected, Pompidou had to make various gestures of goodwill to the Centre; but in reality he was far more a prisoner of the Right than de Gaulle had ever been. Without de Gaulle’s personal prestige, he could not afford the luxury of pursuing eccentric deviations in foreign policy; hence a much more friendly attitude to the US and a welcome to the expansion of the Common Market.
At home his economic policy consisted of devaluation and the associated measures necessary to make the working class pay for it. Between October 1968 and October 1969 wage earners’ buying power fell more than in any year since 1959. And the scheme for making Renault workers into shareholders, a symbolic gesture in the direction of participation, collapsed amid the indifference of all concerned.
March’s election results confirm the transformation. The mystique of Gaullism has faded away, and the Gaullists are just a diminished part of a broader right-wing coalition. But the bourgeoisie still rules openly through a right-wing government, and the Left, despite alliances, despite compromise, remains out of power. To more and more workers it must be becoming obvious that anything short of a clear anti-capitalist policy is futile.
 



ISRAEL is the agent of imperialism in the Middle East. Any struggle against imperialism in the Middle East must be a struggle against Israel. Yet in four successive confrontations (1948,1956,1967,1973) the Arab states, despite apparent numerical superiority, have failed to inflict any lasting setback on the Israeli state. Partly this must be explained by the massive assistance given Israel by imperialism, but partly the explanation lies in the social nature and political strategy of the regimes righting Israel, and in particular Egypt.
The rise of Arab nationalism in its modern form after the Second World War is closely related to the establishment of Israel. It was during the 1948 Palestine War that many young Egyptian army officers – notably one Major Nasser – became fully aware of the corruption and inefficiency of the regime of King Farouk. And four years later, in 1952, a group of ‘Free Officers’ staged a revolt which established a new regime, a regime which Nasser was soon to head.
The political programme of the ‘Free Officers’ was similar to that of many regimes in other parts of the underdeveloped world – a mixture of social reform and modernisation at home and anti-imperialism (much more violent in words than in deeds) in its foreign policy. The original ‘six principles’ of the Free Officers were: ‘to liquidate colonialism’; ‘to liquidate feudalism’; ‘to put an end to the domination of capital over the government’; ‘to install social equity’; ‘to set up a powerful national army’; ‘to establish a sound democratic life’. [1] The very vagueness of these formulae was their strength in the short term; in the longer term conflicts could hardly be avoided.
The ‘installation of social equity’ was in fact a slow and modest process. A number of health and welfare measures were taken which, in a country like Egypt, ridden with poverty and disease, marked a very significant advance. When Nasser came to power virtually every Egyptian child suffered from eye-disease; by the late sixties less than ten per cent were afflicted.
But the reforms did not challenge the basic structures of power and ownership in Egypt. The land reform, for example, limited land holdings to a maximum of 200 feddans (just over 200 acres). The modesty of this can be seen by the fact that, in 1952, the year of the land reform, 94 per cent of landowners held less than five feddans, and 75 per cent of land was in holdings of under fifty feddans. [2]
As for the working class, the new regime made it clear from the beginning that they were to have no active role in the new order.
‘On 12 August (1952) the workers in one of Egypt’s largest spinning mills at Kafr el-Dawar near Alexandria rioted and seized control of the factory. Fearing that this action might lead to workers’ uprisings throughout the country, the junta promptly sent in troops to take back control of the mill, arrested some 200 workers and, after a brief court-martial, hanged two of the leading agitators.’ [3]
In the early years of the regime some improvements were made in workers’ standards. But by the early sixties this had come to an end. As a prominent economist put it:
‘During the past five years a lot has been done for the workers. Most of the new legislation has been in their favour. Now we have to reduce the costs of production in order to make our industries more competitive, which means there can be no new benefits for the workers for the time being.’ [4]
Independent political organisation of workers was strictly forbidden. Whatever the complexion of his relation with Russia, Nasser attacked the Egyptian Communist Party viciously in words and deeds. [5]
The impact of Nasserism on the other Arab states of the Middle East was considerable, unleashing a whole series of revolutions and counter-revolutions. Among the most significant were the overthrow of the Iraqi monarchy in 1958 and the short-lived union of Egypt and Syria (1958-61). Nasser’s rise was also a factor which inspired the Algerian revolt against French rule which began in 1954; though the French government’s belief that an attack on Egypt in 1956 would strangle the Algerian struggle showed a total failure to understand the dynamics of national liberation.
The other variants of Arab nationalism, despite the bitter hostility which often divides them, share many of the same features as the Egyptian example. The Baath (Rebirth) movement, which has had considerable influence in Iraq and Syria, combines nationalism with sharp hostility to Marxism. One of the founders of the Baath, Michel Aflak, described Marxism as ‘a Western ideology, foreign to everything that is Arab’, into which Marx ‘has breathed something of his vengeful Jewish spirit’. [6] In Iraq the land reform launched in imitation of Egypt’s was a total failure [7], and in Syria a decade of land reform left 50 per cent of the rural population landless. [8]
One Arab Marxist has analysed the basic features of the nationalist regimes as follows:
‘Both the Baathi and the Nasserite regimes have this in common: they are the regimes of an embourgeoisified privileged minority of petit-bourgeois origin which has merged with the remnants of the old social order (bureaucrats, ex-managers of nationalised enterprises, etc) and which appropriates the national surplus product through its control over the bureaucratic-military machinery of the state ... this privileged minority ... unable to revolutionise the relations of production, especially in the countryside ... has failed in the task of the primitive accumulation of capital – the precondition for development which requires, in the underdeveloped countries, drawing upon the abundantly available human labour power (which is basically a political question: mobilising the masses in whose interest socialism is built).’ [9]
Meanwhile many parts of the Arab world, despite their opposition to Zionism, have not reached this nationalist stage. Saudi Arabia, despite its massive oil income, remains
an old-style monarchy. All strikes and union organisations were banned following a big strike of oil-field workers in. 1952; and despite claimed increases in educational spending, in 1970 only 10,000 boys and 700 girls were getting secondary education (out of a population estimated between three and eight million – the Saudi Arabian regime resists anything so modernistic as a census). [10]
 
Egypt and Imperialism
SINCE NASSER and the other nationalist leaders could not mobilise the workers and peasants, they could not make a frontal attack on imperialism; their only hope for modernising the countries was to manoeuvre between the two world power blocs. Hence Nasser’s much-vaunted ‘neutralism’, his friendship with Tito of Yugoslavia and his leading role in the 1955 Bandung Conference of non-aligned countries. In financial terms the manoeuvres paid off; between 1957 and 1969 Nasser received, in loans and credit facilities (excluding military credits), £E 482.9 million from Russia and other Eastern bloc states, and £E 782.5 million from non-Communist states. [11]
Nasser’s relationship with Russia led less perceptive sources in the West to label him a ‘Communist puppet’. In fact, as Nasser pointed out, soviet aid and arms were given without conditions – i.e., the Russian leaders did not try to bargain for the release of Egyptian Communists languishing in Nasser’s jails. More important, Russia could not be counted on to support any consistent anti-Zionist line. Russia supported the establishment of Israel, and has put constant pressure on the Arab states to recognise the Zionist state’s right to exist. And during the recent war Russia allowed a higher level of Jewish emigration to Israel than in any previous month. [12]
But Nasser’s strategy of friendship with Russia did not interfere with his policy of attempting to reach agreement with the USA. The USA has now become the dominant imperialist force in the Middle East; US firms control well over half the oil reserves, as against less than ten per cent before the Second World War. Nasser never tried to confront this imperialism head on, but rather to seek common interests with it.
Certainly US-Egyptian relations were punctuated by a number of sharp clashes (the dispute over the financing of the Aswan Dam in 1956, Egyptian support for the anti-Tshombe forces in the Congo in 1964, and the six-day war in 1967). But good relations were restored in a fairly short time on each occasion.
A leading Egyptian journalist, Hassanain Haykal, whose views are often seen to be an unofficial reflection of the regime’s policies, went so far as to argue, in 1969, that the USA’s real interests lay with Egypt, and that the struggle against Israel was necessary only to persuade the Americans of this fact.
‘... the USA sees in Israel an instrument for attaining its aims in the area. No matter how far the Arabs go in their revolt against the US influence and how much they defy this influence, the US aims are guaranteed as long as Israel remains capable of intimidating the Arabs. If Israel’s ability to intimidate becomes doubtful, US policy will have to seek another course. Israel has proved to the USA that for the time being it is more useful to it than the Arabs. Although all the US interests in the Middle East lie with the Arabs, the USA continues to support Israel.’ [13]
Likewise Nasser’s strategy made him quite unable to fight consistently against reactionary forces elsewhere in the Arab world. In 1963, Colonel Aref overthrew the Kassem regime in Iraq in a coup which led to the murder of at least five thousand Communists and workers. Nasser hastened to stress the ‘unity of aim’ of the two regimes. [14] The Cairo radio programme Enemies of God, intended for the anti-monarchist revolutionaries in Saudi Arabia, disappeared during the six days war in 1967 and never returned to the air. [15]
After Nasser’s death in 1970, his successor, Sadat, accentuated the pro-American trends in Egyptian policy, even going so far as to make a dramatic if short-lived break with Russia. This was accompanied by a clamp-down at home on students, left-wing intellectuals and trade unionists. Sadat moved into King Farouk’s old palace, and the new privileged classes began to wallow in luxury. As the satirical poet Agmed Nagm describes them:
‘Sitting in large fast cars ...
Thick pasty necks
Fat bellies
Gleaming skin
Obtuse minds
Soaring incomes and
Swelling paunches ...’ [16]
 
The Struggle Within
SADAT’S POLICIES met growing internal opposition, in particular massive demonstrations by students in January 1972 and again in January 1973. The demands raised by the students brought out very clearly the links between the class stiuggle at home, and the struggle against imperialism. The following extracts are from a statement issued by the Councils for Defence of Democracy and the Homeland, groups set up in the Universities in January 1973:
‘... Prepare, organise, and arm the people in the belief that war-people’s war – is the only way to liberate the occupied land and to deal with the possibility of imperialist attack.
‘... Construct a real war economy, instead of just laying down slogans and bombast about it. This will be possible only by abolishing the privileges and expense accounts currently enjoyed by the higher strata of society, by setting upper limits on salaries (no more than ten times the minimum wage), by eliminating further expenditures on items that do not serve the struggle, by ending imports of luxury goods, and by eliminating imperialist investments in Egypt, particularly investments in banking and the free market.
‘Extend complete support to all sections of the revolutionary Palestinian resistance. Lift all restrictions on the Palestinian movement, open the way for Egyptians to join in, and form popular support councils in the villages and cities, and at points of production.
‘... The living standards of the poor classes of people must be raised; production workers must be granted appropriate compensation for the nature of their work; workers in the private sector must be given a day off with pay; working conditions must be improved, and the workers must be guaranteed security. For these reasons we support the workers’ struggles in Helwan and Shubra el-Khaima, as well as all the union demands of the shipping workers and textile and cotton workers in Alexandria. We ask that they link their trade-union struggle to the political struggle. We condemn the repression, harassment, and firings that the noble working-class leaders are facing.’ [17]
It is against this background of Arab states, afraid to mobilise the working masses at home and afraid of a full confrontation with imperialism, that the relation of the Arab states to the Palestinian struggle has to be understood.
The Arab regime most directly involved with the Palestinians, Jordan, is the one which has shown most willingness to collaborate with Israel. King Hussein, apart from a few lapses into pro-Arab positions, has shown himself a worthy heir to his grandfather Abdullah, who concluded an agreement with Israel under British auspices in 1948. Hussein could wish for no better tribute than this, from an Israeli Professor in 1967:
‘Like very many Israelis I fervently desire an early arrangement with King Hussein of Jordan ... The Israelis have genuine respect and a sneaking affection for the brave little King, and one can hear expressions of almost sympathetic regret that he should have made the terrible blunder he did.’ [18]
But the other Arab states have also done their best to make sure that the Palestinian resistance movement was firmly under their political control. The Palestinian Liberation Organisation, established by the Arab states in 1964, was aimed primarily at preventing Palestinian organisation from struggling independently. The Arab states, after haggling among themselves, appointed as leader of the PLO, Ahmad el Shukeiri, whose sole talent seemed to be anti-Jewish demagogy. The Palestine Liberation Army was firmly integrated into the Arab state armies and had no freedom of action. [19]
After the six days war in 1967 the PLO lost most of its credibility and the initiative was taken by the more genuine fedayin (meaning ‘those who sacrifice themselves’) of Al Fatah and other groupings. But even here the guerrillas took an ambiguous attitude to the Arab states. Yassir Arafat, leader of Al Fatah, said in an interview in 1969,
‘We will not interfere in the internal affairs of any Arab country that will not in its turn put obstacles in the way of our revolution or threaten its continuation.’
Although other groups like The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, however, criticised the Arab bourgeoisie and saw itself as part of the ‘world liberation movement’ [20], they too were prepared to co-operate at different times with one or other of the Arab regimes.
In September 1970, King Hussein set out to show just how much he deserved the affection of the Israelis by launching a concerted attempt to exterminate the Palestinian guerrilla movement. In heavy fighting over five thousand people were killed. Time magazine subsequently alleged that the attack had been arranged at a secret meeting between Hussein and the Israeli Prime Minister. [21]
But it was not Hussein alone who took the responsibility for the massive attack on the guerrillas. The whole range of Arab states-with the very partial exception of Syria – stood by and took no action. They were more interested in trying to negotiate the American-inspired Rogers Peace Plan, which would have recognised the Israeli state. The betrayal of the Arab states was spelt out by Ghassan Kannafani, one of the leaders of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine:
‘Let us recall the situation. On 23 July Nasser accepted the Rogers plan, and a week later the Jordanian government did so too. Once again the Palestinians were put on the shelf. If you read the Arab and international press between 23 July and 6 September, you will see that the Palestinian people were again being treated exactly as they were between 1948 and 1967. The Arab papers started writing about how “heroic” the Palestinians are, but also how “paralysed” they were, and how there was no hope for these “brave heroes” ...
‘... The Egyptian regime was one step removed from direct participation in this liquidation, since it had no direct contact with the Palestinians; it was in a safer position. The only way the Egyptian regime could help Hussein was by keeping silent: and that it did, to the extent that it could resist the pressure of the Arab masses. For the first three days of the fighting in September the Egyptian government, and all the other Arab governments were silent, because they thought that the resistance movement could not survive for more than three days. Then they were forced to move, because the people in the streets of Egypt, Syria and Lebanon were angry at the massacre; but the first five thousand Palestinian victims fell in Amman in silence, and no-one complained.’ [22]
What was left of the guerrilla movement was driven into the dead end of spectacular but futile individual terrorism.
The repressive social order of the Arab states also weakens them in their struggle against Zionism because it makes them unable to exploit the contradictions in Israeli society. The whole of Israeli society is a creation of imperialism, and it would be quite wrong to believe it can be overthrown simply by its internal contradictions. But it would be equally wrong to claim that there is no class struggle in Israel. Israeli workers have a record of struggle and strike; in recent years the Oriental Jews, who suffer from severe discrimination, have begun to rebel; shortly before the outbreak of the recent conflict the ‘Black Panthers’ had achieved some success in the Histadrut (trade union) elections. [23] An Arab movement with a clear class perspective could counterbalance Israel’s military superiority by driving a wedge into her social conflicts.
The recent war against Israel marked no change in the line of Egypt and the Arab states; on the contrary, it showed their determination to continue along the same path. Sadat, despite his frequent bellicose speeches, went to war only after three years of trying to reach a settlement with the USA had failed. But the war was undertaken for quite limited aims, totally distinct from the aims of the Palestinian people. There was no attempt to mobilise the dispossessed masses of the Middle East, let alone the working class in the imperialist countries (such as the dockers at Leghorn in Italy who refused to load munitions for the US Sixth Fleet [24]).
The Al Fatah leadership, with some justification, were suspicious of Egyptian motives when first informed of the 1973 war, fearing a pretext for a new attack on them. [25] While they agreed to participate, the role of the fedayin was far from being the central one it could have been in a genuine anti-imperialist struggle. In Jordan, former fedayin who had fled after the 1970 massacre and tried to return during the course of the hostilities, were turned away by officials armed with a ‘black list’ of former ‘terrorists’. [26]
At the time of writing it is not clear whether the war is over for the moment or not; what is clear is that no solution of the fundamental questions is possible. As the leader of the Democratic Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, Nayef Hawatmeh, put it:
‘All imperialist-Zionist manoeuvres aimed at settling the Middle East conflict without taking account of the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination are doomed to failure; only the Palestinian resistance is entitled to speak in the name of the Palestinian people which it represents and to decide its fate. We are not alone in the battle. All the progressive forces of the world support our just struggle.’ [27]
As far as Egypt is concerned, the future pattern is already clear; the appointment of the well-known pro-American Ismail Fahmi as Foreign Secretary on 31 October indicates that Sadat will pursue his wooing of Washington. At the same time he will probably lose again the mass popularity he won during the days of fighting. The students, and possibly the workers, will again start to challenge the regime.
Meanwhile the announcement by both Al Fatah and the Democratic Front that they would be prepared to participate in negotiations for a compromise solution [28] may lead to further divergences within the Palestinian movement. Both individual terrorism and loving up to Arab statesmen are more and more clearly dead ends. The lesson to be drawn from the tragic losses and suffering of the last few weeks is that the only road to the overthrow of Zionism is the revolutionary overthrow of the Arab regimes.
 



The Right Divided
Wolves in the City: The Death of French Algeria
Paul Henissart
Hart-Davis, £2.95; Paladin (paper back), 60p.
In 1962, after over seven years of cruel war, the French withdrew from Algeria. But in the last year De Gaulle’s government faced a grim challenge from the OAS (Secret Army Organisation), which strove through terrorism to prevent Algerian independence. The OAS had massive support from European settlers in Algeria and wide backing in France; it enjoyed at least the passive approval of high-ranking figures in the Army, Government and legal system. And yet it failed.
In some ways the obstacles confronting the extreme Right are the mirror-image of those that face the Left. (Certainly the OAS felt they could learn from the Left; Susini, their main theoretician, was a student of Lenin, and the terrorist organiser Degueldre dreamed of imitating the Budapest rising of 1956).
For example, the OAS was torn by sectarian divisions; it attracted all who opposed De Gaulle from the Right monarchists and tax-reformers, traditional conservatives and fascist activists. As a result, it never clarified its strategy, whether it wanted a physical confrontation with the state or whether terrorism was merely a means to put pressure on the government.
The OAS sent carefully worded moderate letters to French political leaders; fished for money from the Algerian wine industry (but got only a few hundred pounds out of the millions the industry made in profits); and hoped against hope that De Gaulle’s prime minister Debre was really on their side. The OAS even made advances to the French Socialist Party (and got some tentative encouragement – from some of the self-same politicians now participating in the left-wing electoral alliance). Yet at the same time the OAS pursued a campaign of almost indiscriminate terror against Algerians and anyone who opposed them; a campaign that certainly was out of the control of the OAS leaders, and which rapidly alienated the support even of members of the French army who had originally been sympathetic.
Salan, the OAS leader, a drug-addict and increasingly out-of-touch with those he claimed to represent, deliberately refused to clarify his programme so as not to split his potential supporters. Even the basic aim – whether to keep Algeria French or to create a European-controlled coastal zone by partitions, was never properly defined.
Henissart’s book tells the story of the last fateful year of French Algeria. He seems to be not always sure whether he is writing a work of history or a thriller (though to be fair the ambiguity lies in the subject matter). But his book is a readable account which can be recommended to those who want to explore the intricacies of French politics. Possibly, too, it may cast some light on the situation in Northern Ireland.
 



Antoine Bloye
Paul Nizan
Monthly Review Press, £3.10
IN HIS introduction to Nizan’s novel, first published in 1933, Richard Ellman hails this book as ‘one of the few truly great Marxist novels’. This is a pity, for while Antoine Bloye is a good novel and well worth reading, it doesn’t live up to that particular claim.
The story of Antoine Bloye is that of a railway porter’s son who himself goes to work on the railways and rises into the lower ranks of management. It is a story which combines the picture of a historical epoch – from the 1860s to the 1920s – with the sensitive portrayal of an individual. We see how the pressures of society stunt and dehumanise Bloye; how his sexuality is destroyed and his family life reduced to a set of mechanical gestures. Above all we see him at work, a man totally consumed by his work, and yet aware, in a quite undefined way, that he has missed out on something.
To this extent Nizan has succeeded in integrating his Marxism – he was a member of the French Communist Party in the 1930s – with his literary creativity. Not only is it a novel which takes history, including economic history, seriously, but it also draws on such marxist notions as ‘alienation’ and ‘reification’, so often the starting point for metaphysical meandering, and makes them graphically concrete.
So far, so good. Yet the work is disappointing. For its structure is basically tragic. Firstly because Nizan uses the device of beginning the book with Bloye’s funeral. And secondly because all his accounts of the security and complacency of pre-1914 bourgeois life are tinged with irony, because the reader is always aware that the end if coming, that slaughter and chaos are just around the corner. Such fatalism betrays the Stalinist limits of Nizan’s Marxism.
Worse, there is no alternative. In his youth, before crossing the class lines, Bloye tried to lead a strike. But this is one of the weakest episodes of the book, being almost completely unmotivated. Thereafter the workers who appear act as a mute reproach to Bloye, a reminder of his divided loyalties. But they do not act on their own account. They do not offer a lived alternative to the cramped existence of Bloye’s class.
It was Nizan himself, in one of his penetrating essays, who pointed out that bourgeois critics have decreed that a reception in a wealthy drawing-room is a ‘literary’ subject, but a strike is not. Yet he himself sticks to the convention that the appropriate subject for a novel is the individual destiny of a member of the middle class.
Reading Antoine Bloye I was reminded that I still have not discovered a better novel about working class consciousness and struggle than Zola’s Germinal – written in 1885. Why has no twentieth-century Marxist writer surpassed the woolly-minded radical Zola? The answer to that question would tell us a lot about socialism and culture in our epoch.
 



LAST WEEK’s military take over in Chile was a massive defeat for the Chilean working class, and indeed for the working class of the whole world. There is still little information as to the precise extent of the repression taking place, though some reports have spoken of up to 20,000 dead. But it requires little imagination to recognise that the army and their right wing friends are setting out to destroy completely the organised working class in Chile.
A month before the coup the armed forces were already raiding factories and homes of left wingers in search of arms, while disregarding open preparations for violence by the right. Now that they have a completely free hand they will have few scruples about killing and torturing.
For the Chilean working class this is nothing new. Over the last few years there has been a carefully fostered myth that Chile is a country of peaceful and democratic traditions. As far as Chilean workers are concerned nothing could be further from the truth. The Chilean labour movement, one of the strongest in South America, was forged in struggle and bloodshed. The Valparaiso dock strike in 1903 left 30 dead and the 1905 Santiago meat strike left 200 killed. In 1907, 2000 were massacred at Iquique and in 1925, 3000 at Coruña.
In January this year, just before the elections a left wing socialist newspaper issued an open letter to the election candidates. This said: ’We saw what these politicians did in October and we know where the the path we want to follow will lead. But, they ask aren’t you afraid of the violence of another Coruña? Of more bullets? Of an underground existence? Of confrontations? For years we have had Coruñas, bullets, clandestinity, and confrontations. Nothing new that Chile’s rich can come up with will terrorise us.’
The Chilean working class will not be crushed forever but it has learnt a hard lesson in the hardest possible way. That lesson is that no enlightened leaders, no alliance with progressive forces, no parliamentary compromise can substitute for the basic need for the working class to create its own organisations and fight for its own programme.
 



Communism and the French Left
Charles A. Micaud
Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 42s.
Professor Micaud believes that democracy needs a ‘consensus’ on basic political principles; in France, the lack of a ‘loyal opposition’, accepting these principles, has opened the way to Right-wing extremism. Revolution is for him only a chimerical solution which appeals to workers when ‘the channels of individual and group promotion appear blocked,’ and which would fade away before the concrete reformist gains made by a party of the moderate Left.
Nonetheless, Micaud’s survey of the French CP especially in the post-1945 period, contains much useful and interesting information. He deals at length with the nature of the CP’s support. His treatment of the intellectuals (who join the Party out of ‘collective neurosis’ and a religious desire for an eschatological Absolute) is somewhat sketchy, and adds little that is new for anyone who has read some Sartre. But on the far more important question of working-class support for the CP he gives more valuable information. He starts off by showing the ‘atomistic’ nature of French society; and to this general picture of fragmentation he adds the results of interviews with Grenoble metal-workers. He concludes that they are ‘decidedly not revolutionary’; nonetheless three-quarters express resentment at social injustice, and nine-tenths feel indifference towards politics (while still voting). Their attitude to the CP is ambivalent; they recognize it as a workers’ party, but are distrustful of the leaders, and of the USSR.
Perhaps the most salutary effect of this book on an English Marxist is to make him thank God for the Labour Party. He is left to wonder in despair where he would turn if he lived in France. Certainly the CP is, in a sense, a workers’ party; its cells are vigorous and active at rank-and-file level, and achieve considerable popularity. But Micaud leaves us no illusions about ths leadership; the CP, participating in the French Government in 1945, helped to, dismantle workers’ committees that had been set up in 1944.
But what else is there? In a section entitled The Non-Communist Left; An Essay on Futility, Micaud shows how the rest of the French Left is inadequate for his objectives – how much more inadequate for ours are the romantic Christian Mouvement de Liberation du Peuple, the middle-class SFIO, out of touch with the workers, or Mendès-France’s advocacy of neo-capitalism. Only the PSU seems to Micaud to have any hope of success, and that only in the long-term. He omits to mention France’s nine Trotskyite factions, but they offer little consolation.
Nor does there seem much prospect of inner-party opposition. Micaud points out the undemocratic structure of the CP, the strong position of the leadership, the intensive recruiting and training of paid officials, the pervading atmosphere of discipline and loyalty, which meant that the French CP suffered comparatively little from the Hungarian Revolution. Nonetheless, we can only hope that both de Gaulle and Thorez will receive an increasing amount of ‘disloyal opposition’.
 



Algeria & France: from Colonialism to Cooperation
Dorothy Pickles
Methuen; 30s.
In this book Mrs Pickles gives us ‘a brief study of only one aspect of the Algerian problem, namely, its impact on the politics of post-war France.’ It provides a useful and concise record of the main events of the Algerian war, and of the opportunistic reactions of politicians, Left and Right alike, to them – an interesting work to consult, but not really worth buying at the price. It contains no original factual material, and nothing that IS readers would recognise as analysis. On the one hand one could wish for more statistical, and especially more economic facts than we are given; on the other for a more critical attitude than we get in the treatment of the Manifesto of the 121: ‘The tone of the manifesto was both exaggerated and seditious. Even the most liberal and tolerant of governments could hardly be expected to permit freedom of opinion to go to such lengths.’ The Algerian war was the most savage and degrading of the many struggles in the death-agony of classical colonialism. Now that it is finished, and we can review the whole of it in retrospect, the picture is even more tragic, for we can see clearly the inevitables that dominated the situation. The realistic solutions of compromise and reform that were repeatedly proposed are shown to have been totally Utopian (like all ‘realistic’ policies). The hopes of the Left were likewise illusory – there was neither the will nor the possibility for mass popular defence of the Fourth Republic in 1958; how much less chance of French proletarian solidarity with the FLN. Only a prolonged and bitter conflict could operate the changes in consciousness necessary for a solution. It is a lesson to any in our movement who hope for rapid or easy victories.
 



A Modern French Republic
Pierre Mendès-France
Weidenfeld & Nicolson; 30s.
M. Mendès-France is an intelligent political thinker, a clear writer, and probably has a sincere desire to change society for the better. Unfortunately there is a widespread impression, in England rather than in France, that he also has something to do with socialism. Such an impression is unlikely to survive a reading of this book. The first shock may be administered by the references to Mater et Magistra as though it were some sort of authority, or by the author’s obvious admiration for Churchill; but these are incidental to the whole Utopian fantasy, which must be created by any political theorist who fails to put class conflict at the very centre of his analysis. Instead we are offered democratic political institutions aid an Economic Plan. ‘The Plan must have the support of everyone: the President of the Council in his office, the research worker in his laboratory, and the worker in his factory’. Marx is outdated, and the sophisticated, forward-looking M. Mendès-France takes as his authority – Montesquieu. The key to the failure of the last two republics was the ‘total lack of equilibrium between the principal State organisations: the Assemblies and the executive power’. M. Mendès-France goes further in his desire for equilibrium; trade unions must be incorporated into the machinery of government and play a role in creating the Economic Plan; as a result the unions will come to recognise that the State is no longer their enemy. Nothing, indeed, could be more desirable for French capitalism, if M. Mendès-France could show how it is to be achieved. But he is concerned almost exclusively with abstractions, with ‘a blueprint for the France of the future’. A great deal of space is devoted to the role and composition of a Second Chamber; there is scarcely a mention of the additional bedrooms required by France’s inadequately housed. M. Mendès-France is not totally blind to the problems of modern capitalism, and a central theme of his work is the difficulty of reconciling economic planning with individual freedom. But because he does not transcend the limits of the society that produces this contradiction, his remedy is all the more pernicious: greater participation by the workers in a system that is not their own.
During the Algerian War and the threat of fascism, Mendès-France still offered a plausible leadership; but now, as Gaullism returns to the typical patterns of modern capitalism, he is no longer the key figure of the French Left. Both British workers and the most intelligent British capitalists are turning eagerly to Harold Wilson; but neither French capital nor French workers need or want Mendès-France.



Ben Watson
Art, Class and Cleavage
Quartet, London 1998, pp. 431, £14.00
BEN Watson stands at the point of intersection of two traditions – a Marxist tradition running from Trotsky to the ‘state capitalist’ theories of C.L.R. James and Tony Cliff, and a tradition of revolt in (or against) art that goes from surrealism via situationism to the music of Frank Zappa and the poetry of J.H. Prynne. The only problem is to know whether these traditions do in fact intersect; for if they don’t, Watson has nowhere to stand, and is in free fall into the void – a conclusion supported by some of the more bewildering sections of this insightful but confusing book.
Watson’s declared aim is to overcome the ‘cleavage’ between art and politics/class. In particular, he champions modernism in music and poetry, arguing that the ‘refusal of exchange values gives Modern Art its relationship to revolutionary politics’ (p. 222). The argument takes us through knowledgeable and perceptive expositions of Coleridge, Fourier, Josef Dietzgen, Walter Benjamin, James Joyce and Philip K. Dick. Watson treats Stalinists and liberal academics with contempt, arguing that ‘both contend that knowledge exists objectively, independent of the person who thinks and the society that funds the thinker’ (p. 75). Post-modernism, Political Correctness and feminism all get their fair (and sometimes unfair) share of abuse.
I suspect that many readers of Revolutionary History will be profoundly irritated by Watson’s writing. The assault on the art/politics cleavage takes his writing beyond the boundaries of most works on either politics or culture. The footnotes repeatedly alternate between Lenin’s philosophical writings and Frank Zappa’s lyrics. A taste for puns and the sheer range and obscurity of the references ensure that this is not an easy read.
But in his insistence that music, poetry, sex, schizophrenia and death deserve discussion by Marxists, Watson is firmly in the tradition of Trotsky’s writings on culture and everyday life. He claims, convincingly, that the art/politics cleavage has produced ‘a marginalised and unimaginative revolutionary left and an effete, ornamental avant-garde’ (p. 341). Watson has done his best to provoke a dialogue, though he will get few thanks from either side.
The back cover promises a ‘rediscovery of Trotsky’. Watson skilfully deploys Trotsky against current academic trends, makes some useful comments on Trotsky and Freud, and claims that ‘Trotsky is the most appropriate political complement to the revolt of Modern Art’ (p. 185).
But he does not avoid a certain romanticisation of his hero. He dismisses as Stalinist misrepresentation (p. 10) the claim that Trotsky’s alliance with the surrealist Breton was primarily tactical rather than political or aesthetic, although there is impeccably Trotskyist confirmation from Naville and van Heijenoort that Trotsky knew little of surrealism, and didn’t much like what he knew. Likewise he claims that Trotsky ‘carried a book of Mallarmé’s poetry in his pocket when leading the Red Army’ (p. 10). We know from Alfred Rosmer that Trotsky had Mallarmé on his bookshelves in his military train, but to infer that he was declaiming ‘Le vierge, le vivace et le bel aujourd’hui’ as the bullets whistled through his hair is unsubstantiated wish-fulfilment. It is also unfortunate that Watson, an enthusiast for poodles, does not note Jacqueline Lamba’s recollection that Trotsky, in argument with Breton, ‘attributed an almost human soul to dogs ...’ (Arturo Schwarz, André Breton, Trotsky et l’anarchie, Paris 1977, p. 210).
The last third of the book is devoted to Voloshinov’s work on Marxism and linguistics. Again, there is much that is valuable here, but some of the claims are dubious. Watson counterposes ‘concrete utterance’ to ‘abstract systems’ (p. 373), and thus dismisses Saussure’s work, identifying it with the traditional grammar of the schoolroom. But his stress on utterance forgets that language cannot function unless it has a grammatical structure that makes it possible for one speaker to understand another; the English language exists independently of particular speakers, just as the solar system exists independently of human beings. In rejecting the ‘abstract’, he forgets that science requires abstraction; Marx’s Capital moves between the concrete and the abstract. Far from reinforcing traditional grammar after the manner of a Labour education minister, Saussure’s affirmation of the arbitrariness of language undermines any claim that one grammar is ‘better’ than another. And in his stress on ambiguity, Watson focuses excessively on literature. Ambiguity is a virtue in poetry, but a distinct disadvantage in Health and Safety regulations.
James Thurber once drew a cartoon of a bewildered man in an art gallery, captioned ‘he knows all about art but he doesn’t know what he likes’. Watson knows only too well what he likes, and the book sometimes turns into a catalogue of his personal tastes. Watson calls his method Materialist Esthetix; the eccentric spelling abbreviates as ME! (The conventional spelling would have given the acronym Ma, to the hilarity of amateur Freudians; or perhaps MA, symbolising the academics for whom he feels such searing hatred.) At one point, he lists 10 names (all unknown to the present reviewer) and describes their work as ‘the only poetry worth reading in England’ (p. 325). Anyone who disagrees with Watson’s tastes is damned, not only aesthetically, but politically and morally. This style of intellectual terrorism is much closer to Matthew Arnold and F.R. Leavis than Watson would like to think. Before attempting to establish a single revolutionary canon in music and literature, he should ponder the passage in Trotsky’s Literature and Revolution which promises that under Socialism political parties will be replaced by ‘parties’ advocating different tendencies in theatre, music and sport.
As Watson acknowledges, to overcome the art/politics cleavage requires, not the best efforts of the best intellectuals, but social revolution (p. 341). Without that revolution, Materialist Esthetix, like surrealism and situationism, must be a judged a failure. Yet an interesting failure is sometimes preferable to a boring success.
 



Pierre Broué
Histoire de l’Internationale Communiste
Fayard, Paris 1997, pp. 1120, FF295
PIERRE Broué’s history of the Communist International is an impressive achievement. As well as over 800 pages of scrupulously documented text, it contains a detailed chronology, an extensive bibliography, and an index with biographical sketches of virtually every individual who plays a part in the story. In addition, there is a list of some 8,000 pseudonyms used by those active in the Communist movement. (I was slightly less impressed when the first entry I checked – Tony Cliff – turned out to be inaccurate.) Doubtless there are errors and omissions, but it would require a whole team of specialists to locate where they are. Broué has provided not only an enthralling narrative, but a work of reference which will be indispensable to anyone working in the field.
Whilst the account centres on the key states of Central and Western Europe which decided the fate of the post-1917 revolutionary wave, Broué includes much material from other parts of the world, and there are full accounts of the development of revolutionary Communism, and then Stalinism, in both Asia and Latin America. Whilst some sections rely heavily on established accounts – Isaacs on the Chinese Revolution, Renshaw on the British General Strike – Broué also makes substantial use of recently discovered archive material. An important example is the use of material from the work of Bernhard Bayerlein, showing the divergences within the Comintern leadership at the time of the German events of 1923 and after. Amongst other material, he quotes a letter from Stalin in August 1923, urging that the Germans be held back and not stimulated; Zinoviev’s draft theses on Germany from August 1923; details of the dispute between Trotsky and Zinoviev in the autumn of 1923; and Rákosi’s report to Zinoviev of October 1923.
The latter part of the book, dealing with the Stalinised Comintern, is perhaps the less interesting. The broad outline of the crimes of the Third Period and the betrayals of the Popular Front are a well-known story, and although Broué adds much detail, he does not revise the general picture. Certainly he provides sufficient documentation to belabour any surviving admirers of Stalinism. Whilst the catastrophic outcome of the Third Period in Germany is all too familiar, the story of the massacres in Colombia and El Salvador, also produced by Third Period policies, will be less so. Broué also details the leadership changes carried out during the Third Period; as he points out, it was the leaderships established during the Third Period who implemented the policies of the Popular Front. Chapter 32 provides an extensive roll-call of those murdered at the hands of the Stalinist apparatus.
Yet, as Broué shows, the Comintern was never altogether a ‘monolith’ (as some of us have perhaps too easily believed). The famous zigzags were neither unanimous nor executed without hesitation. Thus the Comintern opposed Duclos’ attempt to get L’Humanité published legally under the Nazi occupation of France. Even when Stalin decided that the Comintern must be dissolved, there were divergent voices on the Executive. No-one defied Stalin, but there were several views as to how the strangulation should be carried out. Perhaps such differences should not surprise us in an organisation where fear and ambition had replaced principle. But individuals did make a difference, and Broué attempts to evaluate their rôles. Thus Dimitrov (whose direct involvement in the Sofia Cathedral episode Broué makes clear) emerges as a complete scoundrel, who drank too much and sexually harassed secretaries; André Marty, however, is said to have been a ‘big-mouth’, but not the butcher he is often accused of being.
Broué considers that by 1935 the Comintern was no more than a ‘direct dependency of the political police of the [Soviet] state’. Undoubtedly there is a substantial degree of truth in this, and Broué provides much detailed material on the rôle of Russian agents within the various Communist parties. Nonetheless, a number of reservations should be noted. Firstly, the various Stalinist parties retained sufficient roots in their national labour movements for them subsequently to develop into variants of Social Democracy. Secondly, in the 1930s and during the Second World War, the Communist parties continued to attract many of the best class fighters of their generation. To dismiss militants of the quality of Harry McShane or Joe Jacobs as merely ‘Stalinists’ because they became embroiled in Communist parties at a time when Trotskyism was almost invisible would be sectarian folly. And thirdly, a theoretical question arises: if the counter-revolutionary Comintern was simply a projection of the Russian state machine, then what sort of state was it? Could it in any sense be a state that represented workers’ class interests, in however degenerated a fashion? Wisely, Broué makes no attempt to pursue this point.
But it is the first half of the book which is much more illuminating and thought provoking, and highly relevant to the education of a new generation of revolutionaries. For here we are dealing with a living movement, with all its richness and contradiction, its spontaneity and its mistakes. Anyone who believes there was a line of continuity between the early Comintern and the later monstrosity that bore the same name should read Broué’s detailed account of the full debate and open argument that characterised the first congresses.
But Broué also undermines the romanticisation that has existed within the Trotskyist camp. I recall a faction in the International Socialists (led by Sean Matgamna) which included in its programme support for the ‘first four congresses of the Communist International’. I was never sure what this might mean, and having read Broué I am finally convinced it was meaningless. Indeed, the real Comintern was something of a ramshackle affair, a hasty improvisation to deal with an urgent and unpredictable situation. We can learn at least as much from the early Comintern’s mistakes – which were numerous – as from its programmatic declarations. But precisely these were the mistakes – and often dubious manoeuvres – of a living movement. The point was neatly summed by Georg Lukács, in a remark recorded by Victor Serge: ‘Marxists know that dirty little tricks can be performed with impunity when great deeds are being achieved; the error of some comrades is to suppose that one can produce great results simply through the performance of dirty little tricks.’ Here we have beautifully encapsulated the essential difference between Lenin and Zinoviev.
For many on the revolutionary left, even today, the Comintern is cited as though it provided a simple recipe book for the construction of revolutionary parties. But as Broué shows, the formation of the Comintern was a complex process, in which individuals, networks of personal contacts, the various ‘foreign sections’ based on ex-prisoners-of-war in Russia, small political groups and mass parties all interacted in the context of a unique revolutionary wave emerging from the war and the Russian October. Those who seek to reduce this to the shibboleth that all revolutionary parties come simply from splits within existing working-class institutions should study Broué and think again. Thus in the example of France, revolutionary Syndicalists like Rosmer, Monatte and Martinet played a key rôle in the formation of the Communist Party, even though they had never felt any inclination to ‘enter’ the SFIO. And if they had played an even larger rôle, whilst the corrupt parliamentarians like Cachin had been excluded, the PCF might have been better able to face up to the demands of the new period.
The real problem was, of course, that the overwhelming majority of the established leadership of the working class had sold out in 1914. The Comintern’s task was therefore to forge a new leadership, at every level from Central Committee to shop steward, within the few brief years before the revolutionary wave began to subside. The amazing thing is not that there were mistakes and that bizarre short-cuts were pursued, but that so much was achieved. Some of us might draw the lesson, contrary to the advocates of ‘entrism’, that it is a great pity that the left in the Second International did not break away – or at least develop a much more solid factional organisation – before 1914.
Be that as it may, the Comintern leadership found themselves in a race against time. Paradoxically, the Russians had to try to teach other parties to rely more on their own concrete analysis of circumstances, and less on imitation of the Russian example. This is the message of Lenin’s magnificent but despairing speech to the fourth Comintern congress, when he warned: ‘We have not learnt how to present our Russian experience to foreigners.’ Broué provides a neat example of the tendency to see the world through Russian eyes when he cites the repeated practice of the Italian Communists of referring to Mussolini’s Blackshirts as ‘White Guards’ – something hardly calculated to clarify the issues for the average Italian worker.
It is also in this context that the question of ultra-leftism in the Comintern must be understood, and here Broué can be criticised for taking too superficial a view of matters. It is easy enough in retrospect to condemn the March Action and the ‘theory of the offensive’. Of course, it is quite right to blame Béla Kun for his stupidities – as Lenin did one once occasion to such an extent that the congress record had to be altered to moderate his vituperation. But the fundamental questions are: firstly, why was there such a shortage of cadres that a man like Kun was given responsible positions? And secondly, why did the ultra-leftism of such leaders find a genuine ‘resonance’ (as our Pabloite friends used to call it) amongst the layers of newly radicalised young workers, militant, angry and impatient, but lacking experience and any real sense of tactics.
Lenin himself seems to have related to ultra-lefts of all types with understanding and patience. He realised that most ultra-lefts were genuine revolutionaries, and even amid the tremendous pressures of post-revolutionary Russia, he found time to argue and convince. Broué’s account brings out the differences between the various Bolshevik leaders. Indeed, contrary to the popular image of ‘Bolshevism’, even the leading core of Bolsheviks was far from being homogeneous. Broué brings out the different rôles of Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev, Bukharin, Radek and others. Zinoviev, despite his talents as an orator, appears mainly in a negative light. It was Zinoviev (not Trotsky, as is often alleged) who threatened to shoot the Kronstadt insurgents ‘like partridges’. It was above all Zinoviev’s ‘Bolshevisation’ of the Comintern that paved the way for Stalin. Moreover, Zinoviev is shown to have been one of the very first proponents of the ‘theory’ that Social Democracy was a ‘variety of Fascism’.
But most striking of all is the visible gap between Lenin and even his most gifted associates. Lenin understood that the art of party-building requires a knowledge of when to split and when to pull together. Of course, splitting is a lot easier than pulling together, and all too many of Lenin’s would-be followers (including even, at times, Trotsky) have preferred to split rather than pull together.
Broué’s sympathies tend to be with the right wing of the revolutionary movement. In particular Paul Levi, whom he had already presented in a relatively positive light in his 1971 book on the German Revolution, is here presented as a major figure in the Comintern leadership. Certainly Broué is quite right to endorse Levi’s critique of the March Action; Levi was undoubtedly a shrewd analyst of the political situation. But it must also be said that he was an inept faction-fighter. One can scarcely imagine Lenin deciding to break party discipline, but then failing to follow through, and retreating from the debate. Within a more stable leadership team, Levi could certainly have played a very useful rôle, but in the near chaos of the German party he failed to live up to the demands upon him.
One review can only touch on a very few of the many issues raised in Broué’s book, which will undoubtedly continue to provoke discussion and further research for years to come. In the last issue of Revolutionary History, Al Richardson described the book as ‘magisterial’. Perhaps I am not quite so easily pleased, but there is no doubt that this is an important and valuable book. I would add the hope that an English translation will soon appear, but it might look as though I am volunteering for the job. Good luck to whoever has the stamina to undertake it.
 



Dear Editor
In his review of Les Forster’s Rocking the Boat (Revolutionary History, Volume 6, nos. 2/3), Ray Challinor states that ‘Harry McShane died cursing Tony Cliff and the SWP’. I have no doubt that Challinor is being scrupulously truthful in this claim, but political honesty requires that it be placed against the background of historical record.
Harry McShane became a member of the editorial board of Labour Worker (forerunner of Socialist Worker) when the paper moved to Glasgow in May 1963, and remained one, contributing to the paper, until it returned to London in September 1964. He continued to collaborate with the International Socialists and the Socialist Workers Party until his death in 1988. Contrary to Challinor’s claim that he was not allowed to make a ‘political contribution’, he made many such contributions. Thus he wrote a page-long article, Realm of Freedom, in the first issue of Socialist Review in April 1978, spoke — alongside Eddie and Ruth Frow — on the early years of the Communist Party of Great Britain at the SWP’s Skegness rally in 1980, and addressed a meeting at the conclusion of the IS-inspired Right to Work March in 1976 — the first time he had ever spoken at the Albert Hall.
In 1978 McShane published his autobiography, No Mean Fighter, written in collaboration with a (then) SWP member, Joan Smith. In this he commends the IS/SWP for their ‘Neither Washington nor Moscow’ line in CND, and for the way they built the Right to Work Campaign. He continued to attend Glasgow SWP meetings until shortly before his death. In Socialist Worker (8 March 1986) Paul Foot records that McShane, aged 93, had attended a meeting at which Foot spoke; he also scrupulously notes that McShane criticised him, saying ‘there wasn’t enough about the Russian betrayal, Paul’.
McShane was not in total political agreement with the IS/SWP. As he made clear in his autobiography, he aligned himself politically with Raya Dunayevskaya, and was involved with a small group of ‘Marxist humanists’ in Britain, as well as writing many letters to the American News and Letters in the 1960s and 1970s.
Dunayevskaya’s ideas were not those of the IS/SWP, but there is no evidence that McShane expected the IS/SWP to provide him with a platform to propagate ‘Marxist humanism’. Rather, in all the published examples I have consulted, he stressed what united him with the SWP. I know of no public utterance of McShane’s in which he criticised the IS/SWP, or in which he repudiated the positive things he said about it in his autobiography and elsewhere. Presumably neither does Challinor — or he would cite them, instead of relying on deathbed curses.
McShane showed considerable courage in breaking from the CPGB at an age when others would have been thinking only of retirement; it is unlikely he would have been intimidated from making a political break from the SWP if he had wished to do so.
Challinor’s review shows some of the dangers inherent in the current fashion for ‘oral history’. Oral testimony can provide a valuable source for historians, but should always be balanced against other evidence. The facts I have quoted are all available to any researcher in published material; they cannot be negated by hearsay and gossip.



 


Fraternally
Ian Birchall



 



Colette Chambelland
Pierre Monatte, une autre voix syndicaliste
Les éditions de l’Atelier/Éditions Ouvrières, Paris 1999, pp. 190, FF 125
PIERRE Monatte was Alfred Rosmer’s friend and comrade over many years, an incorrigible class-fighter and an intransigent revolutionary till the day he died. Yet it is only now, nearly 40 years after his death, that a biography of him has appeared. Monatte was written out of history by the Stalinists, and ignored by Trotskyists because he kept his distance from Trotsky in the 1930s; as for the right-wing anti-Communists, Monatte was far too bloody-minded for them even to try coopting him.
Colette Chambelland’s biography is short, but rich in information. She knew Monatte in her childhood as a family friend, and she has had access to his diaries, letters and personal archives. Her book is an important contribution to the recovery of those currents in twentieth-century Socialism which resisted the twin perversions of Stalinism and Social Democracy.
Monatte was a born rebel. He became a revolutionary in circumstances which remind those of us born later just how easy a time we have had of it. He narrowly escaped expulsion from school for being in possession of a text by Zola on the Dreyfus case; later he was thrown out of the family home when a rich horse-dealer threatened to withdraw his custom from Monatte’s father, a farrier, unless the young Monatte renounced Socialism. When his comrade Benoît Broutchoux, an anarchist miner, was jailed, Monatte stood up in the courtroom yelling ‘Down with the court!’, and was lucky to get off with a suspended sentence.
Chambelland shows Monatte’s evolution to revolutionary syndicalism and his differences with both anarchists and parliamentary Socialists. The journal he founded, La Vie ouvrière, was a model of Socialist journalism; its articles were clear and accessible to worker readers, yet without patronising or over-simplifying. The journal never ducked the difficult issues; in 1912, when Charles Andler wrote an article dealing with what he saw as dangerous pro-imperialist trends in the German Social Democratic Party, many on the French left believed it should not be given wide circulation for fear it might inflame anti-German feeling. Monatte, despite opposition from Jaurès and others, reprinted the article because he believed the issues should not be evaded.
Chambelland shows how La Vie ouvrière brought together those from the Socialist, anarchist and syndicalist milieux. In seeking to establish dialogue between the different currents of the left, Monatte thus helped to pave the way for the radical regroupments that took place during and after the war.
In 1914, Monatte, alongside Rosmer, was one of the handful who opposed the war from the first day. When called up to the army, he went without question (though he had friends in the union bureaucracy who could undoubtedly have got him exemption had he asked) and served in the trenches. The decision to go to the army seems to have been essentially a result of the moral component that was so important in the syndicalist tradition; Monatte felt an obligation to fight alongside his fellow-workers, though he felt more anxiety at the prospect of killing than of being killed. In an army that was more peasant than proletarian, he had little opportunity to agitate or promote anti-war ideas.
Monatte rejoiced at the Bolshevik Revolution; yet it is at this time that the divergences with Rosmer begin to appear. Rosmer was always an enthusiastic traveller, and he was glad to visit Russia and stay there for many months working in the Comintern apparatus. Monatte was much more deeply attached to his roots in the French labour movement, and he never visited Russia, even for the founding congress of the Red International of Labour Unions.
Nor did he move as far as Rosmer in the direction of Leninism. He did not join the French Communist Party (PCF) at its foundation, and in 1922 he was writing that the trade unions would play the essential rôle in the emancipation of the working class, and the party only an auxiliary rôle. Only in May 1923 did he join the PCF, and he became a member of its Executive Committee the following January.
To understand Monatte’s brief period in the PCF, it is necessary to look at the historical context. The PCF was created in December 1920 when the majority of the Socialist Party (SFIO) voted to affiliate to the Comintern. All too often this is seen as providing some sort of Delia Smith-style recipe for the formation of all future revolutionary parties. On the contrary, it was a very contradictory victory. To win the majority of the main working-class party was of course highly desirable, but one vote scarcely converted the membership into Communists. And winning the majority meant including many opportunists of the species who would swim with any stream going (the same species as the ex-Bennite Blairites we know so well today).
In this situation, the rôle of the revolutionary syndicalists, the Rosmers and Monattes, was crucial. They were vitally needed in the PCF to provide a political and moral counterweight to the corrupt parliamentary cretins who had come from the SFIO. Lenin and Trotsky (but all too few of the other Bolsheviks) understood this, and urged Monatte and other syndicalists to join the PCF. Chambelland quotes a letter to Monatte from his Swiss friend Fritz Brupbacher, reporting a conversation with Trotsky in which the latter expressed his sympathy for revolutionary syndicalism, and urged Monatte and friends to state their conditions for entering the PCF.
Monatte could not last long in the PCF. Faced with the pretentious charade of Zinovievite ‘Bolshevisation’, Monatte, Rosmer and Delagarde issued an open letter to party members stating: ‘It is said that the party must be an iron cohort. In fact … it is not an iron cohort that is being formed, but a regiment of slugs.’ Expulsion followed the next month.
The potential and actual rôle of the revolutionary syndicalists in the early years of the PCF is one that requires much more study. With their stress on proletarian self-emancipation and workplace struggle, their anti-authoritarianism and their moral integrity, they could have played a vital part in complementing other currents in the party, and where necessary counteracting them. That they failed to do so cannot be blamed on Stalinism — the die was cast before Stalin had emerged from his relative obscurity. Much of the blame lies with Social Democrats and the Zinovievites, who, whatever the rhetoric, opposed the syndicalists for all the wrong reasons. But the syndicalists also take some of the blame for their own sectarianism — Monatte himself was surely wrong not to join the PCF at its foundation and fight within it at a time when he could have had a real influence (as did his friend Marcel Martinet). At a time when regroupment between different currents of the left is again on the agenda, it is important to learn from this period.
Monatte had no personal ambitions, and returned to work as a proof-reader (in the 1940s he read the proofs of Sartre’s Being and Nothingness). He never shared Rosmer’s hopes in Trotskyism, and devoted the rest of his life to La Révolution prolétarienne. A journal which had contributors such as Monatte, Rosmer and Louzon was way above the general run of left-wing papers, but although La Révolution prolétarienne admirably held together its basic core, it never recruited from a new generation, and its impact on the broader labour movement was negligible.
Chambelland entitles her last chapter Neither Stalinism nor Reformism. Like others, Monatte tried to walk the narrow line of independence from both Washington and Moscow. Certainly many of his judgements may be questioned — for example, his support for the American-financed Force ouvrière breakaway from the CGT, or his description of Russia as ‘red fascism’. But on the essentials he never wavered. At his funeral, in Gaullist France in 1960, while the Algerian war still raged, there were two wreaths from family and friends — and a sheaf of flowers from an Algerian workers’ union. This was not a man who had made his peace with imperialism.
 



Yvan Craipeau
Mémoires d’un dinosaure trotskyste
L’Harmattan, Paris 1999, pp. 360, FF 180
NOT far from his ninetieth birthday, Yvan Craipeau has published an autobiography that is full of wit, insight and sheer enthusiasm for life. Despite the repeated batterings on the head he received in anti-fascist demonstrations, Craipeau retains a lively memory for concrete detail. Like other veterans of the movement, he shows that revolutionary Socialism is a better antidote to the ageing process than any drug on the market.
Craipeau has lived a varied life, and there are many sections of the book – his childhood in rural France, his marriages and children, his experiences teaching in Guadeloupe – that are a delight to read. However, for the purposes of this review, I shall assume that Revolutionary History readers are narrow-minded philistines, and will concentrate on the sections most likely to interest them, those on French Trotskyism in the 1930s and 1940s.
Craipeau was first drawn to Trotskyism as a teenager through reading Trotsky. When in 1929, he first made contact with the organisation, he was shocked to discover that since the French Trotskyists saw themselves as a faction of the Communist Party, he was expected to join the PCF. (‘These heretics see salvation only in the Church that is driving them out.’) However, he rapidly recovered from his surprise and spent the summer of 1930 building Communist Youth sections in the Vendée; the PCF youth was in decline and the party was unwilling to call a conference for the Atlantic region because the Trotskyists would have had a majority. It could not last, and he was expelled – but the bureaucracy was only able to win a vote for his expulsion by threatening that all those who voted against would themselves be excluded. Craipeau’s account is a reminder that the Stalinisation of the PCF was not such a smooth process as might appear in retrospect.
But the Trotskyist movement also had its problems; Craipeau arrived at around the time of the dispute between Rosmer and Molinier. He recalls Rosmer as seeming ‘unbelievably old’ (he was in his early 50s). Craipeau sided with Molinier, whose dynamism he admired, in the disputes with Naville. He gives a vivid account of Molinier’s driving, as impatient as the rest of his politics, which made ‘every journey an adventure’. But even Craipeau drew the line at one of Molinier’s stratagems. The Trotskyists were giving shelter to a very young Greek woman who had fled repression in her native country; she was a leading figure in the Archeiomarxist group. Since Molinier was anxious to win influence with the Archeiomarxists, he proposed that Craipeau should sleep with the young woman.
At a time when the extreme right was on the rise, violence was common, and Craipeau gives some vivid descriptions of street-fighting. Often the tactics employed were provocative. Thus a single comrade would be sent out into the streets of the Latin Quarter to distribute violently anti-fascist leaflets. This would attract a crowd of fascists who were then attacked by the Young Leninists, armed with iron bars, who had been waiting in hiding. Earlier, in 1931, the Trotskyists had invaded the notorious Colonial Exhibition and smashed various precious exhibits to protest at repression in Indochina.
But it was not all activism. By the mid-1930s, Craipeau had rejected the view that Russia was in any sense a ‘workers’ state’, and saw it as a new form of exploitative society, in no way progressive in comparison with capitalism. (Craipeau now accepts the state capitalist analysis.) He was strongly influenced by the writings of Ciliga, and claims to have anticipated the work of Rizzi. He claims that in 1937 about one-third of the members of the POI held his position.
At the outbreak of war, Craipeau was in the Pivertist PSOP, which effectively disintegrated. A small group of Trotskyists met in Paris and drew up a leaflet about the declaration of war. Barta (the grandfather of Lutte ouvrière) was assigned to get this printed in large numbers. He failed to do anything about it, and the others voted for his expulsion.
Though Craipeau says little new about the politics of Trotskyism under the German Occupation, he gives some lively stories of activity in clandestine conditions, including the time he escaped the Gestapo by hitting one of them on the chin with the Complete Works of Oscar Wilde.
Craipeau describes the situation in Paris at the Liberation, when the Trotskyist leadership was claiming that soviets were being established under Trotskyist leadership. In fact, Trotskyists comrades did hold leading rôles in the workers’ militias in several factories, but they had not ‘come out’ politically, so their influence was limited.
Nonetheless, Craipeau argues that the potential for the Trotskyist movement in the immediate postwar years was substantial. In the autumn of 1946, Craipeau fell only 300 votes short of being elected as the first Trotskyist member of parliament in France. In 1947, Craipeau argues, there was a real possibility of fusion between the Trotskyist PCI and two left splits from the SFIO, leading to a party of some 10,000 members. But the Craipeau leadership was replaced by a ‘sectarian’ alliance of Frank and Lambert, and the merger came to nothing. Of course, this is Craipeau’s account, and others might be less optimistic about the prospects. Nonetheless, this is clearly a period which deserves closer study.
Craipeau now abandoned the Trotskyist movement, but he remained active in left-wing politics for another three decades. He describes some colourful incidents, such as the time when he – literally – kicked Pierre Lambert downstairs. He was active in the Nouvelle gauche in 1954 and the Union de la Gauche socialiste in 1957. In the latter, in the aftermath of Hungary, he launched the slogan: ‘The UGS opens its doors to all Communists who have ceased to be Stalinists, but not to Stalinists who have ceased to be Communists.’ In 1960, he was involved in the founding of the Parti socialiste unifié; he recalls the leadership voting unanimously to reject one application for membership – from a certain François Mitterrand.
Craipeau’s memory may be fallible, and his account certainly needs to be checked against the available documentation. But his autobiography is an invaluable contribution to the history of French Trotskyism; it is also an enthralling and enjoyable read.
 



I first met Chris Harman in the spring of 1963, in Peter Sedgwick’s attic. [1] We had gone to Liverpool for a meeting of the Young Socialist paper Young Guard. There had been a danger that control of the paper would pass from the International Socialists (IS) to various orthodox Trotskyists, but we won the vote. Long-forgotten froth of far-left factionalism. But not entirely so. Young Guard had real influence in the Labour Party Young Socialists, and through it what had been the tiny Socialist Review Group, with less than 40 members, grew by 1964 to a couple of hundred comrades, the people who went on to take advantage of the industrial upturn of the mid-60s and then the upheavals of 1968.
Chris had become politically active in Watford while still at school. [2] He was involved in an independent left youth group formed after the 1959 election by people with a range of left wing views, but distrustful of the Labour Party. [3] There were contacts with the New Left; on an Aldermaston CND March he bought a copy of International Socialism and assumed that such a well-produced journal must be the product of a large organisation. Subsequently Tony Cliff was invited to speak. Chris’s ideas were still in flux – he thought Russia was state capitalist, but that Poland and Cuba were socialist.
In autumn 1961 he went to Leeds University where he teamed up with Mike Heym. He joined the Socialist Review Group, which became IS the following year. Building a branch was not easy in Leeds, where the Communist Party was still strong, and the Socialist Labour League (forerunner of the Workers Revolutionary Party) was also influential. They sold Young Guard, International Socialism and Socialist Review. Cliff came to Leeds about twice a year to speak.
In 1964 Chris came to do a PhD at the London School of Economics (LSE). Here he began to develop as a significant student leader. He played a major part in the LSE occupation of 1967 when disciplinary action was taken against students protesting at the appointment of a collaborator with the Rhodesian racist regime as LSE director. This marked the beginning of the student movement in Britain.
At the same time Chris was active on the editorial board of Labour Worker, forerunner of Socialist Worker. There were not many of us and there could be no question of specialising. We all had to turn our hand to whatever was required. Chris began to acquire his enormous breadth of knowledge and interests. In the first few months of 1965 he wrote on the witch-hunt of Communists in the engineering union, on incomes policy and on the United Nations. [4] He later wrote, as “our mining correspondent”, a sharp critique of a Communist Party pamphlet on the future of the mining industry. [5] He refused to use his name “in case I ever meet a miner”. The following year he wrote a major piece on the tenth anniversary of the Hungarian Revolution. The next month the paper carried a letter from a Hungarian émigré stating that “even a Hungarian who witnessed those days could not have given a more detailed and better informed account of the uprising”. [6]
It was not all writing. In July 1966 a demonstration against the Vietnam War was attacked by police. A number of those arrested were charged with assaulting the police and “possessing an offensive weapon”, that is, a placard on a stick! Some were jailed. However, Chris managed to turn the tables. “With a well-briefed lawyer and able witnesses he received merely a fine. On the basis of previous case law the offensive weapon charge was dropped”. [7] He thus helped to establish that a placard was not an offensive weapon.
It was partly as a result of Chris’s intervention at a meeting of the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign in the summer of 1967 that the first big Grosvenor Square demonstration in October 1967 was organised. [8]
Then came 1968. This was a crucial turning-point for the International Socialists. [9] Chris, still only 25 years old, established himself as an indispensable part of the leadership. From 1964 to his death he was always a member of the leading body of the organisation under the various names of Working Committee, Executive Committee and Central Committee.
There is a wonderful description of Chris at the LSE in 1968:
“We have to be absolutely clear about this,” said Chris Harman from the platform of the LSE Old Theatre, as he always said when starting a speech. A groan went round the theatre and Harman brandished his moped crash helmet. “We must be quite clear what’s happening. 1968 is a year of international revolution no less than 1793, 1830, 1848, 1917 and 1936. We are experiencing the re-birth of the international Marxist movement after over 30 years of defeat and hibernation.” The audience of prematurely hard-bitten student lefties gathered to inaugurate the Revolutionary Socialist Students Federation looked impressed. Harman, although fairly widely disliked, was also widely respected as a Marxist intransigent. When he started evoking the Paris Commune, the Russian Revolution, the Barcelona uprising, he meant it. Militants were to be seen conferring about what did actually happen in 1830. [10]
In 2008 I chaired a meeting where Chris spoke on the legacy of 1968. In private conversation he commented sourly – but alas prophetically – that the reason why the fortieth anniversary was being commemorated was that most of us would be dead by the fiftieth. But in speaking he defended the spirit of 1968 as passionately as he had done four decades earlier. His book The Fire Last Time is a powerful record of the origins and impact of that legendary year. [11] It’s now fashionable for bright young journalists to sneer at 1968. Chris centred his account on class struggle and separated the serious issues of human liberation from the trivia of lifestyle. “May 1968” was not about “student riots”, as is often ignorantly repeated, but the biggest general strike in human history. Yet he never forgot the cultural dimension, above all with references to his beloved Bob Dylan, who provided a couple of chapter titles.
As the euphoria of 1968 began to subside, new arguments emerged. Chris, with his concern for clarity, sometimes lost friends. A notorious example was the memorial meeting for Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh, who died in September 1969. An eyewitness describes Chris’s contribution:
He addressed the meeting with a certain lack of style but no more than one would expect and proceeded in fairly forthright terms. He dealt first with Ho Chi Minh’s contribution to the world revolutionary movement ...
After a while Harman proceeded to get on to the question of Ho Chi Minh’s contribution to killing off the Trotskyist movement in North and South Vietnam. He expanded on various themes and pointed out that from the International Socialists’ point of view, though they supported fully the Vietnamese people’s struggle against American imperialism and had done a great deal practically in Britain on this theme, it was crucial to realise that Ho Chi Minh and the regime he had headed were not the answer to North Vietnam or Vietnam as a whole and what was eventually necessary was a workers’ republic which would have to get rid of the present set-up. This went almost unnoticed by the audience ... Anyway, Harman finished his speech and a lady aged about 55 to 60 got up and marched to the front and said that it was absolutely outrageous that people should just sit there and vegetate when somebody had just made a totally slanderous attack on the leader of the Vietnamese Revolution who had just died. Whereupon there was thunderous applause from the 60 percent of the audience who weren’t in IS. Harman looked slightly surprised and slightly grieved and slightly pleased by the reaction to his address. Tariq Ali looked very unhappy indeed because he could see his meeting falling apart in front of him. At the back of the hall a Maoist shouted “Washington spy!” at Chris Harman, which seemed to please him further. The audience now became somewhat heated. [12]
Chris had not quite finished with the academic world. In 1968–69 he was employed teaching social science at Enfield College of Technology (one of the forerunner colleges of Middlesex University). His contract was not renewed. He told me recently that he had been contacted by Eric Robinson, the head of department responsible for his dismissal, who had read Chris’s A People’s History of the World and now regretted his decision. Chris replied thanking him for liberating him from the academic world.
Chris had no patience with the division of labour which characterises the academic profession. Was he an economist, a sociologist, a historian, a political scientist or a philosopher? His work spread cheerfully over a range of disciplines. Ask an academic historian a question, and often you will be told, “It’s not my period.” To the author of A People’s History of the World, such professional demarcations were an utter irrelevance.
Chris was an “organic intellectual” in Gramsci’s sense of the term. [13] It should be remembered that when Chris wrote his review of John M. Cammett’s book on Gramsci in 1968 (IS1: 32) the Italian Marxist was little known in Britain, other than through the dubious interpretations of Stalinists or the New Left Review team. Chris was one of the first British writers to point to Gramsci’s importance; later he would vigorously defend the revolutionary content of Gramsci’s work as against the Eurocommunist misrepresentation that it pointed to the abandonment of class politics (IS1: 98/99).
1968 unleashed new waves of struggle around the globe, and a new internationalism was born. Chris embarked on one of the activities that would continue for the rest of his life – travelling abroad to meet socialist activists, to discuss with them and to learn from them. At Easter 1969 he attended an international seminar on socialism and revolution organised by students at Prague University while Czechoslovakia was still under Russian occupation (SW 26/4/1969). There is a memorable description of Chris’s intervention by the writer John Berger:
A political activist from London described the daily struggle in British factories to resist anti-trade-unionist legislation and his group’s long-term aim of creating workers’ councils to act as soviets. Could some of the lessons they had learned apply to the Czech situation? His was the longest and most passionate speech, which remained uninterrupted. After it a Czech student remarked, “Do you know what most of us would reply to all that you have just said? We’d ask you whether you had read Dostoyevsky’s The Possessed.” The activist, who had held the floor with such force, shook his head – not to answer “No”: he had surely read it – but as though to free his face from a mesh of cobwebs into which he had mysteriously and inadvertently walked. [14]
In September 1970 he was in Jordan when the government attacked Palestinian organisations and began to drive them out of the country. Socialist Worker carried a front-page lead by “Chris Harman just returned from Amman” which described how “the shells have been tearing apart the corrugated iron huts, tents and crude concrete dwellings where the refugees somehow eke out an existence. Whole blocks of flats have been blown apart in order to ‘flush out’ a single sniper” (SW 26/9/1970).
By now he had become a full-time worker for the party; he remained one for the rest of his life. Although his main work was on publications, he also took a close interest in day to day activity. George Paizis, an old comrade from the LSE, joined IS in 1970 and rapidly became North London District Secretary. He recalls: “Chris helped me a lot. He was on the end of the phone every day, whenever I needed him. He would listen to all my questions and suggestions and come up with ideas”. [15]
At the end of 1968 Chris took over as editor of International Socialism. Under Mike Kidron and Nigel Harris the journal had played a vital role in developing the IS analysis of the world. Now, with the rapid recruitment in 1968 and the turn to industrial struggle that followed, the journal had to be more directly oriented to party building. Chris’s article on Party and Class (IS1: 35) was an important contribution to the debate on democratic centralism that took place in the organisation during 1968; it has been frequently reproduced since. [16] A special issue devoted to Trotsky’s writings on fascism and the united front provided the foundation on which IS anti-fascist work was developed during the 1970s (IS1: 38/39). Three articles by Jim Higgins laid out the foundations of revolutionary tactics and strategy in the trade union movement (IS1: 45/46/47). Chris also saw the importance of the journal in developing a broader socialist culture. He published Peter Sedgwick’s remarkable article on Orwell (IS1: 37). I personally had several arguments with Chris in which he sharply attacked my enthusiasm for Sartre, arguing that Sartre was an apologist for Stalinism. Then, rather paradoxically, he urged me to write a defence of Sartre (IS1: 45/46). He was thus of enormous encouragement to me, as he must have been to many other comrades, in developing as a writer.
Chris relinquished the editorship at the end of 1971, but resumed it in September 1973. Again the journal, now a monthly, had to steer the organisation through a difficult period which saw the Chilean coup, the Middle East war, the end of the post-war boom and the intense industrial struggle culminating in the defeat of the Heath government. Chris’s contribution went far beyond what appeared under his own signature. The piece April Dream in Portugal published under my name was substantially rewritten by Chris with a number of additional passages (IS1: 69). I believe Towards a Rank and File Movement by Andreas Nagliatti (IS1: 66), which laid down the IS position on this important question, actually had a substantial input from Chris.
Chris also worked on Socialist Worker, then edited by Roger Protz. Roger had developed the weekly paper from a rather scruffy four-pager launched in 1968 to a well-designed 16-page paper. The Heath government of 1970–4 saw the biggest upturn in class struggle in Britain since the 1920s. In 1972 the Saltley Gates picket mobilised thousands of engineering workers in support of the miners; a few months later the threat of a general strike ensured the release of five dockers imprisoned under Heath’s anti-union laws. In 1974 a second miners’ strike led to the fall of the Heath government. Analysing the Communist Party’s role in recent industrial struggles (IS1: 63) Chris concluded that “in an increasing number of struggles, the CP as a party refuses to give a lead of any sort ... The short term aim of a revolutionary socialist organisation like IS must be to replace the CP as the main focus to which militants in industry look for a lead.”
At the same time came the overthrow of the dictatorship in Portugal and the start of a wave of mass workers’ struggle. Chris reacted to this from the very beginning, insisting that there was a pre-revolutionary situation in Portugal; often he seemed to be nagging comrades to urge us to do all we could to intervene. The next tumultuous 18 months proved him right. He visited Portugal more than once, to see things for himself, and to discuss with members of the Portuguese revolutionary left. However, Chris shared with Cliff the belief that the choice ahead was between socialist revolution and the return of the far right. In autumn 1975 he wrote in “Portugal: The Latest Phase” (IS1: 83), “There is no possibility of evading for more than a few months (at most) sharp, armed clashes between the classes.” He and Cliff both underestimated reformism, which in the shape of Mario Soares’s Socialist Party saved the system.
The 1970s were also stormy years inside the party. In 1974 Cliff made a number of demands for changes in Socialist Worker, which led to the removal of Roger Protz. Paul Foot took over, and then in 1975 Chris became editor. There were new challenges for the paper – the way in which the trade union bureaucracy had gone along with Labour’s “Social Contract”, the shift from major national strikes to smaller struggles like that by Asian women at Grunwicks for union rights, the rise of unemployment and the launch of the Right to Work Campaign, and the threat of racism and the far right. Chris supported Cliff’s policy of developing a paper not written for workers but substantially written by workers.
The argument over Socialist Worker led to a more general internal dispute, which at the end of 1975 led to the departure of not only Roger Protz, but other veteran leaders from the 60s like Jim Higgins and John Palmer, as well as a number of trade union activists, notably in Birmingham. Chris sided with Cliff throughout this dispute. [17]
So it must have been a shock to Chris when he in turn came into conflict with Cliff. In early 1978, with Cliff’s support, Chris was removed from the editorship and Socialist Worker was “relaunched”. The result came to be known as the “punk paper”. The aim, to relate to the new audience around the rapidly growing Anti Nazi League, was laudable. The means employed, a paper with more coverage of sport and music, and even a soap opera style serial, but with diluted politics, and less coverage of the – admittedly quiescent – industrial struggle, were more questionable. That summer a conference of the Socialist Workers Party (SWP), as the organisation was now known, voted to reject the new orientation of the paper. The four journalists primarily responsible – Paul Foot, Jim Nichol, Laurie Flynn and Pete Marsden – resigned. Chris was restored to the editorship, but within days Cliff manoeuvred to ensure that he was forced to stand down again. [18] Cliff himself then assumed the editorship.
Not surprisingly, Chris found this “disturbing”, but he viewed the situation positively. He could now do what he felt necessary to build the organisation without having to consult with Cliff twice a week. He had to think for himself. [19]
Chris was effectively marginalised within his own organisation. He was still under 40 and had an impressive record of publications. He could easily have returned to the academic world, and achieved much greater comfort and prosperity for the last 30 years of his life. I don’t think the possibility even crossed his mind. He was totally devoted to the party and to socialist principles.
At the beginning of 1979 he wrote a remarkable article entitled The Crisis of the European Revolutionary Left (IS2: 4). This analysed the problems faced by revolutionaries in various parts of Europe and was an important complement to ideas Cliff was developing about the downturn, raising major questions about how the party should reorient to a changing situation. Looking back on the early 1970s Chris noted that “the expectations of the revolutionary left look absurd in retrospect”, and argued that “In a downturn in the class struggle, it is the duty of revolutionary organisations to relate to all sorts of movements that develop outside the workplaces among oppressed and exploited groups. But it has to do this while never forgetting that the agent of revolutionary change lies elsewhere ... the link with the working class movement has to be an active one, not merely a rhetorical one.”
At the end of 1979 he became editor of Socialist Review, a position he described as a “consolation prize”. Socialist Review had been launched the previous year, also to relate to the ANL milieu. Its first issues had been lively but somewhat chaotic. Chris transformed the magazine into an important educational tool for the party as the ascent of Thatcherism made life a lot more difficult for revolutionaries.
Throughout this period Chris had been turning out not only a flood of journalistic writing, but some much more substantial contributions to Marxist understanding. [20] Cliff’s work on state capitalism had been at the centre of Chris’s intellectual work since the early 60s [21], but he did not simply parrot Cliff’s conclusions. Rather he produced a number of important pieces which complemented Cliff’s work.
In 1967, for the fiftieth anniversary of the Russian Revolution, Chris had written How the Revolution Was Lost (IS1: 30), frequently reproduced as a pamphlet. Cliff in his book on Russia had given an account of the structures of Russian state capitalism. What was missing was an account of the origins of the system. This was an important question since Cliff – unlike other theorists of state capitalism – had always defended Bolshevism and denied that Leninism led to Stalinism. Chris’s carefully argued account showed how the revolution had been defeated.
In 1974 came his first book, Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe. [22] This was in a sense the sequel to Cliff’s 1952 book Stalin’s Satellites in Europe. Cliff had shown how the Eastern European Stalinist states had come into existence. Chris’s account showed the internal contradictions that became ever more visible. Cliff had argued that Stalinism produced its own gravedigger, the working class. Chris gave a vivid narrative account of how workers had fought back, in East Germany in 1953, Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968. The revised edition under the title Class Struggle in Eastern Europe took the story forward to Poland in 1980 and the rise of Solidarity. [23] The epilogue came in 1990 with Chris’s article The Storm Breaks (IS2: 46), where he argued that the collapse of “Communism” was “neither a step forward nor a step backwards, but a step sidewards [sic]”.
Asked if the failure of the Russian Revolution had been inevitable, IS members would reply that the revolution failed because it did not spread, that if the German Revolution had succeeded things would have been different. But most of us had only the haziest idea of what actually happened in Germany in 1918–23. Chris’s The Lost Revolution (1982) provided a readable and concrete account of the process. He drew on Pierre Broué’s monumental study [24] (only available in English in 2004) and on a range of German-language sources. [25]
The German Revolution raised many questions of strategy and tactics – ultra-leftism, the united front, the call for a “workers’ government”, etc. It is doubtful if an academic with no practical experience of revolutionary organisation could have written the book. Take, for example, Chris’s account of the crisis in the first year of the German Communist Party. A large section of the membership held wildly ultra-left positions, such as refusal to participate in elections and to work in the trade unions. Such positions were a serious problem for the party, limiting its capacity to intervene and to recruit widely in the working class. The party leadership forced confrontation and lost half the membership. As Chris wrote:
The party leadership would have done better to have pushed through its own policies at the congress and then taken on and removed the most irreconcilable opposition figures in the localities one at a time – especially since in the months that followed it became clear that different forms of impatience were driving the different oppositionists in completely different directions. [26]
Chris was doubtless thinking of his own experience at the LSE and of the rapid recruitment of revolutionary students into IS in the aftermath of 1968. [27]
In spring 1982 Chris returned to the editorship of Socialist Worker, a post he would keep for the next 22 years. It was a bleak time. Thatcher was on the attack, and the level of resistance was low. The SWP had decided to wind up its rank and file trade union groups and the Right to Work Campaign. Tony Benn’s attempt to rally the Labour left had passed its peak. Now Thatcher was fanning the flames of nationalism with the Falklands war, which gave Chris what he later called a “golden opportunity” to reorient the paper. There were organisational problems too, and initially Chris was spending 60 to 80 hours a week on editing.
Through two decades Chris steered the paper through a long downturn punctuated with occasional sharp rises in the level of struggle, trying to neither miss opportunities nor arouse false hopes. Again he was a central figure in the leadership; his quarrel with Cliff was made up. He was a regular speaker at meetings around the country. Though never as impressive an orator as Cliff or Paul Foot, he was a lucid speaker whose talks had a powerful intellectual content.
Throughout the 12 months of the miners’ strike it was the central question in Socialist Worker. From 10 March 1984 to 9 March 1985 every issue of Socialist Worker but one had a front-page lead on the strike. In the early months the paper concentrated on proposing strategies which could enable the strike to achieve victory. As it became a long war of attrition, Socialist Worker focused more on the need to build solidarity with a defensive struggle. Even in the last week of the strike Socialist Worker headlined Fight On, and argued that “staying out remains the only way to ensure a settlement which will keep the union intact ... and ready to fight off future attacks” (SW 2/3/1985). The paper never admitted that defeat was inevitable until the hard core of militant miners themselves accepted the reality.
Chris was a theoretician as well as a journalist, and this helped him to guide the paper through difficult situations. After the poll tax riot in 1990 there was a virulent press witch-hunt against “anarchists” alleged to be responsible for the violence. Socialist Worker responded with an editorial headed No Wonder They Fight Back, seeing the riot as a response to unemployment, student poverty and police harassment. “Of course no socialist believes rioting will beat the poll tax, but neither should any socialist condemn the howl of rage which filled the fashionable West End last Saturday.” Doubtless Chris remembered what he himself had written about the March Action in Germany in 1921. [28] There was a constant interaction between theory and practice.
In autumn 1992, when the Tories announced a programme of pit closures, Socialist Worker headlined General Strike Now! (SW 24/10/1992). This was not a rush of blood to Chris’s head, but resulted from the fact that the paper had a network of organisers and supporters throughout the country, and was able to respond to the mood of anger within the working class movement.
The revolutionary hopes which we had shared in the aftermath of 1968 had evaporated, but Chris continued to use the paper as an organiser and an educator, preparing the new cadres who would respond to whatever opportunities the years ahead might bring. Chris gave particular attention to developing a team of journalists. Among many tributes that appeared after his death, there were several from journalists who had worked with him.
Kevin Ovenden recalled that:
Chris had a rare gift for crystallising a nuanced political position or difficult concept into a few, vivid words of plain English ... The effort he expended, and made those of us working on the paper sweat over too, to make even a single headline accurately capture a complex reality and cut through it, was an indication of how seriously he took the task of communicating our tradition to a mass audience.  
Hazel Croft remembered him “bringing editorial meetings down to earth by insisting that the paper covered the hardships and concerns of its working class readers”. [29]
In the 1978 dispute Chris and Paul Foot had been bitterly opposed, but Chris never let personal grudges interfere with his political judgment. In 1984 he persuaded Paul to write a weekly column for Socialist Worker, saying, “We’ll like it, but that’s not the point. It will do you good.” [30]
In 1994 Chris wrote an important article on Islamic fundamentalism, The Prophet and the Proletariat (IS2: 64). Beginning with the Marxist analysis of religion, Chris set out to give a detailed account of the social context which produced Islamism, with extensive examples from Egypt, Algeria, Iran and Sudan. He also made a creative application of Tony Cliff’s theory of deflected permanent revolution. Stressing the contradictory nature of Islamism, he concluded:
The left has made two mistakes in relation to the Islamists in the past. The first has been to write them off as fascists, with whom we have nothing in common. The second has been to see them as “progressives” who must not be criticised.
He urged socialists to aim to “win some of the young people who support it [Islamism] to a very different, independent, revolutionary socialist perspective”. [31]
Chris’s most substantial work came in 1999 with his massive A People’s History of the World. [32] It contained a vast amount of information on different periods and topics, but was given its focus by the consistent attempt to apply the Marxist method to the whole of human history. Chris drew on a lifetime’s breadth of reading, but he also needed to fill the gaps with intense labour. Though carrying on with his editing and general political duties, he managed to get to the British Library a couple of times a week, where, as he once told me during a hurried lunch, he read four books in a day.
With its attention to detail it was a valuable educational resource, which helped to give revolutionary activists, constantly caught up in the short-term preoccupation with the next paper sale, a sense of their place in the long sweep of human history. Despite its title, this was not the “history from below” much promoted in the late 20th century. Certainly Chris opened his account with some lines from Brecht:



Who built Thebes of the seven gates?
In the books you will find the names of kings.
Did the kings haul up the lumps of rock?



Human history could not have happened without the labour of nameless millions. But for Chris it was equally important to grasp history from above, to understand how our rulers have ruled us, so that we can learn how to overthrow them. Academic specialists may find errors in the treatment of particular periods and countries, but few academics would have dared to take on such an ambitious venture.
The new century brought enormous new opportunities with the post-Seattle anti-capitalist movement and then the anti-war movement. As Chris wrote in Anti-Capitalism: Theory and Practice (IS2: 88):
Hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions of people are beginning, for the first time, to challenge the global system ... No one can dictate what they think and how their ideas develop. But that does not mean there are not arguments over ideas, or that any of us should abstain from those arguments ... It is up to all of us to help build the new movement – and to help it to learn to deal with these issues.
In 2004 he retired from Socialist Worker and again became editor of International Socialism, which he had first edited 35 years earlier. The new period also produced problems, and with the Respect debacle the party went through a difficult patch, which Chris analysed in his article The Crisis in Respect (IS2: 117).
Just after his remarkable appearance before a committee of the US Senate in 2005, George Galloway addressed a packed rally in the Friends Meeting House in London where he was, quite justifiably, greeted with enormous enthusiasm. In the course of his account Galloway mentioned that while waiting to appear he had smoked a Cuban cigar. This produced a spontaneous wave of applause. I felt no obligation to endorse Fidel Castro’s export trade; glancing around the hall I saw that Chris too was sitting with his hands calmly folded. A principled gesture or a reversion to the sectarian habits of our 1960s youth?
Revolutionaries have a double duty: to encourage the maximum possible unity in struggle and to seek the greatest possible clarity in understanding the situation. Did Chris always achieve the correct balance? Perhaps not. But he had absolutely nothing in common with those whose only response to new initiatives is to stand back and predict failure – the ultimate soft option. Right up to his death Chris remained an indispensable figure in the SWP leadership.
Chris had a broad range of cultural interests, and one reason among so many for lamenting his untimely death is that he was never able to develop these in writing. As John Rose reminds us (SW 10/11/2009), he had a great admiration for Flaubert’s novel Sentimental Education, which depicted the 1848 revolution in France. A critical study by Chris would have been enthralling.
He also had a surprisingly wide knowledge of popular culture. I remember him intervening in a discussion on Walter Benjamin with a reference to the Honeycombs. [33] Only sport eluded him. Last year at a book launch for Dave Renton’s C.L.R. James: Cricket’s Philosopher King he appalled many of his own comrades by arguing that James’s writings on cricket were no more significant than a Labour MP professing to be an Arsenal supporter.
The last discussion I had with Chris was during the lunch break at an SWP day school on Lenin, just five days before he died. Referring to Althusser’s claim that Marxism is not about human happiness but about “a change in the mode of production” [34], I asked him if he thought socialism was about happiness. He frowned at me, clearly feeling the question was too complex for my simplistic formulation, and said, “It depends what you mean by happiness.” We had no time to pursue the question, and now I shall never know what he thought. I do know that few people compare to Chris in the way he devoted his life and his powerful intellect to the struggle for a fairer and happier world.
* * *
Notes
1. In order to prevent this article drowning in footnotes I have given sources in the text; SW indicates Socialist Worker and IS1: and IS2: the two series of International Socialism. A collection of Chris’s writings, which will be expanded, is on the Marxist Internet Archive at >www.marxists.org/archive/harman/index.htm. Other pieces, at the time of writing not on the MIA, can be found on Chris’s own website >http://chrisharman.blogspot.com/. There are also items on the two International Socialism and Socialist Review websites, >www.isj.org.uk/ and >www.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/. Since most readers are probably more adept than I am at navigating the internet, I shall leave it to them to locate the material.
2. Some of this account is based on a two-hour interview I did with Chris in April 2009.
3. Loosely connected with the similar group in Newcastle described in Charlton, 2009.
4.Labour Worker, Mid-January 1965, 1 April 1965, Mid-April 1965.
5. Labour Worker, September 1965.
6. Labour Worker, November, December 1966.
7. Labour Worker, 5 August 1966.
8. Harman, 1988, p. 149.
9. See my article Seizing the Time: Tony Cliff and 1968 (IS2: 118).
10. Widgery, 1976, p. 341. Widgery notes that he is quoting contemporary personal diaries, including his own, so it is not clear whether this was observed by Widgery himself or one of his friends.
11. Harman, 1988.
12. Widgery, 1976, p. 414. Again it is not clear who was actually the author of this account.
13. Gramsci distinguished “traditional” intellectuals – such as academics who claim to be autonomous of the class struggle – from “organic” intellectuals who act directly on behalf of one of the contending classes.
14. Berger, 1972, p. 241. Chris is not named, but the description is unmistakable to anyone who knew him at that time.
15. Interview with George Paizis, October 2008.
16. Since Chris is sometimes seen as merely a disciple of Cliff it is worth noting that this article contained criticisms of Cliff’s views on both Lenin and Luxemburg. In particular Chris dissented from Cliff’s formulation in Rosa Luxemburg that “for Marxists in the advanced industrial countries, Lenin’s original position can much less serve as a guide than Rosa Luxemburg’s”, a formulation which Cliff changed in the edition of Rosa Luxemburg issued shortly after Chris’s article. (See Cliff 2001, p. 113 for the text of the changes.) Influence was not all one way.
17. In Jim Higgins’s account Chris is depicted as the archetypal Cliff loyalist, whose role was to produce “the justification for Cliff’s latest wheeze” – Higgins, 1997, p. 116. Jim felt somewhat threatened by the younger generation, and though he was only twelve years older than Chris he used to refer to him as “the boy”.
18. For a detailed account by a participant see Steve Jefferys, The politics behind the row on the paper, in the Steve Jefferys Archive, Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick, MSS.244/2/1/2.
19. Interview with Chris, April 2009. Chris gave his own account of the dispute in his article The Revolutionary Press (IS2: 24).
20. I’ve only mentioned a small part of Chris’s enormous output. Many readers will be indignant that I have omitted their favourite article or pamphlet. To cover everything would require an article four times as long which would have read like a bibliography rather than an appreciation.
21. Chris’s major contributions in the field of political economy are dealt with in Joseph Choonara’s piece in this issue.
22. Harman, 1974.
23. Harman, 1983.
24. Broué, 2004.
25. Chris had a remarkable capacity for reading foreign languages. At speaking he was not so successful. Though he had read Althusser in the original, when I visited France with him I had to ask where the toilet was on his behalf.
26. Harman, 1982, p153.
27. Broué’s account of this episode is far more sympathetic to the manoeuvres of the KPD leadership-Broué, 2004, pp. 317–321.
28. Harman, 1982, pp. 192–220.
29. See >http://tinyurl.com/yazcyc6.
30. Foot, 1990, p. xv.
31. The journalist Nick Cohen quite disgracefully added the word “secretly” to this sentence in order to give it a meaning diametrically opposed to Chris’s intention – Cohen 2007.
32. Harman, 1999.
33. The first band with a female drummer to reach Number One (August 1964).
34. Sartre, Gavi and Victor, 1974, p. 197.
* * *
References
Berger, John, 1972, Selected Essays and Articles (Penguin).
Broué, Pierre, 2004, The German Revolution, 1917–1923 (Brill).
Charlton, John, 2009, Don’t You Hear the H-bombs Thunder? (North East Labour History/Merlin).
Cliff, Tony, 2001, Selected Writings: Volume One (Bookmarks), Rosa Luixemburg, Note.
Cohen, Nick, 2007, What’s Left?: How Liberals Lost Their Way (Fourth Estate).
Foot, Paul, 1990, Words as Weapons (Verso).
Harman, Chris, 1974, Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe (Pluto).
Harman, Chris, 1982, ">The Lost Revolution (Bookmarks).
Harman, Chris, 1983, Class Struggles in Eastern Europe 1945–1983 (Pluto).
Harman, Chris, 1988, The Fire Last Time: 1968 and After (Bookmarks).
Harman, Chris, 1999, A People’s History of the World (Bookmarks).
Higgins, Jim, 1997, More Years for the Locust (IS Group).
Sartre, Jean-Paul, Philippe Gavi and Pierre Victor, 1974, On a Raison de se Révolter (Gallimard).
Widgery, David, 1976, The Left in Britain 1956–1968 (Penguin).
 



Simon Turner (SR 1980:3) is quite right to suggest that current SWP policy on trades councils is haphazard; such work is largely left to the initiative of individuals with even district committees, let alone the national organisation, offering minimal guidance. Unfortunately Simon is wrong about just about everything else.
I think few of us who have worked regularly on trades councils think in terms of the 1926 experience; our concerns are much more pragmatic. An area with an effective trades council, which can at least provide communication between various sectors, and on occasion take initiatives, is better off than an area which has no such organisation. It is SWP policy to ‘defend our unions’, to develop and strengthen all meaningful forms of trade union organisation. Trades council work must be put in this context.
Simon is correct to say that the level of trades council activity varies enormously; that some councils are important, others irrelevant. But to put it like this is fatalistic. The experience – confirmed by all the reports published in Socialist Review – is that what makes the difference will be a small group of activists prepared to carry the burdens. In an ideal world, of course, trades councils would be personed by honest, dynamic and efficient left reformists, who would lick the stamps and duplicate the minutes; SWP comrades would conserve their valuable energies in order to inject the politics and fight for the correct line. (But then in an ideal world we wouldn’t need trades councils anyway.)
My own experience is of becoming a delegate to an almost totally moribund trades council. When I first started to attend, the average attendance was seven, with at least half of pensionable age, and the sole activity was listening to the secretary reading word by word through the correspondence received from the TUC. During the nurses’ dispute in 1974 I made the modest proposal that we write to branches inviting them to take whatever action they saw fit in support of the nurses. I was told that such interference in disputes was not permitted.
The first breakthrough came when we merged with the other trades council in the borough. (This should have happened at the time of the local government reorganisation in 1964, but we only got round to it in 1975.) The merger was opposed by one of the more long-standing members on the grounds that, ‘We were due to meet them twelve years ago to discuss that, but it was snowing, and none of them turned up.’
What the merger meant was that a small group of people – CP, LP, SWP – came together who were committed to trying to make the trades council a more relevant and interventionist body. An SWP member became president and an active and efficient CPer the secretary.
The achievement was limited and modest; we raised money for local disputes and sent delegations to pickets; we held two public meetings on the cuts and for a time circulated a cuts bulletin; we circulated to all branches for discussion a statement on the need for total opposition to the NF; we adopted a Chilean political prisoner and welcomed him to Britain when he was released (this got full-page spreads in the local press). That more was not done can be attributed partly to the general level of struggle, partly to the small number of activists. But at least a start was made; there is a potential for development as the situation changes.
The point is that nothing could have been done without the activists being involved in the procedural and bureaucratic aspects. ‘It is necessary to restructure the meetings, to farm out the boring routine correspondence to the executive so that trades council meetings could concentrate on major reports, speakers, local disputes and campaigns.’ To begin with we couldn’t even move that the trades council banner be sent on demonstrations because there was no banner to send; an SWP member (not me) had to do the sewing. To me the lesson of Bob Lloyd’s letter (SR 1980:4) on the bureaucratic entanglement of Oxford trades council is not the world-weary abstentionism he evokes, but rather the importance of fighting to win the chairpersonship.
The problem, then, is not one of seeking positions, but of doing jobs. It is futile our proposing that trades councils take on certain tasks unless we are prepared to make the effort to implement the decisions. If this means being elected secretary, minutes secretary or auditor, so be it.
Obviously there is a question of priorities. If a comrade has the choice between taking a meaningful position in the workplace, and doing trades council work, then it is obvious the former comes first. But many comrades, either because of their particular workplace situation, or because they are in a field of employment where the potential for militancy is limited, are available to do trades council work. The danger with Simon’s article is that it will discourage such comrades from seeking the possibilities, and allow them to take refuge in ultra-left justifications for the boredom and idleness that is natural to all of us.
After all, when comrades become revolutionary socialists, they accept, at least hypothetically, the possibilities of jail, torture, exile and death. Is a couple of hours boredom once a month too much to ask?



 


Ian Birchall
North London



 






The uprising in Kwangju has pushed South Korea into the news just as the 30th anniversary of the Korean war has come up. The regime sustained by American – and British – bayonets in that war has proved to be just as brutal now as it was then. 20 years of economic ‘development’ may have created large scale industry. But it has not wiped out poverty and oppression, which is why when students took to the streets they were joined by miners armed with dynamite.
South Korea’s rulers will be looking at the future with trepidation. Kwangju has occurred just as the world economic crisis is beginning to affect them and as they face intensified competition from other Asian economies such as Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan.
Meanwhile, across the 38th parallel in North Korea, any glee at the events in South Korea will be dampened by an awareness that their own industrialisation has depended upon loans from Western banks which are becoming more difficult to repay. Such difficulties led to the last five year plan being abandoned and must be worrying to North Korea’s rulers as they review the new world crisis.
But where did the two Koreas come from? And what was the war that was fought over the country 30 years ago? Ian Birchall looks at this murky episode in the first Cold War.



* * *
It is thirty years this month since the outbreak of the Korean War. The Korean War marked the most intense phase of the Cold War, and helped to launch the long post-war boom. It also produced McCarthyism in the linked States and the final rightward lurch of the 1945 British Labour government. Last but not quite least it precipitated a crisis in the depleted ranks of British Trotskyism which gave birth to the Socialist Review group, ancestor of the SWP. (Indeed, many Socialist Review readers have doubtless been harangued about their position on Korea, generally by youthful cadres who were not born until some years after the cease-fire). [1] As we enter a new phase of Cold War, an attempt to retrace the course of the Korean War may have some lessons for the present and the future. [2]
After many centuries of national independence, Korea was annexed by Japan in 1910, and remained under Japanese occupation until the end of the Second World War. Unlike China or Vietnam, Korea did not have a strong Communist tradition in the twenties and thirties. A Korean Communist Party was founded in 1921 by émigrés in Moscow, but by the following year it was in disarray; at the Fourth Congress of the Comintern in November 1922 Eberlein reported that four Koreans had arrived, but dissensions in the Party were so great that it was impossible to discover who were the delegates; two were admitted as guests and two turned away. A new Korean CP was founded in 1925, but by the Sixth Congress of the Comintern in 1928 its status was so unsure that its delegates received only guest tickets. The party was again revived in the 1930s, and Kim Il-Sung began to make his name as a guerrilla leader; however, Kim appears to have gone to Russia at some time between 1938 and 1942.
 
The Division of Korea
On August 14th, 1945, five days after the bombing of Nagasaki, Japan surrendered. The question of what was to be done with Japanese-occupied territories was now urgent. The main ‘spheres of influence’ into which the post-war world was to be divided had been settled at Yalta, but a number of loose ends remained. Korea was one; the USA had been angling for an international trusteeship (under US domination), and since this scheme had fallen through no clear alternative had been cobbled up. So, on August 4th, the US president, Harry Truman, issued General Order Number One, which specified that Japanese troops south of the 38th Parallel should surrender to the Americans, and those north of the line should surrender to the Russians. A copy of General Order Number One was sent to J.V. Stalin, for information. Stalin in fact seems to have been quite happy with the carve-up, for Russian troops had already entered Korea two days earlier, and US troops arrived in the country only on September 8th. For the time being Stalin was glad to play along with the West.
Thus the two Korean states came into existence; in the North, Kim Il-sung arrived wearing Russian uniform to head the government. Incidentally, the man who was sent away with a ruler and a pile of old maps to work out the best dividing line, and came back with the decision that it should be the 38th Parallel, was a bright young rising star called Dean Rusk, subsequently to be a hawkish US Secretary of State during the Vietnam War. (Those comrades who insist that ‘workers’ states’ can come into existence without the self-activity of the working class are prone to run into difficulties; but it is hard to think of a more grotesque notion than attributing the paternity of a ‘workers’ state’ to Dean Rusk).
At no point along the line were the Korean people actually consulted as to whether they wanted one or two states, let alone what form such states should take. In the South the US gave short shrift to the revolutionary committees which had emerged out of the anti-Japanese resistance; where necessary Japanese forces were used against them.
In the North the resistance was incorporated into a pro-Russian regime, which was consolidated by a land reform from which 700,000 families benefited; the land, however, remained state property; the peasants rented it from the state and paid it tax in kind. The North contained the major industry of Korea (mines, chemicals, power stations) with a working class estimated at quarter of a million in 1945; there is no evidence of it being mobilised. By 1947 Kim had established his political control after a faction fight with pro-Chinese elements in the Party.
In the South, the US military government established, in 1946, the quaintly named ‘Representative Democratic Council’, headed by Syngman Rhee, a seventy-year-old who had lived for thirty-seven years in the United States. His regime was based on landlords and other conservative groups, and delayed the progress of the land reform begun by the US Military government. Rhee’s government rapidly became unpopular; thousands of his opponents were jailed, and at one point a quarter of the country was under martial law. By 1947 a US-commissioned opinion poll showed that a majority of South Koreans thought they had been better off under the Japanese.
In 1947 the United Nations resolved that all foreign troops should withdraw from Korea. Russian forces had left by the end of 1948, but the US forces were asked to stay longer because of disturbances in the South Korean Constabulary, and they did not depart until June 1949. However, neither regime could be described as independent in any meaningful sense. Both originated, not from any popular movement or democratic process, but from the military intervention of the two leading world powers. Both continued to be armed by their superpower sponsors, and both owed their political credibility and their political loyalty to those same sponsors. Therefore in order to understand the outbreak of hostilities in June 1950 it is necessary to take a look at the overall picture of international relations at that date.
 
The Outbreak of War
The Cold War, which had begun in the spring of 1947, had reached something of a stalemate. The long-drawn-out Berlin blockade, from June 1948 to May 1949, had ended in a costly draw; further confrontation in Europe seemed futile. In the autumn of 1949 Russia had exploded its first atomic bomb, an important step towards the establishment of a nuclear balance of terror. In April 1950 US president Truman initialled a National Security Council paper which urged America to ‘undertake a massive rebuilding of its own and the free world’s defensive capabilities and adopt an unflinching “will to fight” posture towards its enemies.’ The proposed conclusion was a quadrupling of arms expenditure.
So, the post-war honeymoon between America and Russia had totally collapsed; neither side was capable or desirous of a total abandonment of the post-war ‘spheres of influence’, but both sides were ready to nibble around the edges, and if necessary to risk a trial of strength to see how far the other side would go. Obviously the Third World provided the most expendable territory and forces for such a trial of strength. It was in this context that both sides responded to the opportunities offered by Korea.
It is a disputed question as to how the Korean War actually began. While the US claim was that North Korea launched an unprovoked invasion of the South, pro-Russian sources claim the opposite. Certainly Rhee had made many threats to invade the North over the preceding two years, and he acquired a strong incentive for war by the catastrophic defeat of his supporters in the elections held at the end of May. However, the rapid military advantage gained by the North (which occupied almost the whole of the South within two months) suggests that the North was well-prepared for war, and that if the South did take the initiative, it was an inept and ill-advised one. From a revolutionary socialist point of view, however, the question as to who fired the first shot is a relatively minor one. What is at stake is the social nature of the regimes at war, and the way in which the major powers took up the issue.
The pro-Russian interpretation of the war has always been that, if Rhee did start the war, he did so in close collusion with the United States. The facts suggest that this is unlikely. The United States had not given great priority to Korea in the preceding period. Between 1948 and 1950 General Bradley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had put South Korea seventh on his priority list, with Europe at the head of the list. Nor was the US particularly well-prepared in military terms for the outbreak of war. As one pro-American historian records:
‘Apart from the disintegrating South Korean Army, the only forces immediately available to MacArthur lay in the four skeletonized American divisions garrisoning nearby Japan ... In the United States itself only one army division and part of one marine division were ready for immediate service, and these could not be shipped to Korea for some weeks.’ [3]
 
The aims of West and East
Yet the United States did see the war as demanding immediate and massive intervention. Part of the American motivation was the so-called ‘domino theory’ to be much cited during the Vietnam War. President Truman’s daughter recalls:
‘My father walked over to the globe in front of the fireplace and gave it a spin. “I’m more worried about other parts of the world,” he said. “The Middle East, for instance.” He put his finger on Iran, and said, “Here is where they will start trouble if we aren’t careful.”’ [4]
More important was the concern to retain the control over the Pacific won in the Second World War. The Chinese Revolution had obviously been a major set-back for the US in the Far East. But Chiang Kai-shek’s pre-revolutionary regime had been so corrupt and indefensible, and the terrain so vast, that no intervention had been possible. In both social and geographical terms, Korea seemed a better bet. The United States rapidly and fraudulently disguised itself as the United Nations, with token forces from Britain and other UN member-states in tow, and launched itself into the war.
Russia likewise seems to have been initially surprised by the outbreak of war. Russia was currently boycotting the UN Security Council in protest at the seating of the Chiang Kai-shek regime as the representative of China; it was this absence of Russia which allowed the US to get UN cover for its intervention in Korea, constituting at least a propaganda setback for Russia. Russia decided to keep out of direct involvement in the war, but gave unambiguous political and military backing to the North Korean regime.
In broader terms the Korean involvement fitted Russian strategy. Between 1948 and 1950 Communist Parties throughout the Far East – Burma, Malaya, Indonesia, the Philippines, India – had launched armed guerrilla struggles, often on an ill-prepared basis. Isaac Deutscher (who can scarcely be accused of being soft on the ‘state capitalist’ analysis) gives an account of what he sees as Stalin’s motivation for involvement:
‘In June 1950 Kim Il-Sung, the head of the Communist administration, charged Synghman Rhee’s government of the South with aggression and ordered a general offensive across the 38th Parallel. The rapid initial success of the Northern troops indicated that the blow had been well prepared, so well, indeed, that it seemed plausible that Stalin and Mao had been consulted about it beforehand or that they had even issued the marching orders. That Mao should have favoured the venture was not surprising. To him the Communist attempt to obtain control over the whole of Korea must have looked like a natural sequel to the Chinese revolution ... Stalin’s motives were less clear. He was anxious to avoid armed conflict with the West; and his strategic interest in Korea was only slight. (Korea has a ten-mile frontier with the USSR, whereas her frontier with Chinese Manchuria stretches over 500 miles.) Yet Stalin acted with an eye to his latest rivalry with Mao. Having so recently and so scandalously misjudged the chances of the revolution in China, he was anxious to dispel the impression of political timidity he had given, and wanted to prove himself as daring a strategist of revolution as Mao.’ [5]
 
The cause of the war
The contradictions in the situation meant that the early course of the war was dramatic and horrifying. Under the corrupt Rhee dictatorship, South Korean morale collapsed disastrously; many soldiers and civilians went over to the North Korean forces. Two months after the outbreak of war, by the end of August, North Korean forces controlled virtually the entire peninsula. Then the United States staged the bold landing at Inchon, behind the North Korean lines. With vastly superior forces they swept northwards, and by the end of October the remnants of the North Korean army were pushed back to the Chinese border. Indeed, the North Korean army was virtually destroyed; perhaps only one tenth of the original 325,000-strong army escaped back to the North.
The massive US thrust into North Korea was clearly a direct threat to China, and the Chinese response was to send large forces of ‘volunteers’ into Korea. (The disguise of the Chinese as ‘volunteers’ was as fictitious as the American disguise as ‘UN forces’. The involvement in Korea had a massive effect on Chinese development, leading to much greater state centralisation of the economy).
The whole character of the war was now transformed. The armed forces of both South and North Korea had been largely smashed; the war was now a conflict between the United States and China being fought on Korean soil. Originally the war had been – partially – a national liberation struggle. When North Korean forces came into the South workers and students rose in their support. But this aspect of the war had always been secondary; after the first few months it became non-existent. The use of guerrilla warfare was always subordinated to more conventional tactics; as the importance of Russian military aid to China and North Korea increased, pressure was more and more put on Russia’s allies to drop the use of guerrilla warfare. This is in striking contrast to the Vietnam war, where in almost all phases guerrilla warfare dominated, showing that here the dominant aspect was that of a genuine mass-based popular struggle.
By the end of 1950 the fighting was again bogged down around the 38th Parallel. Both sides had tested the situation; it was time to cut their losses. For neither side has anything to gain from further escalation. Even the bellicose US commander, MacArthur, admitted that nuclear war was a ‘form of mutual suicide.’ [6] Hence the US propagated the concept of ‘limited war’, conflict within coexistence.
The concept of limited war was all the more real for the United States in that it provoked a severe faction fight within the American ruling class. Throughout the war, and especially after the Chinese intervention, there was deep conflict between the political leadership of the United States and General Douglas MacArthur, the US commander in Korea. This came to a head when MacArthur wrote to a Republican congressman, publicly criticising US political strategy in Korea, and concluding, ‘There is no substitute for victory’. He was then sacked in April 1951. This victory of political over military considerations showed clearly that the dominant strategy of the US ruling class was for a limited conflict within a continued acceptance of the Yalta carve-up.
The war dragged on for two more years, with military stalemate accompanied by desultory peace negotiations. But it took political changes in both Washington and Moscow to liquidate the whole sorry affair. In 1953 Eisenhower, a Republican, replaced Truman as president. Eisenhower was the representative of significant business groups that wanted an end to the war; moreover, it was easier for the traditionally right-wing Republicans to make peace than Democrats, who always ran the risk of being labelled ‘soft on Communism’. In Russia Stalin died and was replaced by the Malenkov-Beria duo, which set about liquidating some of the foreign problems bequeathed to them.
With these changes an armistice was fairly rapidly agreed in July 1953. The way in which the war was switched off is one more confirmation that it was in essence a confrontation between the great powers, in which the Korean people were only the victims. Once again a contrast with Vietnam is instructive.
 
The Outcome
There were no victors in this barbarous war. One estimate puts the total casualties as high as four million. Korean agriculture and industry were laid waste. If the US hawks were denied the chance of using atomic weapons, they did get the opportunity of experimenting with a new and hideous weapon – napalm.
Korea remains divided, with ritual negotiations permanently trapped on the level of discussing what form negotiations should take. South Korea has achieved, in the quarter century since the war ended, an economic boom. But it was a boom bought by the massive superexploitation of Korean workers. And low wages can be maintained only by crude authoritarianism. In the fraudulent democracy of South Korea, the president preserves a majority by appointing a third of the members of parliament. Inflation, riot and repression remains the normal pattern of life.
The so-called socialism of North Korea offers no more appealing a prospect. While North Korea has massive debts to Japan and the West, democracy is replaced by the grotesque personality cult of the megalomaniac and nepotistic Kim Il-Sung. (In 1977 the Central African Emperor Bokassa sent an emissary to North Korea to study how to organise a personality cult.)
The Korean War was not a revolution, not a national liberation struggle, not even a fight between the relatively more and less ‘progressive’. It was a squalid trial of strength between two symmetrical power blocs, carefully limited to the territory of an Asian people far from their own heartlands. The only response that revolutionary socialists could make was to denounce the fraud and to start looking elsewhere for the real potential for revolutionary change.
* * *
Notes
1. This article will not deal with the repercussions of the Korean War on British and world Trotskyism. For this see The Fourth International, Stalinism and the Origins of the International Socialists (Pluto, 1971) especially pp. 11, 76–8, 96–8, 103–4.
2. The main sources for this article are: T. Higgins, Korea and the Fall of MacArthur (OUP, 1960); A.B. Ulam, The Rivals (Allen Lane, 1971); G. Kolko, The Politics of War (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1968); D. Horowitz, From Yalta to Vietnam (Penguin, 1967); I. Deutscher, Stalin (Penguin, 1966); D-N- Pritt, Brasshats and Bureaucrats (Lawrence & Wishart, 1966); E. O’Ballance, Korea: 1950-1953 (Faber & Faber 1969); P. Naville, La Guerre et la Révolution I. (EDI Paris, 1967); M. Truman, Harry S. Truman (Hamish Hamilton 1973). As will be seen, these sources range from openly pro-American, through liberal-critical, to Stalinist and Trotskyist. I have tried as far as possible to give an account of events based on the common ground between radically differing interpretations.
3. Higgins, op. cit., pp. 33–4.
4. Truman, op. cit., p. 461.
5. Deutscher, op. cit., p. 584.
6. Higgins, op. cit., p. 148.
 



Stalinism, as the song says, ‘gave us all such a bad name’. Twenty-seven years after the old butcher was committed to a well-deserved grave, his ghost still walks. Right-wingers trying to discredit the whole idea of socialism, left libertarians frightened of the discipline of an organisation – for both the Stalin myth is alive. Organised Stalinist politics today may be no more than a few ageing hacks in the New Communist Party masturbating over pictures of their hero in full military regalia, but the historical experience of Stalinism is still an albatross hanging round our necks. If we fail to understand it and explain it, we shall have to go on paying the price for it.
In 1956, three years after Stalin died, Nikita Khrushchev made his famous ‘secret speech’, which within weeks was one of the most widely publicised documents in history. Khrushchev denounced crimes that Trotskyists had publicised twenty years earlier (and were called Nazi agents for their pains). But Khrushchev’s explanation was worse than useless. ‘Stalin was a very distrustful man, morbidly suspicious; we knew this from our work with him.’ Now it would be hard to doubt that Stalin was in fact a very nasty man; what remains unexplained is how such a nasty man achieved virtually absolute power in an allegedly socialist society.
Stalinism was the product of defeat. Failure of revolution in Western Europe, disintegration and demoralisation of the working class inside Russia, left the state machine in the hands of a group of managers and bureaucrats whose connection with the working class, was only on the level of rhetoric. Once they abandoned world revolution, the only road was industrialisation from above. As Stalin said in a speech of 1931: ‘We are fifty or a hundred years behind the advanced countries. We must make good this lag in ten years. Either we do it or they crush us.’
Stalin succeeded. As Isaac Deutscher wrote in his obituary: ‘Stalin found Russia working with a wooden plough and left her equipped with atomic piles.’ But the price of such rapid industrialisation was a terrible one. Every last vestige of working-class power was crushed. And the process was accompanied by a disastrous agricultural policy. At Stalin’s death the grain harvest and the cattle stock were both lower than in 1913. The Russia which today, sixty years after the Revolution, still has to import grain from the West, is the Russia built by Stalin.
This forced-pace industrialisation could only be carried out by ruthlessly crushing any form of workers’ democracy and destroying the very Bolshevik Party in whose name Stalin ruled. As Khrushchev reported in the secret speech:
‘It was determined that of the 139 members and candidates of the party’s central committee who were elected at the Seventeenth Congress (1934), 98 persons, i.e. 70 per cent, were arrested and shot (mostly in 1937-38). What was the composition of the delegates to the Seventeenth Congress? It is known that 80 per cent of the voting participants of the Seventeenth Congress joined the party during the years of conspiracy before the Revolution and during the civil war; this means before 1921. By social origin the basic mass of the delegates to the Congress were workers.’
Lower down the same bureaucratised murder prevailed. Joseph Berger, a pioneer of the Palestinian Communist Party who spent many years in a Stalinist labour camp, reports:
‘When there were thousands of deaths every day it was obviously impossible to check the circumstances of each one. But a maximum permitted mortality rate was laid down; so long as mortality remained within these limits it was considered normal.’
Stalinism cannot be equated with an impatient bureaucrat or a bossy cadre; it was counter-revolution on an unprecedented scale.
The personality cult that surrounded Stalin was notorious. Grotesque poems were churned out; one French Communist wrote that ‘for a Communist ... Stalin is the highest scientific authority in the world.’ Stalin personally rewrote his own biography, adding such phrases as: ‘Stalin never allowed his work to be marred by the slightest hint of vanity, conceit or self-adulation.’
The Communist International, which Stalin inherited, was transformed from a party of world revolution to a tool of Russian foreign policy. Communist militants the world over jumped through a series of hoops – the grotesque theory that Social Democracy was ‘social fascism’, the Popular Front, the Hitler-Stalin pact, the wartime adulation of Churchill and Roosevelt, the overnight discovery that Tito was a fascist. A whole generation of revolutionaries were driven into disillusion or turned into mindless hacks.
Stalinism was not inevitable; it was the fruit of defeat. Faced with fascism and mass unemployment, millions of workers looked to Mother Russia for victories they could not win by their own strength. And it has been the self-activity of workers – the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, the French General Strike of 1968, the Polish strikes of 1980 – that has driven wedges into the Stalinist monolith. Only the rebirth of a revolutionary international can finally lay the ghost of Stalin.
 



In 1968 the French left was a beacon for the whole of Europe. In the early seventies France was overtaken by Italy, but by the end of the decade the Italian left had paid a heavy price for missed opportunities. The recent anti-semitic bombings in Paris open up the grim possibility that France now faces the development of a more and more ‘Italian’ type of political situation.
With inflation at over 13 per cent, and unemployment around one and a half million, France faces the same crisis as other Western countries. But in France the problem is compounded by the evident disarray of the mass parties of the left. Since the collapse of the Union of the Left before the 1978 elections, the divisions between the Communist Party and the Socialist Party have grown ever deeper. Accusations of ‘treachery’ and worse are common currency in discussion between the two parties, and both devote more energy to attacking each other than they do to fighting the right-wing Giscard government.
Moreover both parties are torn by debilitating internal dissension. In the Socialist Party the struggle between Rocard and Mitterrand for the presidential candidacy has dragged on for over a year. The Communist Party, because of its traditional monolithic structure, has felt the strain even more.
In the period of the Union of the Left, the CP aimed to present a social-democratic, ‘Eurocommunist’ face to the world, and recruited extensively on that basis. The subsequent left turn, made to prevent itself losing the initiative to the Socialist Party, has had tremendous repercussions inside the party. Hardly a day goes by but some more or less prominent member of the party unburdens their conscience in the bourgeois press.
Five Paris councillors have announced that since the decisions on the party’s presidential election campaign were not taken democratically, they do not consider themselves bound to support it publicly. Eleven members of the CP in Marseilles have issued a statement saying that the party ‘has failed to carry out its duty in face of racist violence.’ And the Communist Party of Martinique, France’s West Indian colony, has called on its supporters to abstain in the presidential elections, even though a Communist candidate, Georges Marchais, is standing.
The dispute erupted this autumn in a set of squalid manoeuvres surrounding the senatorial elections. The excitement generated bore little relation to the actual significance of the French senate. The system of indirect election for the senate, based on an electoral college drawn from municipal councillors, gives the Socialist Party a huge advantage over the CP, which it has no qualms about exploiting. When, however, the CP announced that it would not follow its traditional policy of standing down on the second round to enable the Socialists to be elected, it was accused of breaking with the traditions of left unity.
What was at stake was not, of course, the Senate. The French Constitution devised by de Gaulle, which elects both president and parliament by universal suffrage, has an effect highly conducive to political demoralisation – it means that France is virtually permanently in a pre-electoral period. For over a year France has already been plunged into manoeuvres about the forthcoming presidential elections; already the main parties are looking beyond next Spring to the parliamentary elections scheduled for 1983 (and after that, of course, the 1988 presidential election will be just round the corner!) Hence the repeated hints and threats from the CP that they will not support the Socialist candidate (likely to be the closest challenger to Giscard) on the second ballot.
Inevitably the disarray of the left has spilled over into the trade union struggle. The polemics between Socialists and Communists are echoed by the bureaucrats of the CGT (aligned on the CP) and the CFDT (aligned on the SP). Even in important strikes the two unions have failed to work together. The CGT has adopted a more militant stance, though it has always stopped short of effective action to coordinate the various fragmentary struggles. The result, inevitably, is demoralisation. Union membership, which has been low in France since the 1940s, is on the decline. Initiatives like the campaign for ‘Unity in Struggle’, sponsored by individual CP and SP militants, and encouraged by the LCR (French section of the Fourth International), obviously respond to a widespread desire for unity, but have not been able to stop the rot.
The disarray of the left has given Giscard’s regime the green light to launch an attack on all sections of the working class. In particular immigrant workers have been the victims. France is imposing even stiffer regulations on the right of immigrants to stay in the country, and Stoléru, minister allegedly responsible for the well-being of immigrants, recently announced that there could be no question of any further immigrants being admitted to France. An Egyptian journalist, Simon Malley, is being unceremoniously thrown out of France because of his views on third world politics.
All this means that police attacks on immigrants go virtually unchecked. Indeed the French police seem to be more or less completely out of control. When Marseilles police recently killed a seventeen year old Moroccan during an identity check, it was the fourteenth case of an ‘accidental’ killing by police since the beginning of this year.
The emergence of small but ruthless groups of neo-Nazis is in no way surprising in such a situation. Not only do these groups have significant support within the police force, but the state authorities and courts have conspired to take no action. A Communist militant who has received repeated death threats from extreme right-wing organisations had his complaints rejected by the courts on the grounds that there were ‘no known neo-Nazi organisations in France.’ Yet the killings at the Paris synagogue at the beginning of October have been preceded by a whole series of attacks on synagogues, Jewish shops and similar buildings. In September the government did ban the main Nazi organisation, the FANE; it simply changed its name (by one letter, to FNE) and carried on meeting unmolested in the same premises.
In the short period after the bombings a certain degree of left unity was achieved. But it did not go beyond a few large demonstrations. In the absence of an effective response from the left, the initiative has gone predominantly to the Jewish (and generally Zionist) organisations. These organisations have spoken quite rightly of the need for self-defence and physical retaliation against the fascists. But Zionist politics in isolation from the working class movement has little to offer. Some prominent figures in the Jewish community have gone so far as to allege that it was actually the left which was responsible.
Self-defence has tended towards individual retaliation; in fact the first act of retaliation by a Jewish organisation led to a serious physical attack on an 84-year-old man, who had acid thrown in his face. It transpired that he had no fascist connections, but simply had the same name as a well-known Nazi journalist. The situation could easily degenerate into a futile round of terror and counter-terror.
The general shift to the right in French politics leaves the revolutionary left in an isolated and dangerous position. The revolutionaries participated wholeheartedly in the demonstrations that took place up and down the country after the Paris bombings. Most of the revolutionary groups have put forward formally correct positions on the nature of fascism.the responsibility of the government, the need for self-defence and a working-class response. But in general the left seems to have lost the initiative. Objectively the French situation is absolutely ripe for an initiative like the Anti-Nazi League; in fact no-one seems willing or able to take the initiative. Yet the milieu seems to be there: at the beginning of October a rock concert called ‘Rock Against Peyrefitte’ (the minister of justice) attracted three thousand people.
One reason for the lack of initiative seems to be that the electoralism which is tearing the mass parties of the left apart is also infecting the revolutionary left. The LCR in particular is putting all its energies into a campaign for unity between the Communist and Socialist Parties. Their presidential candidate Alain Krivine seems to be running almost exclusively on the programme of demanding that all left candidates should support the best placed left candidate in the second round. In practice this almost certainly means Mitterrand; presumably many workers will follow the logic and vote for Mitterrand on the first round too. The LCR’s electoralism has gone so far that it recently commended the Zionist organisation Renouveau Juif (Jewish Renewal) for having raised anti-Giscard slogans on the antifascist demonstrations. In fact Renouveau Juif ‘s criticisms of Giscard are confined to a condemnation of his oil-fired pro-Arab foreign policy.
As for the rest of the revolutionary left, Lutte Ouvrière are proposing to run Arlette Laguiller for the Presidency on a purely propagandist basis; while the organisation that has grown fastest over recent years, the OCI seems to be degenerating yet further; a group of its members recently launched an unprovoked physical attack on LCR members with such slogans as ‘Nazis’ and ‘Kill them’.
Unfortunately there seems little evidence of any widening audience for the revolutionary left on an electoral level. There was recently a municipal by-election in Orleans, where in 1977 a joint revolutionary slate obtained the impressive score of 11.8% of the vote. This time three revolutionary groups presented separate lists; the total score was 8.4%.
All in all a bleak outlook for the French left. Yet the French working class is far from defeated. An effective initiative, on jobs or racism, could easily turn the tide. If not, the Italian road is all too likely a prospect.
 



Sartre’s Marxism
Mark Poster
Pluto, £6.95/£2.95
The Work of Sartre, Volume I: Search for Freedom
Istvan Meszaros
Harvester, £4.95
Poster’s Sartre’s Marxism is another step on Pluto Press’s sad pilgrimage to irrelevance. It is indeed a sorry stablemate to Duncan Hallas’s excellent Trotsky’s Marxism, which stresses that the unity of theory and practice is the very heart of Marxism. (Incidentally, by what error or calculation is Hallas’s book omitted from the list Also in this series on the cover of Poster’s book?).
A lasting socialist commitment must spring simultaneously from the head and the gut. Without theory the gut can be disoriented by change of tempo or bought off by reforms; but without the gut the head merely speaks words of ever increasing length into the void. It is this combination of head and gut that makes Sartre so exceptional among intellectuals in an age when theory is so easily divorced from practice.
Only a few months ago, when the young revolutionary Pierre Goldman was murdered by off-duty police, Sartre, blind and scarcely able to walk, joined the protesting demonstrators on the streets. It is Sartre’s undying activism, his never-satisfied sense of responsibility, that earns him the respect of Marxists, however sharply they may criticise his ideas.
There is not a breath of this in Poster’s antiseptic account, a great disappointment in view of his earlier and much better book, Existential Marxism in Postwar France: From Sartre to Althusser. Poster actually boasts that he will avoid the temptation to ‘historicise the theory’ – i.e. to locate the ideas within the practice that gave rise to them. Poster ignores – and indeed seems to be ignorant of – much of what is most interesting in Sartre’s career.
Thus he claims that Sartre’s thought before 1940 was ‘apolitical’ and that it was because of the Nazi occupation that Sartre ‘chose the left’. But Sartre’s pre-war collection, of short stories The Wall (grotesquely retitled Intimacy in English to catch the porn market) contains searing attacks on Franco and on French anti-semitism.
Poster, in fact, confines himself to an analysis of one of Sartre’s works, The Critique of Dialectical Reason. But if Sartre’s Marxism stand or falls by the Critique then it surely falls. The Critique is overlong, rambling, turgid and frequently incomprehensible. It was written in the 1957–60 period; Sartre was deeply depressed by the failure of his own strategy of influencing the French Communist Party and above all by the failure of the French left to respond to the Algerian struggle for national independence. Simone de Beauvoir has given us a vivid account of how the Critique was written:
‘To maintain this pace I could hear him crunching corydrame capsules, of which he managed to get through a tube a day. At the end of the afternoon he would be exhausted; all his powers of concentration would suddenly relax, his gestures would become vague, and quite often he would get his words all mixed up. We spent our evenings in my apartment; as soon as he drank a glass of whisky the alcohol would go straight to his head. “That’s enough”, I’d say to him; but for him it was not enough; against my will I would hand him a second glass; then he’d ask for a third: two years before he’d needed a great deal more; but now he lost control of his movements and his speech very quickly, and I would say again. “That’s enough”. Two or three times I flew into violent tempers, I smashed a glass on the tiled floor of the kitchen.’
The Critique may be a salutary warning against the dangers of mixing drink and drugs, but it is far from the substantial contribution to Marxist theory that Poster claims. Indeed, to understand why Sartre wrote it is necessary to see how it flows out of his earlier work, and in particular from two long polemical essays he wrote during the fifties.
The Communists and Peace (1952–54) was written at the height of the Cold War, when sections of the French bourgeoisie wanted to ban the Communist Party outright. Some leftists argued that since the CP was Stalinist and bureaucratic, its disappearance would be no loss to the French working class. To this Sartre responds that the existence of a class cannot be abstracted from the organisational forms it adopts, and that, whatever the weaknesses of the CP, an attack on the CP is an attack on the working class as such.
The Spectre of Stalin (1956–57) was a passionate response to Khruschev’s crushing of the Hungarian Revolution. For Sartre this posed another question: how could states which had established their economies on a socialist basis be guilty of the errors that led to the Hungarian rising and of the crime of crushing it? This must mean that the relation between the economic base and political superstructure is far more complex and tortuous than Marxists had hitherto supposed.
Now Socialist Review readers will have little difficulty in pointing to the gaps in Sartre’s argument – the need for an independent, non-Stalinist revolutionary party and the recognition that the Stalinist states were state capitalist. But the two essays are none the less valuable, for they point, with clarity and honesty, to the real dilemmas of the left in the bleak years of the fifties. Sartre’s solutions have been overtaken, but we can still learn from the questions he asks.
There is little of value in the Critique that had not already been developed, in a more concrete form, in the two earlier essays. By abstracting the Critique from the arguments that gave rise to it, Poster is making method an end in itself. Even if his account of Sartre’s method is correct, there is no indication as to what political consequences it would lead to. There are now so many books on Sartre that even a specialist cannot read them all; this is one we could have done without.
Meszaros’ book is a horse of a different colour. He begins by displaying, and communicating, a very obvious enthusiasm for Sartre that contrasts with Poster’s dessicated style. Moreover, he makes the very valid point that ‘it is Sartre’s lifework as a whole that predominates, and not particular elements of it.’ His references range far and wide through Sartre’s well-known and Iesser known writings, showing that fragmentary and polemical texts are often richer and more concrete than the turgid attempts at system-building.
Meszaros confronts Sartre above all as a philosopher, in terms of the preoccupations of his own earlier works on Marx and Lukacs. In itself, that is no bad thing, for those preoccupations are those of an activist Marxism, centered on the problem of human freedom. Meszaros brings out strongly, if at times obscurely and at too great length,’ the basic contradictions between the individualist framework of Sartre’s thought and the Marxism he aspires to. Yet he shows too that this is not simply an incompatibility, but an ambiguity and a tension which have positive critical value.
Yet Meszaros too stands at too great a distance from history, and lets Sartre’s thought appear as a self-sufficient system rather than as a response to the dilemmas of a hectic and confused historical period. Political questions drift into the background, or are presented in a brief and misleading form. Thus he can write of the period from 1944 to 1946 as a ‘short interval of serene rejoicing over the shared victory over Fascism’; yet these were the very years when the French CP betrayed the possibility of revolution and entered the government as open strike-breakers. Sartre’s play Dirty Hands catches the cruel dilemmas of these years; there is little ‘serenity’ about it.
A second volume of Meszaros’ work, to deal with the Critique and Sartre’s theatre, is still to appear, so it is not yet possible to make a final judgment on his achievement. In the meantime it is as well to recall that Sartre is his own best populariser; his novels, plays, and a host of articles and interviews bring out the contradictions and ambiguities that his attempts at systematic philosophy could never resolve. Which is why the most valuable book on Sartre is The Writings of Sartre by M. Contat and M. Rybalka, which consists simply of a chronological list of Sartre’s writings, with ample quotation of the more obscure and ephemeral. Here Sartre in his own words tells us more about his failures and successes than any of his learned commentators.
 



From the flood of obituaries of Sartre a clear bourgeois party-line emerges. Sartre was on the wrong side politically, being ‘soft on communism’, an uncritical supporter of Russian labour camps, terrorism, etc., etc.; his influence has waned and he is virtually unknown to the younger generation; yet somehow, despite all that he was a ‘great man’. Much of what has been written is marked by a combination of patronising smugness and pig-ignorance. Thus the Sunday Times (April 20th) quotes Mary Warnock as having consigned existentialism ‘to the intellectual dustbin’. Ms Warnock’s main claim to fame is a book on Sartre’s evolution to Marxism in which she quotes Marx’s ‘fourteenth thesis on Feuerbach’. (NB for new readers – there are only eleven.)
In The Observer (April 20th) John Weightman laments that Sartre did not agree with Voltaire’s statement: ‘I may not agree with what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it’. (Actually Voltaire never said any such thing.) But precisely one of the things Sartre always insisted on was that words were a form of action. Sartre never took refuge in ‘theoretical praxis’, ‘relative autonomy’ or any of the other mystifications whereby a whole generation of would-be Marxist intellectuals have sought to disconnect what they said from what they did – or more likely didn’t do.
For Sartre the unity of theory and practice was paramount, and it is nothing less than an insult to him to suggest that one can acclaim his ‘philosophy’ while dismissing the practice it led to. The only obituary Sartre deserves is one that defends him against the smears and lies of his would-be friends, while at the same time rigorously criticising his political practice.
Contrary to received opinion Sartre was never a Stalinist and never a Maoist. Nor, contrary to the wishful thinking of some, was he ever a consistent revolutionary socialist. Sartre’s work is a long dialogue with the revolutionary left; a dialogue full of hesitations and misunderstandings. From the failures of this dialogue we can learn something of the weakness of the left in our age.
Clive James (Observer, April 20th) thinks Sartre supported Stalin and Mao because ‘he was taking revenge for his bad eye’. (I don’t know if Mr James has any physical disability to blame his inanity on.) A more fruitful approach to tracing Sartre’s development would be to start with a story he tells in his autobiography Words. As the child of a rich bourgeois family he had for a while a governess called Marie-Louise who used to lament to her pupil that she couldn’t find a husband. For the young Sartre her unhappiness called into question the values which his family had tried to instill into him.
‘I thought wages were proportionate to merit: so why did they pay her so badly? If you had a job, you were proud and dignified, happy to work: since she had the good fortune to work eight hours a day, why did she speak of her life as being an incurable ill? When I reported her grievances, my grandfather burst out laughing: she was much too ugly for any man to want her. I didn’t laugh: so you could be born condemned? In that case they had lied to me: the order of the world concealed a state of intolerable disorder.’
It is this gulf between theory and practice, between ideology and reality, that led Sartre to break irreconcilably with his own class. His whole work is devoted to the quest for values which can be taken seriously, which can be implemented in practice. If God does not exist, if human beings have freedom of choice, then we must follow through the logic of those propositions, accept all the consequences they entail.
 
Sartre and Socialism
The only solution was socialism. But for Sartre the road to socialism was far from easy. Too young to participate in the great social upheavals which followed the First World War, Sartre came of age politically as Stalin was consolidating his power over the Comintern, and fascism was rising throughout Europe. He was never in much doubt that he was an anti-fascist, but the question of positive political alignment was a much more difficult one. In the thirties his circle of friends included at least one Trotskyist, Colette Audry, and Sartre was certainly familiar with the debates of the period; but the revolutionary left was too peripheral to political reality to exert any real influence on him.
The major Marxist influence on him at the time was Paul Nizan, Communist, novelist and journalist: Nizan was a loyal Stalinist up to the Stalin-Hitler pact, after which he left the party; shortly after he was killed. After the war a number of CP intellectuals – notably Aragon and Henri Lefebvre – spread the totally unfounded story that Nizan had been a police informer. From this whole affair Sartre retained a distrust of the French Communist Party, which survived whatever tactical alliances he might make.
The German Occupation was a crucial period for consolidating Sartre’s political commitment. Not that he was in any sense a Resistance hero; but the experience made clear to him the nature of writing as a political act. In 1943 his play The Flies was performed in Paris; Sartre’s choice of a theme from Greek mythology had concealed from the German censor the fact that the play was a clear encouragement to Resistance. Sam White (Evening Standard, April 18th) dredged up the tired old slander that Sartre was somehow ‘collaborating’ with the Germans by cheating the censorship this way. This slander was first launched by Andre Malraux in 1959 when he was a minister in de Gaulle’s government. Sartre was able to reply that the performance had been approved by the main Resistance organisation for writers, the CP-controlled National Writers’ Committee.
Up to the end of the German Occupation, then, Sartre was a man of the mainstream left: against fascism, for socialism, agnostic about Marxism. It was in 1944–45, when revolution was on the agenda for France, that Sartre faced a real choice as to whether to take the reformist or the revolutionary road.
Many years later, in 1961, Sartre described the choice he faced at the time of the Liberation:
‘It was possible, in 1945, to choose between two positions. Two and only two. The first, and better, one, was to address the Marxists and them alone, to denounce the aborted revolution, the slaughtered Resistance, and the disintegration of the left. Some journals adopted this position courageously, and disappeared unheard: it was the happy time when people had ears not to hear and eyes not to see. I am far from believing that these failures condemned their attempts, and I claim we could have imitated them without sinking ... But to denounce the revolution betrayed, it would first have been necessary to be a revolutionary: Merleau (Merleau-Ponty, his collaborator – I.B.) wasn’t one, and nor was I yet. We didn’t even have the right to declare ourselves Marxists, despite our sympathies for Marx. Now revolution is not a state of mind: it’s a day-by-day practice illuminated by a theory. And if reading Marx isn’t enough to make you a revolutionary, you converge with him sooner or later if you are fighting for revolution. The result is clear: only men formed by this discipline could effectively criticise the left; so, at that time, they had to be more or less closely linked to Trotskyist circles; but straightaway this affiliation disqualified them, without it being their fault: in this mystified left dreaming of unity, they appeared as splitters.’
So Sartre turned his back on the revolutionary road; instead he adopted a reformist line; unwilling to join the Communist Party, which he saw as manipulative and dogmatic, he sought, through his journal Les Temps Modernes, and later through his own political group the RDR (Revolutionary Democratic Assembly), to put pressure on the CP from outside, though without any clear critique of the CP’s non-revolutionary nature.
Ironically, it was just at this time that the revolutionary left had some chance of breaking through. With the CP deeply buried in a coalition government, following a no-strike line, the Trotskyist left offered the only militant alternative. There were modest electoral successes, and gains in the Socialist Party Youth; in 1947 Trotskyists took the lead in the strike at the Renault car-plant. But it was too little and too late; with the Cold War and the consequent turn by the CP, there was set-back and demoralisation for the whole working-class movement. The French Trotskyist movement dissolved into factionalism and unprincipled blocs. Instead of Trotskyism being a force of attraction to Sartre, it was the other way round. Many Trotskyists entered the RDR, seeing it as a short-cut to building a mass organisation. But the RDR, with its woolly programme, was bound to disintegrate. For some, like David Rousset, briefly a close associate of Sartre, the RDR was nothing more than an easy bridge from Trotskyism to Gaullism.
 
Dirty hands?
Yet the ghost of revolutionary politics still walked in the corridors of Sartre’s mind. In his play Dirty Hands the young Communist Hugo denounces the old Party leader Hoederer as follows:
‘The party has a programme: the achievement of a socialist economy, and one means to achieve it: the use of the class struggle. You’re going to use it to carry out a policy of class collaboration in the framework of a capitalist economy. For years you’re going to lie, cheat and manouevre; you’ll go from one compromise to another; you’ll defend to our comrades reactionary measures taken by a government that you are part of. No-one will understand: the hard ones will leave us, the others will lose the political education they’ve just acquired. We shall be contaminated, softened, disoriented; we shall become reformists and nationalists; to end up with, the bourgeois parties will only have to make the necessary effort in order to liquidate us.’
For Sartre, Hoederer, not Hugo, is the hero of the play; yet it would be hard to find a more acute, and indeed prophetic, indictment of the policy of the French CP in 1944–47, and the sorry price it paid for it in the following decade.
But as French Trotskyism collapsed into factionalised irrelevance in the early fifties, Sartre was more and more pulled towards the Communist Party. At a time when many representatives of the bourgeoisie were calling for the banning of the CP, Sartre argued that, whatever the weakness of the CP, to liquidate the main organisation of the working class could only bring disaster for French workers. Moreover, he claimed, those thinkers of the extreme left who denounced the CP were in effect allying with those who wanted to see it banned.
Sartre’s position was sadly wrong. In the 1950s there was no short-cut available, no alternative to the slow patient task of rebuilding the revolutionary current from scratch. But Sartre was never an uncritical pro-Stalinist. In 1952 he published a long article called The Communists and Peace, the aim of which was ‘to declare my agreement with the Communists on precise limited subjects, arguing on the basis of my principles and not theirs.’
George Steiner (Sunday Times, April 20th) tells us that Sartre was ‘damnably wrong – on the Soviet camps for example’. Now in 1952, when the CP were still denying the very existence of labour camps, Sartre wrote in a polemic against his former friend Camus:
‘Yes, Camus, like you I find these camps unacceptable; but just as unacceptable is the use that the “so-called bourgeois press” makes of them every day. I don’t say: the Madagascan before the Turkoman; what I say is that you mustn’t use the suffering inflicted on the Turcoman to justify the suffering we impose on the Madagascan. I have seen the anti-communists rejoicing at the existence of these prisons? I’ve seen them use them to give themselves a clean conscience; and I had the impression that they were not, bringing help to the Turcoman, but rather exploiting his misfortune just as the USSR exploits his labour.’
One can only assume that George Steiner thinks it was ‘damnably wrong’ not to applaud the camps.
But even in this period Sartre’s dialogue with the revolutionary left continues. The Communists and Peace contains long passages of polemic, directed both against Germain (Ernest Mandel) and against an ex-Trotskyist, non-Leninist grouping called Socialisme ou Barbarie (political ancestors of the Solidarity group in Britain).
 
The right choice
Sartre’s honeymoon with the CP ended with the Hungarian Revolution, and thereafter his main commitment was to anti-imperialism. Sartre had close links with those groups in France which gave active material support to the Algerian liberation struggle. François Jeanson, an old friend of Sartre’s, organised one of the best known of the pro-Algerian networks; he tells how, when he visited Sartre in 1959, ‘within two hours, I had an interview from him for our clandestine paper, as well as some addresses which were going to be very precious to us.’ Sartre’s giving of a signed interview to an illegal paper was a deliberate challenge to the state.
Apart from the Jeanson network, one of the main groups involved in giving aid to the Algerians were the French Trotskyists. Slowly, through the Algerian struggle and subsequently the Russel Tribunal on war crimes in Vietnam, Sartre rebuilt his links with the revolutionary left, and saw the increasing passivity of the CP, caught in the logic of its parliamentary aspirations.
1968 was the first time since 1945 when revolutionary politics came out of the wilderness. This time Sartre made the right choice; there was no ambiguity as to his support for the students, no doubt that this could be the beginning of a revolutionary process had not the CP diverted it back into safe channels.
From then until his death Sartre was always on the side of the revolutionaries. Yet Sartre could not escape the decline and crisis which afflicted the French left in the seventies. His main alignment was with the Maoists, though that never meant an uncritical support for Maoist politics, let alone for the Chinese regime. When Michele Manceaux published in 1972 her book The Maoists in France, Sartre contributed a preface which began with the words ‘I am not a Maoist.’ Sartre admired the Maoists for their activism and their total break with bourgeois legality; he rather naively hoped that Maoist students taking jobs in factories would come to be a new type of intellectual.
Sartre’s determination, his continuing activism, inspire respect even where his political judgement require the most thorough criticism. If Sartre was a failure, his failure was a part of our collective failure; the corpse is ours to dissect; not a drop of blood must go to the smug ignoramuses of the bourgeois press.
 






How is the left faring on the first anniversary of the Tory government? In previous issues of this Review we’ve examined the balance sheet of the fight back in certain key industries (Leyland, steel, the South Wales mines) and the record of the best known left wing union leader, Arthur Scargill. In this article Ian Birchall looks at what is happening among the traditional Tribunite Labour left.





The first year after an electoral defeat is always a time for the Labour Left to go on to the offensive. Deprived of the fruits of office and with no electoral boat to rock, it can appease its consciences: at leisure. Bevanism in 1952 and the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament in 1960 are the most obvious precedents. The surprising thing, in this first year of Thatcherism, is not that the Labour Left has been vocal, but that it has done so little.
Within a few days of the Tory victory Tribune, the main organ of the Labour Left, launched itself into the ‘Great Debate’ on Labour’s future. Richard Clements, the editor, called for ‘the most strenuous campaign to build up the Labour movement and to harness its resources to the great battle to spread the ideas of socialism’ (11 May 1979). In the same issue Tony Benn’s eight-point plan was prominently canvassed. The eight points (defend workers’ interests; analyse achievements of the Labour government; rebuild LP mass membership; advocate conference policy through parliament; support LP policy on EEC; make LP more democratic; launch more Labour papers; reaffirm democratic socialism) were in themselves pretty unexciting. So too was the plan (once again with the magic number of eight points) that Benn launched in January of this year: full employment; modernising of manufacturing industry; import controls; industrial democracy; expansion of public services; revival of authority of House of Commons; more democratic and tolerant society; free speech (Guardian, 23 January 1980).
The sharp certainties (on public ownership, foreign policy) which characterised the reformist left thirty or even twenty years ago have evaporated into a mist of liberal rhetoric. At the very time when the argument for a socialist alternative has become crucial, the Labour Left has become unable to carry that argument even in its own propagandist terms.
Instead the Left has got caught up in a long and debilitating wrangle about the structures of the Labour Party. Benn’s argument was that ‘If the Labour Party is to work together to fight and beat the Conservative government, the quickest route is to tackle our problems of internal democracy’. (Guardian, 21 September 1979) Eric Heffer called for Labour to become a party ‘deeply rooted among people to which they turn when in trouble’ (Guardian, 25 June 1979), and Tribune (2 Nov.) demanded that the Labour Party hold one hundred major public rallies throughout Britain over the next six months (there was no mention of what the rallies should be about).
All this represented a clear recognition of the decline of Labour’s mass base.
The official Labour Party paper, Labour Weekly, admitted (28 Sept.) that Labour’s real membership was only 284,000 (as against an official claim of 675,000). But the logic followed ever decreasing circles as it became less and less a debate about mass participation and more and more a squabble about constitutional niceties.
In one sense the Labour Left is still obsessed with the lessons of 1960. Then the Left was at the head of a movement for nuclear disarmament which could put a hundred thousand people on the streets; but despite winning a conference victory was unable to do anything about the refusal of the parliamentary party to accept conference policy. One lesson of 1960 is that the Left failed to mobilise at the grass-roots, to turn union block votes into active commitment. Instead the Left has become obsessed with the possibility of capturing the PLP through the device of reselection, forgetting that ‘left’ MPs can sell out faster than they can be reselected. The whole project has the pitiable air of the attempt to dry a swamp by throwing in handfuls of dry earth.
A serious attempt to rebuild the Labour Party on a mass working-class base would have to begin with the main areas of conflict created by Thatcher’s anti-working-class policies — cuts and the industrial struggle. Yet in both respects the Labour Left has fallen far short of what was necessary.
Labour is of course weakened in its opposition to the cuts by its own past, by the vicious cuts made under Callaghan. But it is also weakened by its future, by the knowledge that when and if it returns to power it will have to go on working within the same old capitalist framework. This is the logic that led Neil Kinnock, Tribunite and shadow education secretary, to annoy his more naive colleagues by refusing to commit himself to restore the education cuts made by the Tories. Mr Kinnock clearly feels the weight of future office heavy upon his shoulders. This is how he sees the problem:
‘The next Labour government will be elected at a time of unprecedented economic and industrial weakness and will inherit disastrously impoverished education, health, welfare and benefit services. In the absence of firmly agreed Labour Party policies giving specific public expenditure priority to particular services removed by three or four years of Toryism it would be mistaken and unconvincing to create the illusion that we will fully or quickly restore the cuts made by the Tories.’ (Labour Weekly, 14 March 1980)
For Kinnock, there is no utopian ultra-left nonsense about fighting the Tories here and now, about stopping the cuts. The next four years are inevitable, and after that Labour’s excuses are already made. Hardly the stuff to inspire and mobilise workers who see schools and hospitals being run down and closed in the here and now.
All this is of a piece with the Left’s refusal to mobilise for militant policies to stop the cuts. At a joint meeting of the Labour NEC and the Shadow Cabinet in December only Tony Saunois, the Young Socialist member, advocated defying the law in the fight against the cuts. (Guardian, 4 Dec. 1980)
Instead of trying to build a serious grass-roots campaign, the Labour Left has come more and more to rely on the official leadership of the TUC. The special issue of Tribune produced for the November 28th demonstration against the cuts contains articles by no less than twelve general secretaries.
The same is true to an even greater extent of the industrial struggle. For the Labour Left the struggle for wages, the defence of trade union organisation may be an area of policy, indeed an important one; what it never becomes is the central core of the struggle, the realm in which the working class confront the very essence of their exploitation and fight for their self-emancipation.
Tribune has devoted many articles to Thatcher’s policies on wages and anti-union laws; some of them are interesting and well-informed. But all are characterised by a sense of looking at the trade union movement from the outside, of commenting on its strategy and predicting its achievements, but not, at any price, of fighting for a line inside the movement.
Thus within weeks of the Tory victory, Tribune ran an article on the front page headline, typically, How Long Before the Confrontation with the Unions? The article continued in interrogative style: ‘But how militant will the unions’ response really be? Are any of the major unions willing to get involved in an immediate confrontation with the Government?’ The problem is seen as one of prediction, not mobilisation; there is no sense that Tribune wants to be at the head of the confrontation, or even that it really wants it to happen at all.
One reason for this passivity on industrial matters is the concern of the Labour Left not to get into dispute with the trade union bureaucracy. More and more the Tribunites seem to be clutching on to the coattails of the TUC leadership, and not only of the left, but of the centre and even the right. Signed articles by Basnett and Weighell appear in the columns of Tribune.
This passivity was particularly clear in the case of the steel strike. Individual Labour Left MPs might speak and demonstrate in support of the steel-workers; Tribune carried well-argued articles putting the union case. But there was no strategy, either of mobilising the rank-and-file in the steel unions, or of winning other workers to solidarity. Putting the case for the steel workers in Tribune (11 Jan. 1980) was entrusted to Bill Sirs himself. And Tribune was so remote from the blood sweat and tears of the struggle that it could commit an act of what can only be described as scabbing, by printing a full-page advertisement for the British Steel Corporation, urging participation in the strike-breaking ballot. (7 March 1980)
Indeed, in some ways Tribune is lagging behind the General Council of the TUC. When it comes to the day of action planned for May 14th, Tribune begins to get cold feet; a front-page editorial (29 Feb. 1980) explains ‘What the TUC must do about its “day of action”.’ Instead of fighting for maximum rank-and-file mobilisation, Tribune offers advice on public relations and warns:
‘The TUC must spare no effort to make its policies known to the widest possible public. It must face the unpalatable fact that the May 14th strike could be a technical success (the majority of industries and services would indeed stop for the day) but an ultimate failure, because the public at large may see the strike only in negative terms, and not as a positive gesture towards the sort of society they themselves want.’
Only the depths of parliamentary cretinism could come up with this juxtaposition of the ‘public at large’ to working-class action.
Fourteen years ago Chris Harman concluded a history of the Tribune tendency in International Socialism journal with these words: ‘When the working class itself begins to solve its own problems, Tribune will no doubt be looking the other way.’ Nothing has changed.
 



With a hundred thousand people on the streets to demonstrate against nuclear weapons, the Labour Party is anxious to get in on the act. Tony Benn spoke in Trafalgar Square, and gained some of the loudest applause of the day. Michael Foot, not to be upstaged, has announced that as prime minister he would return any Cruise or Pershing missiles based in Britain to the United States. (Guardian, 27.10.80) (Impounding and dismantling them would have been a little too extreme even for an Aldermaston veteran like Foot.)
There are obviously good reasons why many people in the anti-Bomb movement are looking to the Labour Party. Initial involvement in CND may spring from a purely moral – and wholly legitimate – revulsion at the threat of the destruction of humanity. But protest cannot remain purely moral. Getting rid of the Bomb is a political problem, a question of power. The Labour Party, a governmental political party likely to be catapulted back into office by Thatcher’s ineptitude if not by its own merits, is clearly a more ‘realistic’ instrument for nuclear disarmament than any more ideologically pure political alternative. It is therefore necessary to take very seriously the arguments of those who see the future for CND as lying in closer and closer co-operation with the Labour Party. For if we cannot win the argument on this question, there is an all too great danger that the defeats of twenty years ago will be repeated.
Nuclear weapons are not a morally obscene blot on an otherwise healthy system. They are an integral part of the whole social order which oppresses us.
Nuclear weapons in Britain are a byproduct of Britain’s membership of NATO and of the British alliance to American imperialism. The massive expenditure on nuclear weapons has been a key determining factor in the evolution of Western capitalist economies since World War II. The control systems inherent in the nature of nuclear weapons has reinforced the continuing tendency to ever more centralised state power. To take on the Bomb is to take on all these things. But the Labour Party – and especially the Labour left – is irrevocably wedded to parliamentary reformism and cannot take on these tasks. It is this that explains the contradictions that run through Labour policy on the Bomb.
Last month’s Labour Party conference voted by an overwhelming show of hands for a ‘commitment in the Labour Party manifesto to unilateral nuclear disarmament’; and conference also agreed to oppose British participation in any defence policy ‘based on the use or threatened use of nuclear weapons’. So far so good.
But conference also – on the advice of the allegedly leftist NEC – declined (by a massive majority of 6,274,000 to 826,000) to support a motion calling for withdrawal from NATO. Conference also, by an almost two-to-one majority, rejected a motion opposing ‘peaceful’ uses of nuclear power. (Tribune, 10.10.80)
These contradictions have led to some contradictory logic-chopping on the part of some representatives of the left. Thus Benn told demonstrators in Trafalgar Square that ‘any government needed to have a credible defence policy, but it did not have to be a nuclear one’. (Guardian, 27.10.80) And Chris Jones of Tribune 124.10.80) informed his readers that ‘if the resources we now put into nuclear weapons were diverted in conventional weapons, they could actually strengthen NATO on the ground in Central Europe, where the military planners are most worried by the Warsaw Pact’s strength.’
Banning the Bomb, defending Britain and strengthening NATO – a contradictory enough set of objectives. When the chips are down and the question of political power is posed, Benn, Foot and the Tribune gang will have to decide which way to jump.
Writing in Tribune, veteran left MP Frank Allaun says (24.10.80):
‘But Tribune readers must be warned: the battle has not yet been won. In 1960 the Labour Party conference similarly took this limited unilateral step. A year later, after intensive work by the Campaign for Democratic Socialism and Hugh Gaitskell, the decision was reversed.
‘There will be a similar attempt before our next annual conference. We must, at all costs, hold that line.’
Allaun has learnt nothing and forgotten nothing. He is quite prepared to go through the whole shabby scenario again with nothing but a greater determination to win. But there are some real lessons to be learnt from the movement of the early sixties.
 
It was, of course, a Labour government, that of Clement Attlee in 1947 (which included Aneurin Bevan and Harold Wilson), that first decided to manufacture an independent British nuclear ‘deterrent’. True to the undemocratic tradition that characterises nuclear politics, Attlee did not even inform all his Cabinet colleagues of the decision.
For a long time anti-nuclear protest was muted, trapped in the frozen polarities of the Cold War. It was only after the twin crisis of Suez and Hungary had begun to create space for a non-aligned movement that nuclear disarmament began to gain momentum. Initially the momentum came from outside the Labour Party. A group of intellectuals (Bertrand Russell, A.J.P. Taylor, J.B. Priestley) found a base among a new generation of radicalised students, readers of such publications as Universities and Left Review.
It was only after Labour’s third consecutive election defeat in the autumn of 1959 that the debate was taken centrally into the Labour Party. With over four years to go before another election, and considerable demoralisation at the grassroots, both left and right factions in the party could afford a showdown. Nuclear disarmament became just one of the weapons in that struggle. At Easter 1960 a hundred thousand people joined the CND march from Aldermaston to London. And in the autumn of the same year, the Labour Party conference at Scarborough voted for unilateral nuclear disarmament, to the shock, horror and indignation of the bourgeois press and the Gaitskellite party leadership.
In fact, the base of the victory was somewhat shallow. The. constituency party votes had gone against unilateralism (521,000 against and only 260,000 for). The unilateralist victory was secured by the union block votes, especially those of the TGWU (now led, by an accident of mortality, by Frank Cousins after years of right-wing domination) and of the AEU (after a bizarre set of manoeuvres which had led, at the previous month’s TUC, to the AEU voting both for and against unilateralism). The famous Scarborough victory was, in short, a product of two factors; firstly, the emergence of CND as a mass movement of youth and students outside the Labour Party; secondly, an anti-Gaitskell feud by trade union leaders during Labour’s traditional post-electoral leftward lurch.
Having won the victory, the Labour left rested on its constitutional laurels. It did not fight effectively in the constituency parties, nor did it take the argument to the rank-and-file of the unilateralist unions. Indeed, the Campaign for Democratic Socialism, a body hurriedly set up by the pro-Gaitskellites to fight for a reversal of the 1960 decision, did more genuine grass-roots campaigning than the Labour left. The issue was further clouded by the so-called ‘Crossman-Padley compromise’ (devised by the man who became known as Dick Double-Crossman) which called for abandonment of the independent British deterrent but insisted on Britain’s staying within a nuclear NATO (a rationalisation quite acceptable to American imperialism). Foot and Cousins backed the compromise in the interests of party ‘unity’. As a result the unilateralist position was. easily reversed at the following year’s conference. (Just about the only voice in the movement to point out the fragility of the 1960 decision, and to call for a rank-and-file strategy as the only way of preserving victory, was the infinitesimal Socialist Review group.)
Other events now intervened. At the Labour Party conference in 1962 Gaitskell made an anti-Common Market speech which helped to reconcile him to the left. Then, early in 1963 he died suddenly and was replaced as Labour leader by Harold Wilson, a man who had never been a unilateralist, but retained links with the Labour left.
 
In the summer of 1963 the Profumo scandal revealed the decay of Toryism and made Labour electoral victory almost inevitable. The Labour MPs who had backed CND began to realise where their priorities lay. What was the destruction of all life on earth compared with the first Labour government for thirteen years?
The whole left collapsed into servile flattery of Wilson. Thus Aldermaston marcher Michael Foot could write that Wilson had:
‘Other considerable qualities too for a Labour leader – a coherence of ideas, a readiness to follow unorthodox courses, a respect for democracy ... above all a deep and genuine love of the Labour movement.
‘We are told he is tricky, untrustworthy, an addict of political infighting. Of course he is canny, ambitious, often cautious, always cool, usually calculating. And why not?’ (Tribune, 22.2.63)
Faced with the collapse of its lifeline to the Labour Party CND was left floundering. In late 1962 the CND executive issued a new policy draft called Steps Towards Peace, which effectively abandoned unilateralism altogether and stressed nuclear-free zones and more power to the United Nations. Yet such was the magnetic power of the Labour Party (plus the absence of real democratic structures in CND) that only a few people from the extreme left made any attempt at a fight against this new line. The Aldermaston March was suppressed in favour of a one-day stroll across London.
The radicalism that was left in CND was channelled into the direct action (non-violent sit-downs) organised by the Committee of 100. In itself this direct action was a useful break with the parliamentary cretinism of British politics. But without any real political framework it too was doomed to evaporate.
In the run-up to the election Wilson continued to promise that the British ‘independent deterrent’ would be abandoned by a Labour government, while stressing that this was fully in conformity with US. wishes. But six weeks after taking power, Wilson visited US president Lyndon Johnson, and his line was now somewhat different.
‘Wilson proposed an Atlantic Nuclear Force, which excluded the Germans and the French. The British contribution to the ANF, promised Wilson, would be the V-bomber fleet and the full complement of Polaris submarines, whose building would go ahead as planned. Thus the promised “renegotiation” of the Nassau agreement turned out to be a proposal to remove “the German finger from the nuclear trigger”, and the explicit promise that Britain should stop making her own nuclear weapons was clearly broken by the decision to continue with the building of the British Polaris.’ (P. Foot, The Politics of Harold Wilson, Penguin, 1968, p. 212)
True, Wilson did appoint a minister of disarmament (Lord Chalfont). He also appointed a minister of defence (Denis Healey) who cut defence expenditure from 7 per cent of GNP to 6.3 per cent. But that was still the highest figure of any Western European country, and Healey’s cuts were achieved by rationalisation of expenditure, not by any effective disarmament.
So a mass movement of enormous potential was squandered because there was no alternative to tailing the Labour Party. Twenty years on it is no surprise that a Labour Party, starved of rank-and-file activists, is casting envious eyes on the hundred thousand CND marchers. Tribune headlines ‘Common Market and nuclear disarmament could be Labour’s election winner.’ (10.10.80)
But we must not let history repeat itself. There are two roads for CND -to sink into the Labour Party swamp, or to link up with the struggle for the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism. The clear lesson of 1960-64 is that only the latter is a ‘realistic’ course.
 



Simon Raven was expelled from his public school, Charterhouse, for homosexuality; he failed to complete his postgraduate studies at Cambridge University because of idleness; and he was discreetly thrown out of the Army (and warned off the Turf) for gambling debts. He is, then, a man who knows some of the main institutions of the ruling class from the inside. If he has been excluded from them, it is not because he has any principled opposition to them, but solely because they have imposed limits on his self-indulgence. Raven’s writings – especially Alms for Oblivion, a cycle of tea novels – may help us a little in drawing the map of Tory Britain.
I recall, shortly after the Lewisham anti-NF demonstration in 1977, watching a late-night by-election programme on television. The Labour representative, a somewhat intense ‘intellectual’, was demanding that SWP members be put in concentration camps or psychiatric hospitals. The Tory, however, was Angus Maude (now a close associate of Thatcher), and he was taking a much more affable, relaxed line, confident that everything would ‘blow over’. Perplexed by this paradox, I realised that the only way I could make sense of it was to see Maude as Raven’s Captain Detterling.
Detterling is a fixer, a man whose relaxed cynicism is based on a pragmatic willingness to bend almost any principle, but who is never shaken in the belief that privilege in general, and his own very considerable privilege in particular, is absolutely justified and assured. As one of his friends puts it, he is ‘callous, cowardly, corrupt and viciously smug’.
Raven gives us a whole gallery of Tories. Four of the nine key characters in Alms for Oblivion are Tory MPs, and three achieve ministerial status. Not that he writes ‘political novels’ in the normal sense. We never actually see any of his
MPs in parliament, and indeed they are so busy with blackmail, indulgence in sex, drink, cricket and expensive meals, and lining their own pockets that one wonders how they ever find time to attend parliament. For Raven politics is mainly intrigue and backstairs manoeuvring. If you’re fed up with reading the Tory press pontificating about the re-selection of Labour MPs, give yourself a change by reading Raven’s account of a Tory selection in Friends in Low Places.
Alms for Oblivion gives us ten novels, each self-contained, but all interlocking with the rest. There are nine main characters, and at least a hundred minor ones. Raven is an ingenious and skilful narrator, and much of the charm of the work derives from the way that half-forgotten characters reappear in new settings, and minor incidents that pass unnoticed suddenly acquire significance. What makes Raven an excellent storyteller, always able to exploit a detail or an accident, is his Tory view of history. In his own words ‘Human effort and goodwill are persistently vulnerable to the malice of time, chance and the rest of the human race.’ In other words, all efforts to change the world are futile.
The individual destinies traced in the cycle are intertwined with twenty-eight years of British history. The cycle opens with a memorial service to celebrate the end of World War II; it ends in the summer of 1973, just a few months before the Middle East war finally brought the post-war boom to an end.
What Raven chronicles over this period is the declining world role of British imperialism. The institutions that Raven knows and dissects are inescapably tied up with imperialism. The public schools trained colonial administrators, and the army kept ‘order’. Yet history has condemned British imperialism.
So deeply is Raven entrenched in the British imperialist dream that some of the novels are based on the absurd fantasy that the United States actually organised such anti-British liberation movements as EOKA in Cyprus. Above all, Anthony Eden’s Suez adventure in 1956 is the point at which the utter bankruptcy of British imperialism is revealed; two of the ten novels are focused on the Suez events.
But the old gang are determined to survive the decline of Empire. To do so they have to adapt themselves to a changing world. How they do so is suggested symbolically in an incident that comes in the earliest novel, Fielding Gray, and shows just how important sport is for moulding the ideology of the ruling class. At the end of a tightly balanced cricket match the batsman simply stops the ball dead at his feet. With the approval of the opposing captain he picks up the ball to throw back to the bowler, who then appeals. The umpire (Somerset Lloyd-James, future blackmailer and Tory MP) gives him out, declaring ‘No one can give a player permission to break the rules’. The bowler had breached all the conventions of gentlemanly play; but the rules are unbreachable. This might provide the moral for all Raven’s work – you may, indeed you will have to, break the conventions, but the rules are sacred.
So Raven traces the way in which the old ruling group, the products of the public schools and Oxford and Cambridge, adapted themselves in the fifties and sixties to the changing pattern of British society. The Marquis Canteloupe, whose ancestor was in charge of the other-rank brothel at Agincourt, makes a fortune from turning his stately home into a profitable company called Cant-Fun. The whole milieu is a parasitic one – the army, education, politics, publishing and advertising. Productive industry never soils Raven’s pages.
Raven undoubtedly owes much of his success to the lurid accounts of sexual activity in his novels. At times one feels that with each novel there is a frantic search to find a variant even more esoteric than those in previous volumes. By, the time we get to Sasha Grimes, who can only make it by miming the crucifixion, we begin to wonder if it’s really worth bothering.
But behind the sensationalism, Raven applies the same principles to sex as he does to politics. At first sight he is tolerant and broadminded. Many of his (male) characters are bisexual. Fielding Gray, the central figure and obviously in part a self-portrait of Raven, is haunted through his adult life by the only person he ever loved, his school-friend Christopher Roland, whom he drove to suicide.
But if the conventions may be handled laxly, the rules remain. None of his characters would dream of ‘coming out’. Raven knows well that on occasion the sexual double standards of the ruling class as in the Profumo case of 1963 – can have an explosive force to shake the credibility of the elite.
Finally, Raven offers us a mirror in which we can see ourselves as Tories see us. For there are socialists in Raven’s world. Their values are perceived as alien and threatening.
The worst novel of the cycle is Places Where They Sing, dealing with the student movement of the late sixties. Here Raven lurches from the grotesque (a girl who in the heat of sexual ecstasy shouts ‘Marx, Mao, Marcuse, Fidel, Che’) to reactionary fantasy (everything is blamed on the mysterious outside agitator Mayerston). Thus Raven shows us, not only the twists and turns of the Tory mind, but also its fatal blind-spots.
 



Eurocommunism: Myth or Reality?
Paolo Filo della Torre, Edward Mortimer and Jonathan Story (eds.)
Penguin, £1.95
To publish a paperback entitled Eurocommunism: myth or reality? is to answer the question before one starts. The authors of this collection of boring if fact-filled essays have a vested interest in making the myth into a reality. As long as the Eurocommunist bosses continue to vacillate and manoeuvre, they will need well-heeled commentators to explain their every movement to a waiting world.
The only trouble is that the various authors, while honest and accurate enough at the level of detailed fact, don’t really understand the political problem at all.
Time and again they come back to a strange entity called the Leninist ‘vanguard party’, until we realise that they actually believe that the Communist Parties of Europe were, until at least the early seventies, really and truly preparing to seize power by violence. Small matter that all the facts they themselves quote contradict this quaint notion; they are irrevocably hooked on it.
Stuart Holland, from whom one might have hoped for something marginally better, even claims that Alvaro Cunhal, of the Portuguese CP, ‘still believes in the spirit of Petrograd and all power to the Soviets.’ (There was little evidence of this when the PCP was breaking strikes and grabbing hold of the trade union machine in 1974–75.) And if you don’t know what the CPs are now, it’s a bit hard to work out what they are turning into. (There’s not much point in speculating what sort of butterfly a caterpillar will turn into if the caterpillar is really an earthworm.)
Again, Neil McInnes tells us that ‘the communist party has no memory: its members are mostly young people, honestly ignorant of the past; few of them stay in the party for long; and the records are party secrets.’
Leaving aside the contempt for working people that this remark betrays, it is, purely and simply, a grotesque untruth. (When I was in France in 1977, the Khrushchev ‘secret speech’ of 1956 was making front page news in the national press. An awareness of history is an absolutely central component in the current crisis of the CPs.)
The authors do have some inkling of the trap that the Eurocommunists are caught in. If they move too close to the social democrats then they give the social democrats the initiative; if they move back to the left they condemn themselves to isolation. Indeed, with the CPs having suffered electoral setback in Italy, a paralysing faction-fight in France, and stagnation in Spain, the Eurocommunists may have already shot their bolt.
Doubtless their decline will provide more copy for muck-raking Kremlinologists, but as far as the real political crisis in Europe is concerned, the key issue is ‘Eurosocialism’, not ‘Eurocommunism’. Perhaps we shall see another little volume devoted to ‘Eurosocialism’. If so, it will doubtless be deferential and platitudinous. The real allies of the bourgeoisie cannot be subjected to the same critical gaze as their mythical foes.
One theme which warms the hearts of the contributors is the Eurocommunist relapse into nationalism. Neil McInnes notes with glee ‘communism’s failure to conquer nationalism. The very vice in socialist internationalism that brought Lenin to denounce it and found a new International was discovered to have eaten the heart out of communist internationalism too.’ Santiago Carillo, he will be pleased to note, agrees with him. ‘Life’, he is quoted as saying by another contributor, ‘shows that vitality of national sentiment is a factor of enormous force.’
But proletarian internationalism will not lie down and die quite so easily. Nationalism retains its grip on workers, not because it is rooted in their nature, but because their own struggles have been confined within national limits, and, above all, because their self-styled leaders have capitulated to it all down the line. One need only note the hypocrisy of the Joint Declaration of the French and Italian CPs (15 November 1975) which speaks of ‘free movement of persons inside and outside their country’, and contrast it with the French CPs shameful line on immigration.
To pander to the worst prejudices of workers and then to prove from this very pandering the ‘vitality of national sentiment’, such is the vicious circle of self-fulfilling prophecy that the charlatans of Eurocommunism have collapsed into.
 



UnCommon Market
Stuart Holland
Macmillan, £2.95
Stuart Holland played a creditable role in the Brixton dole picket, and is currently being attacked by Len Murray for taking action which should be the minimal duty of any MP elected under the label of ‘Labour’. It would be a pleasure, therefore, to report that he had written a useful and interesting book. Unfortunately honesty requires me to state that it is a boring irrelevance.
In 1975 the SWP called for a ‘No’ vote in the Common Market referendum, because we saw the ‘yes’ campaign as consolidating Wilson’s links with British capitalism and clearing the path for wage controls. However, we have nothing in common with those elements in the Labour left and CP who try to blame the current crisis on EEC membership and want to launch a campaign for withdrawal. Such a campaign can only be a diversion from the real targets. Doubtless it would be popular – witness the flood of sub-racist filth churned out by the media because French fishermen fighting for jobs have screwed up Brits’ holidays, But it would be profoundly anti-working class.
Holland, as one of the subtler lefts, is hedging his bets. In his Preface he tells us the book is ‘analytical rather than prescriptive’ (in plain English, it is irrelevant to action), and denies that it is the ‘rationale for an anti-EEC case’.
The valid point in Holland’s argument is that the Common Market doesn’t work, even in its own terms. Capitalism, historically embodied in the nation state, cannot create effective international institutions (though it may create temporary blocs and working agreements). Holland shows how the free market ideology of the EEC ensures that the Rome Treaty’s provisions are ‘concerned with preventing abuses to competition and the market mechanism rather than with providing a framework for joint intervention to achieve what the market itself cannot do.’ Thus the EEC has failed over twenty-odd years to establish a meaningful transport policy; all it has done is to forbid individual governments from protecting, people and the environment against hordes of giant lorries. The Common Agricultural Policy benefits rich landowners, not poor peasants, while raising food prices for workers. Monetary integration, he argues, ‘is irrelevant to the real needs of Western Europe now.’
So far, so good. If anyone in the whole wide world (except for Williams, Owen and Rodgers) still believes the EEC has anything to do with real internationalism, Holland will help disabuse them. For the rest of us, he has little to offer. He does offer reforms of the EEC institutions which, he claims, ‘could increase support for closer cooperation between governments at the European level’. Maybe. But do we really want closer co-operation between Thatcher, Schmidt and Giscard d’Estaing. Far better for us if they are at each other’s throats.
A few pages later Holland tells us that ‘joint action by labour at an international level in response to multinational capital tends to be rare, temporary, and relatively ineffective.’ Once again, true enough; But to note the fact is hardly helpful; what we need is a discussion of how this State of affairs can be changed. But Holland passes on. Advice to governments on how to link up, but none for workers. For doubtless Holland, despite his guest appearance at Brixton dole, sees his future with governments rather than with workers. And that is why his book cannot help us much.
 



There is a town-twinning arrangement between the French port of Boulogne and Gdansk in Poland. And if Polish workers gave us the most significant victory of the summer, the Boulogne fishermen put up a heroic if unsuccessful fight for the right to work.
The French fishing industry is in deep crisis. During the seventies the number of fishermen in France fell from 36,000 to 24,000 (the number of jobless in France is now lower than in Britain, but still well over a million). Yet the French government was willing to offer aid to the fishing industry only on condition that wage costs were cut – i.e. that the size of crews doing a dangerous and exhausting job should be cut. The fishermen’s main grievance was the rising cost of fuel. Over recent years fuel prices have risen six-fold, while fish prices have only doubled. Yet in 1979 French oil companies doubled their profits. French fishermen tend to have to travel especially long distances to the fishing grounds, which makes fuel costs a particularly heavy burden.
The most exciting thing about the fishermen’s strike was the way in which it brought to life what is generally one of the most dreary clichés of Marxist theory – the class alliance between the proletariat and the petty-bourgeoisie. The French fishing industry is remarkable in that it unites in the same trade unions wage-earning fishermen employed by big companies, like those in Boulogne, and self-employed artisan fishers like those in Brittany. (This situation goes back to the thirties when the CGT and the Catholic unions competed to organise the self-employed fishermen.)
While the Boulogne fishermen merely took strike action they had little impact. But when, in mid-August, the blockade tactic caught on like wildfire, it united in struggle fishermen who were paid according to a variety of systems – either wages plus bonuses, or sharing the proceeds of the catch. Traditional distrust between Breton and Normandy fishermen, based on earlier disputes, also evaporated. Demands for a guaranteed fish-price and, above all, a fuel subsidy, forged a magnificent unity in struggle.
The blockade tactic proved, in the first instance, highly effective. On August 19th there was what amounted to a picket line right round the French coast from Dunkirk to Corsica. The largest French shipowners, the Compagnie Generale Maritime, lost nearly half a million pounds in the first week of the dispute, the port of Le Havre claimed the blockade was costing half a million pounds a day. A hundred thousand processing distribution workers on shore depend on the fishing industry; at Boulogne 900 fishermen on strike caused five thousand lay-offs on shore.
Moreover, the struggle received impressive solidarity. The Boulogne fishermen got substantial financial support from the locality. The support of the fishermen’s wives was magnificent and total. At a demonstration in Boulogne on August 13th fishermen were joined by steel-workers, hospital workers and railway workers. The blockade was supplemented by vigorous and imaginative tactics. Boulogne fishermen regularly invaded employers’ offices; the CGT organised a pirate radio in support of the strike.
The vigour and extent of the strike posed the French government with some real problems. The pro-competition, anti-subsidy ideology which is at the centre of the government’s economic policy meant that it could not concede on the key demand of fuel prices. Moreover, to make concessions at the very beginning of the autumn negotiating round would have risked opening the floodgates to other sectors. Yet to break the strike was also not so easy. The traditional riot-police could not be used against seaborne picket lines – the navy would have to be brought in. But the navy is not a force with any experience of strike-breaking. Many sailors in the French navy come from fishing families, and some of the naval conscripts are themselves fishermen. The navy is popular among sailors and one of its principal peace-time duties is helping fishermen in distress.
For a short time in mid-August it seemed as if the French government was bewildered by the situation. Transport minister Le Theule was left to carry the can while the rest of the cabinet lounged on the beaches. But in fact the French government strategy was rather more subtle than it appeared at first sight.
The apparent neglect of the situation was designed to weaken the unity of the struggle by giving time for contradictions between the various groups of fishermen to emerge. The government steadfastly refused overall discussion, saying the problems were different in the different ports, and would have to be settled by separate negotiations. This distracted attention from the key unifying issue – fuel prices – and encouraged differences to develop. By sitting back the government avoided the unpopularity of sending in riot police and instead allowed clashes to develop between the fishermen and other groups of workers – especially lorry-drivers – as well as with holidaymakers, all of which necessarily weakened morale and solidarity. When the navy was sent in, it was not to break the blockade as a whole, but on the pretext of safeguarding oil-supplies (in fact France had over three months’ supplies at the time). Two ports only were attacked, Antifer and Fos-sur-Mer, the latter of which is on the Mediterranean, far away from the main centres of militancy.
Such a ‘divide and rule’ strategy could have been defeated – but only if the unity of the fishermen themselves had been maintained by united organisation. Unfortunately there was deep and public disunity between the two unions involved, the CP-dominated CGT and the CFDT with its looser links to the Socialist Party. (The Boulogne men are divided 50–50 between the two unions, while the CFDT had most of the artisan fishers). Both unions seemed to be more interested in next year’s Presidential election than in winning the strike. The CFDT was anxious to prove itself ‘responsible’ as the ally of a potential governmental party, while the CGT was concerned to prove its ‘militancy’ by outflanking the CFDT to the left – without actually making that militancy concrete.
The strike originally erupted when the workers rejected the compromise proposed by the unions (reduction of crews from 22 to 20, instead of the 18 demanded by the employers). The unions backed the strike, but failed to take the measures to spread the struggle that could have been crucial at the high-point of struggle (around August 20th). The CGT did nothing to involve dockers and other port-workers in the strike, let alone link the struggle to other strikes, like the long fight by railway tracklayers, which lasted from June to September. If there was spontaneous nationalism among the fishermen (demands for import controls, hostility to British and German fishermen) the unions did not fight it but actually encouraged it. The protest by Seguy, the CGT leader, at the use of the navy, was strong, but purely verbal.
Thus it is no surprise that the strike fragmented and was defeated. The Breton strikers went back, in a mood of bitterness, by September 8th, and the last blockade (Fecamp, near Le Havre) was lifted on September 10th. But it was only on September 18th that the Boulogne fishermen voted, by a majority of 399 out of 699, to resume work, The gains, claimed as concessions by the CFDT, were minimal – a promise to cut hours that is meaningless in the conditions of non-stop work that prevails on a fishing-boat, and an agreement that crews stay at 22 pending negotiations (which will almost certainly lead to cuts). The CGT quite correctly denounced the CFDT for accepting such limited gains; but by urging the Boulogne men to stay out, without any prospect of victory, for an extra week, the CGT seemed more interested in its political image than in helping the fishermen. Bitter lessons from a struggle of magnificent potential.
 



‘“Our theory is not a dogma, but a guide to action,” Marx and Engels always said, ridiculing the mere memorizing and repetition of “formulas”, that at best are capable only of marking out general tasks which are necessarily modifiable by the concrete economic and political conditions of each particular period of this historical process.’ (Lenin) [1]
‘The differential character and trajectory of the Scandinavian social formations, from the Dark Ages onwards, form a fascinating problem for historical materialism, and a necessary control for any general Marxist typology of European development, that is all too often neglected.’ (Perry Anderson) [2]
To produce, over twenty years, 117 issues of a theoretical journal [3], each containing some 60,000 words; to present to English readers numerous contributions to Marxist theory written in French, German, Italian, Swedish, Russian and other languages; to make major contributions to Marxist debate in the fields of philosophy, economics, aesthetics, history, feminism, etc.: all this is no mean achievement. It is one that cannot be denied by even the most impeccably bourgeois sources: ‘truly a magnificent achievement’ (Times Higher Education Supplement); ‘one of the most important reviews on the British intellectual scene’ (Le Monde); ‘arguably the most influential political review in the country’ (Guardian). [4]
Such an achievement deserves, and requires, fraternal but rigorous criticism. One important attempt at this has recently been made by Edward Thompson, a founder of the Review, in his The Poverty of Theory, [5] three out of the four essays in which are, directly or obliquely, aimed against the current editorial team of NLR – Thompson’s sparkling polemical style – only occasionally marred by self-indulgence – and the transparent sincerity of his commitment to political activism gives his work an imposing length. None the less, it must be recognised that Thompson’s political standpoint is in fact clearly to the right of that of NLR; his political strategy is openly Popular Frontist and anti-Leninist; he is concerned for ‘national sovereignty’; he sees both wings of the IRA as ‘terrorists’, the anti-NF action at Lewisham as a ‘provocative incident’ and the upsurge of 1968 as ‘a rich kids revolutionary farce. [6] Moreover, Thompson’s characterisations of NLR are often impressionistic and selective; Perry Anderson (NLR’s editor since 1962), has little difficulty in showing, in his reply to Thompson, that it is not guilty of some of the obsessions and omissions that Thompson accuses it of, and that, indeed, it is very much more eclectic than Thompson’s critique would suggest. [7]
All history is selective; but a brief history of NLR faces particular problems. In its twenty years NLR has published several hundred full length articles and a similar number of shorter pieces and notes. The range of both themes and quality is daunting. The possessor of a complete file has some valuable material – for example Gramsci’s Soviets in Italy, a contemporary commentary on the Italian factory occupations of 1919–20 (NLR 51/28), or Martin Nicolaus’ The Unknown Marx, which presented in 1968 the Grundrisse, at the time scarcely heard of by most Marxists. (NLR 48/41). For the lovers of the more esoteric archive material there is the correspondence between Isaac Deutscher and Heinrich Brandler (NLR 105/56); for the lovers of the retrospectively grotesque then is Conor Cruise O’Brien arguing that if the Easter Rising had only been postponed until 1918 it might have been successful (NLR 37/4); and for those who do not get all their satisfaction from theory there is a very practical (if under-theorised) piece of advice on contraceptive methods (NLR 23/57).
Obviously one article cannot confront this mass of material. The NLR Editorial Committee has published many articles as documentation or as contribution to debate, rather than because its approves. It would be easy, but fruitless, to score points by picking out the weakest items. Instead I have tried to concentrate attention on those articles which seem to me to be the most serious attempts to confront major problems. Inevitably I lay myself open to accusations of distortion by omission.
A history of New Left Review is more than an account of the evolution of one small group of intellectuals. It offers the possibility of examining the development of the British Left over the last two decades. Isaac Deutscher, speaking at the meeting that launched NLR, proclaimed, ‘Forward to the Red Sixties!’ The Red Sixties have given way to the Not-So-Red Seventies and the Not-Yet-Coloured-in Eighties. The problems NLR has faced – or failed to face – have been common to us all. International Socialism was launched in 1960 – the same year as NLR – and aimed itself largely at the same audience, the new generation radicalised by CND.
But while IS was always linked to an organisation, however small, NLR’s claims have been on the level of pure theory. The crisis of theory has been a crucial component of the crisis of the revolutionary left in the seventies [8], and a judgement on NLR raises the whole problem of the relation of theory and practice.
Because for NLR this has meant, from the beginning, a stress on the key political role of intellectuals:
‘The full conversion of the Conservative working class, for instance, can only be achieved through a detour through the sociological groups that generate the consciousness which mystifies it. In other words, the necessary ideological contest for a permanent majority must also be fought and won where the ideology originates – in the intelligentsia.’ [9]
More recently, however, Anderson has become deeply, even masochistically, aware of the divorce between theory and practice. At the end of his essay The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci he notes ‘The structural divorce between original Marxist theory and the main organizations of the working class in Europe has yet to be historically resolved.’ (NLR 100/78). And his book Considerations on Western Marxism [10] concludes lugubriously: ‘All that can be said is that when the masses themselves speak, theoreticians – of the sort of the West has produced for fifty years – will necessarily be silent.’
International Socialism has always argued for a radically different concept of theory – as a ‘guide to action’. The more the masses speak (and act), the more crucially necessary theory will be. But the aim of this article is not to compare the output of NLR and IS (however favourable to us a comparison of the files of the two journals would be). It is to assess NLR in terms of its own theoretical pretensions. In order to do so I have divided the article into two sections. First comes a historical sketch of the main phases of NLR’s development, in relation to the changing priorities of the situation; then follows a survey of its contribution to the main problems facing socialist theory today. [11]

History of NLR
(i) Origins
The origins of the British New Left lay first and foremost in the political crisis of the British Communist Party in 1956, provoked by Kruschev’s ‘secret’ speech and the Russian invasion of Hungary. While nearly ten thousand members left the Party, an unprecedented debate arose around the history, theory and practice of Communist politics. [12]
One group of dissidents was centred on Edward Thompson and John Saville, who between July and November 1956 produced three issues of a duplicated journal called The Reasoner. They were suspended from the Party and resigned following the Russian intervention in Hungary. [13]
Thompson and Saville were not, at this stage, aiming for an Alternative organisation, but for a journal in which problems could be debated and clarified. In reply to the CP Executive, they cited the case of Labour Monthly, published by Party members, but not under democratic control of the Party. [14] And by November 1956 Saville was writing to Thompson ‘I am asking for an English Marxist Esprit – which to me is the best periodical afloat.’ [15]
What he got was the New Reasoner, which produced ten issues; between 1957 and 1959. Among those who were associated with it were Ken Alexander, Doris Lessing, Peter Worsley, Mervyn Jones, Ralph Miliband, Christopher Hill, Iris Murdoch and Eric Heffer. In general, the core of the New Reasoner group were comrades who had spent several years in the Communist Party, and still identified with many of its traditions; they described themselves as ‘a journal of the democratic Communist opposition. ‘ [16]
A rather different group was represented by the Universities and Left Review, also founded in 1957. Some of the founders were ex-CP students, but ULR did not have the same sense of allegiance to the Communist tradition. What ULR did have was access to a new generation of young people being radicalised by a different set of circumstances. Repulsion at Cold War rhetoric and a Gaitskellite Labour Party led young people to flood into the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. At the same time the fifties was a period of complex cultural transition; there is no space to analyse this here, but the developments may be imagined as taking place within a field whose four corners consisted of Elvis Presley, Lonnie Donegan, John Osborne and Kingsley Amis. ULR played an important role in organising for the first CND March to Aldermaston in 1958 (at a time when the CP was still opposed to unilateralism), and also ran a coffee bar, The Partisan, in Carlisle Street (below the offices of the present journal), where there was ‘good skiffle and folk’. [17]
ULR and the New Reasoner were both overwhelmingly in the hands of intellectuals, though the New Reasoner may have had a periphery of ex-CP workers. The only place where the embryonic New Left seems to have had a working class base was in the former CP stronghold of Fife, where ex-CP members formed the Fife Socialist League, which succeeded in winning a local council election, and taking 4,886 votes in the 1959 General Election. [18]
1956–60 was a period of vigorous and open discussion. But the liveliness of debate concealed some fundamental ambiguities which were to lay up trouble for the New Left.
To begin with, the New Left was ambivalent on the whole question of Marxism. Many of the contributors to ULR were openly hostile to the whole Communist tradition; thus Charles Taylor: ‘Stalinism did not just add itself to Communism, it was not an external element deflecting the main stream of Communist development. In every real sense it has grown out of Communism.’ [19] And even Saville and Thompson were writing in 1959: ‘We tend to see “Marxism” less as a self-sufficient system, more as a major creative influence within a wider socialist tradition.’ [20]
Of course the dogmatic adhesion to ‘marxism’ in itself guarantees nothing; but the New Left’s ambivalence about Marxism paved the way for other problems. The New Left revulsion against Stalinism was sincere enough, but it was not worked through in theory. All too often the critique was couched in liberal terms. When Thompson launched his critique of Stalinism inside the CP with his article Winter Wheat in Omsk, he quoted Milton twice; George Matthews in reply cited Shelley. [21] The whole debate on democratic centralism raged between a Stalinist model of the monolithic party and a liberal or even libertarian rejection of it; only a few individuals – Eric Hobsbawm, Cliff Slaughter [22] – tried to present a Leninist alternative. Likewise, the first editorial of the New Reasoner compared ‘the state orthodoxy of “Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism”’ to ‘its stunted opposite, dogmatic Trotskyism’. [23]
Hence the concern with ‘humanism’ in the early New Left. Once again Thompson was the most eloquent advocate of socialist humanism: ‘Stalinism is socialist theory and practice which has lost the ingredient of humanity’. [24] The New Left, however, ‘is humanist because it places once again real men and women at the centre of socialist theory and aspiration, instead of the resounding abstractions – the Party, Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism, the Two Camps, The Vanguard of the Working-Class – so dear to Stalinism.’ [25]
The debate about humanism was to be a central theme in the subsequent evolution of the New Left, so it is worthwhile insisting on its roots in the post-1956 period. The humanism of the early New Left was an expression of authentic revolt against the mechanical deformations of Stalinist theory and the sheer barbarity of Stalinist practice. At the same time it represented a failure to follow through the theoretical logic of anti-Stalinism. Clearly, in terms of the classic Marxist model of base and superstructure, there was a contradiction between saying that the Russian state-owned economy was socialist, and recognising the non-socialist nature of the legal, political and cultural practices of Stalinism. There were two paths leading from this point. One led to a re-examination of the socialist credentials of Russian social and economic institutions; the other – socialist humanism – led to a greater emphasis on the capacity, for good or for ill, of human agency. In this sense Kruschev’s ‘secret’ speech, with its stress on Stalin’s personality defects, was a profoundly humanist document. If one man could do so much harm, other men and women, by dint of trying, could do a deal of good.
The theoretical issues would take years to resolve. In the shorter jerm the anti-dogmatism of the New Left tended to mean a failure to draw the lines between reform and revolution. Before the founding of New Left Review, ULR and the New Reasoner cooperated in 1959 to issue a pamphlet – A Socialist Wages Plan, by Ken Alexander and John Hughes, in which the authors argued that a Labour Government and the unions should come together to plan a redistribution of incomes. [26] Once again, the ghost of this bureaucratic Utopia stayed to haunt the New Left for several years I to come.
 
(ii) The first twelve issues
New Left Review, born of a merger between ULR and the New Reasoner, produced its first issue in January I960. [27] In style it was radically different from the NLR of later years; its front cover depicted Harold Macmillan gazing in bemused fashion at what was apparently some piece of nuclear weaponry; and inside it contained a wide range of articles relating to the political and cultural concerns of the day. Ralph Miliband analysed the Labour Party and Raphael Samuel working-class Tory voters. Michael Barratt Brown reported from Yugoslavia and Michael Kullman described the election in North Kensington where Oswald Mosley had made a sinister intervention. There were debates on strategy for CND and non-violence in the US black movement, and a transcript of a discussion between Raymond Williams and Richard Hoggart. Arnold Wesker contributed Act II of his play The Kitchen, and John Braine an essay on a provincial cinema. Book reviews covered Chartism, the falling rate of profit and Lolita.
With nearly 9,000 copies of the first issue distributed (NLR 2/69), it clearly had a significant audience. NLR conceived its function as being both propaganda and agitation. The first issue set the task as follows:
‘The Left Clubs and New Left centres – the New Left in general – must pioneer a way forward by working for socialism as the old missionaries worked: as if consumed by a fire that is capable of lighting the darker places in our society. We have to go out into towns and cities, universities and technical colleges, youth clubs and Trade Union branches, and – as Morris said – make socialists there.’ (NLR 1/2)
This of course, was the age when Macmillan’s slogan ‘You’ve a never had it so good’ had a certain plausibility, and the Labour Right was arguing that capitalism was permanently changed. Articles like Charles Taylor’s What’s Wrong with Capitalism? (NLR 2/5), which probed the nature of capitalist priorities, by contrasting expenditure on advertising and packaging with that on education and health, were of great help in arguing for the relevance of socialism in 1960. A team of NLR supporters produced a daily four-page bulletin for the 1960 Labour Party Conference at Scarborough (NLR 6/71), where a nuclear disarmament resolution was carried against Gaitskell’s opposition.
But behind the propaganda and the activism, the ambiguities of the earlier period persisted. Edward Thompson launched a debate on fundamentals with his article Revolution (NLR 3/3), in which he rejected both Parliamentary evolutionism and ‘the cataclysmic model of revolution’ which he argued ‘owes more to Lenin, Trotsky, and Stalin than to Marx’ (NLR 3/6). The rather blurred advocacy of a transition involving both Parliament and mass mobilisation ended with an appeal to the ‘long and tenacious revolutionary tradition of the British commoner.’ (NLR 3/9) The debate involved a broad cross-section of the left, including Judith Hart (‘E.P. Thompson’s distinction between revolution and evolution is unconstructive, and poses an artificial dilemma.’ [NLR 5/58]) and Eric Heffer, who after criticising Thompson’s treatment of the State, concluded that ‘even now, in all Labour-controlled local authorities, a system of workers’ control could be introduced in all departments’ (NLR 5/60). Thompson’s extended review of Raymond Williams’ The Long Revolution (NLR 9/24 and 10/34) takes the debate further, and perhaps brings out better than anything else the ambiguity between the Marxist and non-Marxist currents in the New Left.
The debate was not academic; it related to the whole question of NLR’s orientation. That the working class was important nobody denied; but was it more than that? C. Wright Mills, an American sociologist who had great influence on the early New Left, wrote Letter to the New Left in which he described the concept of the historic agency of the working class as a ‘labour metaphysic’ and ‘a legacy from Victorian Marxism that is now quite unrealistic.’ (NLR 5/22)
In turn the absence of a commitment to the working class threatened the unity of NLR’s preoccupations. As Mike Kidron (then editor of International Socialism) pointed out in an acute letter, the relation of theory and practice was jeopardised:
‘Here is an intellectual liberalism that makes equals of all problems. True, class and class consciousness are recognised as fields of enquiry, but so is much else, and all so well segregated. Little is done to bridge them. I defy anyone to see in the spate of words on cinema and sentiment, painting and politics the primacy of a single galvanising element, ... In a word, to my mind IS is geared to action; NLR is not. Action demands priorities of preoccupation; inaction can do without.’ (NLR 7/59)
More immediate aspects of political strategy also suffered. The years I960 and 1961 saw a deep ferment in the Labour Party around the issues of nuclear disarmament and nationalisation. But NLR was unable to develop a clear strategy for intervention in the Labour Party struggle. In striving to hold together a disparate bag of political tendencies, it could opt neither to wage a determined fight inside it, nor to try to build an organisation outside it. Its advice on electoral strategy was no more than a moralistic laissez-faire:
‘Where the candidates are good, we should concentrate our forces, swing the enthusiasm of a Left Club behind someone who will vote NO to the Bomb, when the rest of the parliamentary fraternity troop through the door into no-man’s-land: where the candidate is weak, bad, compromising, we should draw away from political blackmail as if from the plague.’ (NLR 1/2)
The next issue contained a delightful comment from Peter Sedgwick, who imagined the city of Lidchester where all four MPs were killed simultaneously in a collision of Daimlers on the M1. In the ensuing by-elections Lidchester Left Club endorsed Labour, Liberal and Independent Left candidates according to circumstances, and equipped itself with a loudspeaker van with sliding panels so that the slogan could be changed as constituency boundaries were crossed – ‘a vote won for Labour on the wrong side of a street would mean the squandering of Socialist energies upon a scoundrel’ (NLR 2/70).
The same ambiguity developed at the level of organisation. NLR saw itself as more than a journal, and its audience as more than passive readers. Left Clubs were formed in many areas – at the peak NLR listed some forty contact addresses. There was a genuine concern to establish Left Clubs in industrial ‘non-University towns’ (NLR 4/70), and to make the clubs into active ‘centres of socialism’ (NLR 6/72). But in practice the Clubs could be no more than discussion groups; they had no control over the Review, nor did they have a coherent strategy towards the Labour Party, CND etc. Moreover, the debate on organisation was effectively blocked from the top. Too many of the leading figures in the New Left had been repelled by Stalinism, yet retained an opposition to Trotskyism, for a fruitful discussion of forms of organisation which might combine democracy with centralism. Thompson complained vigorously that he was ‘getting bored with some of the members of “Marxist” sects who pop up at Left Club meetings around the country to demand in a your money or your life tone whether the speaker is a Marxist, whether he “believes in” the class struggle and whether he is willing to give instant adhesion to this or that version of the Creed’ (NLR 6/21). Anyone who has encountered the Socialist Labour League (and its successor the WRP) will admit that Thompson had some reason to be irritated. [28] But Thompson in fact used the abuse of one sectarian current to evade the real debate; a passing compliment to International Socialism (‘the most constructive journal with a Trotskyist tendency in this country’ (NLR 6/22) in no way made up for this. The real questions were simply not asked.
So, by the end of 1961, New Left Review was clearly riddled by its own internal contradictions. Whether these would raise it to a higher level remained to be seen.
 
(iii) The ‘coup’
With the special double issue 13–14 (January–April 1962), NLR changed its form. The magazine style, with pictures on the cover and inside, gave way to the sober, picture-less, book-like format which, with minor alterations, it retains at the present time. Stuart Hall, who had edited the first twelve issues, retired. An Editorial Committee took over the responsibility for the production of the Review; from number 15 Perry Anderson became Editor, assisted by a committee including Tom Nairn and Robin Blackburn. With several additions and a few departures this became the nucleus of the present Editorial Committee. The original Editorial Board abandoned responsibility for the journal, but was to continue to deal with ‘other matters’ (NLR 12/13). Two years later it was announced that the New Left Board had been ‘dissolved’ (NLR 24/112). The network of Left Clubs seems to have collapsed. [29]
Thompson has given a typically colourful account of the circumstances of the transition:
‘Early in 1962, when the affairs of New Left Review were in some confusion, the New Left Board invited an able contributor, Perry Anderson, to take over the editorship. We found (as we had hoped) in Comrade Anderson, the decision and the intellectual coherence necessary to ensure the review’s continuance. More than that, we discovered that we had appointed a veritable Dr Beeching of the socialist intelligentsia. All the uneconomic branch-lines and socio-cultural sidings of the New Left which were, in any case, carrying less and less traffic, were abruptly closed down. The main lines of the review underwent an equally ruthless modernisation. Old Left steam engines were swept off the tracks; wayside halts (Commitment, What Next for CND?, Women in Love) were boarded up; and the lines were electrified for the speedy traffic from the Marxistentialist Left Bank. In less than a year the founders of the review discovered, to their chagrin, that the Board lived on a branchline which, after rigorous intellectual costing, had been found uneconomic. Finding ourselves redundant, we submitted to dissolution.’ [30]
As too often in Thompson’s writings, the brilliance of the imagery conceals a lack of substance. Thompson fails to explain the administrative means by which Anderson sacked the old Editorial Board; Anderson has no difficulty in showing that the ‘notion of an editorial coup is a legend’. [31] More important, Thompson fails utterly to explain the political basis of the coup. For Thompson, the old Board had, by 1961, ‘reached a point of personal, financial and organizational exhaustion’ [32]; Anderson’s equally inadequate account concentrates on personal factors and an ‘exaggerated sense of generational distance’. [33] It is certainly clear from all accounts that a good deal of personal bitterness was involved; but to see the change as the replacement of bluff, amiable Edward Thompson by aloof zombie Perry Anderson is to evade all the issues.
NLR was created in 1960, when CND was still dominated by a mood of naive non-party enthusiasm; by 1962 the defeat of unilateralism in the Labour Party, combined with the revival of Labour’s electoral fortunes, had created a very different situation. Much of CND’s initial support had simply evaporated; but many other people now saw the Labour Party as the main arena of struggle. Groups like the IS and the SLL, which had a serious strategy for fighting inside the Labour Party (especially the Young Socialists) were able to show modest but significant growth in this period; NLR, with its studied disdain for strategy, was unable to do so.
To this another, secondary factor may be added. The original NLR Board consisted overwhelmingly of academics. And the sixties was to be a period of unprecedented academic expansion. For those working in the social sciences above all, there was indeed ‘room at the top’. No less than ten of the original EB members were to achieve professorial appointments, and one a knighthood. [34] It would be absurd to suggest that all sold out, though some undoubtedly did. But the pressures towards intellectual specialisation and academic respectability undoubtedly made it more difficult for the old nucleus to cohere effectively.
The coup marked a significant shift in style and personnel; as far as politics was concerned there was no clear break. In 1966 Anderson was to make a biting attack on the politics of the early NLR, accusing Thompson, among other crimes, of ‘maundering populism’ (NLR 35/34). Yet a journal which for many years made heroes of Mao Tse-Tung and Fidel Castro could equally be accused of populism of a different variety. After a year of Anderson’s editorship, NLR published, as its only comment on the Cuba crisis a piece by Ruth Glass which far exceeded in liberalism and sentimentality anything Thompson had perpetrated; it concluded: ‘And human integrity was maintained most strikingly by one man: it became identified with Bertrand Russell just because in this context, so strongly opposing the pull towards helplessness, he was acting as an individual, on his own’ (NLR 17/8).
Or again, there is a clear line of continuity between the Socialist Wages Plan and Anderson’s support for incomes policy (NLR 27/25).
Anderson himself declared openly for Marxism in 1963 (in a footnote to his article on Portugal), and on the somewhat esoteric grounds that it was ‘the only thought which has rigorously united developmental and structural analysis’ (NLR 17/113). But a range of left reformist currents co-existed within the Review for some time, with eventual split-offs of editors and contributors to Views, The May Day Manifesto, The Spokesman, etc. [35] And the Anderson team was to lead the NLR as the next sections will show, through a series of avatars in response to changing conjunctures. The myth of the coup can only confuse a study of that evolution.
 
(iv) Waiting for Wilson
In the course of 1964 NLR made a more ambitious attempt than at any other time in its history to unite theory and practice. The problem was stated in an announcement at the end of 1963:
‘By the end of 1964, a Labour Govt, should be in power. This will open a new period for the Left, and poses already clear problems of analysis, strategy and organization. How can we prevent the Wilson administration from going down in history as an involuntary renovator of capitalism and ensure that it takes its place as the Government which irreversibly inaugurates the transition to socialism?’ (NLR 22/125)
To ask the question in such a form was of course to assume that it was possible to ensure anything of the sort; moreover, it defined the task for socialists as offering policies to Wilson rather than preparing the working class to fight against Wilson if and when necessary. But it was within this framework that NLR published a series of historical and theoretical articles pointing to a strategy for the present situation. Of these the central articles are by Editorial Committee members: Anderson’s Origins of the Present Crisis (NLR 23/26), Nairn’s The English Working Class (NLR 24/43), Anderson’s Critique of Wilsonism (NLR 27/3) and Nairn’s The Nature of the Labour Party (NLR 27/38 & 28/33). These were accompanied by a number of related articles, some by distinguished guest contributors.
Origins of the Present Crisis boldly attempts a sweeping sketch of three hundred years of British history. [36] Briefly, Anderson argues that England had the first and ‘least pure’ bourgeois revolution in Europe; that England had the first industrial revolution, producing a proletariat for which socialist theory was largely unavailable and an ‘industrial bourgeoisie polarised from the start towards the aristocracy’; that Britain’s seizure of the largest empire in history retarded the development of British society (NLR 23/28–35). The analysis presents a formidable display of erudition; however, the proposition that the aristocracy still plays a key role in British society seems to have had a rather impressionistic foundation, namely the election of a noble nonentity, Alec Douglas Home, to the leadership of the Tory Party following the Profumo debacle. (In fact, far from representing a significant shift, Home’s reign was a brief interlude before power passed to ‘Grocer’ Heath.)
It is this historical perspective that provides Anderson with his understanding of the British working class. ‘A supine bourgeoisie produced a subordinate proletariat’ (NLR 23/43). The British working class was, by the late nineteenth century, irrevocably condemned to backwardness in comparison with its continental counterparts: ‘Marxism had missed it. Mature socialist theory developed in precisely the years of the British proletariat’s amnesia and withdrawal. In France, in Germany, in Italy, marxism swept the working class’ [37] (NLR 23/36). Nairn echoes the same disdain for the traditions of the British labour movement. ‘It embraced one species of moderate reformism after another, became a consciously subordinate part of bourgeois society, and has remained wedded to the narrowest and greyest of bourgeois ideologies in its principal moments’ (NLR 24/44).
And thus Anderson came to his conclusion. In England the bourgeois revolution had never been properly completed; hence the present crisis. ‘The international pressures of contemporary capitalism require a radical adaptation. The unfinished work of 1640 and 1832 must be taken up where it was left off’ (NLR 23/53).
Later in 1964 Anderson devoted a second article to the specific situation of the expected Labour Government. Here he sees clearly the danger that a Wilson regime will simply carry out the necessary tasks of modifying British capitalism. Yet he also develops a wildly optimistic scenario for an alternative to this. Wilson’s very opportunism becomes a virtue:
‘At the same time, the very vices of Wilsonism offer the possibility of transcending it ... He never commits himself to right-wing credos: he always frames his proposals so as to leave himself maximum freedom of manoeuvre. Under his leadership, the whole Labour programme has become open-ended. It is not at any point socialist; but nor is it, unlike his predecessor, inherently incapable of debouching onto socialism. It is thus neither a barrier nor a trampoline for the Left: it is simply a political space in which it can work.’ (NLR 27/21)
This optimism continued unabated even after Labour’s narrow election victory in 1964. An editorial statement just after the election declared:
‘For a party with a small parliamentary and popular majority, the temptation is always the same: to do nothing, avoid controversy and provocation, wander along in a ‘centre-left’ mediocrity and confusion of purpose. If the Labour Party succumbs to this temptation, even minimally, it will lose everything. Its only hope is to magnify the impetus which carried it into power – by seeking controversy, by creating genuine conflict in ‘public opinion’, and by thus mobilising the whole of the working class out of its apathy at the next election. The Labour Party is condemned to act radically, or perish.
Fortunately, it appears that Wilson understands this. Where Gaitskell would have sought ‘moderation’ at all costs, and wilfully sacrificed the class-character of the Labour Party for the sake of a mythically-conceived ‘middle-class’ vote, Wilson will be more ready to follow the logic of the situation.’ (NLR 28/3)
One of the more bizarre aspects of this optimism was the extent to which the rigorous theoreticians of NLR were mystified by Wilson’s individual personality. For Anderson:
‘Wilsonism emerged as a precise response to the new situation: the slow crisis of English capitalism and the transformation of the Cold War. In many ways it has been a creative response, which has made the Labour Party into the dynamic left-wing of European Social-Democracy.’ (NLR 27/4)
‘All the most crippling limitations of the British Labour movement have been incorporated in the lamentable succession of its official spokesmen. Now suddenly this is over. The Labour Party has at last, after 50 years of failing, produced a dynamic and capable leader.’ (NLR 27/22) [38]
Wilson was even commended as being ‘untouched by anti-communist phobias’ (NLR 27/5). This was less than two years before Wilson’s celebrated denunciation of the ‘tightly knit group of politically motivated men’ who were intervening in the seamen’s strike. [39]
But it was not merely prediction and evaluation that was at stake; there were concrete recommendations. In March 1964 NLR published an article by John Hughes (incidentally a member of the old NLR Editorial Board) called An Economic Policy for Labour. This was not just a discussion piece; the editorial introduction announced ‘It is the most cogent left-wing economic plan so far produced to meet the needs of the situation in which a Wilson Government will probably find itself, and to fit realistically with the outlook of the Labour Party. It should be kept, debated and referred to by everyone on the Left’ (NLR 24/3). Hughes’ article is in fact openly reformist; he takes it for granted that a Labour Government must co-exist with the private sector, but that ‘the economy can be pushed towards socialism’ without substantial extension of private ownership. He declares that ‘the two main facets of economic policy will be – firstly, organization of the physical increase in output, linked to our choice of social and economic priorities; secondly, a co-ordinated incomes policy aiming at increasing real earned incomes while stabilising prices’ (NLR 24/6–7, 10–13).
For Anderson too the lure of incomes policy was powerful:
‘Does this mean that the unions should a priori refuse any discussion of incomes policy? By no means. To advocate such a policy would in any case be Utopian, since all the major unions are committed to discussions with a Labour Government. What it does mean is that they should demand as a priority, not greater wage increases, but measures of workers’ control. For workers’ control is the only negotiable exchange for an incomes policy: it alone offers a genuine counterpart – powers and not pence. The sacrifice of trade union autonomy to the state which is involved in an incomes policy could only be compensated by the gain in return of decisively increased autonomy and control for the workers in the plant ... A crucial first step could be, as Tony Topham has recently suggested, the institutionalised right of shop stewards and Trade Union officials to have access to company books, and thus to administer the provisions of the incomes policy regulating profits.’ (NLR 25/27)
Tom Nairn even went so far as to argue that the policies of the Labour Government and the TUC for co-operation between unions and state must be beneficial because it would mean that ‘trade union leaders can no longer hide within their corporative shell, pretending to be “only trade unionists” and turning a deaf ear to demands for more involvement in extra-economic affairs’ (NLR 28/58).
Throughout the run-up to Wilson’s election, NLR published articles by eminent guest contributors who were concerned to make practical proposals for Labour policy. Thus Thomas Balogh argued that the only alternative to the Common Market was higher investment through ‘shared sacrifice’ with trade union support (NLR 16/30); Michael Lipton declared that in the matter of railway freight transport we ‘can learn a lesson in Socialist planning from West Germany’! and that British Railways should employ more economists (NLR 19/13–14); Barbara Castle urged the relevance of learning from the experience of French economic planning (NLR 24/33). In 1965 NLR published jointly with Fontana a collection of essays entitled Towards Socialism; contributors included Balogh on The Drift Towards Planning and Richard Crossman on The Lessons of 1945. Castle and Crossman, of course, served uninterruptedly in Wilson’s cabinet from 1964 to 1970, while Balogh was Economic Adviser to the Cabinet Office. It is hard to escape the conclusion that NLR was not so much advising the Labour Government as giving it a touch of leftist credibility.
The euphoria did not last. By May 1965 NLR was bitterly denouncing the crimes of Labour foreign policy (NLR 31/1), and the next issue declared: ‘The Labour Government has now been in office nine months. In that short time it has won the virtually universal contempt of the Left, both in this country and – even more so – abroad. Few regimes have so immediately lost all credit or respect’ (NLR 32/1). And later in 1965 Bob Rowthorn contributed an article on The Trap of an Incomes Policy which concluded:
‘Thus an incomes policy must be fought, not only because it does not give adequate guarantees about redistribution of income and nationalisation, but above all because the Labour movement must in return for these guarantees, so emasculate itself that the guarantees themselves become worthless.’ (NLR 34/11)
Very true, but it might have been helpful to say it a little earlier.
But there was little sign of an alternative. In an article on Labour Imperialism Tom Nairn concluded:
‘A maximalist programme can scarcely be opposed to a minimal programme in the classic fashion any longer, under present conditions in Britain. There can only be a maximalist programme, the ruins of the Labour Party’s minimalist positions lie scattered all about us. Labour’s aims amounted to taking over from the traditional ruling class, at least for a while, and to solving its problems for it within the general ambit of its vision of things. A socialist programme must envisage the replacement of that class and the structure of its power in society.’ (NLR 32/15)
This might be read as the a call for the building of the revolutionary party independently of Labour. If so, nothing more was heard of it. NLR did not switch to align itself with the growing working class opposition to Wilson as manifested in the great seamen’s strike of 1966. [40] Instead it went off at a rather esoteric tangent.
 
(v) Western Marxism
‘The English working class, immunized against theory like no other class, by its entire historical experience, needed theory like no other. It still does’ (NLR 24/57). Thus wrote Tom Nairn in 1964. Having failed to show Harold Wilson how to inaugurate an irreversible transition to socialism, the NLR team turned their attention to another form of good works, namely, bringing theory to the British workers.
The intellectual and cultural backwardness was an essential part of the analysis of British society which Nairn and Anderson had developed in 1964. Anderson developed the argument further in 1968 in a major article called Components of the National Culture. Here he argues that ‘Britain, the most conservative major society in Europe, has a culture in its own image: mediocre and inert’ (NLR 50/4). He goes on to give a survey of the role of émigrés in British intellectual life which appears dazzling in its erudition until one begins to question its arbitrary basis; there is a list of foreign born ‘maitres d’ecole’ of various academic disciplines which is neatly tailored to prove its point – why exactly is Lewis Namier the ‘maitre d’ecole’ of British historiography? (NLR 50/17) But what is ultimately irritating about Anderson’s analysis is not so much the anti-British bias (that shows a healthy gut feeling) but rather the romanticisation of Western Europe. In his reply to Thompson he writes that there ‘has never been a Marxist culture in this country, in the sense that Marxism becomes the normal intellectual consensus of great numbers of writers and scholars’ (NLR 35/26). The notion of a Marxist ‘consensus’ is indeed a quaint one; what Anderson appears to mean in fact is that Marxism was trendy in Paris in the 1960s.
It is in this framework that NLR embarked on the enterprise of systematically translating and presenting the key texts of Western Marxism. By ‘Western Marxism’ is meant the tradition of Marxism in Western Europe since the Stalinisation of the Comintern; the key figures are Lukacs, Korsch, Gramsci, Benjamin, Horkheimer, Volpe, Marcuse, Lefebvre, Adorno, Sartre, Goldmann, Althusser and Colletti. [41] Anderson notes that this tradition is characterised by a separation of theory and practice:
‘Nor is this tradition an unimpeachable one. Far from it: it has suffered immensely by its divorce from political reality and practice. Lukacs wrote Geschichte und Klassenbewusstein in exile in Austria after the fall of the Hungarian Commune. Gramsci wrote his Notebooks in prison after the triumph of Mussolini’s fascism. Sartre wrote the Critique in France, in lonely opposition to the Algerian war before which the whole Left lay supine.’ (NLR 35/3l) [42]
What characterised Western Marxism above all was what Anderson, in one of his more lucid moments, described as ‘obsessive methodologism’. [43] The Western Marxists (with the exception, to a considerable extent, of Gramsci) were concerned with the status and method of Marxism rather than with the application of Marxism to concrete analysis and strategy. Such a concern took various forms – from Goldmann’s attempt to show the superiority of Marxism in interpreting the great works of the bourgeois literary canon to Althusser’s relentless exegesis of the concepts used in Capital. It is easy to understand how such a current of Marxism developed, in a context where non-Stalinist revolutionary parties were absent and Cold War attacks on Marxism compelled a defensive posture. It is less easy to defend the encouragement to perpetuation bestowed on such work.
Anderson has shown convincingly in reply to Thompson that NLR is not a mouthpiece for Althusserianism; on the contrary, as he demonstrates, it has been characterised by a wide-ranging eclecticism. [44] Humanist and structuralist, Hegelian and non-Hegelian Marxisms have been represented, alongside such non-Marxist thinkers as Levi-Strauss, Lacan and the Annales school. As early as 1963 NLR introduced a representative of an alternative tradition to Western Marxism, the ‘prominent Belgian socialist’ Ernest Mandel (NLR 20/2). [45]
Much of this effort was positive in value. We may be grateful to NLR for enriching the content of socialist discussion in Britain. [46] Only a philistine could deny that we have something to learn from Gramsci, Lukacs or Sartre. Timpanaro’s The Freudian slip (NLR 91/43) is a model of the kind of critical rigour that should be applied to much Marxist writing.
The job might, however, have been done without the pretentious rave notices that accompanied each new theoretical star. In 1966 Anderson told us that ‘Jean-Yves Calvez’s monumental La Pensée de Karl Marx is irreplaceable’ (NLR 35/27). Little more was to be heard of this Jesuit priest who had seemed to be God’s gift to Marxism. The same year Ben Brewster announced that Sartre’s Critique of Dialectical Reason ‘has dispensed with the theoretical paraphernalia of the Stalin-Trotsky debate and thus is able to comprehend both positions’ (NLR 37/31). It is doubtful whether Sartre himself would have claimed so much. Two years later Brewster introduced us to André Glucksmann, ‘a member of the brilliant younger generation of French theorists influenced by Louis Althusser’ (NLR 49/40). Glucksmann is now a star of the nouveaux philosophes and a vicious anti-Marxist. By the next year NLR was urging us over the Alps like an impatient courier: ‘Of the major contemporary European schools of Marxism the Italian is the least known in the English-speaking countries’ (NLR 56/1). The journal’s style did much to create a milieu in which Marxist theory became the pursuit of the latest fashionable thinker. By the late seventies there were coteries of of English Marxists where expressing an interest in Sartre or Lukacs was like declaring an admiration for Frank Sinatra to a group of punk rockers.
The most influential of all NLR’s introductions was that of Althusser, whose Contradiction and Overdetermination was translated in 1967. Brewster rather patronisingly informed NLR readers:
‘Many socialists in England are still defending Marxist humanism against Stalinist dogmatism without realising that this battle is largely won; it has been reduced to a conflict with bourgeois distortion of Marx, and even this is fast disappearing to give place to a bourgeois critique of communism based on the work of the younger Marx. To bring Marxist theory into line with contemporary conditions a completely new conception is needed. Althusser’s work represents one approach to such a scientific Marxism.’ (NLR 41/14)
The article presented was in fact resolutely Stalinist. [47] Not only does a footnote explicitly praise The Foundations of Leninism by Stalin, but the section on the Russian Revolution explains October 1917 in terms of a purely Russian conjuncture and provides a theoretical foundation for ‘socialism in one country’. (NLR 41/19–22).
Yet despite all the pretentious claims, Western Marxism did not seem to lead to anything concrete. [48] The political lessons were scarcely ever drawn. Thus NLR published several articles by Nicos Poulantzas, but never pointed to the fact that he was a long-standing member of the Greek CP and a pioneer of Euro-Communist reformism. Thus theory and practice lurched farther apart. And so, when the Anderson team made its second foray into practical politics, it had even less roots in reality than the first.
 
(vi) The Student Vanguard
In 1964 NLR had underestimated the power of reformism in the labour movement; in 1967–69, impressed by a student upsurge in Britain, France and around the world, it tried to by-pass reformism. For Western Marxism, isolated from working-class practice, the student movement was a godsend. Anderson’s Components of the National Culture ends its ponderous tour through the sterility of British intellectual life with the announcement: ‘A revolutionary culture is not for tomorrow. But a revolutionary practice within culture is possible and necessary today. The student struggle is its initial form’ (NLR 50/57). And the following year James Wilcox showed how Althusserianism could provide the foundation for the transformation of students into a substitute revolutionary vanguard:
‘The traditional assumption of strategy on the revolutionary Left in Europe is that nothing can be changed until everything is changed. European revolutionaries have sometimes been so preoccupied with the necessary struggle against reformist illusions (“islands of socialism”) that they have implied that the revolution will suddenly emerge one day fully armed, like Minerva, from the head of the proletariat. Capitalist power is seen as what Louis Althusser has called an “expressive totality”: that is to say the power of the ruling class is thought to be evenly and equally distributed in all the institutions that comprise the social order. Each part “expresses” the meaning of the whole with equivalent efficacy: the power of the ruling class cannot be encroached upon until the social order as a whole has been destroyed. By portraying the revolution as a Last Trump that will transform social relations once and for all the traditional idealist conception of revolutionary strategy can easily succeed in daunting the revolutionary movement as at the size of the tasks before it. This leads to an indefinite postponement of the decision actually to start looking for ways to make the revolution rather than to wait for its immediate conception in the womb of capitalism’s general crisis.
‘On an international scale the Russian revolution and Lenin’s theory of the “weakest link” showed the falsity of these conceptions. The appearance of Red Bases in the protracted guerrilla war of the Chinese revolution further shows their falsity within the context of one national struggle. Thus in a sense “agrarian reform” in the rural Red Base preceded and assisted the triumph of the revolution on a national scale just as the work of transforming education in a university Red Base may precede and assist the full consummation of the revolution in the advanced capitalist countries. The guerrilla’s liberated zone is initially located in those areas which are geographically inaccessible to the repressive forces of the established order. We must ask ourselves whether the complex structures of late capitalism do not contain areas, sociologically inaccessible to the repressive forces of the ruling class, which can become growing points of revolutionary power? The black ghettos in North America already promise to become areas of this sort. The student movement, the rent struggle and the Ulster Civil Rights movement have similar possibilities on their strategic horizons.’ (NLR 53/26)
I have quoted this passage so extensively because, in its admixture of reformism, ultra-leftism, pretentiousness and sheer fantasy, it sums up all that was worst about NLR’s student strategy.
The student movement in Britain began with the LSE occupation in the spring of 1967. The next issue of NLR bore the device ‘Student Power’ in red letters on the cover, and contained two articles analysing the struggle. This showed NLR had its ears to the ground (or to some of the ground: the strikes at Myton’s and Roberts-Arundel in the same year awoke no echo in the pages of NLR). The article Student Power: What is to be Done? by Gareth Steadman-Jones, Anthony Barnett and Tom Wengraf (NLR 43/3) was in general useful and sober; it analysed the structural changes in education caused by the growth of student numbers, raised a number of concrete demands (democracy, discipline, course control, higher grants), and argued for a strategy of work within student unions.
But in the heady atmosphere of 1968–69, such sobriety rapidly faded. Reports were published by a number of participants in student struggles, and issue No. 53 contained a symposium of four pieces on the nebulous concept of ‘Red Bases’. The general line was now unambiguously ultra-left. Thus David Triesman, writing from the storm centre of Colchester, declared:
‘The lessons are these. We must not be afraid of polarization. If there is a moderately large minority committed to action, as there was, they must begin as soon as possible to hold sanctions over the University ... Secondly, the staff must not be encouraged to come in too soon. They cannot help being a moderating influence since they can hardly incite us to seize the University. What we should do, if the situation were to arise again, would be to behave as provocatively as necessary and to effectively sanction the University to the extent that they need to use force, probably the police. Complete occupation of offices rather than corridors will achieve this. It is at this stage that the administrations commit their ultimate folly, and it is at this stage that the staff and less political students will feel encouraged to enter a situation already politically structured.’ (NLR 50/71) [49]
The heady atmosphere of student struggle contaminated NLR’s overall view of the world. The most graphic example is probably the article Two Tactics by James Wilcox, mentioned above, which contains some striking passages:
‘The critiques of “economism” and “trade unionism” by Lenin and Gramsci have never been rebutted. Strikes, even general strikes, tend to induce passivity in the working class: after all, in itself a general strike is simply workers doing nothing on a large scale.’ (NLR 53/24)
‘The pseudo-left only recognises those forms of resistance which have the blessing of the ruling order (strikes, demonstrations, trade unionism etc.). It is not prepared to consider the testimony of other popular acts of resistance (industrial sabotage, absenteeism, fiddles, delinquency, shop-lifting, “madness”, etc.).’ (NLR 53/28)
‘The time might come when some sections of the European student movement should “industrialize” themselves or try to find ways of organizing the resistance of the proletariat, petit bourgeoisie and lumpen proletariat ... Such a movement could enter not just the factories but also the cultural institutions of the working class. For example, should it follow the example of the early Bolshevik Party and send groups of specially trained comrades to work within the religious sects which have a working class membership and elements of an anti-capitalist ideology?’ (NLR 53/31)
Another symptom of the insurrectionist mood which prevailed in NLR at this time is the publication of several articles dealing with questions of military strategy and tactics. Introducing André Glucksmann’s Politics and War in the Thought of Mao Tse-Tung, Ben Brewster lamented the fact that ‘in the twentieth century West, Marxists have largely ignored military strategy and have remained obstinately oblivious of recent developments and extensions of strategic theory’ (NLR 49/35). To fill this gap NLR gave us Blanqui’s Instructions for an Uprising (NLR 65/30), and Brewster’s Armed Insurrection and Dual Power (NLR 66/59).
In all this the working class was not forgotten – or not quite. NLR did not discuss any of the sharp struggles that marked the last two years of the Wilson Government, but it found space for two articles on student support for the Standard Oil strike in Richmond USA by an American Maoist, Robert Avakian. (NLR 55/42 and 56/35). This combined a folksy style, referring to the workers as the ‘guys’ (there is no mention of gals) with long quotations from Mao Tse-Tung, as for example: ‘Already several of the guys are taking leadership, and they have shown us the truth of Mao’s statement that “The masses have boundless creative power”’ (NLR 55/47).
The 1968–69 period was the only period since 1962 when NLR seems to have conceived of some sort of activist role for itself. Members of the editorial team were active in the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign and the Revolutionary Socialist Students’ Federation; an NLR banner was carried on the October 1968 Vietnam demo. [50] Heads were put on the block in a fashion rarely seen among the older generation of New Left academics. Two editorial Committee members were victimised, Nairn being sacked from Hornsey College of Art and Blackburn from LSE for support of student militancy. But when the euphoria died down there was no balance sheet of the experience; Blackburn’s 1971 article The Heath Government (NLR 70/3) makes no reference to students, despite the important Tory attack on student union organization. From now on theory and practice were to become ever more remote.
 
(vii) Burnt Fingers
By 1970 the euphoria had largely gone, and new strains and tensions were emerging in the New Left milieu. One symptom was the collapse of Black Dwarf, with which a number of NLR Editorial Committee members (Barnett, Blackburn and Fred Halliday) were involved, under the strain of political controversy. [51] There was however, no attempt at reconsideration of the 1968–69 line. Apart from Russell Jacoby’s The Politics of Subjectivity (NLR 79/37) – a critique of aspects of US Maoism and feminism – the previous positions were simply abandoned as though they had never existed. In his essay The Heath Government: A New Course for British Capitalism (NLR 70/3) Blackburn returned to NLR’s earlier preoccupation with strategy for the Labour movement. Yet enough ultra-leftism remained to make this piece (published a couple of months before the 1972 miners’ strike) singularly insensitive to the way the anti-Tory struggle was developing:
‘We should remember that in strictly Leninist terms a strike in defence of trade union rights is not a political strike but rather expresses a trade unionist and economist level of consciousness ... Given its potent ideological and material resources, the government has every chance of winning its first encounters with organized labour.’ (NLR 70/20, 22)
But the biggest crisis for NLR was to come over an international question. Up to this point it had been distinctly pro-Chinese, and some Editorial Committee members appear to have believed that there was no real difference between Maoism and Trotskyism. [52] But events in 1971, when China gave public support to the Pakistan Government in attacking the Bangladeshi liberation struggle, and to the Ceylonese Government in crushing the JVP rising [53], meant that the cracks could no longer be papered over. An editorial statement declared: ‘The deliberate diplomatic, military, political and economic support extended to the Yahya regime by the Chinese Government is an act of gross and cynical opportunism that tramples on the cause of proletarian internationalism and deals a heavy blow to the development of the world revolution’ (NLR 68/1). In criticising the Chinese role in Ceylon, Editorial Committee member Fred Halliday pointed out, quite correctly, that: ‘One of the most basic principles of Marxism and Leninism is that when the masses rise, revolutionaries support them, even if their action is adventurist, as Marx did over the Paris Commune and Lenin did over the July days‘ (NLR 69/87).
Two roads now lay before NLR; either a process of political clarification, in which questions of analysis and strategy were confronted, with almost inevitably further splits, or to continue as a review in which differing ideas co-existed rather than competed. The latter was chosen; controversy was becoming too expensive a luxury.
 
(viii) From Heath to Thatcher
The rest of the story may be more briefly told. NLR in the sixties, whatever its weaknesses, attempted to engage strategically with contemporary events. The NLR of the seventies increasingly remained aloof. The Themes section which opens each issue comments only rarely on contemporary events, confining itself to summarising the Review‘s contents. There is little indication that the Editorial Committee has any conscious or collective policy; several members of it have made no contribution to the Review for a number of years. Anderson and Nairn, who originally contributed much of the theoretical dynamism of the magazine, have withdrawn from their concern for the contemporary British Labour movement, Anderson into a historical study of the state, Nairn into an obsession with the varieties of British nationalism. With the establishment of New Left Books as a publishing house (in itself a positive step) NLR has often seemed to publish articles as plugs for forthcoming books rather than because of their revolutionary relevance.
NLR has continued to publish important articles on the state and on economic perspectives; it has continued to print valuable studies of the situation in particular countries. But such articles do not reflect the priorities of action; topics and themes co-exist in a swamp from which confrontation and decision are absent.
An editorial in May 1975 refers to ‘the diverse political convulsions which removed Nixon, Heath, Brandt, Tanaka, Selassie, Caetano, Papadopoulous and Kittikachorn in less than a year’ (NLR 91/4). But few of these convulsions were to be analysed by NLR. Early in 1973 it carried an interesting analysis of the contradictions of the Chilean Popular Unity government, which concluded ‘The UP experience may yet lead to a revolutionary assault on the state apparatus of capital and to the inauguration of a successful transition towards socialism’ (NLR 78/25). But to this day NLR has published no account of what was the worst defeat suffered by the working class in decades (though the SNP victory in the Govan by-election of November 1973 sparked off a whole article on Scottish nationalism [NLR 83/57]). The collapse of fascism in Portugal [54] inspired an interesting analysis from Blackburn (in which this reformed ultra-left attacked Portuguese revolutionaries for their ‘anti-parliamentary cretinism’ [NLR 87–88/41]), which ended with the affirmation that ‘Portugal need not be another Chile or another Spain’ (NLR 87–88/46). But when defeat in Portugal took a quite different form, NLR remained silent. [55] In March 1976 a special issue on Western Europe contained an editorial introduction noting ‘the seemingly inexorable advance of the Italian and the French Communist Parties towards some form of governmental participation in the near future’ (NLR 96/1). The article on Italy foretold ‘a major test of strength between the classes ... in the coming period’ (NLR 96/55). Once again, these issues simply vanished from the pages of NLR.
With regard to Britain, the lacunae are just as glaring. Anthony Barnett’s Class Struggle and the Heath Government (NLR 77/3), published in January 1973, was the last time any NLR contributor attempted an overall study of the present conjuncture in Britain. Indeed one of NLR’s many overseas readers who depended exclusively on the Review for a knowledge of events in Britain would have had to wait until January 1975 to learn that the Heath Government had fallen. (Clearly, no-one was going to make the same mistake about Wilson twice). Readers were now presented with an interview with Arthur Scargill. ‘Scargill’s views represent an intransigent pursuit of proletarian class interests that has not been seen for many decades. They will be widely debated on the revolutionary Left’ (NLR 92/1). They were not, however, to be debated in the pages of NLR, which offered no analysis of the emergence of a new form of centrism in the British trade union movement.
The one member of the NLR Editorial Committee who has continued to write about contemporary Britain is Tom Nairn. However, his tortuous and obsessive dialogue with Scottish nationalism makes his contributions, to say the least, eccentric. His massive article, The Twilight of the British State concludes in a gloomy and fatalistic manner, with little to offer for socialist strategy.
Nairn’s most recent offering, The Future of Britain’s Crisis, is even worse. It is marked, not only by complacency (‘there has never been any risk of, for instance, military dictatorship or fascism’ [NLR 113–114/59]) but by an unbelievable flippancy of tone. Thus Nairn invents a whimsical fantasy about Keynes returning to life and discovering that The Times is unavailable:
‘Hovering in the ghostly foyers of the new Times building in Grays Inn Road, he would take only a few seconds to grasp the dilemma. A management of unbending incompetence, fumbling with “modernization” techniques in a last desperate effort to break even; floors full of unusable high technology imported from California; a mutinous workforce steeped in imperialist corruption and malpractice, prepared to struggle “to the end” for the old customs. So here the “crisis” is not merely prospected. It is happening. And the best newspaper in Britain, The Sunday Times, has been washed down the drain alongside The Thunderer’s Court Circular, Bernard Levin, and the Letters Page where appeals for a National Government are habitually launched.’ (NLR 113–114/67)
That, and that alone, is what NLR had to say about one of the bitterest and most significant industrial disputes of recent years.
The one serious point in Nairn’s article is his prophecy of a National Government as the ruling class solution to the crisis (‘It is surely, virtually certain that this formula will be attempted again’ [NLR 113–114/61]). Now it doesn’t matter that Nairn has made a wrong prediction; we all do that. What is important is that he doesn’t take his own prediction seriously. For a National Government would be the one thing that could split the Labour Party, creating a new PSU/PSIUP type centrist party. Any serious revolutionary socialist who believed that a National Government was on the cards would have to develop a careful strategy towards the Labour Left. But Nairn needs no strategy; he is simply engaging in a literary diversion.
Indeed, throughout the seventies NLR has had little to say about strategy. In the early years of the decade NLR gave a number of plugs to the Il Manifesto split from the Italian CP (cf. NLR 60/96, 66/35); the subsequent split and decline of the tendency went unanalysed. [56] More recently NLR has published two articles by Louis Althusser on the development of the French CP; both contain admiring references to Thorez and the golden Stalinist past of the PCF (NLR 104/21, 109/35, 37). The second piece, What Must Change in the Party was hailed by NLR as ‘the most dramatic and eloquent intervention to date in the Communist movement’ (NLR 109/1). The series of articles, first published in Le Monde, show the final strategic fruit of the monstrous edifice of Althusserianism – writing letters to the bourgeois press complaining that a Stalinist party is Stalinist. [57]
 
(ix) Kiss and make up?
NLR has not analysed the Thatcher government, but there are signs that a chill wind is being felt in Carlisle Street, and the Editorial Committee is seeking to reinforce its base. NLR has always been open and eclectic in its contributors [58] but there is evidence recently of an attempt to regroup former contributors and editors. Recent issues have contained a piece on Poulantzas by Stuart Hall, the original editor of the Review (NLR 119/60), and a long study of the British Marxist historians by Raphael Samuel, a member of the original Editorial Board (NLR 120/21). Samuel was one of the founders of History Workshop, and NLR clearly sees the History Workshop milieu as an important part of its periphery (up to two thousand people attended the History Workshop Conference in Oxford last December).
The most recent issue takes the process further. It contains an article by Thompson on the nuclear threat, prefaced by an editorial statement that admits a ‘failure of focus’ on the nuclear question by NLR. (NLR 121/1) Thompson’s piece is a passionate indictment of the arms race, but the politics are to the right of the Popular Front. Thompson bases his call for the ‘broadest possible popular alliance’ on the assertion that ‘indeterminism itself is not a “class issue”: it is a human issue’ (NLR 121/29–31). In one sense, this is is a platitude; the bourgeoisie, despite deep shelters, will die too in a nuclear war. But in another sense it is nonsense; if the ruling classes of the world did not have a vested interest in nuclear weaponry which workers do not share, the whole problem would not exist.
The same issue contains an article by Mike Ruskin, another early collaborator of the Review. [59] Here the argument is openly reformist; Rustin praises Beyond the Fragments for its ‘eloquent and accurate critique of Leninism’ and asserts that ‘“Subsitutionism” and “ultra-leftism” follow inevitably from a pure politics of class’. He denounces direct action against fascists, considers the CP’s ‘broad democratic alliance’ is still too narrow, and ends by prophesying a ‘very bitter future’ (NLR 121/66, 68, 73, 77, 89).
Anderson concludes his recent book on Thompson by urging reconciliation: ‘it would be good to leave old quarrels behind, and to explore new problems together.’ [60] The sentiment is admirable, but with the sort of allies that NLR is currently courting one cannot foresee any great success. Unity is a splendid thing, but unity without programme leads only to the swamp.

The NLR’s main themes
‘What is the constitutive nature of bourgeois democracy? What is the function and future of the nation-state? What is the real character of imperialism as a system? What is the historical meaning of a workers’ state without workers’ democracy? How can a socialist revolution be made in the advanced capitalist countries? How can internationalism be made a genuine practice, not merely a pious ideal? How can the fate of previous revolutions in comparable conditions be avoided in the ex-colonial countries? How can established systems of bureaucratic privilege and oppression be attacked and abolished? What would be the structure of an authentic socialist democracy? These are the great unanswered problems that form the most urgent agenda for Marxist theory today.’ [61]
We are fortunate in having such a list, produced by NLR’s editor, of the main tasks for contemporary Marxist theory. It provides a useful check-list in assessing the achievements and limits of NLR.
In two areas at least NLR’s contribution has been significant. In the field of political economy there has been a wide range of articles from different points of view, covering a set of key problems: the relation between the internationalization of capital and the nation-state; the problem of development; the reconsideration of aspects of classical Marxist theory, such as the falling rate of profit. Whatever one’s assessment of this or that particular article, the overall achievement must be respected.
In the field of feminism too, NLR has made an important contribution. Juliet Mitchell’s Women: The Longest Revolution (NLR 40/11) was a pioneering study, published as early as 1966, when the discussion of feminism was largely absent from all sections of the left. There have been subsequent important discussions of domestic labour, while articles on Freud and Lacan have contributed to the debate on psychological aspects of feminism. (There has however been very little on the campaigning issues of the women’s movement – equal pay, abortion, nurseries etc.)
 
(i) Imperialism
NLR has always prided itself on its internationalism and anti-imperialism. Solidarity with the Cuban revolution and the Algerian liberation struggles were among the earliest themes to be struck in the journal, and provided a point of continuity between the founding Editorial Board and the Anderson team. All too often, however, anti-imperialism slipped over into a naive Third Worldism. In 1961 NLR carried two enthusiastic articles about the Belgrade non-aligned conference (featuring such countries as Egypt, Ghana, Ethiopia, and Saudi Arabia); David Ross declared that ‘by and large it was the nearest thing we have seen to a gathering of our sort of people in power’ (NLR 12/16). In 1963 NLR initiated a series of articles on the Third World with a general survey by Keith Buchanan, who wrote in praise of Cambodian ‘royal socialism’ (NLR 18/18), and ended by effectively writing off the metropolitan working class:
‘Having tasted the delights of affluence, European workers have tended to become “embourgeoise” and ever more Euro-centric in their attitudes. A Fanon may cry that the well-being and progress of Europe have been built with the sweat and corpses of black man and yellow man, Indian and Arab – but the cry is unheard amid the distractions of a new and delightful opulence.’ (NLR 18/22)
It was around this time that NLR began to produce what has been one of its most useful features, a series of articles analysing the situation of particular countries in considerable empirical detail. Pioneering examples were Anderson’s own work on the Portuguese colonies (perhaps the best thing he ever wrote) (NLR 15/83, 16/88, 17/85) and the unfortunately uncompleted study of the Algerian Revolution by Tom Wengraf and Roger Murray (NLR 22/14). [62] This is a tradition which has continued to the present; among many useful examples are Hanegbi, Machover and Orr on The Class Nature of Israeli Society (NLR 65/3) and Fred Halliday’s Revolution in Afghanistan (NLR 112/3).
But in the mid-sixties a sharper note emerged. NLR’s identification now was not so much with the ‘progressive’ regimes of the Third World as with the guerrilla fighters of Latin America and south east Asia. In 1965 an article by Regis Debray was introduced with the words ‘Guerrilla war has become at once the most successful and the most typical mode of revolutionary struggle in the contemporary world’ (NLR 33/1). Debray explicitly repudiates mass action and argues that rural warfare conditions ‘force the guerrilla to proletarianize itself morally.’ (NLR 33/22, 48). Two years later a second piece by Debray was presented with a special introduction (collectively signed ‘NLR‘) on The Marxism of Regis Debray which declared that ‘what above all distinguishes Debray’s writings is their relentlessly Leninist focus on making the revolution, as a political, technical and military problem’ (NLR 45/8).
The Vietnam War was, from 1965 to 1975, a dominant political reality for NLR. Many articles were devoted to aspects of the Vietnamese struggle; perhaps the most significant was Goran Therborn’s From Petrograd to Saigon, which tried to situate Vietnam in the total process of world revolution. In so doing it conformed neatly to the ‘student vanguard’ thesis then dominant in NLR:
‘it is no accident that all over the advanced capitalist world – in the USA, Japan, Germany, Sweden, France, Italy and England – the new social force which had been the vanguard of the struggle against American imperialism is the student, high-school and youth population. For it is precisely their age which divides them from the myths of the by-gone era of the Cold War.’ (NLR 49/9)
In 1975 NLR announced, with justified pleasure, the triumph of ‘socialist revolution’ in Indochina (NLR 91/4). Since then there has been total silence. Not a single article, whether of justification or of criticism has been provoked by the ‘boat people’, the tragedy of Cambodia (described elsewhere by Anderson as ‘an experience more terrible than that of the tyranny of Stalin’ [63]) or of the spectacle of armed conflict between ‘socialist’ states.
But for a British journal the acid test of anti-imperialism must be the role of British imperialism in Ireland. Initially NLR reacted quickly to the new phase of struggle which opened in late 1968. In May 1969 an editorial statement read: ‘The struggle in Northern Ireland has attained a higher level than on the British mainland ... If effective solidarity action is to be achieved, a considerable work of propaganda and demystification will be needed.’ (NLR 55/1) The same issue carried a transcript of a discussion between a number of People’s Democracy militants (Devlin, McCann, Farrell) which is noteworthy for its general honesty and realism, and for some acute comments by McCann on the relation of class to religion (NLR 55/3). The same issue contained a historical survey by Peter Gibbon which concluded ‘proletarian power is the precondition of national independence’ (NLR 55/41). The subsequent ‘work of propaganda and demystification’ can be briefly listed: a four-page note on the Split in Sinn Fein (NLR 60/49 – 1970), a reprinted interview with Cathal Goulding, largely devoted to criticism of the Provisionals (NLR 64/51 – 1970) and two paragraphs in Blackburn’s account of the Heath government, with more space devoted to criticising the Provisionals than the British army (NLR 70/16 – 1971). That, in more than a decade, is all that the NLR enthusiasts for guerrilla warfare have had to say about the Irish struggle. (One reason for this astonishing silence may be divergences of opinion within the Editorial Committee. Anderson has elsewhere commended Thompson for ‘rightly condemning the Provisional IRA’ [64], while Nairn apparently believes in self-determination for Ulster [NLR 101–102/61]. It is hard to imagine that the Fourth International supporters on the Committee share this view.)
To sum up: NLR has shown enthusiasm for anti-imperialist struggle and provided valuable empirical data. But enthusiasm is not enough. NLR has failed to clarify the dynamics of anti-imperialist struggle today, and retreated into silence on the most difficult questions.
 
(ii) Stalinism
The New Left was born of a crisis in Stalinism, yet it has never adequately resolved the problem of understanding it. The early New Left had relatively little to say on the question, apart from being generally inclined to sympathise with Yugoslavia. It was only in the aftermath of the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia that NLR began to devote a substantial amount of attention to Russian and Eastern European society. The editorial position was implacable: ‘The tasks and type of revolution to be made in Eastern and Western Europe are distinct: but the fate of each depends on the other. The complete overthrow by the masses, from below, of the total political apparatus of bureaucratic rule is the sole formula for socialist democracy in Czechoslovakia, Russia and the neighbouring countries’ (NLR 71/2).
NLR’s greatest contribution in this area has been in the reproduction of significant documents from Eastern Europe. The transcript of the meeting between Gierek and Polish workers at Szczecin in 1971 (NLR 72/35), Miklos Haraszti’s I Have Heard the Iron Cry (a first-hand account of piecework in a Hungarian factory) (NLR 91/9), Rudolf Bahro’s The Alternative in Eastern Europe (NLR 106/3) – these and others are indispensable raw material for any student of Eastern Europe.
Yet, as in other fields, such material is eclectic. For instance, NLR has published several articles on Russia by the brothers Medvedev. These are always well-informed and valuable to read; none the less their standpoint is clearly reformist; they have been well-described by Tamara Deutscher as ‘Soviet Fabians’ (NLR 62/48). Thus in a recent interview Zhores Medvedev states that his general assessment of the Brezhnev period is ‘moderately positive’ and he actually blames low quality of production on the ‘absence of competition’ (NLR 117/3, 17).
But documents are no substitute for analysis, and on the question of actually explaining Stalinist society, NLR’s record has been much weaker. One important attempt to confront the historical questions was an article by the Editorial Committee member, Nicolas Krasso, called Trotsky’s Marxism. Krasso argued that Trotsky suffered from the vice of ‘sociologism’ (an overemphasis on the importance of social classes); he concluded that ‘the superiority of Stalin’s perspective over Trotsky’s is undeniable’ (NLR 44/72, 79). This provoked a wide-ranging debate, with Ernest Mandel defending Trotsky (NLR 47/32) and Monty Johnstone of the CP claiming that Stalin had led ‘the development and defence of the economic and cultural foundations of Socialism’ (NLR 50/121). (A contribution by Chris Harman, putting the ‘state capitalist’ point of view, was rejected for publication.)
In general contributors to NLR have vacillated between two positions: that Russia, etc. are some form of workers’ states, albeit imperfect and bureaucratised (a position argued most eloquently by Ernest Mandel), and that they are some new form of society, ‘post-capitalist’, but neither capitalist nor socialist; thus Lucio Colletti concludes unhelpfully that ‘the countries we call socialist are only socialist metaphorically’ (NLR 56/25). [65] Charles Bettelheim’s view – that Russia became state capitalist after the death of Stalin – is refuted in an editorially commended article by Ralph Miliband (NLR 91/2, 57). But the more substantial body of anti-Stalinist ‘state capitalist’ theory – the work of Tony Cliff, Nigel Harris, C.L.R. James [66], Raya Dunayevskaya, Bordiga or Kuron and Modzelewski – has neither been presented, nor discussed, nor refuted – it has simply been ignored.
On the question of China NLR’s record has been rather more erratic. From the mid-sixties onwards there began to appear a number of pieces expressing ecstatic admiration for Chinese society (NLR 30/61, 50/93). But the reactionary turn in Chinese foreign policy in 1971 (discussed above) led to a reconsideration. From now on articles on China were largely critical. In 1975 two French articles on China were translated with a stern editorial warning about the ‘process of debilitating and ignorant myth-making about post-capitalist societies, fostered with equal assiduity by the regimes in power in them and by those in the capitalist world who substitute models of “socialism” elsewhere for a revolutionary strategy closer to home’ (NLR 89/2). But the analysis of what exactly a ‘post-capitalist’ society is has not been taken very far; a long article by Editorial Committee member Fred Halliday ends with little more than an injunction to ‘free ourselves of illusions prevalent a decade ago’ (NLR 100/192). More recently Tamara Deutscher has written an account of a visit to China, which, with exemplary modesty and simplicity, manages to inform us that Chinese workers have no holidays, and that there is no free education or health service in China (NLR 120/117, 121/22) – facts which longer and more pretentious articles had not brought to our attention.
NLR has given us a wealth of documentary and empirical material on Russia and China. But those looking for an answer to Anderson’s question (cited above) ‘What is the historical meaning of a workers’ state without workers democracy?’ will look in vain in the pages of NLR.
 
(iii) The British Working Class
It has been a persistent theme of NLR that the British working class is deficient in theory. It is a sad paradox that, when it has approached the day-to-day problems of the British labour movement, NLR has almost invariably abandoned the tasks of theory in favour of empiricism and impressionism. Workers’ daily experience is fragmentary and isolated – the employers and the division of labour ensure that. The task of theory is to draw together the experiences and to generalise. In what ways has rising unemployment affected militancy in the workplace? How has the growing number of full-time convenors affected the form and function of shop stewards’ organisations? What is the nature of the left-wing trade union bureaucracy? It is questions like these that socialist militants need an answer to and which they have a right to see discussed in a review of socialist theory.
NLR was never centred on the industrial struggle. Industry was never more than one interesting topic among others. None the less, in its early years the Review published some interesting discussions of industrial questions. Denis Butt’s Men and Motors (written with assistance from Jack Jones) discusses the key role of shop stewards in the car industry (NLR 3/10). Tony Topham’s Shop Stewards and Workers’ Control had some interesting material on steward organisation and strike patterns (NLR 25/3). In the mid-sixties Ken Coates was a regular contributor of short notes on industrial and trade union matters, presenting for example, an account of the internal politics of the AEU from the viewpoint of the Labour Lefts around the paper Voice of the Unions (NLR 42/63). However, the loose links (in terms of shared contributors) that seem to have existed between NLR and the Institute for Workers’ Control were broken at the time of the ‘student vanguard’ turn and no comparable contacts have since been established.
Between 1965 and 1969 NLR presented some twenty-five short essays under the rubric Work. These were first-person accounts of various jobs, involving a variety of manual and white-collar occupations. The anonymous contributors were frequently not socialists, and in most cases had no political or trade union involvement. These highly personal accounts of oppression and alienation in the workplace were often revealing, moving or humourous; they had a vigour and concreteness in sharp contrast with the normal NLR style. Yet necessarily all the items in the Work series remain below the level of trade union, let alone political, consciousness. The Laboratory Technician, for instance, gives a graphic account of the gulf in status and conditions between teachers and technicians in further education (NLR 46/55); it does not even raise the questions as to whether it is possible, despite this, to have trade union co-operation between the two groups of workers.
The Work series came to an end in NLR 53, the issue devoted to ‘Red Bases’. Since then there have been only spasmodic attempts to engage with the problems of the Labour movement; a transcript of a discussion with four car-workers (NLR 80/29); an interview with Arthur Scargill (NLR 92/3); a participant’s account of the Camden council workers’ strike of 1979 (NLR 116/83). Each in itself interesting, but a thin record of a decade that saw two miners’ strikes, Grunwicks and the social contract.
On the one hand analyses, at a high level of abstraction, of the social and economic structures of contemporary society; on the other, descriptions of individual work experiences. Both of these NLR has done, and on occasion, done well. What is lacking is any mediation between the two, a mediation which could be provided only by strategy.
 
(iv) Race and nation
‘The theory of nationalism represents Marxism’s greatest historical failure’ (NLR 94/3). Thus wrote one of the most prolific contributors on the Editorial Committee, Tom Nairn. Certainly NLR has not been notably successful in its attempts to come to terms with the problem. Over the past twelve years it has devoted a disproportionate amount of attention to the phenomenon of Scottish nationalism, apparently being unduly impressed by transient electoral phenomena. Nairn’s first treatment of the theme, in 1968, has some sharp criticism of contemporary manifestations of Scottish nationalism (‘Sporranry, alcoholism and the ludicrous appropriation of the remains of Scotland’s Celtic fringe have been celebrated in a million emetic ballads’ (NLR 49/9), but he concludes by arguing that ‘for Scottish socialists, these contradictions will be murderous unless they build up their own Nationalism to oppose the SNP and – beyond immediate politics – to come to terms with Scotland’s complex cultural inheritance’ (NLR 49/16).
By 1975, however, Nairn seemed completely bewitched by the problem of nationalism. His article The Modern Janus involves a total, and pessimistic, revision of the Marxist tradition:
‘After the revolution in Russia, the Third International engendered what was really an extreme intensification of the myths: internationalism had failed through lack of will-power and organisation – for subjective reasons ... Socialism was a premature birth. So far from being ‘ripe’ (or even ‘over-ripe’) for it, as its protagonists told themselves, conditions in the earlier half of this century were to remain locked in the vice of primitive, uneven development and nationalism.’ (NLR 94/21)
Nairn lurches into a crude psychologism (‘nationalism is the pathology of modern developmental history, as inescapable as “neurosis” in the individual’) and ends up citing Walter Benjamin’s visions of angels.
One thing can be said for Nairn’s article; it was not as bad as a subsequent piece by Regis Debray (a man whose agility in changing positions is equalled only by his arrogance in asserting them). After defending nationalism by analogies with thermodynamics, Debray concludes: ‘Sometimes I even wonder if the whole “anti-Boche” mythology and our secular antagonism to Germany may not be one day indispensable for saving the revolution, or even our national-democratic inheritance’ (NLR 105/41).
Nairn’s views are his own, not those of NLR collectively; when The Modern Janus appeared the editorial introduction sternly admonished us: ‘It is of course, an irreducible tenet of revolutionary socialism that there exists a material basis for internationalism which is not merely a pious hope or abstract principle’ (NLR 94/1). But assertions prove nothing; and the only critique of Nairn so far published has come, not from within the Editorial Committee, but from Communist Party member Eric Hobsbawm, who reminded Nairn, in Lenin’s words: ‘Do not paint nationalism red’ (NLR 105/23).
Yet for a journal which has given so much importance to nationalism, NLR has been extraordinarily complacent about that most pernicious form of nationalist ideology today, racism. Introducing a useful study of The Function of Labour Immigration in Western European Capitalism by Castles and Kosack (NLR 73/3), NLR argued that Powellism is often ‘misconceived as essentially a rabid phobia about colour. In fact this racism in the strict sense is a secondary and contingent manifestation of the structural mechanisms of the labour market and reactionary bourgeois nationalism that are everywhere turned against the sub-proletariat in the imperialist states, of whatever colour’ (NLR 73/1). Immigration is a crucial question, and NLR went on to publish extracts from John Berger’s The Seventh Man (magnificent description, but short on strategy) (NLR 87–88/49). But on the level of political practice racism cannot be so neatly dissolved into immigration. Yet in the last decade NLR has published only one study of British racism – Nairn’s Enoch Powell: the New Right. This makes an interesting analysis of Powell’s ideas through a study of his poetry, before concluding that Powell is not a fascist [67] and that ‘it would be absurd to talk about an English fascism’ (NLR 61/26–27). I can only suppose that Nairn is bemused by an excessive concentration on the question of state power. Because the fascists are not making an immediate challenge for state power, he simply neglects the threat they pose to the labour movement and to the immigrant population on other levels. What other theoretical error could so blind NLR to the significance of British racism in the seventies?
 
(v) Culture
One of the distinctive features of the New Left from the beginning was its concern with the cultural aspects of the struggle for socialism, aspects which the rest of the Left had often ignored. There are a number of cultural tasks which a journal like NLR could perform: to develop a socialist critique of the existing bourgeois culture; to develop a critique of the function and ideology of the mass media and so-called ‘popular culture’; to encourage the production of new work from a socialist standpoint. [68]
Initially NLR attempted all these tasks with enthusiasm. The first twenty issues will disclose, among many other things, articles on Camus, Picasso, D.H. Lawrence, socialist poetry, Iris Murdoch and John Arden, as well as short stories, drawings by Paul Hogarth and an interview with jazz musician Bruce Turner. There were some interesting critiques of the mass media, for example Colin MacInnes’ analysis of Daily Express cartoons (NLR 2/39).
However the discussion of popular culture often took on a more elitist tone. The very first issue carried a piece by Brian Groombridge and Paddy Whannel called Something Rotten in Denmark Street (NLR 1/52), which made an ill-informed and insensitive attack on current popular music – ‘noise of an unbelievable ugliness is wrung from saxophones and guitars with sadistic cruelty and finally processed in the laboratory’. Raymond Williams adopted the same tone of middle-aged paternalism:
‘Can we agree, perhaps, before passing on to the more difficult questions, that football is indeed a wonderful game, that jazz is a real musical form, and that gardening and home-making are indeed important? Can we also agree, though, that the horror-film, the rape-novel, the Sunday strip-paper and the latest Tin-Pan drool are not exactly in the same world ...?’ (NLR 5/53)
The cultural theory that lies behind this is necessarily reformist. For if the working-class youth can be so easily and so totally manipulated by the record companies, then there can be little hope that the working class will ever actually emancipate itself. Hence it comes as no surprise that in 1961 NLR solemnly presented a set of detailed proposals to the Pilkington Committee (set up in 1960 by the Tory Government to advise on the future of radio and television). This went so far as to make detailed suggestions – for example, that there should be more records by Frank Sinatra and Ella Fitzgerald on Juke Box Jury (NLR 7/40).
This kind of patronising nonsense could not survive the Beatles, and by 1964 NLR was developing a broader and more sensitive approach to a range of cultural products. There were short notes on a range of musicians extending from John Cage to Blind Lemon Jefferson, while Lee Russell contributed a series of analyses of cinema directors.
A more sympathetic attitude to popular music was now adopted; in 1966 Alan Beckett discovered that ‘the introduction of rock ’n’ roll in the middle ’50s was a real revolution’ (NLR 39/89) – something many of us had noticed at the time. By 1968 the Rolling Stones were being incorporated into the NLR thesis on British culture:
‘Britain today is a society stifling for the lack of any art that expresses the experience of living in it. Our theatre is a quaint anachronism, our novel is dead, and our cinema a mere obituary of it. Perhaps the only art form which has an authentic expressive vitality in England is pop music. It at least reflects back to us the immediate constituents of experience, even when it does not illuminate them. It is no accident that it is the one product of contemporary British culture which has any international currency. For how long?’ (NLR 47/31)
But the dead hand of theory extended its grip. Lee Russell’s series of short notes on the cinema culminated in a lengthy piece Cinema – Code and Image (NLR 49/65), in which the actual experience of the cinema was drowned in semiological analysis. A little later NLR reproduced – from the unlikely source of a US magazine called Cheetah – a diagram called The Rock Garden, in an attempt to classify different currents of rock music. The diagram is good for a laugh, but NLR appended three pages of solemn commentary (NLR 54/80).
Now NLR no longer even makes a fool of itself. Verse translations and original fiction have long since disappeared from its pages. Discussions of popular culture, of cinema and music, has likewise gone. Nothing remains but pure ‘theory’. The reprinting of Marxist texts from the thirties, the aesthetic debates of Lukacs, Brecht, Benjamin and Adorno, has been useful, but it hardly replaces the confrontation with contemporary culture. Recently NLR published an article by Terry Eagleton on the literary criticism of John Bayley, Wharton professor of English Literature at Oxford (NLR 110/29). This in fact contains some interesting remarks on Thomas Hardy, a writer still widely read by working people. Unfortunately they are camouflaged from view in an obscure polemic with an academic nonentity. At a time when movements such as Rock Against Racism have made popular culture more directly political than ever before, NLR has simply abandoned the terrain.
 
(vi) Language
NLR has long been notorious for its obscure and pretentious style. [69] It is important, however, to be clear on the kind of criticism that is appropriate. Marxism, like any science, requires a technical terminology; serious socialist theory cannot be written in the language of the Daily Mirror. Capital is not a simple book to read, but this is is a quite different matter from the unnecessary contortions of much NLR prose.
Anderson is indeed very much aware of the problem of language:
‘By contrast, the extreme difficulty of language characteristic of much of Western Marxism in the twentieth century was never controlled by the tension of a direct or active relationship to a proletarian audience. On the contrary, its very surplus above the necessary minimum quotient of verbal complexity was the sign of its divorce from any popular practice.’ [70]
The second sentence is a graphic illustration of the problem stated in the first. But awareness of the problem has not aided Anderson to solve it. Writing of the English Revolution, he states:
‘It can, perhaps, be said that it was a clash between two segments of a land-owning class, neither of which were direct crystallisations of opposed economic interests, but rather were partially contingent but predominantly intelligible lenses into which wider, more radically antagonistic social forces came into temporary and distorted focus.’ (NLR 23/28)
(If any readers can tell me what an ‘intelligible lens’ is, I shall be grateful to hear from them.)
NLR has often bemoaned the lack of theory in the British working class. Perhaps the final and most serious indictment of the Review that can be made is that, by its style and manner, it has turned working-class militants away from theory by convincing them that it is irrelevant and inaccessible.
 
Conclusion
Replying to Alex Callinicos’ criticism that NLR has neglected the struggle to build the revolutionary party, Robin Blackburn replies: ‘To this charge, NLR must plead guilty: but one wonders whether even Callinicos believes that it would have been a better journal if it had been subject to the direction of the SWP?’ [71]
Blackburn has a serious point, which deserves a serious answer. There are grave obstacles to the development of theory in too close association with an activist political organisation, especially a small one. Firstly, tomorrow’s picket is always more vital than the elaboration of a long-term theoretical analysis. Secondly when faced with factional attack from within or without, a political organisation will tend to go on the defensive rather than being ready to discuss and modify them in the light of experience (if the WRP is the most obvious example of such a tendency, no organisation is wholly free from it).
Yet despite these disadvantages, the story of NLR confirms that theory cannot develop in isolation from revolutionary organisation. First of all, theory developed in isolation has no discipline of priority. Only constant feedback from an organisation involved in day-to-day struggle can tell us which questions need answering, which problems need analysis. Of course this will happen indirectly. Workers on the factory floor will not (unless they are ‘industrialised’ economics graduates) spontaneously ask questions about the falling rate of profit. But they will ask questions about the current crisis, its potential duration and effects, which will tell us how and in what context to confront the question of the falling rate of profit. A journal under the discipline of an organisation rooted in the factories could not, in 1979, devote twenty pages to the Mafia (NLR 118/53) and not a word to the National Front. The discipline of an organisation would also mean that the journal would have to have a team of writers (known in scientific parlance as ‘hacks’) willing and able to write on whatever subject the conjuncture requires, rather than only on their private interests and research areas. At one time NLR seemed to have such a team, but as its editors have grown more eminent and more specialised it has lost its capacity to respond. This is not to ask that NLR should turn itself into a news magazine, simply to demand some relation to the needs of current struggle.
Secondly, the absence of links to a political organisation allows political analysis to be completely irresponsible. When NLR developed its ideas on Wilson or ‘Red Bases’, there was no group of people actually putting the strategy (if it was clear what the strategy was) into practice. There is no-one to come back and demand a settling of accounts because the analysis was wrong, no-one to vote out the editors because their leadership was inadequate. Tom Nairn can predict a National Government, but no-one is going to do anything about it. He might just as well predict the Black Death or a Martian invasion.
For Anderson the absence of a revolutionary party seems to be accepted fatalistically as an unchangeable given. ‘The structural divorce between original Marxist theory and the main organisations of the working class in Europe has yet to be historically resolved’ (NLR 100/78). The need for a mass revolutionary party is admitted, but there is no suggestion as to where it will come from. [72] With the solitary exception of a chapter in Nairn’s essay on The Left Against Europe? (NLR 75/94). NLR has studiously ignored the existing organisations of the revolutionary left in Britain. When under pressure on the question of political activism, Anderson invokes the Fourth International [73] but he has not put himself or his journal under the discipline of that organisation. [74]
It is no use waiting for the revolutionary party; it has to be built. The task of developing Marxist theory cannot be separated from the building of the party. The British left would indubitably have been the poorer over the last twenty years if NLR had not existed; yet over the last few years it has become less and less relevant to the priorities of struggle. The choice now before NLR is whether it will collapse completely into the passive academic Marxism trapped in the ghetto of higher education social science departments; or whether it will seek to work and debate with those of us trying to build a revolutionary organisation in the working class. The latter choice will not be made without splits and confrontations of a sort that NLR has striven to avoid over the last ten years, but it is our duty to encourage the comrades of NLR to make it.

Notes
In the course of writing this article I have had valuable discussions with Norah Carlin, Peter Goodwin, Duncan Hallas and John Merrington. None of them are in any way responsible for the content or conclusions of what I have written. I am also grateful to Tom Wengraf for allowing me to read and refer to his MA Dissertation An Essay on the Early New Left Review.
All references to New Left Review are given in the text in the form (NLR 59/110), the first figure referring to the number of the review, the second to the page. Where a whole article is referred to, reference is to the first page. Dates are not normally given, but where they seem significant I have included them in the text. All other references are given in footnotes.
1. Lenin, Collected Works, XXIV, 43
2. p. Anderson, Passages from Antiquity to Feudalism, London, 1974, p. 173.
3. NLR 1 was dated January–February 1960; the latest issue to hand at the time of writing is NLR 121, May–June 1980. There have been four double issues.
4. Fred Inglis, Times Higher Education Supplement, 25 August 1978; Pierre Birnbaum, Le Monde, 30 September 1977; Richard Gott, The Guardian, 8 March 1977.
5. London, 1978. Thompson’s book contains discussion of a broad range of questions; this article will touch only on those directly relating to the history of NLR.
6. E.P. Thompson, Writing by Candlelight, London 1980, pp. 280, 166, 281, 171, 199; The Poverty of Theory, p. 99.
7. P. Anderson, Arguments within English Marxism, London 1980, pp. 115–6.
8. Cf. C. Harman, The Crisis of the European Revolutionary Left, IS 2 : 4, especially pp. 82–4.
9. P. Anderson, Problems of Socialist Strategy in P. Anderson & R. Blackburn (eds.), Towards Socialism, London 1965, p. 270.
10. London 1976, p. 106.
11. In adopting this two-fold structure I am, of course, fudging a problem that has worried many NLR contributors – the relation between the synchronic and the diachronic.
12. On the events of 1956 and their repercussions in the 1956–60 period see D. Widgery, The Left in Britain 1956–1968, London 1976, pp. 43–97, and I. Birchall, The British Communist Party 1945–64, IS 50; there are valuable accounts by participants (Saville, MacEwen, Heinemann, Jones) in Miliband & Saville (eds.), The Socialist Register 1976, London 1976; there is a perceptive if pro-Stalinist review of the debate, with ample quotations, in The Cult of the Individual, British and Irish Communist Organization, Belfast 1975. For the internal debate in the CP, with contributions from many who subsequently left the Party, see the files of World News (predecessor of Comment) for 1956 and 1957.
13. J. Saville in The Socialist Register 1976, p. 15. One of those who put the boot into Thompson and Saville was Tom Driver (World News 1956, p. 706), who went on to exercise his talents on a wider stage as General Secretary of NATFHE.
14. The Reasoner, 3 November 1956.
15. The Socialist Register 1976, p. 19. Esprit is a French left Catholic review founded by Emmanuel Mounier in 1932.
16. The New Reasoner, No. 10, 1959.
17. According to the testimony of teddy-girl Val Clarke, Socialist Worker, 1 December 1973.
18. Cf. Lawrence Daly, Fife Socialist League (NLR 4/69).
19. C. Taylor, Socialism and the Intellectuals, Universities and Left Review 1/2, 1957.
20. Editorial, The New Reasoner, No. 10, 1959.
21. World News, 1956, pp. 408–10.
22. Cf. World News, 1956, pp. 655–6.
23. Editorial, The New Reasoner, No. 1, 1957.
24. E.P. Thompson, Through the Smoke of Budapest, The Reasoner, No. 3, 1956.
25. E.P. Thompson, Socialist Humanism, The New Reasoner, No. 1, 1957.
26. For a debate on the pamphlet, featuring a vigorous ‘class struggle’ opposition by Eric Heffer, see the anthology A Socialist Review, London 1965, pp. 85–108.
27. The pioneering analysis of the first four years of NLR, to which any subsequent account must be indebted, is Peter Sedgwick’s The Two New Lefts, IS 17, reproduced in Widgery, op. cit., pp. 131–53.
28. For a classic example of sectarian megalomania see the SLL-controlled youth paper Keep Left (August–September 1959), which compares expulsions from the Labour Party with executions in Hungary: ‘Youth such as these in Streatham, Norwood and Hungary, who fight, and face expulsion or death, for their principles.’ However, the SLL had some more serious things to say. Cliff Slaughter’s What is Revolutionary Leadership? (Labour Review 5/3, 1960), which develops the ideas of Gramsci and Lukacs on the revolutionary party, raised the debate on organization far higher than anything published in NLR.
29. A list of Left Club addresses appeared up to NLR 23 (January–February 1964). However, there had been no amendments to the list since NLR 16 (July–August 1962), suggesting either a degree of political and domestic immobility unparalleled on the left, or – more likely – that the list was a fiction. Individual clubs may have survived for some time – my own recollection is that the Bradford Left Club was still functioning in the summer of 1963.
30. The Poverty of Theory, p. 35. The essay from which this passage comes, The Peculiarities of the English, first appeared in The Socialist Register 1965 in a slightly shortened form; the passage here quoted was published for the first time in The Poverty of Theory. Dr Beeching, incidentally, was the head of British Railways in the early sixties who ruthlessly closed unprofitable lines.
31. Arguments within English Marxism, p. 135.
32. The Poverty of Theory, p. 101.
33. Arguments within English Marxism, pp. 135–7.
34. I have not been able to ascertain whether authorship of the Socialist Wages Plan was a factor in Sir Kenneth Alexander’s achievement of knightly distinction.
35. Tom Wengraf has argued in his unpublished MA Thesis An Essay on the Early New Left Review (Birmingham 1979) that what he calls ‘NLR 2‘ (extending from 1962 to 1964) had distinctive features separating it from both its predecessors and successor. This distinction, he argues, was to be found in its concern with ‘comparative country studies’ of a ‘totalising strategic’ sort. ‘NLR 2‘, he claims, ‘gave a definite primacy to the study of the empirical, the concrete, the historical’, as distinct from NLR’s later concern with ‘theory’ (p. 4).
Wengraf’s view – as an Editorial Committee member at the time – is interesting, but not wholly convincing. First of all, the ‘comparative country studies’ led directly to Anderson and Nairn’s work on the specificity of England, which centred on the weakness of the theoretical tradition; this led directly to the decision to import Western Marxism (see (iv) & (v) below). Secondly, ‘NLR 2‘ was no clearer about the dividing line between revolution and left reform than any other phase of the journal.
36. Obviously there is no space here for a critique of Anderson’s numerous propositions about British history. As far as the seventeenth century is concerned, some aspects of Anderson’s thesis are dealt with in N. Carlin’s Marxism and the English Civil War in this issue of International Socialism.
37. Many critics have shown that Anderson underestimates the British working class. He also grotesquely romanticizes developments on the continent. Thus he claims (NLR 23/26) that France had a working-class party (the Parti Ouvrier) by 1876, whereas Britain did not have a Labour Party until 1900. In fact in 1876 the French working-class movement was in disarray after the defeat of the Commune; most of its leaders were still in exile. The 1876 Congress (which incidentally excluded all intellectuals on principle) set up only one of the many competing groups which were to exist in France before a united Socialist Party was established in 1905.
38. In fairness it should be said that in 1964 the cult of Harold Wilson’s personality was pretty widespread. Thus the same issue of NLR carried a Pergamon Press advertisement for Harold Wilson: A Pictorial Biography by Michael Foot, the photographs in which included ‘even one of him doing the washing-up!’ The cult was not, however, universal: ‘Wilson’s record as a political manipulator up to this point makes Guy Fawkes seem a brilliant conspirator by comparison.’ (Alasdair MacIntyre, Labour Policy and Capitalist Planning, IS 15, 1963).
39. House of Commons, 20 June 1966.
40. There was no extended discussion of the seamen’s strike in NLR. In 1967 NLR published a volume of essays on trade unionism (The Incompatibles, ed. R. Blackburn & A. Cockburn, Penguin), with contributions by Jack Jones and Clive Jenkins. The piece on the seamen’s strike was entrusted to Paul Foot.
41. As listed by Anderson in his Considerations on Western Marxism (London 1976), pp. 25–6. This is an interesting text for students of the contradictions in Anderson’s thought. After an extensive account of Western Marxism, Anderson produces, like a rabbit from a hat, the apparently superior tradition of ‘orthodox Trotskyism’. He then adds an Afterword, regretting that his text might invite an ‘activist’ reading which would be ‘scientifically untenable and politically irresponsible.’ (ibid., p. 109).
42. Interestingly, Anderson’s colleague Robin Blackburn constructed a rather different history for the same tradition: ‘In the twentieth century the modern classics of Marxism have emerged from the most diverse surroundings, all of which emphasize its vocation to change the world: from the Vyborg suburb of Petrograd on the eve of the October Revolution (Lenin’s State and Revolution), from the embattled Budapest Commune of 1919 (Lukacs’ Changing Function of Historical Materialism), from the prisons of Mussolini’s Italy (Gramsci’s prison notebooks), from the caves of Yenan (Mao’s On Contradiction) and from Havana, capital of the free territory of America (Che Guevara’s Socialism and Man in Cuba) and from the Paris students’ Marxist-Leninist Study Circle in a Sorbonne soon to be the storm centre of the French insurrection of May 1968 (Lire le Capital, Althusser, Balibar and others).’ (R. Blackburn, A Brief Guide to Bourgeois Ideology, in Student Power, ed. R. Blackburn & A. Cockburn, London 1969, p. 213).
43. Considerations on Western Marxism, p. 53.
44. Cf. Arguments within English Marxism, p. 115, replying to The Poverty of Theory, p. 404.
45. Obligations of ‘entrism’ meant that at this time Mandel’s Trotskyism was still a closely-guarded secret.
46. NLR was not, however, alone in the field, this journal too can take some credit – cf. E. Gerlach, Karl Korsch’s Undogmatic Marxism (IS 19); G. Lukacs, What is Orthodox Marxism? (IS 24 & 25); C. Harman, Gramsci, (IS 32); L. Goldmann, Is there a Marxist Sociology? (IS 34).
47. An interesting study could be made of the source of many of Althusser’s ideas in Zhdanov’s lecture On Philosophy delivered on 24 June 1947.
48. Juliet Mitchell, in her pioneering essay on feminism Women: The Longest Revolution (NLR 40/16) invokes the Althusserian concept of overdetermination. But it is not clear that this means anything more than a rejection of a crude and immediate reduction of women’s oppression to the class struggle. Does one really need Althusser for that?
49. Triesman is now a member of the National Executive of NATFHE. Doubtless his role in this capacity will be to ensure that the staff do not ‘come in too soon’ in future struggles.
50. Widgery, op. cit., p. 512.
51. Cf. Red Mole, No. 1, 17March 1970.
52. Cf. The attack on Blackburn by the New Zealand section of the Fourth International cited in Intercontinental Press, 11 May 1970, pp. 447–48.
53. Cf. letters by Chou En-lai reproduced in NLR 68/46 and 69/91.
54. It is both tragic and symptomatic that Anderson, who in 1962 produced a very valuable study of Portuguese imperialism (NLR 15/83, 16/88, 17/85) had not a word to say when the Empire finally met its deserved fate.
55. There were brief comments on Portugal (NLR 100/107–110) and Chile (NLR 100/128–9) in a reprinted interview with Ernest Mandel in which he described the Portuguese revolution as having been ‘blown off course’ by the Republica struggle.
56. Cf. C. Harman, The Crisis of the European Revolutionary Left, IS 2 : 4, pp. 67-69.
57. In 1970 NLR published a critique of The British Road to Socialism by Bill Warren (NLR 63/27), which had previously been presented to the Smith Group, a discussion group of CP members and others. Warren, who became a frequent contributor to NLR, was a member of a right-wing pro-incomes policy grouping in the CP. (Cf. J Bearman, Anatomy of the Bennite Left, IS 2 : 6). However, there is no evidence that NLR’s concern to reform British Stalinism was ever more than incidental.
58. Inviting, for example, a book review from the anti-Marxist Tsarist ‘émigré’ Michael Postan (NLR 103/72).
59. Rustin describes himself as a ‘Rip Van Winkle’; certainly most of us imagined he had broken with what could on any reasonable definition be called the ‘left’ some ten years ago.
60. Arguments within English Marxism, p. 217.
61. Considerations on Western Marxism, p. 121.
62. Some of these early studies were encouraged by the ‘African Research and Publications Bureau’ run by a Tanzanian exile Dennis Phombeah (cf. Wengraf, op. cit., p. 21).
63. Arguments within English Marxism, p. 121.
64. Arguments within English Marxism, p. 203. Anderson’s worst enemy would not accuse him of having a limited vocabulary, and when he says ‘condemn’ he does not mean ‘criticize’. Incidentally, in the passage referred to (Writing by Candlelight, p. 171), Thompson denounces both wings of the IRA as ‘terrorist’, but Anderson apparently endorses only the condemnation of the Provisionals.
65. For the current reflorescence of Shachtmanism see P. Binns and M. Haynes, New theories of Eastern European class societies, IS 2 : 7.
66. A short novel review by James appeared in NLR 25/74.
67. Other than on the level of demonstration chants, I do not think any section of the British Left ever supposed he was.
68. Contrary to Colin Sparks (Art and Revolution, IS 2 : 5), I see no good reason for privileging one of these tasks over others.
69. The best parody remains Peter Sedgwick’s Pseud Left Review, IS 25.
70. Considerations on Western Marxism, p. 54.
71. New Statesman, 18 July 1980; Callinicos’ piece appeared in New Statesman, 27 June 1980.
72. NLR’s former belief that the Labour Party could inaugurate a process that would spill over into a revolutionary transition, and its more recent flirtations with Il Manifesto and the Althusser tendency in the PCF suggest a belief that the existing reformist or Stalinist organizations can be transformed by the dynamic of events into revolutionary parties. There is a scientific name for this view, unfortunately spoilt by misuse. It is Pabloism.
73. Cf. Considerations on Western Marxism, pp. 98–101, and Arguments within English Marxism, pp. 152–55.
74. Of the Editorial Committee Blackburn and Hoare are or have been members of the Fourth International; Rowthorn is a member of the Communist Party.
 



The year 1996 sees the 200th anniversary of Babeuf’s short lived ‘conspiracy for equality’, an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the moderate Directory, which governed France, and establish a society based on common ownership of property. Babeuf has long been recognised as an important precursor of the revolutionary socialist tradition; in the founding manifesto of the Communist International, Trotsky declared that the new organisation was ‘carrying on in direct succession the heroic endeavours and martyrdom of a long line of revolutionary generations from Babeuf to Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg’. [1]
Yet to English readers Babeuf remains a shadowy figure. Babeuf gets a name check in most histories of the French Revolution, but very little more. Only three book length studies have appeared in the course of the 20th century. [2] Partly this is a result of British parochialism, partly it is a result of Stalinism, which found it hard to reconcile the study of ‘precursors’ of Marxism with its attempt to transform Marxism into a quasi-religious doctrine. The most important work on Babeuf in the 20th century has been done by anti-Stalinist Marxists: Maurice Dommanget, a syndicalist who helped to arrange Trotsky’s accommodation during his exile in France [3], and Victor Dalin, a supporter of the Left Opposition in the 1920s who spent many years in labour camps. [4]
Babeuf’s ‘conspiracy’ is often dismissed as futile or premature, and Babeuf himself seen as a utopian, a hangover from Jacobinism or a forerunner of Blanqui. The reality, however, is considerably more complex and more interesting. There is now a huge amount of information available on Babeuf which reveals him to be an original thinker and an organiser of considerable significance. The following account will concentrate on the episode of the ‘conspiracy’ and its political and organisational practice. [5]
Babeuf was born in 1760, in Picardy in north east France. He had no formal education [6], but acquired a considerable amount of knowledge from his father, who was an army deserter turned taxman. Babeuf may even have learnt some Latin; certainly he always retained a deep enthusiasm for ancient Rome. Later on he was to adopt the forename ‘Gracchus’, after the Roman advocate of the ‘agrarian law’ (the redistribution of the land). As a teenager he spent a couple of years performing hard manual labour, working on the Picardy canal. Before the development of machinery, canal building required an army of thousands of labourers, and Babeuf was thus introduced to the wage earning working class which was beginning to emerge in France at this time. Then he became a feudiste, employed by landowners to search through documents in order to re-establish feudal rights. He claimed later that it was in the course of this work that he had discovered that the origins of private property, and hence of human inequality, lay in the violence and deception of the landowners.
Babeuf was an enthusiastic supporter of the French Revolution, from the storming of the Bastille through to the establishment of the Republic and the execution of the king. He was invariably on the side of the popular masses who wanted to take the revolution forward towards greater economic and political equality, and against those moderate elements who wanted to call a halt before their own privileges were destroyed. Until 1793 he spent most of his time in Picardy. His old profession had been made obsolete by the revolution, and instead he made several rather unsuccessful attempts to launch newspapers. He was also involved in a number of campaigns against unfair taxation.
In February 1793 he went to Paris, and found employment in the organisation that administered food supplies. Later that year he was jailed on a rather dubious charge of forgery dating back to his days in Picardy. He was released from prison in July 1794, just ten days after the fall of Robespierre and the Jacobins. The most radical phase of the revolution had been brought to an end by the moderate bourgeoisie, who wished to ensure that their own wealth and status were not threatened. But at the same time Robespierre had eroded his own support among the poorest sections of the Paris population; in particular the imposition of wage controls had alienated the emergent working class.
Initially Babeuf welcomed the fall of Jacobin rule. He had not been particularly sympathetic to Robespierre’s most vigorous left wing critics, the so-called enragés, but as one who had a deep commitment to enriching democratic forms, he distrusted Robespierre’s authoritarianism. In particular he was hostile to the repressive measures used during the civil war that had raged in the Vendée in western France.
Soon the realities of the new regime began to manifest themselves; the rich sought to line their own pockets while the poor faced increasing hardship. The well off flaunted their prosperity in luxury restaurants while the streets were full of starving people. The government was now in the hands of a five man Directory, and in Paris gangs of muscadins or ‘gilded youth’ emerged, bunches of thugs who launched physical attacks on the remaining groups of pro-Jacobins.
Babeuf had by this time launched a new paper, the Tribun du Peuple (People’s Tribune). While the early issues were critical of the Jacobins, he did not hesitate long before recognising where the battle lines lay. His response to the strongarm tactics being used against the remaining Jacobins was quite unambiguous:
If you want civil war, you can have it ... You’ve cried ‘To arms’. We’ve said the same to our people. [7]
Not surprisingly he soon found himself in jail again, and he spent most of 1795 locked up.
Babeuf was now vigorously opposed to the Directory, but he did not simply wish to revert to the period of Jacobin rule. He had developed a quite distinctive position which it is entirely legitimate to describe as ‘socialist’. Of course the word ‘socialist’ was not yet in currency. Babeuf usually described his position as the advocacy of ‘true equality’ or ‘common happiness’. But his aim of a society based on economic equality and common ownership of property is clearly recognisable as what later became known as socialism. Before 1789 Babeuf had been deeply influenced by the ideas of some of the 18th century utopian communists; during the revolution he had always combined activism with intensive reading and theoretical speculation.
Of course Babeuf did not think in terms of the distinction subsequently made by Marxists between ‘bourgeois’ and ‘socialist’ revolutions. His concern was always that the revolution should be continued to its logical conclusion, to fight against those who wished to stop it half way or roll back the gains already made. But his goal was quite clearly a society which would be based on economic as well as juridical equality, and which would therefore have no place for private property.
While in prison he had an extensive correspondence with Charles Germain, later to be one of the leaders of the ‘conspiracy’. In one of his letters Babeuf set out a devastating critique of the market economy which has lost none of its power two centuries later:
Competition, far from aiming at perfection, submerges conscientiously made products under a mass of deceptive goods contrived to dazzle the public, competition which achieves low prices only by obliging the worker to waste his skill in botched work, by starving him, by destroying his moral standards through lack of scruples; competition gives the victory only to whoever has most money; competition, after the struggle, ends up simply with a monopoly in the hands of the winner and the withdrawal of low prices; competition which manufactures any way it likes, at random, and runs the risk of not finding any buyers and destroying a large amount of raw material which could have been used usefully but which will no longer be good for anything. [8]
Some historians concede that Babeuf personally had developed a socialist position, but claim that his following came only from those nostalgic for the good old days of Robespierre when they were better fed. Obviously any political movement will be perceived in different ways by different sections of its audience, according to their degree of political sophistication. But the Analysis of Babeuf’s Doctrine, which was widely distributed as a leaflet and flyposted all over Paris, contains a pretty clear statement of Babeuf’s fundamental position:

Nature has given every man an equal right to enjoy all goods.
 
The aim of society is to defend this equality, often attacked by the strong and wicked in the state of nature, and to increase, by the co-operation of all, the common enjoyments.
 
...There is oppression when one person is exhausted by work and lacks everything, while another wallows in abundance without doing anything.
 
No-one can, without committing a crime, appropriate to his exclusive possession the fruits of the earth or of industry.
 
In a true society, there must be neither rich nor poor.

On leaving jail on 12 October 1795, Babeuf faced the fundamental problem of how to pursue his socialist goal and at the same time relate to the immediate situation of crisis he saw around him. For Babeuf the policies of the Directory were not only reactionary in themselves, but opened the door to a much more sinister danger. Royalist plotting was intensifying, while among the common people many were beginning to wonder whether the whole revolutionary experience had been worthwhile. The danger of a monarchist coup which would overthrow the Republic and destroy all the gains of the revolution was a very real threat. If the Directory was not overthrown from the left then there was a good chance it would be overthrown from the right. The Directory was performing a perilous balancing act between Royalists and Republicans, but at any moment it might lose its balance.
To respond to such a situation, organisation was necessary. Over the previous couple of years, especially when he was in prison, Babeuf had gathered together a tiny nucleus of like minded revolutionaries (paradoxically the prisons provided a means of bringing opponents of the regime together). Notable among them were Buonarroti, an Italian disciple of Rousseau who had served the revolutionary government in Corsica and had become a French citizen; Sylvain Maréchal, a poet and militant atheist who had devised an early version of the revolutionary calendar; and Charles Germain, a professional soldier since the age of 17, deeply influenced by both 18th century materialism and the Anabaptists. [9]
In the autumn of 1795 various critics of the regime had attempted to revive the Jacobin tradition of revolutionary clubs by setting up the Panthéon Club. This met in a former religious building close to the Panthéon in what is now the Latin Quarter (just down the road from the area where the first barricades went up in the rebellion of 1968). Often the members met sitting on the floor in a basement by torchlight. Babeuf, Buonarroti and others participated in these meetings. By February 1796 the Directory decided that the club must be closed down. A young general who was rapidly making a name for himself, Bonaparte, took personal responsibility for the operation.
Babeuf now faced a difficult choice between different ways forward. He himself was clearly a socialist. But he did not have enough co-thinkers to engage in anything other than the most abstract propaganda. He had been writing a book to be entitled Equality; if he had completed it, he would have been listed among the utopian communists of the late 18th century, known only to specialists of the esoteric. Alternatively he could have trailed along with the ex-Jacobins, anxious to turn the clock back to the golden days of Robespierre. In that event his distinctive contribution would have been totally submerged.
The significance of Babeuf is that he accepted neither of these alternatives, but strove for a solution which overcame the dilemma. He made no secret of his socialist ideas, and put them forward in his mass propaganda; but he also accepted the necessity of working with, and attempting to mobilise, those whose ideas did not go beyond Robespierre’s. In particular, Babeuf and his supporters used as one of their agitational demands the restoration of the Jacobin Constitution of 1793. This had included the defence of the right to property. Babeuf and his associates did not conceal their criticism of this point, but at the same time saw the appeal to the 1793 Constitution as one which could rally the masses of common people in Paris. Here we see Babeuf grappling with two problems that have returned, in different forms, for revolutionaries of later generations: how to make alliances that will be effective in practice without compromising the basic goals of the movement; and how to relate short term demands that win popular support to the long term perspective of social transformation.
Thus was born the ‘conspiracy for equality’. Before going any further it is necessary to clarify the use of the term conspiracy. When Babeuf and his associates were put on trial in 1797, the main charge used against them was that of conspiracy, a charge to be used repeatedly against socialists and trade unionists for the following two centuries. And when, in 1828, Buonarroti published his influential history of the events, he gave it the title Babeuf’s Conspiracy For Equality. So we seem to be stuck with the term (even though it is a notoriously slippery one that meant quite different things to state prosecutors and to revolutionary activists).
But it is important not to jump from the word to a notion of conspiracy that involves a tiny group operating secretly and manipulatively behind the backs of the masses. Nothing could be further from the reality of the activity of Babeuf. Indeed, when the state prosecutor at Babeuf’s trial in Vendôme began his case against the alleged ‘conspirators’, he described their methods as follows:
Their means were the publication and distribution of anarchistic newspapers, writings and pamphlets … the formation of a multitude of little clubs run by their agents; it was the establishment of organisers and flyposters; it was the corrupting of workshops; it was the infernal art of sowing false rumours and spreading false news, of stirring up the people by blaming the government for all the ills resulting from current circumstances. [10]
Such activity scarcely conforms to the common notion of ‘conspiracy’; indeed much of it will seem remarkably familiar to most readers of this journal.
Certainly the organisation adopted a semi-clandestine structure; this was necessitated by the degree of political repression prevailing under the Directory. For example, the advocacy of the 1793 Constitution was punishable by death and indeed it was for this advocacy that Babeuf and Darthé were executed after the jury had thrown out the conspiracy charges.
At the centre of the organisation was a committee of seven men, including Babeuf, Buonarroti and Maréchal. ‘Agents’ (full time organisers) were appointed for each of the 12 arrondissements of Paris. However, the agents were not to know each other’s identities, and neither were they to know who was on the secret central committee (though of course Babeuf himself, who was living in hiding, was publicly identified with the organisation). Instead an ‘intermediate agent’ was to have responsibility for all communication between the agents and the centre. In theory the ‘intermediate agent’ was not supposed to know the content or significance of the communications he was carrying; in fact he was an experienced political activist and almost certainly knew what he was doing.
Many historians have tried to see the centralisation of the Babeuf organisation as a sinister forerunner of Leninism – and hence of Stalinism. There is little substance to this claim. The basic principle was that no member of the organisation should know more than was necessary for the exercise of their particular functions. It is a principle that is no more than common sense in any situation where an organisation is likely to be subject to infiltration, and where individuals risk interrogation. If it is a principle that has been applied by Leninist parties in certain conditions, it is also one that has been used by a wide range of political organisations under conditions of repression – for example resistance movements in the Second World War.
A vigorous correspondence was maintained between the centre and the agents; circulars were sent out almost daily, and regular reports were received back from the agents. Of course everything had to be copied by hand, and Babeuf himself did copying work amid his many other tasks.
The ‘conspirators’ were guilty of one serious lapse of security. Copies of all outgoing and incoming correspondence were carefully stored – and seized by the authorities at the time of Babeuf’s arrest. They were subsequently published in two large volumes and used as the basis of the prosecution case against Babeuf at the Vendôme trial to show just how dangerous the conspiracy had been. [11] Babeuf’s heirs would be well advised to learn the lesson and invest in a paper-shredder – but historians can scarcely regret the mistake since the documents provide us with an incomparable source that enables us to get a real sense of just how the conspiracy worked.
The role of the agents was central to the whole organisation. They received a small payment – the equivalent of a worker’s wage. In return the centre’s expectations were high. If the agents did not carry out their duties adequately they received stinging rebukes and, in at least one case, threats. A dilatory agent received a letter with the ominous conclusion: ‘Remember that what you were told in your first instruction is still valid: “our only loss would be you, and even if you were ill intentioned, you could not harm us”.’ [12]
But generally the agents seem to have worked well. Their relation with the centre was a two way process. They were given instructions, but also asked to report regularly on the circumstances in their districts. Some of the information required was of direct practical relevance – for example the location of arms stores. But the crucial task of the agents was to report on the ‘thermometer of opinion’ – that is, the state of consciousness among the common people in their areas. There are reports of disputes in shops and snatches of conversation overheard in the streets – all designed to give an impression of the popular mood. Far from going behind the backs of the people, the conspirators knew that they could only have any success by relating to the feelings and attitudes of the common people.
Moreover, the job of the agents was not to substitute themselves for the masses, but rather to facilitate popular organisation. They were told to ‘multiply small meetings as much as you can’. To avoid the dangers of infiltration these were to be held in private homes rather than cafes. Most importantly, a large number of small meetings was to be preferred to bringing too many people together at the same time. [13]
The whole operation was run on a shoestring; if agents were given expenses, it was grudgingly and with the reminder: ‘Be aware that this revolution is not undertaken by aristocrats, and if it were, you wouldn’t want to serve it ... the only funds come from the contributions of sans-culottes.’ [14]
Of course, a newspaper was central to the organisation of the conspiracy. Babeuf’s Tribun du Peuple had existed well before the conspiracy came into existence, but the last issues were put at the service of the organisation. Indeed, Babeuf always saw his paper as an organiser rather than simply a journalistic enterprise.
The circulation of the Tribun du Peuple was probably around 2,000. Undoubtedly it played a key role in diffusing Babeuf’s ideas and giving an analysis of the contemporary situation. Some historians have used the subscription list of the journal to give an account of the nature of Babeuf’s popular support. [15] This is, however, an unreliable source. The Tribun du Peuple was a theoretical journal, often difficult to understand for those unversed in political debate. Moreover, it was expensive. Naturally enough it was the better off, more educated supporters of the conspiracy who subscribed to the journal. The poor artisans and wage workers, who constituted Babeuf’s natural target audience, were often too poor to subscribe and were sometimes illiterate. Among soldiers, who were another key section of the audience, the situation was even worse: one estimate is that among the troops, largely of peasant origin, who were stationed in Paris, only 10 percent could read and write. Moreover, not all subscriptions were individual; it was a common practice for political newspapers to be read aloud in inns and lemonade shops, so the ideas had a wider currency than crude subscription data would suggest.
However, because of the limitations on the Tribun du Peuple, Babeuf recognised the necessity for other forms of propaganda. Alongside the Tribun du Peuple another paper was launched in the spring of 1796, namely L’Eclaireur (The Scout). This was written in a much more popular style, and rather than pursuing theoretical analysis it aimed at radical exposure journalism. Thus the luxurious lifestyle of the members of the Directory was exposed – for example, when each member of the Directory was having eight dozen specially embroidered handkerchiefs made. And the paper took an interest in a high official called Merlin who was reported to have several ‘nymphs’ from the Opéra as his mistresses.
An even wider audience was reached with flyposting. The use of posters had been widespread during the revolution, but Babeuf’s supporters used them to particular effect. The authorities recognised the danger and constantly had them removed, but the reports from the agents show how successful the activity was. Thus in the second arrondissement a policeman tore down a poster, but was immediately confronted by an ‘energetic patriot’ who said: ‘Rogue, you have come to rob the people of the truth which we want them to know; you are an agent of those who are starving us.’ At this, the readers of the poster applauded and the policeman had to run for his life. [16] In the seventh arrondissement some 2,000 people were said to have queued up to read a poster addressed to soldiers. [17]
Another method of propagating ideas even among the illiterate was the use of songs. A focal point for that activity was a café known as the Chinese Baths, where Sophie Lapierre won an audience for the ideas of the conspiracy. Lapierre had been a school teacher and an embroiderer; she was tried at Vendôme and behaved with the utmost courage, refusing to recognise the legitimacy of the court and leading the prisoners in song in defiance of the judges. While the songs did not have a high degree of political sophistication, they made the basic point about human equality in vivid fashion. For example:



Benevolent Mother Nature
You created us to be equal!
So why the murderous inequality
Of property and of work?
Awake to the sound of our voice
Come forth out of the dark night
People! Take back your rights
The sun shines for everyone. [18]



Another of the tasks of the agents was to compile contact lists – lists of all the ‘patriots’ in their area who might be sympathetic to the aims of the conspiracy and who could be called on for action. The lists that survived are often of a remarkable frankness, showing no illusions in the political sophistication of those referred to. Thus one list names ‘the Fleurie brothers, horse dealers, living near the market, excellent in a fight and that’s all’. [19] In another case a certain Himbert was described as an ‘ardent and courageous patriot’, fit for a position of command, but the agent warned that due to his excitable temperament he should not be informed of his role till the last moment. [20]
But while it was necessary to be honest about the potential of contacts, the aim was always to draw them in rather than to create barriers; a letter to the agent of the sixth arrondissement in Babeuf’s own hand states: ‘If people are still susceptible to conversion, it is better to win them over than to reject them from our ranks, because in that way we increase our party and diminish that of our opponents.’ [21]
More prosperous supporters were, of course, not neglected; a circular to agents tells them: ‘You will encourage … well-off patriots to contribute towards the enormous printing costs that revolutionaries are obliged to bear.’ [22] A variety of talented people were attracted by the movement; among Babeuf’s sympathisers was Valentin Haüy, a pioneer of education for the blind and the original inventor of the system of printing now known as braille.
The whole purpose of the work of the agents was to ensure that the conspiracy was rooted in the various localities. Certainly there is some evidence that Babeuf was popular among the common people in some districts. A letter from Babeuf’s elder son, Emile, aged only ten but active in organising the conspiracy, tells how he went into a shop to buy some medicine and when he told the shopkeeper he was Babeuf’s son, she cut one third off the price. [23]
Daniel Guérin, following Dommanget, has argued that Babeuf should have concentrated more exclusively on working class struggles. [24] To have done so would have condemned Babeuf to mere propagandism; the working class alone was still too small to challenge the Directory. Only an alliance of wage workers and other sans-culottes could have any hope of making an impact.
But it is also important to recognise that there was a substantial working class in Paris in the 1790s, and that Babeuf and his supporters did make every effort to relate to it. As well as large numbers of market porters (who had on one occasion saved Babeuf from arrest by hurling mud and rubbish at a policeman who was pursuing him) and dockers (Paris was at this time a major port), there were a number of quite substantial factories and workshops, a few employing hundreds of workers, many employing more than 20 or 30.
The agents were particularly instructed to examine conditions and attitudes in the workshops in their areas. The results are somewhat mixed. In the 12th arrondissement the agent reported that there was little potential at the Gobelins tapestry factory, which employed around 100 workers. As was often the case with the luxury industries, workers were afraid that any attack on the privileged classes who bought their products would mean a fall in sales. But the agent also found a dye works with some 30 workers, and about 20 tanneries with between 15 and 50 workers each, where the prospects were rather more hopeful. [25] The same agent reported that there was growing unemployment, which was making more workers think of the Robespierre period as one of greater prosperity. The agent of the eighth arrondissement reported on a wage dispute where an employer had given his workers a rise to cover the falling value of paper money, but had in fact not compensated them adequately. [26] Thus, while it would be quite wrong to claim that the Babeuf conspiracy was a specifically proletarian movement, it would also be wrong to ignore how relevant wage workers were to it.
Mention should also be made of the role of women in the conspiracy. Babeuf had long been sensitive to the fact of women’s oppression; as early as 1786 he had written a long letter analysing the roots of this oppression. [27] In a reply to the agent of the eighth arrondissement the central committee wrote: ‘We know the influence that can be exercised by this interesting sex, who do not bear the yoke of tyranny any more indifferently than we do, and who are no less courageous when it comes to taking action to break it’. [28]
A number of women played a key role in the conspiracy, including Sophie Lapierre and Babeuf’s wife, Marie-Anne-Victoire Longlet, who had responsibility for distribution of the Tribun du Peuple. Several women were put on trial at Vendôme; all were acquitted, though one contemporary report tells how after the verdict Charles Germain gloated that the jury had been duped, for it had been the women who encouraged the men. [29]
The conspiracy centred on Paris, but considerable work was done to ensure support on a national level. Recent research by Jean-Marc Schiappa has shown that the conspiracy had an extensive network of supporters in various regions of the country, notably in Babeuf’s home territory of Picardy, and in the Mediterranean south. [30]
The conspiracy also devoted great attention to agitation within the army, recognising that unless the soldiers could be drawn over to the side of the revolutionary forces, any rising would be crushed. Prospects for support looked encouraging. Since the heroic days of the defence of the Republic a couple of years earlier, the morale of the army had fallen catastrophically, a situation which was most clearly expressed in a massive level of desertions. One of Babeuf’s supporters reported that most soldiers stationed in Paris would ‘gladly swap the Republic for a cake from their home village’. [31]
Another report gave a vivid account of the miseries of military life and the grievances of soldiers:
The soldier ... is today not only dying of hunger, but he has no shoes and no clothes; he can’t have his shirt laundered, because that costs 30 francs, and where would he get them? … he is also annoyed, vexed and crushed under a heap of tortures graced with the name of military discipline, and at bottom it is a tyranny which is much more highly perfected than under the noble ministers of Louis XVI. [32]
The conspirators made great efforts to win support in the army. Much of the propaganda material aimed at soldiers was carefully written in colloquial, earthy language, full of obscenities, designed to appeal to the military: ‘We’re fucked, my poor friend ..., yes, we’re fucked and flat broke if we swallow the pill they’ve shoved in our gobs’. [33] A poster called ‘Soldier Stop And Read’ urged, ‘No! Citizen soldiers! You will not shoot at your brothers ...’ [34]
At the end of April the Police Legion mutinied. This was a body organised by Bonaparte to ensure security in the capital. Its members were recruited from the Parisian popular classes and many of its soldiers were profoundly hostile to the Directory. But Babeuf’s supporters were not strong enough to generalise the movement. The rising was crushed and 17 militant soldiers were shot.
Detailed plans continued to be made for the insurrection. Banners and pennants were planned; snipers were organised and arrangements were made to seize food stores and the National Treasury; it was planned that all property in pawnshops would be handed back to its owners, a measure designed to win great support among the poor. Buonarroti claimed there were 17,000 men ready for the insurrection. [35] But it was not to be. A government informer, Grisel, had made his way into the organisation, and the conspirators, quite correctly anxious to welcome and make use of a man who seemed well informed and influential in the army, were too open in the way they received him and allowed him to gain information.
On 10 May 1796 the police arrested Babeuf and Buonarroti, seizing documents and arms. The following year the main conspirators were put on trial at Vendôme. The trial lasted 14 weeks, and Babeuf and his friends fought like cats every single day, exploiting every legal technicality and being deliberately disruptive into the bargain. Only with the greatest difficulty did the prosecution persuade the jury to convict, and even then a number of leading activists were acquitted. Only two death sentences were passed, on Babeuf and Darthé. Several others were imprisoned, among them Buonarroti, who survived into the 1830s and wrote a history of the conspiracy which inspired a whole generation of new militants in the period before 1848.
Thus it can be seen that Babeuf’s ‘conspiracy’ was far from what might be imagined as a conspiratorial organisation. In no way was it the predecessor of Che Guevara’s peasant armies or the Baader-Meinhof gang. On the contrary, Babeuf firmly rejected acts of terrorism. In his evidence at Vendôme, the traitor Grisel was obliged to admit that, when as a provocation, he had proposed setting fire to castles outside Paris as a diversion during the planned insurrection, Babeuf had firmly rejected the suggestion. Babeuf had likewise refused an offer by an army officer to assassinate the five members of the Directory. [36]
Likewise, the conspirators were well aware of the dangers of excessive clandestinity; in a letter to the agent of the 12th arrondissement, they wrote:
As far as possible, you should distribute publications in a direct manner. You have to show a bit of daring if you want to encourage it in others; clandestine methods inspire distrust in the uneducated masses. They think that if you seem to be smuggling your ideas in, then there must be something reprehensible about them. [37]
Any serious revolutionary organisation has to strike a balance between secrecy and openness, after making a careful analysis of the objective conditions it has to work under. The basic principle must be as much security as necessary, as much openness as possible. Of course Babeuf and friends, like most organisations since, did not always get it right. Certainly they made mistakes about security, and in the case of Grisel they made a fatal one. But the mistakes were made because they were anxious to open up the organisation to potential recruits. An organisation that does not take risks may survive, but it is unlikely to grow. Some historians have sneered at the conspiracy, saying it was widely infiltrated with police agents. But if that was true, then why did the prosecution at Vendôme find it necessary to stake so much on the testimony of a single witness, the informer Grisel?
Babeuf and his comrades were grappling with real problems, with very little historical experience to help them. If subsequent revolutionaries have been able to learn from their mistakes, it is because they were the real mistakes of a real movement. And, as well as planning the details of their organisation, the conspirators also spent much time drawing up the details of a future society based on the principles of true equality. Buonarroti gives an extensive account of these in his history.
What is striking here is just how far Babeuf’s vision of a future society diverged from that of Rousseau and most 18th century utopians. Contrary to the claims of many critics, Babeuf was not an ‘economic pessimist’ who believed the only hope for equality was to share misery equally among all. Babeuf was no ascetic, and the word ‘abundance’ recurs frequently in his writings. Buonarroti records that the conspiracy aimed ‘… to provide in superabundance things which are necessary to all, and to provide them with objects of pleasure which are not condemned by public morality’. [38]
The draft economic decree produced by the secret Directory promised that the new society would provide everyone with healthy, comfortable and decently furnished accommodation, clothing, laundry, heat and light, adequate food – bread, meat, poultry, fish, eggs – and wine, as well as a free health service. [39]
Likewise Babeuf and his associates anticipated Marx in advocating the transcendence of the distinction between town and country. They envisaged a network of villages, linked by roads and canals so that communication became easier. In their draft ‘economic decree’ the conspirators gave special attention to the development of telegraphic communication. (This was not, of course, electric telegraphy but a form of semaphore signalling, perfected by Chappe in 1794. [40])
Far from opposing technological progress, as Rousseau did, the conspirators recognised that a socialist society would use technology to full advantage:
It is only within a system based on community that the use of machines would be of true benefit to humanity, by reducing toil while increasing the abundance of necessary and agreeable objects. Today, by suppressing a great quantity of manual labour, they take bread out of the mouths of a large number of men, in the interest of a few insatiable speculators whose profits they increase. [41]
Of course, with the massive benefit of 200 years hindsight to help us, we can see that Babeuf’s conspiracy was doomed to failure. Engels was correct, if somewhat uncharitable, to describe the conspiracy as ‘insane … Babeuf’s attempt to jump from the Directorate immediately into communism’. [42] Even in the unlikely event of the insurrection having succeeded, it would at best have ushered in a second period of Jacobin rule, which would probably have been even more short lived than that of 1793–1794. The objective conditions for any kind of socialism quite simply did not exist, and would not exist for several decades to come.
Yet it is one thing to make a historical analysis of the reasons for Babeuf’s failure; it is quite a different one to adopt the complacent and patronising attitude that dismisses the whole episode as futile, that says that, if Babeuf had known what we know now, he would not have done what he did but would have stayed in bed. We know what we know precisely because Babeuf and others like him did what they did.
After the defeat of the conspiracy there was a prolonged downturn in resistance. A few of Babeuf’s followers reappear in later brief opposition movements, but with the rise of Napoleon the left was crushed for a generation. Yet in the longer term Babeuf provided a vital source of ideas and inspiration for the rising socialist movement. Without the heritage of Babeuf, Marx and Engels would have had greater difficulty in achieving what they did.
François Furet has revived a well worn argument in seeing a continuity from Babeuf through Blanqui to Lenin. He tells us that Babeuf’s alleged voluntarism,
… is the highest peak of the revolutionary belief that political will can do everything. The last wave of Jacobin extremism – and doubtless the only intellectual synthesis of the egalitarian passion of those times – elaborates here the theory of the revolutionary putsch, essential for the understanding of the 19th and 20th centuries. The history of secret societies in Europe after the Treaty of Vienna has its origin here, as well as the Russian revolutionary tradition from populism to Bolshevism. [43]
The reality is rather more complex. As far as Blanqui, the greatest of the French leaders of secret societies, is concerned, it appears that he knew relatively little of Babeuf. Blanqui conforms far more than Babeuf to the typical stereotype of the ‘conspirator’; he had far less sense of the practicalities of mass propaganda and agitation. Blanqui was a revolutionary of enormous courage and total integrity, but in organisational terms he marks a regression from Babeuf’s achievement.
Bolshevism is a different matter again. Contrary to right wing mythology, there is no single ‘Leninist’ theory of the party; Lenin’s organisational philosophy made massive shifts between 1902, 1905, 1908, 1912 and 1917, according to his evaluation of objective conditions. In fact there seems to be little evidence that Lenin knew anything of Babeuf; there is a total of two cursory references to Babeuf in his entire writings. But if there is a link between Babeuf and Lenin, then I hope to have shown in this article that Babeuf is the forerunner of the Lenin who urged the opening up of the party in 1905 [44], not the imaginary conspiratorial Lenin of right wing fantasy.
A careful reading of the available documentation about Babeuf shows him to be an original thinker and a talented organiser, whose early death doubtless prevented the full flowering of his promise. There is much in the documentation of the conspiracy, from the general concern to unite theory and practice, down to details of such activities as flyposting, that will seem familiar to revolutionaries two centuries later. Babeuf is very much a part of our tradition.

Notes
1. J. Degras (ed.), The Communist International, I (London 1971), p. 47.
2. E. Belfort Bax, The Last Episode of the French Revolution (London 1911); D. Thomson, The Babeuf Plot (London 1947); R.B. Rose, Gracchus Babeuf (Stanford 1978). The first two are very dated; Rose’s book is sound and sympathetic, but limited in its political understanding.
3. P. Broué, Trotsky (Paris 1988), p. 794.
4. Dalin was a signatory of the pro-Trotskyist statement by members of the Communist Youth, published as Appendix IV in L. Trotsky, The New Course (Ann Arbor 1965), pp. 114–118.
5. For a full treatment of Babeuf’s life and thought see I.H. Birchall, The Spectre of Babeuf (Macmillan 1997).
6. Socialists defend state education, but we should not fetishise schooling; at least two great revolutionaries, Babeuf and Victor Serge, never went to school.
7. Tribun du Peuple, No. 30.
8. Babeuf, Ecrits, ed. C. Mazauric (Paris 1988), p. 258.
9. A religious movement of the early 16th century, inspired by Thomas Münzer, which advocated equality and common ownership of property.
10. Haute-Cour de Justice: Exposé Fait par les Accusateurs Nationaux (Paris 1797), p. 23.
11. Copie des Pièces Saisies (Paris 1797). The material was arranged in bundles and documents, and referred to by number – eg 7/27 would be the 27th item in the seventh bundle.
12. Ibid., 21/11.
13. Ibid., 7/89.
14. Ibid., 16/11. Sans-culotte – the word literally means those who did not wear (couldn’t afford) the knee-breeches worn by the upper and middle classes – was a term used to refer to the section of the urban population that worked and was poor, ie shopkeepers and artisans as well as wage workers.
15. For example A. Soboul, Sectional personnel and Babouvist personnel in Understanding the French Revolution (London 1988).
16. Copie des Pièces Saisies, 20/8.
17. Ibid., 22/17.
18. Ibid., 15/4.
19. Ibid., 10/17.
20. Ibid., 20/2.
21. Ibid., 16/9.
22. Ibid., 7/93.
23. Ibid., 8/4.
24. D. Guérin, La Lutte de Classes sous la Première Rèpublique, II (Paris 1968), p. 401; in general Guérin is a little harsh on Babeuf, and some of his tactical criticisms can be seen as sectarian; but this should not detract from the original and perceptive contribution Guérin made to the understanding of the revolution.
25. Copie des Pièces Saisies, 10/25.
26. Ibid., 10/24, 14/2.
27. Oeuvres de Babeuf, I (Paris 1977), pp. 91–102; the same was not true of all his associates. In 1801 Sylvain Maréchal was to argue that women should not be allowed to learn to read!
28. Copie des Pièces Saisies, 14/20.
29. Mémoires du Comte Dufort de Cheverny, II (Paris 1909), p. 267.
30. J.-M. Schiappa, Gracchus Babeuf avec les Egaux (Paris 1991), pp. 135–146.
31. Copie des Pièces Saisies, 3/3.
32. Ibid., 10/19.
33. Buonarroti, La Conspiration pour l’Egalité, II (Paris 1957), p. 108.
34. Ibid., II, p. 79.
35. Ibid., I, p. 145.
36. Débats du procès, II (Paris 1797), pp. 90–91, 102–103.
37. Copie des Pièces Saisies, 14/19.
38. Buonarroti, I, p. 158.
39. Ibid., II, p. 208.
40. Ibid., I, pp. 165–166, II, p. 210.
41. Ibid., I, p. 159.
42. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, XXV (London 1987), pp. 609–610.
43. F. Furet and M. Ozouf, Dictionnaire Critique de la Révolution Française (Paris 1988), pp. 204–205.
44. ‘… rally all the worker Social-Democrats round yourselves, incorporate them in the ranks of the party organisations by hundreds and thousands.’ V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. X (Moscow 1962), p. 32.
 



In the late sixties the struggle for national liberation by the Vietnamese people had a profound impact on political developments around the world. It divided the ruling class of the United States and caused a deep social crisis in the heartland of imperialism. In Europe the anti-war movement brought thousands upon thousands of students and young workers towards revolutionary politics.
It is now just a year since US imperialism was finally and ig-nominiously ejected from Indochina, and the puppet regimes of Thieu and Lon Nol were overthrown. There has been relatively little discussion on the left of the experience of the new regimes [1]; presumably most people on the British left believe that South Vietnam and Cambodia [2] are either workers’ states or in some sort of transition to socialism.
During the struggle against the war in Vietnam, the International Socialists were often criticised for casting doubt on the socialist content of the liberation struggle. As an editorial in this journal [3] put it:
‘However, to say that the NLF is a genuine popular movement is not to say that the NLF – much less the developed regime of the North – is either socialist, or will lead to socialism, or is no more than the authentic embodiment of the aspirations of the workers and peasants of Vietnam ... in almost all countries of the third world today the radical drive is towards state ownership, and it is the attempt to create a state-class, not a private or bourgeois class, that is spearheaded by the NLF and has already been instituted in the North. The aim is, however, the same: capital accumulation to build an independent nation-state.’
This position was elaborated within the framework of a more general theoretical view. [4] Very briefly, this argues that world capitalism forms a single, interconnected whole. Within this system, the backward countries become increasingly dependent on the advanced, and poorer and poorer in relation to them. Since capitalism is a world system, the working class can come to power even in a backward country where it forms a small minority of the population. But in most backward countries since the Second World War, the potential revolutionary role of the working class has not been realised (for a variety of reasons, notably the political misleadership of the Communist Parties). The peasantry cannot substitute for it, because by its nature it does not pose collective solutions to the problems of society. (Crudely, peasants on an estate see their salvation in dividing the land up among themselves; workers on an assembly line can’t divide it up, they can only collectively appropriate it). The vacuum is filled by a nationalist, state capitalist leadership. Sometimes such leaderships – for example Mao or Castro – pay lipservice to the working class but in fact come to power without any intervention by workers. But the state of world capitalism makes it increasingly impossible for such regimes to achieve the industrialisation necessary for development. Their vain efforts to develop drive them to exploit workers more and more, thus opening up new social conflicts. The regime in Vietnam is still young, still picking up the pieces after one of the most brutal wars in history. Nonetheless, what evidence exists suggests that this analysis is valid for Vietnam.
 
The International Context
The Vietnamese fought, and won, a military struggle against imperialism. But imperialism as an economic system survives, and the newly independent Vietnam seems to be prepared to live with it. (North Vietnam, which allows the Italian state company ENI to explore for offshore oil [5], has done so for some time). People close to the new Saigon government are said to regard the relationship between France and Algeria (that is, the neo-colonial relationship established after Algeria won political independence) as a ‘good model’ for South Vietnam’s own relations with France. [6] The French Renault company is establishing a bicycle components plant in North Vietnam. [7]
French and Japanese imperialisms both saw possibilities as soon as the US withdrew. The New York Times [8] reported:
‘In business circles generally, hope was expressed that Japanese industry could play a role in the economic reconstruction of South Vietnam.’
Clearly Japanese capitalists did not see the liberation of South Vietnam as having removed it irrevocably from the orbit of imperialism. In October 1975 Japanese businessmen visited South Vietnam for the first time since the fall of the Thieu regime and a fisheries deal was concluded. [9] This was paralleled by increasing trade between Japan and North Vietnam.
Sections of American capitalism, too, would like to make a fresh start in Vietnam. In July a Vice-President of the Bank of America spent a week in Hanoi discussing trade [10], and in December it was reported that certain American Chambers of Commerce were urging the US government not to obstruct access to the potential market in Vietnam. [11] On 12 April the North Vietnamese paper Nhan Dan published an article praising commercial quarters in the US which wanted good relations with Vietnam, and criticising Ford and Kissinger for obstructing them. [12]
The other alternative for Vietnam is closer economic links with Russia and China. Here there are two problems – the exploitative nature of Russia’s normal relations with its satellites, and the dangers of being used as a military pawn in the Sino-Soviet dispute. The Vietnamese have always been careful to stay unaligned in the Sino-Soviet dispute and get what they can from both sides.
The option to co-exist with imperialism necessarily imposes limits on Vietnamese foreign policy. Hanoi and Saigon support progressive causes at a safe distance, such as the MPLA and the Polisario Front. But on Asian questions they are more cautious, for example supporting Mrs Gandhi’s emergency measures in India. [13] The real test between proletarian internationalism and peaceful coexistence will come with the growing workers’ struggles in Thailand.
 
Class Forces
The second Vietnam war, after the Geneva agreements of 1954, began as a war about land. The Diem regime established in the South began to restore peasants’ land to the old landlord. It was only the brutality of the Southern regime, and subsequently US intervention, which brought North Vietnam rather reluctantly into the struggle. As a result, it was always the peasantry which provided the main dynamic of the struggle. The war was waged in the countryside, and, following the pattern of China in 1949, the towns were encircled and taken from the outside.
In 1945, when the Japanese were defeated, there was a real possibility that the Vietnamese working class could spearhead the struggle. But the Vietnamese Communist Party held back the workers, and murdered the Trotskyists who might have given them leadership. [14] From this point onwards the Vietnamese struggle was always fought on the basis of a ‘class alliance’. The National Liberation Front programme of 1967 called for ‘unity of all social strata’. The working class as such played a relatively minor role in the liberation, and no efforts were made to mobilise workers for specifically proletarian forms of struggle. When liberation forces captured Saigon Radio on 30 April, one of the first messages they broadcast was an appeal to workers to return to work the next day. [15]
The call for class collaboration continues after the overthrow of the Thieu regime. The official theory insists that while North Vietnam is ‘socialist’, the South is still simply ‘democratic’, though it is hard to see what such a distinction will mean when the two states are reunited. For the time being, private capitalists who support national reconstruction are allowed to carry on in South Vietnam. Last July, at the Congress of the National Liberation Front, an appeal was made to workers ‘in the interest of the people and in their own interest, to unite with the employers to build an independent and sovereign economy’. [16]
There are two reasons why such a class collaboration policy has some plausibility in the short run. Firstly, the Thieu regime was so corrupt, and the American aggression so nakedly brutal that a call for the alliance of all classes could succeed. Secondly, the American occupation so distorted South Vietnamese society that the working class proper forms only a tiny part of the urban population. Saigon, its population swollen from one to three millions, inherited from Thieu 200,000 prostitutes, 150,000 drug addicts, 200,000 police, 300,000 orphans, and half a million defeated soldiers. [17]
Since workers will have to play a key role in ‘national reconstruction’, efforts will be made to win their support for the regime. But in the longer term, reconstruction can take place only at their expense, and class conflict will inevitably reemerge. In North Vietnam, there are already reports of go-slow actions by miners in the Hong-Gai coalfields, which produce coal for export, in support of demands for more and better food. [18]
 
Economic Tasks
The economfc problems confronting the new regime in South Vietnam are formidable ones. There is a massive task of reconstruction after the enormous damage caused by the war. South Vietnamese industry is heavily dependent on imports for energy and raw materials. The heritage of the corrupt and decadent Thieu regime means a chronic shortage of technically trained personnel. Hence a continued emphasis on productivity at all costs.
Yet at the same time one of the major problems facing South Vietnam is unemployment. It is estimated that the country has some three million unemployed out of a total population of eighteen million. [19] One solution proposed is to make the urban population move out to the countryside; it is aimed to persuade one third of Saigon’s three million population to leave the city this year. [20]
Unemployment is accompanied by inflation. Various measures have been taken to control it – price-fixing, threats against speculators – but these cannot solve the fundamental cause, which is shortage of basic commodities including food.
The economic crisis in South Vietnam poses the problem in its starkest terms. The new rulers of South Vietnam may be humane, sincere and idealistic, genuinely committed to the construction of a socialist society. But the tasks they have to carry out in order that the society may simply survive, let alone begin to develop, mean raising productivity and engineering massive movements of population. The burden will fall on the workers and peasants of South Vietnam. More and more their needs and aspirations as workers and as human beings will come into conflict with the norms imposed by the logic of the economic system.
 
Political Structures
For Marxists, the smashing of the state machine and its total replacement is an essential part of any revolutionary process. In Vietnam, there is no doubt that the corrupt edifice of the Thieu state was well and truly demolished. It was replaced by a military body established on 30 April; and in January of this year a new civil authority was set up. Although some bureaucrats from the old regime have been integrated into the new structure, most have been put through a massive ‘re-education’ scheme.
But the key question here is not the smashing of the old state, but the class nature of the new state power. The basic form of political control in liberated South Vietnam is the committee structure that has been built up.
‘First, last summer, came the formation of the "solidarity cells", groups of 10 neighbouring households who now constitute the smallest administrative and social unit. In scores of meetings, these cells elected officials, tried them out for short periods, and then re-elected or replaced them until they arrived at some kind of stability. Such committees do not, apparently, confine themselves to routine tasks like street cleaning. They have a participatory and exhortative role and spend much time discussing public affairs ... One such committee in Saigon, for instance, decided on rice handouts for needy families within the group, persuaded an army officer who had not registered to do so, and discussed at length a case of habitual drunkenness.’ [21]
These committees clearly play a crucial role in administering the life of the country in a period of difficulty. But it is important to be clear as to the nature of these committees. They were established from above by the military authorities [22], and they are clearly heavily influenced by the ten thousand cadres sent from the North after the liberation. [23] And their responsibility for detailed and local issues does not mean that they play any role in establishing the overall targets and priorities of the society. In short, they have nothing in common with authentic workers’ councils or Soviets.
Up to the present, the main source of opposition to the regime has come from some small-scale armed attacks by supporters of the old regime. These have been quickly dealt with, not least because few people have any desire to return to the old set-up. At the same time a regime is being established which combines centralised authority with an element of participation. When opposition begins to emerge from different quarters, it will be ready to deal with it.
 
Cambodia
About Cambodia much less can be said, since part of the strategy of the new rulers is to isolate Cambodia from the rest of the world, so that most information is second-hand and based on rumour; clearly many of the more lurid reports have been quite deliberately fabricated.
What does seem clear is that one of the first measures taken by the new regime was the forced, immediate and total evacuation of Phnom Penh. The situation in Phnom Penh was similar to that already described in Saigon, of a swollen parasitic population. Nonetheless, the methods applied were bureaucratic ones with not a trace of working-class democracy. Other even more radical economic measures have been imposed. Conscript labour is moved around the country to where it is needed; money has been virtually abolished, and barter is widespread. [24] Clearly the new leaders find themselves forced to give overwhelming priority to agriculture in order to provide minimal subsistence for the population.
The intellectual leaders of the ‘Red Khmers’ have now broken with Sihanouk, who for a while was useful to them, and established complete dominance. The new Constitution provides for an Assembly of 150 peasants, 50 workers, 50 soldiers. But within the framework of an economic strategy already established, it is clear that such an Assembly will not exercise any real power.
The ‘Red Khmer’ strategy of an agricultural economy requires the isolation of Cambodia, a Stalinist Shangri-La which opts out of the pressures of a world economy. But this cannot succeed. Already last October the Cambodian leaders made a trade deal with Thailand, and attempts to keep the frontiers hermetically sealed have failed.
As a result, the original strategy of abandoning industry has been partially dropped. Some reports say that workers who were forced out of Phnom Penh last April, were brought back in the autumn to work the rubber and textile factories, and to show government officials how to operate the machines. [25] One report claims that twenty-seven workers from a textile mill in Battambang were executed in January. [26]
 
Conclusion
‘Create two, three, many Vietnams,’ declared Che Guevara. The victory in Vietnam has been an inspiration to millions of workers and peasants around the world. It has shown that the military might of the greatest power on earth can be defeated.
But it is one thing to be inspired, another to follow an example. The possibilities for a nationalist, state capitalist regime in a backward country to achieve development get less and less. China itself is now going deeper into political crisis; and Vietnam will not be able to achieve even what China has achieved.
At the same time, in many backward countries – Thailand, Egypt, etc. – the working class is beginning to go forward on a class basis. Not only does Vietnam seek to coexist with the repressive rulers of Thailand, but it offers no model of working class democracy which could inspire Thai workers. The victory in Vietnam marks the end, not the beginning, of an era.
 



The Novel and Revolution
Alan Swingewood
Macmillan £7.95 hardback/£4.95 paperback.
Swingewood has succeeded in one thing; he has taken an exciting title and wasted it on a trivial and irrelevant book. In this study of political novelists from Gissing to Solzhenitsyn, Swingewood is concerned to rescue Marxism from what he sees as deterministic and reductionist distortions. Thus he tells us that ‘Marx saw writers who directly expressed class interests in their work as mediocre artists’. This may come as a surprise to those of us who have dragged ourselves away from Marx’s unpublished manuscripts long enough to read what he actually did publish (in the Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy), namely his reference to ‘the legal, political, religious, aesthetic or philosophic – in short, ideological forms in which men become philosophic – in short, ideological forms in which men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out.’ On the next page, we are even more startled to read that Engels, in a letter to Margaret Harkness (rechristened Mary by Swingewood) ‘urged that she adopt a less militant and obvious political standpoint’. In fact Engels wrote:
‘The rebellious reaction of the working class against the oppressive medium which surrounds them, their attempts – convulsive, half-conscious or conscious – at recovering their status as human beings, belong to history and must therefore lay claim to a place in the domain of realism.’
Swingewood’s insistence that novel-writing is to be seen as a specific ‘praxis’ rather than an integral part of the total process of making the revolution is, purely and simply, a cop-out. Not only does it allow one to talk, or write, about revolution without putting one’s head on the block; it also allows one to bask in the glory of having a ‘praxis’ all of one’s own. It is profoundly conservative in that it takes the activity of literature for granted. The real human choice between writing novels or engaging in some more direct form of political action (a choice that repeatedly confronted, for example, Victor Serge in his long career as writer and activist) cannot even be confronted in terms of this framework.
Swingewood scores some easy points by looking at the more obviously absurd pronouncements of Georg Lukacs and Zhdanov. But he ducks the real issues here too. Despite all his colossal concessions to Stalinism, Lukacs’ work centres on a real problem – how does the effort to seize reality as a whole found in great realist literature relate to the need of the proletariat to see society as a whole in order to achieve revolutionary consciousness. Zhdanov is rebuked for insisting that ‘literature was part of the class struggle’. But the real criticism of Zhdanov starts, not from a liberal assertion of the autonomy of literature, but from an analysis of the class interests that Zhdanov represented, and his attempt to harness literature as a weapon in the Russian bureaucracy’s fight to increase productivity and discipline workers.
Swingewood deals in patronising fashion with writers whose work flows from the heart of the class struggle – Lenin’s comrade Gorky is ‘insipid and unreal’, Victor Serge ‘naive’. Swingewood’s hero turns out to be Solzhenitsyn. He points triumphantly to the ‘paradox’ of Solzhenitsyn’s reactionary politics. Now of course Engels, writing of Balzac, and Lenin of Tolstoy, pointed to a similar phenomenon of writers whose ideas were conservative but whose work has a progressive impact. One might speculate that in all three cases -Balzac, Tolstoy, Solzhenitsyn – one has writers criticising capitalist societies in terms of pre-capitalist values – values which stress community and attack dehumanisation and therefore – to a certain extent – overlap with a socialist critique. Certainly socialists should read all three writers and learn from them. But they hardly offer a model for generalisation.
Swingewood demands that the heroes of novels be ‘problematical’. But the ‘problems’ of working-class heroes are different from those of bourgeois heroes. Zola’s heroes are cursorily dismissed as ‘non-problematical’. But Etienne Lantier in Germinal, ahead of, behind, or just catching the mood of his fellow-workers, precisely embodies the ‘problematical’ relationship of leaders and masses in the working-class movement.
Once, long ago, it was thought that the study of literature had something to do with the effective use of language. Swingewood, who writes of ‘conflictive social classes’ and ‘novelistic universes’, clearly would not agree.
 






As the international crisis deepens, the need for international cooperation and debate between revolutionary organisations gets ever greater. Yet the sheer number of organisations and tendencies gives an appearance of bewildering complexity to the task. The following article attempts to give an outline of the development of the revolutionary left in Western Europe [1] over the last 15 years, and to evaluate the experience of the main tendencies



The Trotskyist Inheritance
For nearly 20 years after the Second World War the only revolutionary current existing was Trotskyism. [2] But the forces of Trotskyism were small and fragmented. The Fourth International underwent a major split in the 1953-54 period, and many minor splits before and after. Isolation and demoralisation bred factionalism, for to split an organisation numbered in hundreds or even tens was a decision that could be taken relatively lightly.
The Trotskyists could not be blamed for their isolation. In the forties the mass reformist parties had headed off the revolutionary challenge; and in the fifties the post-war boom allowed the system to stave off any real threat. But the long period in the wilderness was accompanied by a political degeneration. [3] It is impossible here to trace the various twists and turns taken by different organisations. It is enough to note the main features that characterised most ‘orthodox Trotskyist’ groupings in this period.

An ambiguity about the role of the working class as the agency of socialist transformation. This ambiguity can be traced to the decision, in 1951, to characterise Russia’s East’ European satellites as ‘workers’ states’ even though the working class had played no role in their establishment. In the fifties and early sixties it was manifested on the one hand in a tailing of leftist currents in the social-democratic parties and trade-union bureaucracies; on thf other in the giving of more or less uncritical support to such regimes as Castro’s Cuba and Ben Bella’s Algeria. The rise of the student movement in the mid-sixties saw a sharp turn to an orientation on the ‘youth vanguard’.
A fetishism of the revolutionary programme in itself as a substitute for any effective mobilisation around the programme. The Transitional Programme of the Fourth International (1938) was given an apparently timeless value, and certain demands (‘open the books’, ‘the sliding scale of wages’) were lifted out of context to acquire an almost magical significance.
The development of the strategy of ‘entrism’ into the mass reformist parties – social-democratic (Britain, Belgium, etc), or Communist (France, Italy) – as a long-term strategy.

The inevitable result was that small groups of Trotskyists became so deeply submerged in mass reformist parties that their identity was distorted and in many cases individuals were absorbed.
The combination of objective factors and political deformation was such that the possibility for political intervention by Trotskyists during this whole period was minimal. To their credit, it must be said that the Fourth International, virtually alone amid the apathy and opportunism of the French and European left, attempted to give material support to the Algerian liberation struggle (two leading Trotskyists, Pablo and Santen, were imprisoned for this). In France, entry work on the Communist Party student organisation bore some fruit in the mid-sixties with the creation of the JCR (Revolutionary Communist Youth), which was to play a significant role in the events of May 1968.
Perhaps the most significant results of entrism were to be seen in Belgium, where the Trotskyists – notably in the person of Ernest Mandel – had considerable influence in the left of the socialist party, grouped around the paper La Gauche, which, together with its Flemish sister paper Links, had been able to win the support of up to a quarter of the delegates at the Socialist Party Congress in 1960. But during the Belgian General Strike (December 1960-January 1961), La Gauche was so enmeshed in the Socialist Party machine that at a crucial point it withdrew its support for the demand for a ‘March on Brussels’ which might have prevented the collapse of the strike. [4]
Mention must also be made of one European Trotskyist grouping with significant following that systematically attempted to avoid the errors listed above. This was the Voix Ouvrière group in France (banned in June 1968, its heritage was taken up by Lutte Ouvrière). Tracing its descent to a grouping which had refused any concession to nationalism during the German Occupation, and which had played a key role in the historic Renault strike of 1947, VO differentiated itself by a stress on the working-class as the agency for socialist revolution. This meant, on the theoretical level, a refusal to characterise the Eastern European satellites as ‘workers’ states’; and on the practical level an exclusive concentration on systematic implantation in the factories by means of regular factory bulletins, a refusal to get involved with the struggles of such groups as students and teachers, and a moralistic conception of party building, in-volving a vigorous selection of militants on the basis of total dedication and a complete break with ‘petty-bourgeois’ habits and life-style. As a result, VO combined a working-class base superor to that of any Trotskyist organisation in Eurppe, with a high degree of organisational routinism and theoretical sterility. [5]
 
The Rise of Maoism
The split between Russia and China, which from the middle of 1963 was to become open and increasingly bitter, led to a transformation of the face of the European left. The Chinese did not attempt to create a new International. But the creation of splits from existing Communist Parties and of pro-Chinese propaganda groups
was certainly useful to them in their struggle against Russia. [6] The way in which ‘Marxist-Leninist’ parties, groups arid circles sprang up in different countries from June 1963 onwards certainly suggests coordination from Peking, though no serious effort seems to have been made to unite the various competing grouplets in any given country.
It is hard to define Maoism as a coherent political doctrine, but its very incoherence helped to win it support from a variety of quarters. Mao’s praise of Stalin as against the ‘revisionist’ Khrushchev attracted CP members who felt the Parties had become soft since the death of Stalin; at the same time the model of the Chinese revolution and China’s rhetoric of support for ‘Third World’ struggles attracted many radicalised youth unable to identify with the working class at home.
Quite naturally, Maoism developed unevenly according to national circumstances. In Italy, the combination of a CP moving rapidly rightwards, a large peasantry in the South and the extreme feebleness of the Trotskyist tradition meant that Maoism made rapid gains. In France, where the CP was reluctant to ‘deStalinise’ and where Trotskyism had some small implantation, Maoism had much less political space to develop in. In Germany, where the political level was much lower, Maoism had to percolate slowly through the student movement but eventually became the biggest component of the far left. And in Britain, where Trotskyism had some base within the labour movement, Maoism never effectively got off the ground.
Politically, the main features of Maoism were as follows:

Voluntarism. Official Chinese ideology, especially in the periods of the Great Leap Forward (1958) and the Cultural Revolution (1966 onwards) laid stress on the possibility of developing the Chinese economy by will alone, despite objective factors. Transposed into revolutionary strategy, this meant an emphasis on revolutionary will and initiative, and an underestimation of objective factors. This was a valuable corrective to the routinism and passivity which afflicted most pro-Moscow CPs; at the same time it meant a dangerous underestimation of the grip of reformism on the working class. Most Maoist tendencies took ultra-left positions, both on the question of electoral support for mass reformist parties in the absence of an alternative, and on the question of a serious strategy for fighting the trade union bureaucracy within the existing trade union machine.
Populism. The experience of the Chinese revolution, where the working class played a very minor role, together with such Maoist theoretical constructions as the ‘bloc of four classes’, led the Maoists to dissolve the working class into a much broader and vaguer notion of the ‘people’. Once again this had a positive side. When certain intermediate groups – notably students – were taking the lead in struggle, the Maoists were quicker to adapt to the fact than the CPs or some Trotskyists. But the dangers of class-collaborationist politics are profound. At times of a low level of struggle these are merely grotesque – for example those French Maoists in 1965 who wanted to support de Gaulle for President (against Communist and Socialist backed Mitterand) in the name of a ‘National United Front’ with the ‘anti-American’ bourgeoisie. But as the struggle rises, the danger gets deeper: thus in Portugal, all the Maoist tendencies adopted a ‘stages’ theory of revolution which obscured the central question of workers’ power as an immediate task.
Stalinism. Since they took their critique of Russia and the CPs from China, the Maoists had no criticisms going back before the 1953-56 period. This meant an uncritical adoption of political ideas from earlier periods of the Communist movement – for example, the characterisation of reformist parties as ‘social fascist’. It also meant an uncritical adoption of the Stalinist form of party – what had been, in a mass movement, a gross distortion of democratic centralism, became, in the case of tiny groups, a ludicrous application of bureaucratic and hierarchical rigidity.

Before 1968, the ability of the Maoists to intervene politically was very limited. Perhaps their most important intervention was in the building of Vietnam committees, clearly opposed to the pacifist and lobbying orientation of the CPs, in both France and Italy. In France the UJCML (Union of Marxist Leninist Communist Youth) tried to adopt a proletarian orientation by sending its student supporters to work as propagandists and agitators in the factories. Its populist orientation was summed up in the name of its paper Servir le Peuple (Serve the People).
 
Guevarism
The third political current that gained some significant support in Europe in the mid-sixties can loosely be described as Guevarism. It took its inspiration from the Cuban revolution, and especially the left turn in Cuban policy embodied in the creation of the Latin American Organisation of Solidarity (OLAS) in summer 1967; and from Che Guevara’s unsuccessful attempt to establish a guerrilla base in Bolivia, culminating in Guevara’s death in October 1967. The main theoretical reference points were Guevara’s various writings on guerrilla warfare and Regis Debray’s book Revolution in the Revolution? [7]
As with Maoism, the main impact of Guevarism was not its particular tactical conceptions (the guerrilla foco, etc.), as its general voluntarism. Guevara had dismissed the whole problem of ‘objective conditions’ with the assertion: ‘It is not necessary to wait until all conditions for making the revolution exist; the insurrection can create them.’ [8] But whereas Maoism insisted on its historical credentials – Marx, Lenin, Stalin, Mao – Guevarism challenged the very idea of ‘revolutionary legitimacy’. In Cuba, Castro had made the revolution first, and discovered he was a Marxist later. Guevarism confronted the traditional problems of revolutionary politics – which is the revolutionary class, the relation of party and masses, the content of the socialist programme – not so much by solving them as by dismissing them as irrelevant.



The heirs of Guevara are the urban guerrillas who make their own heroism a solution to their impatience with the working class’



In some senses this insistence on ‘making the revolution’, as distinct from the arid theoretical arguments into which both Trotskyist and Maoist groups often lapsed was healthy and refreshing. It played a valuable role in attracting new layers of youth and students towards revolutionary politics. In Spain, for example, the FLP (Popular Liberation Front), founded in the late fifties, can be roughly characterised as Castroite or Guevarist. By the mid-sixties a Marxist current within the FLP led to the establishment of Accion Comunista, which developed a working class orientation.
In a period of rising struggle Guevarist ideas could be a valuable stimulus to initiative. But in a period of decline the same ideology leads to the dead end of individual terrorism; the last heirs of Guevara are the various urban guerrillas who make their own heroism a solution to their impatience with the working class.
 
The Rise of the Student Movement
Before 1968 none of these tendencies – Trotskyism, Maoism or Guevarism – had made any serious impact in the working class. Though the level of struggle was slowly rising from 1963, when there were big strikes by French miners and Italian engineers, working-class militancy was still predominantly economic and firmly in the grip of the reformist parties and unions.
But the student movement offered a fertile field for the development of revolutionary ideas. The student movement that began to develop throughout Europe from the mid-sixties represented a coming together of two themes. Firstly, the changing nature of the Universities in bourgeois society. The massive increase in the number of students admitted to higher education meant that a degree was no longer a passport to privilege in later life; at the same time the antiquated syllabuses and structures of the Universities clashed sharply with the interests and aspirations of the students.
Secondly, students were the first sector in society to become widely involved in mass anti-imperialist campaigns, especially against the war in Vietnam. The two issues – bourgeois education and imperialism – became inextricably combined through such questions as University involvement in military research and students’ democratic right to political organisation.
By 1968 a mass student movement had grown up in several European countries. The danger was, in the absence of any movement on the part of the working class, the evolution of theories that overestimated the role of students in the total revolutionary process. The populism and lack of clarity about the agency of revolution which, to a greater or lesser extent, affected all the main political currents on the revolutionary left, accentuated this problem.
The development of the student movement took different forms in different national contexts. In Germany, the SDS (Socialist German Student Federation) had its origins as the student section of the German Social-Democratic Party. The SDS was expelled from the party following the sharp move to the right at the Bad Godesberg conference: in 1959. The SDS built up its strength mainly around anti-imperialist campaigns, which led to it being largely isolated from the working-class movement, and hence a target for repression and victimisation by the right. In June 1967 a demonstration against the Shah of Iran led to the murder by police of a student demonstrator, Benno Ohnesorg. His funeral was a demonstration of 20,000 people, and for the next year the SDS grew rapidly. In April 1968 a fascist attempted to murder one of the SDS’s leaders, Rudi Dutschke, and there was a period of almost insurrectionary struggle, still, however, in almost complete isolation from the working class.
In France it was the rightward moves by the CP from 1965 onwards, as they sought electoral alliances with the Socialists and Radicals, which led to splits among its student organisation, with the emergence of both Maoist and Trotskyist currents.
In Italy the movement developed later than elsewhere in Europe, and only erupted with the occupation of Turin University late in 1967. But from then on it expanded rapidly – partly because the Italian CP, having observed the danger), of the dogmatic attitude to the student movement shown by the French CP, showed a much more conciliatory attitude to student radicalisation.
 
May 1968: The First Test
But the key turning-point for the European revolutionary left was the events of May-June 1968 in France. At the beginning of May student struggles in the University of Paris led to bitter battles between students and police. The students were clearly under the leadership of various revolutionary groups – Trotskyist, Maoist and anarchist – and were sharply denounced by the Communist Party. The political crisis provoked by the students spilled over into a general strike with factory occupations involving ten million workers. But in the working class the CP still had an almost total grasp, and was able to divert a potentially revolutionary movement into economic demands and parliamentary elections. As the right regained control it outlawed all the main revolutionary organisations; most rapidly regrouped under new names.
The significance of the French events was that, for the first time for many years, the revolutionary left had won an audience beyond its immediate periphery. The CP was forced to polemicise, albeit in the most scandalously dishonest terms, with the ideas of the ‘ultra left’; the right launched a witchhunt against the threat from the extremists; and the mass media seized on the ideals of the revolutionaries as a trendy new topic to be distorted, and trivialised. All this posed the challenge, for the revolutionary left, of finding ways of speaking to a much wider audience.
The general strike had been a crucial test for the various currents on the revolutionary left who, for the first time had to try and live up to their pretentions to be mass leaders. Basically the various tendencies fell into two categories – those who operated primarily in the student milieu, and those with a working class orientation. The more or less anarchist Movement of the 22nd March, led by Daniel Cohn-Bendit, was initially the main organising force among the students. However, as the situation developed, it had little to say beyond denouncing repression and in effect disappeared by the end of the strike. The Trotskyist (Mandel variety) JCR, while in theory having an orientation to the working class, in practice adopted the strategy of building a base among students before attempting to build seriously in the working class.
At the opposite end of the spectrum was the Trotskyist (Lambert variety) OCI [9], which took an abstentionist attitude to the student struggle, withdrawing its members in the middle of a crucial confrontation with the police. At the same time it must be said that the OCI were influential in launching the factory occupation at Sud-Aviation, which was to snowball into the general strike. The main Maoist groups likewise turned their back on the student struggle, even though their main source of membership was students, in order to propagandise at the factory gates.
The main lesson of the French events was the need for a revolutionary party which could have drawn together the fragmented opposition to the CP sell-out, and attempted to develop the mobilisation of the working class. In the short term, not surprisingly in view of their small size, none of the groups was up to this task. But the question now posed to all revolutionary groups in Europe was how to prepare for the next time.
 
The Rise and Fall of Spontaneism
The May events had also, of course, demonstrated the spontaneous revolutionary potential of the working class. The onesided assimilation of this experience led to the emergence of yet another current on the European left, which can best be labelled as ‘spontaneism’.
The theoreticians of spontaneism had nothing startlingly original to say. [10] They drew heavily on existing anarchist and syndicalist writings; Cohn-Bendit in particular took many of his ideas from the Socialisme ou Barbarie group, a libertarian split from French Trotskyism in the fifties which had produced some interesting studies on bureaucracy and alienation.
The basis of spontaneist politics was an underestimation of the grip of reformism and the ability of bourgeois society to reintegrate workers even after they had been through a high level of struggle. Amid the euphoria of May 1968 it was indeed hard to imagine that workers would return to their old ideas and patterns of life; but the next year or two were to show that this was indeed the case.
The logic of this was, first, the rejection of any need for a revolutionary party, which was seen as simply reproducing the bureaucratic structures of bourgeois society inside the revolutionary movement.
Secondly, in the short term a more serious error, spontaneism meant turning one’s back on the trade union organisations. The unions were seen as wholly conservative bodies which simply served to integrate workers into capitalist society (this was often coloured by a middle-class disdain for the ‘economistic’ concerns of the unions). But by trying to bypass the union machine, leftist groups were in fact opting out of the task of waging a political fight against the union bureaucracy.
Spontaneism was put to the test in Italy in the summer and autumn of 1969, when a wave of strikes, sometimes assuming a near-insurrectionary character, broke out, with the movement, for a time at least, clearly out of the control of the CP. Two spontaneist groupings, Potere Operaio (Workers’ Power), and Lotta Continua (Continuous Struggle) had some significant intervention in this period. While for a time the sort of demands they were raising – a workers’ and students’ assembly at FIAT, a rejection of delegate committees (‘we are all delegates’) and even, in the case of PO, the incomprehensible slogan ‘refusal of work’ – related to the high level of struggle, in the longer term their importance declined rapidly.



‘The question posed by the 1968 events in France to all revolutionary groups in Europe was how to prepare for the next time.’



The student movement, which in 1968 had seemed to be of impressive dimensions throughout Europe, was, by 1970, in a clear state of decline. The German SDS disbanded itself, giving birth to a number of Maoist sects. And as the real nature of the task ahead, the prolonged struggle against reformism, became clear, spontaneism as a political tendency began to fade. The major spontaneist tendency still with considerable influence is Lotta Continua in Italy. The opportunist dangers inherent within spontaneist politics have begun to show themselves in some of Lotta Continua’s more recent positions, which seem to show considerable illusions in the possibilities of such forces as the MFA in Portugal and the Italian Communist Party being pushed to the left.
 
Centrism in Crisis
But even if the spontaneist euphoria had dispersed, the crisis remained profound. In France in 1968 and in Italy in 1969, the working class had shown its strength and emerged undefeated. This posed an ominous threat to capitalism in a period when the post-war boom was showing its first signs of coming to an end. And the effects of the crisis began to make themselves felt in the existing centrist organisations and, to a lesser extent, in the mass reformist parties.
In both France and Italy the sixties had seen the development of centrist parties of some significance – the PSU (Unified Socialist Party) in France, and the PSIUP (Italian Socialist Party of Proletarian Unity) in Italy. Both were born from splits in the social democratic parties – in France over Socialist support for the Algerian war, in Italy over Socialist entry into a coalition government. Both had some parliamentary representation and membership numbered in thousands (far more than any revolutionary groups). Both existed on the uneasy frontiers between the horse-trading of the respectable left and dialogue with Marxism. Both fell prey to the crisis. In 1972 the majority of the PSIUP decided to liquidate into the CP, which it had been tailing for some time. And in the early seventies the PSU was riven by splits, losing its right wing to the newly reconstructed Socialist Party of Mitterand, and some of its left to the Ligue Communiste (Mandel Trotskyists) and to Revolution!
In Denmark there were somewhat similar developments. The VS (Left Socialists) had come into existence in 1967 as a split from the Socialist Peoples Party (itself a centrist anti-Moscow split from the CP) when the latter supported anti-working-class economic measures imposed by the Social Democrats. The VS soon became an arena for a variety of competing tendencies from Maoists to anarchists, and was inherently unstable. A Leninist current which developed within it gave birth to the KF (Communist League), which has subsequently tried to develop a factory-based organisation.
But if old centrist groupings were in crisis, new currents were emerging. Conflicts in the Italian CP over the class struggle at home and the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia led, in 1969, to the emergence of the Il Manifesto group. This was able to launch a daily paper in 1970, and after merging, in 1974, with the PDUP (the minority of the PSIUP which did not enter the CP) it became clearly the biggest force to the left of the CP in Italy. While having certain pro-Chinese sympathies, Il Manifesto could not be characterised as Maoist. More important is its use of certain spontaneist formulations. While having a certain ultra-left appeal, these also indicate an opting out of the task of building a mass revolutionary party which could challenge the present power of the CP; this could, of course, make an eventual coming-to-terms with the CP easier. In the long term, the new centrism is unlikely to prove more stable than the old.
 
The Decline of Maoism
The events of 1968-69 were a spur to ultra-leftism, and Maoism as well as spontaneism profited greatly from the upsurge. At the beginning of the seventies Maoism was clearly the dominant tendency on the West European left in almost every country except Britain and France.
But Maoism has subsequently seen a downturn in its fortunes. A number of reasons can be given:

Chinese foreign policy has become increasingly difficult for any serious revolutionary to defend. China’s support of repressive regimes in Pakistan, Ceylon, Iran, etc; its backing of the FNLA in Angola; the feting of mass-murderer Nixon in Peking – each was another nail in the coffin of dogmatic Maoism. It would seem that by 1976 only a masochist anxious to relive the experience of the Moscow trials or a trainee Jesuit could wish to be an uncritical supporter of the Chinese regime.
As the crisis unfolds, the by-passing of existing mass organisations and the underestimation of reformism which characterised most Maoist groupings has been shown to be positively dangerous.
The Portuguese events put the Maoist tendencies to the test and found them wanting. The worst of the Maoists (the MRPP) were led by the theory of ‘social fascism’ into objective support for the Socialist Party, while even the best (UDP) were still caught in the trap of the stages theory.

A look at the French Maoists after 1968 will illustrate some of the political limitations of the current. The 1968 crisis led to a regroupment of Maoists. The more orthodox followers of Stalin and Mao formed around the paper Humanité Rouge, which not only acted as a servile propaganda voice for China, but also neatly illustrated how ultra-leftism can come round full circle to the right. Thus in 1974 they proclaimed that the French CP leaders were ‘much more dangerous’ than Giscard d’Estaing, because of their support for capitulation to Soviet social imperialism. [11] And in 1975 it accused the CP of being the main cause of ‘subversive activity’ in the French army by ‘lulling vigilance in face of Moscow’s aggressive plans in Europe’. [12]
The more activist current regrouped around the Gauche Proletarienne (Proletarian Left) with its paper La Cause du Peuple (The People’s Cause). This tendency saw itself as reliving the Resistance to the German occupation, and borrowed some of its strategy and rhetoric from the spontaneists. As well as sending its student members to agitate in the factories, it openly encouraged acts of violence. Thus an article in La Cause du Peuple of 1969 proclaimed:
‘And when we want to, all together, we’ll kidnap you, we’ll spit in your throats and hang you – first by the feet, and if you don’t understand then, by the neck.’
Such adventurism on shaky foundations naturally invited repression, which the French state was not slow to provide. From 1973 onwards the Gauche Proletarienne went into decline, and when La Cause du Peuple reappeared after a year’s gap in November 1974, it offered self-criticism for its earlier impatience and indiscipline.
But the decline of dogmatic Maoism does not mean the end of Maoist influence in the European left. The late sixties saw the emergence of a current which can be loosely described as ‘semi-Maoist’. The most significant of these groups is the Italian Avanguardia Operaia (Workers’ Vanguard), which came into existence out of the struggles of 1968, a section of its leadership having come from the Fourth International. AO rejected the dogmatic sectarianism of the existing ‘Marxist-Leninist’ groups, and their uncritical support for every turn of Chinese policy; they also clearly rejected any identification with the Stalinist tradition. Their orientation was primarily to the working class, and to the building of shop floor committees. They grew rapidly, largely by a process of fusion with other localised groups, and by 1975 were strong enough to launch a daily paper.
Groups of roughly similar orientation to AO also came into existence in several other European countries. In France a section of the Fourth International split to form Revolution!, in Sweden the FK (Communist League) was formed, and in Switzerland a number of similarly-minded groups were federated by the Conference of Berne. Mention should also be made of Bandera Roja (Red Flag), a Maoist split from the Spanish CP. A considerable section of this organisation rejoined the CP in 1975.
 
From Sects to Parties
By the early seventies revolutionary socialists had gained a wider audience than they had known for many years, and the working class was slowly re-emerging on to the stage of history. The task was to grasp the new opportunities.
For the previous 20 years or more revolutionary groupings had been judged by the formal positions they took on historical and international questions (‘Where do you stand on the Russian question?’ etc.). Now such questions, while not irrelevant, were secondary. The main test facing any group was whether it could shake off the habits of isolation and sectarianism and involve itself in mass agitational work.
One natural response to the situation was a desire for unity, to go beyond the sterile barriers that had fragmented the revolutionary left. In the days following the May events, Lutte Ouvrière proposed a unification of all revolutionary tendencies in France with possibilities of broad internal discussion. The proposal did not bear fruit; nor did the extended discussions in the next year or two towards a more modest unification between LO and the Ligue Communiste. In Italy, however, Avanguardia Operaia made some advances by mergers with other localised groupings; and in the last year there have been moves to unification between a number of groupings on the Spanish left. [13]
To some extent the ability of revolutionaries to speak to a mass audience can be measured by conventional barometers such as elections. One indication that revolutionary consciousness has not totally vanished in France since 1968 has been the fact that in two Presidential election’s revolutionary candidates have succeeded in getting a small but significant vote. In 1969 Alain Krivine of the Ligue Communiste got 239,000 votes (1.05 per cent), and in 1974 Krivine and the LO candidate Arlette Laguiller got between them almost 700,000 votes, (2.69 per cent) with Arlette alone getting 2.33 per cent. [14] Equally significant were the gains made by AO and Il Manifesto in the 1975 local elections in Italy.
Another indication of sympathy for revolutionary ideas lies in mass demonstrations. When a young Maoist, René-Pierre Overney, was murdered by factory guards at the Renault factory in February 1972, a demonstration, variously estimated at 30,000 to 100,000 strong, was called at the initiative of the revolutionary left, despite the conspicuous boycotting of the CP.
All this goes to show that there exists, in France and Italy, and to a lesser extent elsewhere, a significant current open to revolutionary ideas. Yet, for the moment at least, no group has succeeded in building a mass revolutionary party. The various revolutionary groups are not to be condemned for this; but what they will stand or fall by in the present period is their ability to build bridges between themselves and that broader movement, bridges which will enable them both to influence that movement and to learn from its experience, bridges which will be crucial when the building of mass parties becomes an immediate prospect.
The form such bridges should take must vary greatly according to national circumstances and traditions, but in most European countries two of the key forms are:

a mass revolutionary newspaper, which aims not only to make propaganda, but to agitate and organise;
some form of rank-and-file organisation which seeks to bring together the most militant elements in the industrial struggle.

On both counts it would seem that at present (leaving aside Portugal), Italy has reached the highest level. No less than three revolutionary groupings – AO, Lotta Continua and Il Manifesto – have succeeded in launching daily papers. AO’s activity in building CUBs (Unitary Base Committees) as a form of autonomous rank and file committees in factories of Northern Italy is one of the most important aspects of its work.
 
Towards a new International
The revolutionary left throughout Europe – and the rest of the world – is still diverse and fragmented. If a new International is already an objective need in the world crisis, the concrete possibilities for establishing one in no way exist. There is neither a recognised and competent international leadership, nor a mass movement which can provide real feedback as to the viability of a political line. The futility of attempting to build an International from the top downwards on the basis of small groups is once again highlighted by the Portuguese experience.
Not only does the main claimant to the title of ‘Fourth International’ have two sections in Portugal, following different lines, but one of the two main factions of the international leadership is able to publicly accuse the other of conduct liable to ‘seriously discredit Trotskyism in the eyes of advanced workers not only in Portugal itself, but throughout capitalist Europe’. [15]
There is no apostolic succession, no historical continuity embodied in one chosen tendency. The regroupment necessary for the building of a new International can only take place as a result of several years of political debate, parallel to practical international cooperation.
Who is to take place in such a regroupment? There are a few small groups which share the general political framework of the International Socialists in Britain – for example, the Socialist Workers Movement in Ireland and the SAG (Socialist Workers’ Group) in Germany. [16] Clearly we have a duty to assist and encourage such groups. The practice and orientation of such groups as Avanguardia Operaia and Revolution! indicates they will probably be important elements of a regroupment, whatever the precise scenario may be. The important thing to be clear about is that the origins and abstract positions of a group can sometimes matter less than its orientation and practice. When the Third International was founded, it drew its forces from the ranks of both social democracy and anarcho-syndicalism, which had been deeply shaken by the crisis of the First World War. It may well be that in the coming few years such labels as ‘Maoist’ and ‘Trotskyist’ will give way to new differentiations.
There can be no blueprint for a revolutionary regroupment. But there are certain clear themes which will be central to such a process: for example:

clear acceptance of the need to smash the bourgeois state and of the historical role of the working class;
commitment to the building of revolutionary parties which are mass organisations and not sects;
rejection of any stages theory of revolution;
rejection of the manipulative and opportunist politics of the Stalinist tradition;
a practical day-to-day orientation to the working class as it is and not as it might be.

The Portuguese revolution, the coming crisis in Spain, and the overall rise of working-class struggle will pose these questions in ever more concrete form. The next few years will show which tendencies will make history, and which will be recorded in the footnotes of history books.
 



THE present crisis in Spain must be understood in terms of a coming together of economic and political factors. After the Civil War Franco built an economy based on state regulation and import controls. It was 1950 before levels of production had reached pre-Civil War figures. The economy was stagnating and it became clear to the Spanish ruling class that it needed to look outwards. In the first instance aid and bases were negotiated with the United States. By the late 1950s Spain was beginning to be reintegrated in the world capitalist economy, with the rise to power of the ‘liberal’ technocrats of the Opus Dei faction. In consequence the national budget was balanced in 1960 for the first time in years, and the foreign trade balance actually revealed a slight surplus.
During the sixties there followed a period of rapid industrial growth. This meant a rapid increase in the size of the working class. The percentage of the active population engaged in agriculture dropped from 54.8 per cent in 1940 to 27 per cent in 1970. There was a massive influx of new workers into the industrial areas. At the same time, large numbers of Spanish workers emigrated to find employment elsewhere in Europe. By 1966 it was estimated that 850,000 Spaniards were working in other European countries. The remittances from these emigrant workers, combined with the huge income from tourism, changed the balance of payments deficits into surpluses.
The development of the Spanish economy forced the Spanish bourgeoisie into closer contact with the Common Market. In 1970 a preferential trade agreement, covering a period of six years, and seen as a first step to Spain’s integration into the Common Market, was signed between Spain and the EEC. The EEC agreed to reduce tariffs over a period of six years by an average of 63 per cent on 93 per cent of industrial goods imported from Spain into the EEC, and by an average of 27 per cent on 64 per cent of the EEC’s imports of Spanish agricultural products.
However, the Spanish bourgeoisie’s hopes of a smooth integration into the advanced economies of Western Europe were dashed by the world economic crisis that began to develop in the early 1970s. Since Spain went into the crisis late, its hopes of benefiting from the much heralded boom are slim. Unemployment has risen to 5 per cent of the active population, and the situation is aggravated by the fact that unemployment elsewhere in Western Europe means that emigration is no longer a solution for unemployment in Spain. Inflation is running at close to 20 per cent, and in 1975 the GNP rose by only 0.8 per cent, as compared with figures of up to 10 per cent in the boom period. All this means that the economic space for political manoeuvre is very limited.
 
The Crisis of the Bourgeois Reform Strategy
THE team of men who have been running Spain since Franco’s death were Franco’s accomplices. They ruled with him for decades; now they rule without him. That alone should be enough to convince us that their strategy for reform is strategy purely and simply in the interests of the Spanish ruling class.
The reform strategy has two basic motives. Firstly, faced with a rising level of working-class combativity, the Spanish ruling class need to give some sort of institutionalised recognition to representatives of the labour movement, in order to have some kind of intermediary in the event of confrontation. The present aim appears to be to legalise the PSOE, but not the Communist Party. This may fail as the PSOE are insisting on the legalisation of the Communist Party. Efforts will doubtless be made to buy them off, but if they fail the regime can certainly survive a legalised Communist Party.
The second aim is to gain admittance to the European Common Market. For reasons deriving from the Common Market’s pretensions to democracy and the presence in its leading organs of social-democrats attached to parties with memories of the Spanish Civil War, this will be impossible unless there is at least some form of liberalisation.
So,the scenario planned by Franco’s successors is the slow introduction of a number of democratic reforms,with elections some time in 1977, but great care will be taken to learn from the Portuguese experience and not let things get out of control.
Such a strategy necessarily requires a delicate balancing act. Moreover, any government trying to carry it through inevitably opens itself to criticism from both left and right.
The problems of Spain’s rulers are aggravated by the world economic crisis. Faced with recession and inflation, they find that even if they wanted to buy off the working class, they have precious little possibility of doing so. This has already led to tensions within the Government. When the Finance Minister Villar Mir introduced the 1976 budget, he stated that ‘The race between prices and wages has been won by wages’. It was an open secret that many of his colleagues in the government considered that such an attempt to blame inflation on workers’ wages was politically inept, and the official paper of the state trade unions. Pueblo has regularly criticised the Finance Minister. (Le Monde, 4-5 January 1976).
Another complication is that even if the government solve the internal problems, they may have difficulties in gaining admission to the Common Market. While France, Belgium and West Germany are supporting Spanish entry, Britain, Holland, Denmark and Italy are all at present hostile. (Economist, January 31) One factor that may affect their calculations is that if Spain and Greece (and possibly Portugal) all join the EEC, the plans for political consolidation of the EEC will face new difficulties.
A partial consolation is the fact that the military agreement signed between Spain and the US in January brought Spain a considerable amount of military and economic aid. This may lead the Spanish ruling class to consider whether its interests lie closer to Europe or the US. As Prime Minister Arias Navarro told Newsweek in January:
‘Either Europe recognises our role as a natural ally or Spain will have to limit the use of its military bases to the needs of the US and of the Spanish people.’ (reported Le Monde, January 6).
All this means that the Spanish government is far from a united and coherent body. The Economist (March 13) reported on the political tensions that are emerging between its leading members:
‘The cabinet is feeling the strain of the complex politicking imposed upon it by the need to lay the foundations of a democracy while pretending to respect the elderly dogma of Franco’s anti-democratic National Movement. Military ministers are unhappy about the strikes and Mr Fraga’s talk of democratization. Mr Fraga has contradicted Mr Are/tea’s statement that the Communist leader, Mr Santiago Carrillo, will be allowed to return. There is a gap between Mr Fraga and the prime minister, Mr Arias, who is not keen to be the fall guy for a reformist operation that may go further than he would like. ‘There is also the problem of Mr Villar Mir, the Finance Minister, whites considered a liability by some of his colleagues. Having tolerated for too long a major flight of capital, issued a tactless call for belt-tightening, and then devalued the peseta without taking the complementary measures needed to obtain maximum benefit from it, Mr Villar has angered workers, businessmen and administration alike.’
The divisions in the cabinet are sufficiently open to the opposition outside that it was possible for Felipe Gonzalez, leader of the PSOE, to state:
‘Fraga is the only member of the government who has a programme to carry out.’ (Cited Intercontinental Press, March 8).
These conflicts to some extent reflect conflicts between the social forces in play.
At the time of the strikes in early March, Le Monde (March 10) reported conflict between the political strategy of the government and the economic needs of the employers.
The financial policies of Villar Mir are seen as being in the interests of the big banks and the multinationals and are therefore arousing the hostility of the small and middle-sized firms which constitute a large section of the Spanish economy. As a result some sections of the capitalist class are turning to the Democratic Convergence.
Moreover, there is conflict between the various political institutions. Representatives of the extreme right are strong in the Council of the Kingdom, which has tried to block the government’s plans, and in the Cortes. At one meeting of the Cortes defence commission, Mr Pedrosa, an old Falangist, described the University as being a ‘Marxist bunker’; his son had participated in a ‘Christ the King’ guerrilla attack on the Madrid law faculty. (Le Monde, February 22).
The extreme right do not necessarily share the interests of Spanish capitalism. Whereas the sections of big capital linked to the multinationals see the EEC as an essential component of their future, the Falangist leader Jose-Antonio Giron has publicly attacked Ministers who were ‘begging at the gates of Western Europe’. (Le Monde, March 21)
But the Spanish bourgeoisie is wisely not putting all its eggs in one basket. If the present government does stumble and fall from the tight-rope, there are other bourgeois forces to replace it. A number of bourgeois liberal opposition groups have come into existence, taking a position of criticising the government for the slowness of reform, but not querying the basic premises of its strategy. Probably the largest grouping are the Christian Democrats, who on February 1st, held a legal conference of over three hundred delegates in Madrid. The Christian Democrats believe they and their allies could win more popular support than the present regime. One leading Christian Democrat said in January:
‘We don’t need violence or subversion because we know there is a clear majority in the country for a democratic regime. But ministers are frightened of democracy, because with the possible exception of Fraga and Areilza they would all be defeated in a free election.’ (Economist, January 24).
Meanwhile, the extreme right are also mobilising. Guerrilla attacks on the left are becoming more frequent. Recently the director of Doblon, a moderately reformist economic journal, was kidnapped by right-wing guerrillas, taken into the hills thirty miles from Madrid, assaulted and told to leave Spain within three days or he and his family would be killed. (Le Monde, March 10) For the moment the extreme right serve as a means of intimidating the left rather than as an alternative contender for power: but if the bid to enter the EEC finally fails, then more sections of the bourgeoisie might see the extreme right as the safest bet.
Faced with a growing challenge from the working class, the government’s reforms will be more and more clearly revealed as illusory. The bourgeoisie will then have to select an alternative, either to the left or the right. In such a situation the role of the army, where left and right are organising, can be crucial.
 
The Workers’ Organisations
BUT the bourgeoisie’s ability to save the situation will depend crucially on the strength of the political challenge from the Spanish working-class organisations.
Any account of these must begin with the Communist Party (PCE). It was formed in 1920 and was still a small organisation (800 members) [1] when the Second Republic was founded in 1931. By the beginning of 1936 it was still only 10,000 members strong. [2]
During the Civil War the PCE increased its membership enormously, partly from the working class and also from the ranks of the petit bourgeoisie whose small holdings and businesses were being threatened by the collectivisations of the Anarcho-Syndicalists. The new recruits were attracted to the Party by the Popular Front policy, which meant that its strategy was to block with various Republican parties against working class organisations in order to keep the political struggle of the time within the limits of a fight to defend the Republic. This strategy often meant the repression of genuine working-class organisations.
After the defeat of 1939 the Party managed to maintain its organisation in Spain during the following period of repression and isolation. Because it was virtually the only organisation continuing to resist Franco inside Spain it started to gain the respect of large numbers of workers. After ‘de-Stalinisation’ in 1956, the political line of the PCE stressed a policy of ‘National Reconciliation’, i.e. the need to unite all ‘patriotic and anti-fascist’ forces of the nation to achieve the end of the dictatorship by ‘peaceful and democratic means’. By the late fifties it had not built a very solid base, and its clandestine trade union, the Organisazacion Sindical Obrera, had not achieved very much. This was soon disbanded when the Collective Bargaining Law was introduced in 1958 and a new form of workers’ organisation grew up.
The Collective Bargaining Law decreed that in future wage negotiations would be carried out between workers and management without state interference. The intention was to harness workers to the aims of their employers. In fact, the opposite happened. The bottom layer of the fascist unions, which was supposed to do the negotiating, was usually more on the side of management than of workers. So workers started to set up their own organisations, the workers’ commissions, in order to mobilise for better wages and conditions. During this time (1962-63), the workers’ commissions led many strikes and commissions were particularly well developed in the industrial areas of Barcelona, Madrid, Seville and the Basque country. The commissions usually existed in any real form only for the duration of the struggle and then would withdraw into isolation. Some of the more conscious militants tried to create permanent workers’ commissions, but they were usually little more than informal groups of militants meeting together secretly to discuss the problems of their factory. With the growth of the workers’ commissions, which had taken the Communist Party and the rest of the left by surprise, the Party ordered its members to attempt to control them.
In 1966 the Falangist bureaucrats of the fascist unions made an attempt to bring the workers’ struggles back into their unions by holding elections for a few posts. Alone among the groups on the left, the PCE considered this to be a challenge on the part of the bureaucrats which had to be accepted. They put up candidates and waged a campaign everywhere they had influence. This was quite successful and their candidates were elected at all levels in most of the major industrial regions. The problem with this policy is that the fascist unions are generally distrusted by workers for very good reasons; and that it exposes militants to victimisation and pressure is put on workers to vote the right way by management; e.g. in some factories voting is in the manager’s office and in his presence. While the PCE made gains in the elections a lot of militants exposed in the process were thrown out and sometimes brutally suppressed in the period up to 1969.
Most other groups on the left from the PSOE (Spanish Socialist Workers Party) to the revolutionaries have taken the position of boycotting the elections. In the most recent elections the left campaigned for a boycott with a large degree of success. For example, in Madrid, the percentage of abstentions ranged from 20 per cent to almost 100 per cent. In Barcelona a similar picture emerges; in one workplace with 500 potential voters, only 30 votes were cast, of which 22 were blank. In the Basque Country the level of boycott was highest; in Guipuzcoa the average percentage of abstentions was 50 per cent; in many factories the elections were cancelled because of the workers’ boycott. [3]
The rising level of struggle and the success of Communist Party-supported candidates in the official trade union elections is also leading discussion about the whole question of organisation. Within the Communist Party some currents (represented mainly by the PSUC – Catalan Communist Party) want to move towards liquidating the workers’ commissions in favour of work in the legal unions, while an opposite tendency, represented by Camacho favours parallel work using both the legal unions, and the workers’ commissions on a factory level. [4]
There are two other trade union federations. The USO (Union Sindical Obrera) has links with the CFDT in France; it is in favour of workers’ management and co-operatives rather than nationalisation. Under the influence of events in Portugal, the PSOE has recently been building up its union, the UGT. The PCE and USO are in favour of one single trade union federation, the UGT are opposed, being in favour of political unions. The relative strengths of the federations are difficult to estimate. The Economist (January 31, 1976) suggests that of those on strike in Madrid during January, half were influenced by the workers’ commissions and a third by USO and the UGT.
Between November 1968 and February 1969 a ‘state of siege’ was declared throughout the country. During this time thousands of working-class militants were arrested, jailed and worked over in the police stations. As pointed out earlier, the job of the police was made easier by the PCE’s policy of infiltrating the fascist unions. The workers commissions movement appeared to have been completely destroyed. But by the early seventies new workers’ commissions had been set up, this time presented as autonomous organisations of the working class.
In Barcelona fifty factories were linked together by a co-ordinating committee. But again they suffered from having to operate in clandestinity. During periods of struggle there was often the possibility of mass meetings where the workers commissions could be elected and could be controlled by the workers. At other times they became just talking shops for militants. That is, if they had not suffered from repression or the sectarianism of left-wing organisations. In the absence of mass struggle, workers’ commissions would be set up by any group of militants in a factory, often just the militants of one political organisation. This led to a situation where in some factories, with members of several different political groups, there were several different workers’ commissions.
Similarly, the co-ordinating committees did not mean very much as they consisted of activists in isolation. All this is not to downgrade the workers’ commissions; in times of struggle they have been genuinely autonomous working-class organisations.
Having set out the general picture of the labour movement, we can now turn to the political organisations. The PCE is continuing the Popular Front strategy with a vengeance Santiago Carrillo (Secretary General of the PCE) and Calvo Serrer announced the formation of the Democratic Junta in June 1974. Calvo Serrer is an ex-member of Opus Dei he now claims to be a ‘liberal monarchist’. His links with various fascist organisations in the past show the breadth of the Democratic Junta. Apart from the PCE and Serrer’s Agrupacion, the Junta contains the Confederacion Socialista, which comprises the PSP (Popular Socialist Party), which split from the PSOE, the FID (Independent Democrats), and numerous regional socialist groups. The politics of the Junta are summed up by a quote from Mundo Obrero (PCE newspaper) of January 22 1975:
‘Today the Democratic Junta covers a wide sweep of social forces from left to right, from the working class to the dynamic sectors of capital.’
Its twelve-point programme is a programme for parliamentary democracy with no mention of socialism, and includes such gems as Point 8:
‘The political neutrality of the army and its exclusive professional dedication to external defence.’
As one writer describes the Junta:
‘The only political bodies excluded by definition from the Junta are the Spanish Government itself and the so-called extreme right of the Falange.’ [5]
This alliance with the ‘dynamic sectors of capital’ means, of course, that the PCE leadership has to prove its strength by mobilising the working class, and also its suitability for government by restraining the working class.
This has led the party to oppose some strikes. For example, when 200,000 workers in the Basque country were on strike. Party members distributed leaflets opposing it. This has meant that the PCE has lost support in some industrial areas.
The other main alliance is the Platforma de Convergencia Democratica (Democratic Convergence). Thus brings together the PSOE, the UGT, Christian Democrats, Basque National Party, Carlist Party, Movimiento Comunista (Maoist) and various other social-democratic groupings and regional Christian Democrat groups. This alliance also contains ‘ex-fascists’. Joaquin Ruiz Gimenez, the leader of the Christian Democrats is a former President of Perkings Hispania, subsidiary of the Massey Ferguson multinational. He was a member of the fascist Falange in the Civil War and served as an officer in Franco’s forces. It is clear that the Democratic Convergence will attempt to emulate Soares’ success in Portugal, putting themselves forward as the guardians of democracy and backed by the US and European Social Democracy. But, as in Portugal, this will not preclude temporary alliances with the Communist Party. The Democratic Junta and the Democratic Convergence are at present in negotiations for joint action against Juan Carlos, but it is not clear how stable such an alliance can be. (A formal alliance of the Junta and the Convergence has now been ratified – Ed.)
Another important factor in the situation is the various nationalist organisations. The best-known of these is ETA V in the Basque Country. Until the early seventies, ETA consisted of largely middle-class elements, and the movement was dominated by a petit bourgeois ideology. But more recently there was a growing influence of working-class activists which tried to change ETA’s politics to class politics. This culminated in a split at the Sixth Congress where ETA VI split from ETA and subsequently joined the LCR (Liga Comunista Revolucionaria), the Spanish section of the Fourth International (Mandel). The remainder of ETA is now known as ETA V, and is the section well known for its guerrilla activity.
During the sixties a large number of small left-wing groups emerged. The Russia-China split and the reformism of the PCE gave rise to a number of Maoist groups. The PCE’s break with Moscow even gave rise to a pro-Moscow Communist Party, and a non-stalinist left grew out of radical Catholicism and guerrillaism, and has developed a political analysis which takes as its starting point the POUM and possibly has traces of anarcho-syndicalism.
The PCE split with Moscow after the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. It is said that Dolores Ibarruri (‘La Pasionaria’), leader of the PCE then living in Moscow, visited Brezhnev just before the invasion imploring him not to send in Russian troops as it would set the Communist movement back ten years. She was ignored and the PCE is now completely independent of Moscow. In 1970 the Russians set up a rival Communist Party, the PCOE (Spanish Communist Workers Party), headed by Enrique Lister. It appears to be very small but did oppose the PCE’s participation in the fascist union elections.
There has been a proliferation of Maoist groups which have taken positions ranging from critical support of the PCE’s strategy to FRAP who advocate guerrilla struggle.
One of these groups, Bandera Roja (Red Flag), split from the PCE and in a pamphlet [6] published two or three years ago criticised the PCE for:


losing influnce in the workers’ movement because of the increasing revisionism of their slogans, in particular the demand for anmesty, petitions to Bishops, etc.;
uselessly compromising itself by participation in the sindicatos verticales (fascist unions);
making a pact with the so-called evolutionist sectors of the oligarchy;
the recruitment of middle-class elements into the party for lack of ability to attract workers;
the view of the army as potentially a patriotic force which will defend the Spanish people instead of enslave them as it did in 1936.


Bandera Roja has since split, with a large section going back into the PCE. The remainder gives total support to the Democratic Junta.
A similar thing happened with the Oposicion de Izquierdas (Left Opposition). After a year outside the PCE in which a number of the PCE’s more pacifist and social-democratic characteristics came under fire, they have now re-entered the PCE. Another Maoist group which has fallen into line behind the Democratic Junta is the PT (Labour Party), formerly the Partido Comunista Internacional. One of its leaders is quoted as saying:
‘We have a number of reservations about the Democratic Junta, but we are in agreement on the essential things. We do not renounce the revolution nor the principles of Marxism-Leninism, but we are now beginning a transitory period. The essential point today is to fight against the Franco dictatorship’. [7]
One of the Maoist groups which has managed to make a more pronounced break with the PCE (M-L) (Communist Party of Spain Marxist-Leninist), whose front organisation is FRAP. They advocate a Popular Federated Republic which would be a kind of coalition between the small and medium bourgeoisie and working class against the monopolist bourgeoisie. They are well-known for some very heroic guerrilla operations; they seem to consist largely of students.
There are two other groups, the MCE (Communist Movement of Spain) and the ORT (Organisation of Revolutionary Workers). These groups have deeper roots in the working class, especially in the Basque Country. They disagree with PCE (ML) on the importance of work in the workers’ commissions, in which they are active. Both ORT and MCE were in the Democratic Convergence, but ORT left it in November last year.
There are many groups on the non-Stalinist revolutionary left. The CNT (Anarcho-syndicalist trade unions) has now virtually disappeared, but one can detect its influence in some of the groups. The POUM still exists. Having suffered Stalinist repression during the Civil War and later fascist repression, it still manages to maintain an organisation with some, though small, base in Spain. Many Spanish revolutionaries characterise it as an ‘ex-combatants club, but with no capacity to open new directions, it sits instead as the custodian of a rich political history, waiting to transmit that history to the post-war generation.’ It has been the point of departure for those trying to develop a revolutionary position.
The revolutionary left is still very small, few of the groups are organised nationally. Some of the revolutionary groups split from the FLP (Popular Liberation Front). This was a Castroite grouping which came to a revolutionary position while in the HOAC (a legal organisation of Catholic workers which organised to fight for higher wages and conditions). It was one of the earliest forms of workers’ organisation under Franco and was largely left alone due to its claim to be a religious body. The FLP carried out numerous guerrilla actions and had some measure of support, particularly in Catalonia in the early sixties. The FLP appears to have been responsible for the increasing working-class influence in ETA which gave rise to split of ETA VI. And there have been other tendencies in the FLP which have rejected guerrillaism and turned to working in the class.
One of these groups is Accion Comunista (AC). AC argue that in the short-term their priorities are democratic demands, work around the unemployed and building the workers’ commissions into a mass movement. They are in favour of one workers’ commission in each factory, elected at mass meetings of workers in the factory. They are also active in building workers’ commissions in the shanty towns, and among unemployed workers. These commissions take up questions of unemployment, the conditions in the shanty towns, amnesty for political prisoners, freedom of the press and assembly, the right to free trade unions and the dissolution of the Civil Guard and the political police. AC call for one trade union confederation uniting all workers.
On the national question, AC argue for self-determination for the Basque Country, Galicia and Catalonia. That is to say, they argue for economic unity of the whole of Spain, but for cultural and linguistic autonomy for these regions. But if the workers of a region wish to secede they have the right to do so. The decision on a region’s relationship with the rest of Spain would be decided by all the workers in the region. This means that in the Basque Country where more than 50 per cent of the workers are from other parts of Spain, many from Andalusia, all workers would have the right to decide.
Until fairly recently AC have had a perspective of building a tightly-knit cadre party. This, they argue, was the form suitable for conditions of clandestinity. Now there is the possibility of building a mass revolutionary party and this is the perspective they have adopted. AC have members in most of the major industrial areas.
Another significant organisation on the revolutionary left is the OICE (Organisation of the Communist Left in Spain). OICE rejects the theory that the zigzag between liberalisation and repression is caused by splits within the bourgeoisie. It sees repression as an essential element in the bourgeoisie’s attempt to carry out a controlled reform of Spain’s political apparatus. Therefore it rejects the Communist Party’s strategy of alliances with the ‘democratic bourgeoisie’ as suicidal.
OICE’s main activity is in the factories, where it attempts to build ‘Anti-Capitalist Committees’ to fight around immediate concrete demands. It has a perspective of building the workers’ commissions into workers’ councils, and therefore is opposed to raising the demand for the creation of independent trade unions, but would work in them if they came into existence.
OICE is also active in building neighbourhood associations, and in struggles about health and education.
The fact that the OICE has been able to exercise some influence in the present wave of struggles is shown by a report in the legal Christian Democrat magazine Cuadernos para el Dialogo (March 20), about the struggles in Vitoria, which quotes a local leader of the UGT as saying that if anyone was responsible for uniting the various workers’ organisations, it was the anti-capitalist committees.
The LCR-ETA VI (Revolutionary Communist League – Basque Nation and Freedom VI) have already been mentioned. The LCR fused with a section of the Basque Nationalists and are the Spanish section of the Mandel International. It is said that they were composed initially of students but their ranks have been expanded with the entry of some worker militants in the last year or so. They believe that a general strike in Spain would initiate a revolutionary crisis in Spanish capitalism which would open the way to a socialist solution.
Among other groups we may mention UCL (Communist Union of Liberation) and LO (Lucha Obrera – Workers’ Struggle). LO seem to be based mainly among Spanish immigrant workers in Germany, and they have been active in organising immigrants.
A number of these organisations have had discussions on regroupment, in particular LO, UCL, AC and POUM. The discussions apparently broke down after a disagreement over the demand for one trade union federation. These groups continue to have the perspective of eventual regroupment.
 
The Working Class Upsurge
THE strike wave of the first three months of 1976 was the deepest and widest that Spain had seen since the Civil War. The strikes involved all the main sectors of the working class, and in some cases there were occupations of workplaces. Le Monde (March 2) reported that ‘Several industrial estates close to Barcelona are in a state of virtual rebellion. In some cases traders and the population are supporting the strikers’. Moreover, the strikes spread into new sectors of the population. On 1 March, a teachers’ strike left a million children without classes. Even football was affected, with a number of leading footballers demanding trade union rights (not an insignificant fact, given the importance of football in Spanish society).
In February a strike of public employees in Barcelona led to the government having to requisition for military service three thousand policemen and five hundred firemen who were striking for higher wages. They were compelled to return to work, wearing the letter ‘M’ (for military) under threat of court martial.
What the strikes showed was the breakdown of the dividing lines between economic and political struggle. It was clear that in most cases the struggle began as economic struggles. Le Monde reported (14 January) after the ‘day of struggle’ on 12 January:
‘The results of this “day of struggle” show that the working masses in Spain today are being mobilised only by trade union questions: strikes are taking place only in those sectors involved in the collective agreements in process of being negotiated. After this test of 12 January, no political party, no clandestine union can claim to be deeply implanted in the working class.’
If this view was belied by the events of the next few weeks, it was because, in the situation of economic crisis combined with government promises of liberalisation, the dividing line between trade union and political issues became almost invisible. As another Le Monde correspondent wrote a few weeks later (6 March):
‘The desire of workers to gain the right to permanent and free bargaining with the employers naturally leads into the demand for genuine trade unions and for the freedom of speech.’
In a situation where the government was trying to impose wage controls, and using the state machine to repress economic strikes, then every strike automatically became political.
The Madrid metro strike in January posed a direct threat to the government. The workers’ initial demand was economic – a wage demand of almost 50 per cent. But to grant such a demand – and since they were public service workers the government was directly responsible for the decision – would have meant the complete collapse of the wages policy. Yet the strike could not be ignored. Two million people a day use the Madrid metro. Hesitating to requisition the strikers, the government sent troops in to run the trains. The strikers got pledges of support from the Chrysler and Standard Electric factories in Madrid.
The strike was called off when the workers were offered a flat-rate bonus of 1,500 pesetas while negotiations continued. But if the strike could be solved on the economic level, the political impact was enormous. The Minister of Information pledged that there would be no victimisation of strikers. Even more striking, as Le Monde reported (11 January).
‘The press service of the Army Ministry has issued a statement saying that if soldiers took on the job of running metro trains during the strike, they did so on government orders. The statement stresses that the army does not take sides on the issues of the dispute.’
The strikes in the Basque country, notably at Vitoria, also began as essentially economic struggles. At Vitoria the issue was aggravated by the refusal of the employers to negotiate with anyone other than the totally unrepresentative official unions.
The level of struggle is shown by some extracts produced from a document produced in Vitoria:
‘The 3rd of March will remain in the memory of the Vitorian working class as one of the most dramatic in their history. From early morning a general strike paralysed all the large companies (with the sole exception of Michelin), all the small factories, building sites, centres of education, most businesses, bars, banks ...
‘At 10.00am the first large demonstration of the day took place. From the Andurza district some 8,000 people marched towards the centre of the city, where a large number of students were waiting to join the demonstration. The police fell upon the demonstration with an extraordinary violence, using all their resources; rubber bullets, tear gas, firearms ...
‘At 1.00pm the forces of repression momentarily abandoned their sites, something that was taken advantage of by the Vitorian people in order to organise themselves. They built barricades. Some 5,000 people assembled in the Church of St Francisco to reflect upon the situation and devise plans of action for the afternoon. But the “greys” (police) soon returned, surrounding the church and stopping more people from entering the meeting. They would not even allow the representatives from the factories on strike to enter the church. Within a short time a large number of people were concentrated outside the church, a large number of people who, as in the morning, were shouting slogans readmitting the sacked workers and withdrawing the police, and calling on the employers to accept the demands of the striking workers, etc.
‘The tension increased every minute. The “greys” who were surrounding the church received reinforcements and, without waiting for more, brutally attacked those standing outside the church. At the same time they began throwing bombs of tear gas inside the church, through the windows. There is no need to explain the consequences. Immediately the interior of the church became completely unbearable, no-one being able to breathe. People inside the church could hardly see the person next to them. It was impossible to remain inside. There was no alternative other than to break the windows and leave the “hell” any way they were able to.
‘The police waited outside. The orders they received were very precise. A few minutes earlier the “greys”surrounding the church had received the following message on their radios: “If you cannot disperse the crowd in any other way SHOOT TO KILL”. And this is what they did. Immediately those inside the church began to leave, feeling sick from the gas, the armed police charged them, waving batons in all directions. The workers tried to defend themselves in any way possible from the aggression of which they were the object. Immediately the police had began to machine-gun the crowd. To kill. The screams of the crowd were so loud they drowned the noise of the machine-guns which continued unfeelingly. Three comrades, Pedro Maria Martinez, Romualdo Barroso and Francisco Aznar were murdered. More than a hundred were wounded by fascist bullets.
‘The horror, indignation and controllable anger extended throughout Vitoria as people heard the news ... The same night the Committee of Representatives agreed to issue a call to express their solidarity with the people of Vitoria and issued the following document:

‘After two months of strikes by the whole working class and working people demanding bread, the answer from the employers with their government backing them up is ... one two three ... deaths and large number of wounded. The working class and the people of Vitoria demand popular justice for the murderers of the dead workers. We demand the demotion of the Civil Governor, the Chief of Police, of the Mayor, and the President of the Committee. We demand the dissolution of all repressive bodies.
‘In the face of such a massacre we call for an INDEFINITE GENERAL STRIKE of the whole working class and people of Vitoria.
‘We call on the whole town to attend factory and neighbourhood meetings and that everybody comes out on the streets. COMMITTEE REPRESENTING THE FACTORIES IN STRUGGLE. 3 March 1976.’

‘... News of the bloody events of Vitoria shook the entire working class of Euzkadi. In Pamplona, on the same day, the 3rd, the workers council with more than 1,000 delegates ... The first information that arrived was confused. It was rapidly confirmed. In effect, the police had machine-gunned thousands of workers in Vitoria, there there were various dead and wounded, and indignation was widespread. And the decision unanimous: the following day would be general strike.
‘And that’s what happened. The first to strike were those on night shift at Potasas mine. The following day, all the assemblies confirmed the decision taken the previous night by the delegates “for the strike”
‘Small businesses, bars, everywhere workers were leaving their work. Students also united with these actions which, during the morning, took the form of demonstrations.
‘... In the rest of Navarra actions were reported; in Tafalla. where there was a general strike on the Thursday that affected all the work centres and all businesses. A demonstration took place in the centre of the city. On Friday the stoppage continued in the factories as well as in an important part of the commercial sector. During the afternoon a funeral was held for the victims of Vitoria which was attended by almost the whole village’.
The strikes of early March have been followed by a further lull; but the intensity of these conflicts and the breadth of involvement shows that the class struggle will remain at a high level for many months to come. The revolutionary left’s ability to relate to these struggles could be decisive for the future of the European revolution.
 



The Communist Movement from Comintern to Cominform
Fernando Claudin
Peregrine, £4.75
Fernando Claudin was an active militant of the Spanish Communist Party for over 20 years, and at the time of his expulsion in 1965 he was a member of its Politbureau. The present book is simply the first part of his attempt to explain his divergences from the present line of the world Communist movement. It is an impressive historical study, extending from the Russian Revolution of 1917 to the Chinese Revolution of 1949. Claudin has researched widely on original documents; he has read and critically absorbed the writings of Trotsky and Isaac Deutscher; he neither apologises for Stalinism nor lapses into anti-Communism. Even at £4.75 for an 830-page paperback it is a book worth reading. If the rest of this review concentrates on its weak points, it is precisely because I take it to be a serious contribution to revolutionary debate.
Claudin’s analysis starts with Stalin’s dissolution of the Communist International in 1943. It is easy for him to show that this was a declaration of non-revolutionary intent made by Stalin to his wartime allies, and that the arguments advanced had no validity. But from this he goes on to question the very basis of a centralised International, arguing that the Comintern’s ‘ultra-centralised structure’ did not meet the real needs of the working-class movement.
Now it is easy to show that the Third International had extreme powers of intervention in the national sections, and that from the beginning the Russian Party dominated the Comintern (they did, after all, have a revolution behind them). But here it is content, not form, that matters. What were the nature of the interventions?
Take, for example, the French party. Formed by a Congress of the Socialist Party at which the majority voted to affiliate to the Comintern, it was from its inception stuffed out with shifty careerist parliamentarians, and had virtually no orientation to the industrial struggle. In the first few years of its existence the Comintern aimed its interventions at changing the Party and giving it a proletarian orientation. Would it have been better to leave it alone?
Claudin’s critique is not simply organisational. He accuses Lenin and the Bolsheviks of ‘theoretical complacency’, alleging that they overestimated the imminence of revolution in 1919, by underestimating the grip of reformism on the working class in Western Europe. Now it is a fact that capitalism survived the twenties, and from our point of view it is vital to, examine the political (fascism, co-option of labour leaders) and economic (arms economy, planning) means whereby it has survived. But it was hardly the job of the founders of the Comintern to predict all this. Far from their being fatalistic or complacent, their whole strategy and the very existence of the Comintern was based on the premise that either they must smash capitalism or it would smash them.
In his conclusion, Claudin calls the whole Leninist conception of the party into question, attempting, rather unconvincingly, to oppose Marx and Luxemburg to Lenin. In itself, this is a clapped out spontaneist red herring. The arguments are familiar: the party is not external to the class, but derives from the class’s awareness of the need for effective organisation; but since the class’s consciousness is necessarily uneven, the party or embryo party may at times represent only a tiny minority of the class.
The basic issue is neither organisation nor theory – it is politics. The political basis for the Communist International was a clean break with the reformist strategy of Social Democracy, on the basis of a revolutionary line of smashing the bourgeois state and establishing soviet power. And on this key question, Claudin hedges his bets. Many left-wing Social-Democrats, he tells us, thought the split ‘harmful’; the 21 Conditions for affiliation to the Comintern (designed to ensure that all CPs engaged in regular day-to-day revolutionary practice) ‘shut the doors of the Comintern to ... many of the best cadres of the movement, inspired by sincere revolutionary feeling.’
Claudin backs up his argument by invoking the strength and resilience of the Social Democracy, showing how it grew at the Communists’ expense in country after country. But thereby he undermines his own argument. For if Social Democracy was and is so powerful, then all the greater is the need for a distinct and tightly organised alternative to it. Doubtless the newly-formed Communist Parties made errors of both sectarianism and opportunism. But if they had not existed, then the Social Democracy’s task of regaining control over the labour movement would have been made ten times easier. (One’s respect for Claudin’s judgment is not enhanced by a footnote in which he deplores the Argentinian CP’s failure to recognise the progressive aspects of Peronism.)
Claudin is concerned mainly with the movement internationally; his treatment of developments inside Russia is fragmentary and incidental. And this, precisely, leads him into a dangerous ambiguity. The various CPs subordinated the class struggle to the interests of the Russian state – but what were those interests? Were the Stalinists comrades who were mistaken, however deeply, or were they representatives of an alien class interest?
Russia, Claudin tells us, is a ‘totally new social system ... Neither capitalist nor socialist ...’ Like Max Shachtman’s theory of ‘bureaucratic collectivism’ this doesn’t get us very far. What are the laws of motion of this society, what is its dynamic? This is not so much Marxism as a bewildered gaping at an uncomprehended phenomenon. Claudin ends up comparing the East European trials of the early fifties to the exorcisms of the mediaeval church – a neat debating point, but not much in the way of an explanation.
Behind this lurks a fundamental vagueness on the agency of socialist revolution.
‘The course of the world revolution still has many surprises and many changes of personnel in store.’
The ambiguity extends to the Yugoslav and Chinese revolutions. Claudin stresses, correctly, the importance of these revolutions which took place independently of Stalin and thus shook Moscow’s grip on the world movement. But Claudin goes much further than this; though never lapsing into naive Maoism or Titoism, he sees these revolutions as alternative and preferable models for the transition to socialism, and a clear break with the class collaborationist policies of the Moscow-line CPs.
And so Claudin, despite many valuable insights, falls short on the question of a clear characterisation of Social Democracy and Stalinism. As the crisis deepens, more and more people will turn to socialist ideas; but they will not all make it direct to revolutionary politics. A variety of political currents will feed on the radicalisation. Not only will Stalinist and Social Democratic organisations enjoy a certain resurgence, but all manner of centrist bodies will spring up. Their function will be to serve as a bridge over which revolutionaries and potential revolutionaries can be herded back into the reformist camp (Cf. the French PSU). Often a leftist-sounding rejection of the Leninist party will serve to cover up an unwillingness to make a full-blooded challenge to the mass reformist parties (Cf. Il Manifesto in Italy). The fight against centrism will be a key aspect in rebuilding the revolutionary movement, Claudin’s book, unfortunately, will not help us in that task.



Socialism and Revolution
André Gorz
Allen Lane, £4.50.
DOES THE transition to socialism require the smashing of the existing state, or can it be achieved through piecemeal reforms? This has been the most fundamental question in the socialist movement for the last century, and important arguments have been produced by the partisans of both sides.
There are also those who hedge their bets, who argue that ‘the destruction of the bourgeois apparatus pf repression ... is no longer the first priority, as it was fifty years ago’, and that what is needed is ‘a socialist strategy of progressive reform’. In Marxist jargon such people are called ‘centrists’. And although centrists have been known to fight bravely on the barricades, they cannot – by definition, as it were, since they duck the fundamental question – contribute to Marxist theory.
André Gorz – from whose book of essays the above quotations come – is a centrist. M. Gorz is friends with everyone. On page 64 he quotes with unbounded admiration the Italian spontaneists of Lotta Continua; on page 86 he tells us that the trade union bureaucrats of the Italian CGIL and the Belgian FGTB have understood the need to attack ‘the whole system’.
As a result, all the main issues are missed. The essays – all but one written in the mid-sixties – assume that capitalism can continue indefinitely to provide workers with ‘a basic livelihood and even a modest surplus’. With the flavour of a ‘revived forty-five’, readers can taste again the clapped out rhetoric of the New Left of the early sixties, complete with that particularly absurd and sexist notion that the working class are corrupted by possessing washing machines. Politics becomes, not a necessity flowing from the very guts of the struggle, but something superimposed in glossy and ill-translated volumes from Allen Lane.
Likewise the question of Stalinism. Russia is ‘socialist’, its ‘authoritarian planification’ was ‘scarcely avoidable’, but it is not a ‘model’.
And above all, the question of who is going to do the job is fudged Mr Gorz lectures us at length about the need for a ‘revolutionary mass party’, its strategy, tasks and structure. Just one small problem remains. Where is this party? Is Mr Gorz a member? Where do I sign on? Is he, by some strange chance, talking of the existing Communist Parties, or do these wonderful organisations have to be built from scratch? All is lost in verbiage. The British left needs theory, but it can do without Mr Gorz.
 



The Labour Movement in Europe
Walter Kendall
Allen Lane, £5.00
The Communist Parties of Western Europe
Neil McInnes
Oxford, £5.00.
Walter Kendall has produced a useful reference work. It has chapters on the history and structure of the labour movement in the EEC countries (minus Ireland, Denmark and Luxemburg) as well as a study of the European car industry. If you want to know how to get on the Executive of a Dutch trade union, how collective bargaining works in Italy, or how many days were lost in strikes in Belgium in 1897, then turn to Kendall’s book.
But if you want to understand the class struggle in Western Europe, turn somewhere else. For Kendall’s picture, erudite and well-documented as it is, is unbelievably distorted. For Kendall the official structures are everything, working-class activity nothing. For instance, the massive struggles that took place in Italy in 1969, characterised by great imaginativeness and originality in tactics and organisational forms, get this comment from Kendall:
‘To understand the behaviour of sections of the Italian labour force, the contradictory phenomena of upward deference in unions and labour force coupled with near-anarchist outbreaks of strikes, demonstrations and even violence, one must take account of the rural origin of much of the modern working class.’
In other words, they’re only peasants and they haven’t read the Rule Book yet. Not that ‘upward deference’ was much in evidence on the streets of Turin in 1969.
Likewise, when Kendall turns to Britain, he dismisses as ‘Utopian’ the idea of a national shop stewards’ movement with the comment:
‘the stewards already exercise great power within the unions and could exercise more if they really so desired.’
Kendall’s fixation with official structures makes him quite blind to those sections of the class who are excluded from them. Europe’s nine million migrant workers – not only the most viciously exploited but also the leaders of some of the most courageous struggles – get less than half a dozen paragraphs in Kendall’s book. And even here they are seen, not as part of the labour movement, but as an external obstacle. Thus, in speaking of low unionisation levels in France, he says:
‘The existence of up to two million foreign workers, some notoriously difficult to organise, is certainly a mitigating circumstance of which one ought to take account.’
Or again,
‘One ought also to draw attention to the extent to which German unions have ensured that an unprecedented influx of voluntary migrant labour into the German economy has neither undermined union wages and conditions, nor resulted in uniformly deplorable conditions for the migrants themselves.’
It must be of great consolation for a Turkish Gastarbeiter to know that, deplorable as his conditions are, they are not uniformly so.
Women get an equally raw deal. Thus on page 14 Kendall tells us that ‘universal suffrage’ was achieved in Belgium in 1893; though on page 217 he himself tells us that women didn’t get the vote till 1948. Or, speaking of working hours in Britain, he remarks:
‘Among women, who at the margin would appear to value leisure time more highly than money, average working hours, at 38, are a great deal lower than for men.’
The ignorance of the real pressures on women workers is incredible. But then, they don’t go to the branch meetings, so they’re not really part of the labour movement at all.
But it’s not just immigrants and women that are external to Kendall’s labour movement – it’s politics too. Anything that lies outside the social-democratic spectrum is alien to the working class. The enormous impact of the Russian Revolution on the European working class is reduced to Russian manipulation and Russian finance.
This leads him into a bit of gentle rewriting of history. Thus in speaking of the events that led to the exclusion of the French Communist Party from the government, he writes:
‘In April 1947 an unofficial strike closed the nationalised Renault motor-plant at Boulogne-Billancourt in Paris, hitherto regarded as a fortress of PCF support in the labour movement.’
Now that strike was in fact led by Trotskyist militants of the Union-Communiste, who were able to take the lead because of their consistent anti-Stalinist politics. This is not to overestimate the influence of a tiny group who soon lost control of events. But conscious revolutionary militants are part of the working class, and from time to time they have an influence on events. Kendall sees the structures, but he is blind to the forces that will sweep them aside.
Kendall writes as one who has thirty years’ experience in the labour movement; McInnes writes as Associate Editor of Barron’s (New York). Yet in many ways McInnes is more class conscious (for his class) than Kendall McInnes begins with the crisis, and in particular one symptom of it.
‘It was in 1974 that it first seemed that before 1980 there could well be communist ministers in office in France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Cyprus, Finland, Norway, and Iceland.’
What should the class-conscious bourgeois do? McInnes makes it clear that the myths of the Cold War will no longer serve. The Communist Parties are not part of some terrible conspiracy, their militants are not undeviating zombies. They are political parties like any other and therefore corruptible. They can be lived with.
As McInnes points out:
‘There is no tactical line that can be adopted, however calculatingly, year after year through successive election campaigns that does not in the end compromise a political party, involve it in connections it cannot easily break, and commit it to particular policies and alliances in the event of winning power.’
One of his most interesting points is on the question of front organisations. The error, shared by Stalinists and McCarthyites alike, was that front organisations were a means of manipulating the masses in the interests of Communist policy. The reality was that the front organisations acquired a dynamic of their own and ultimately distorted party policy, or caused splits in the leadership.
Equally interesting is McInnes’ summing-up of the prospects for the new social democratic Communist Parties.
‘The “advanced democracy” imagined by western communists is an illusion inconsistent not only with Marxist theory but with common sense ... That situation would not be a transition to anything but counter-revolution, as events in Chile in 1973 demonstrated.’
The fact that McInnes would certainly be on the side of the Pinochets serves only to make the testimony more convincing.
 



Broad and Alien is the World
Ciro Alegria
Merlin, £2.50
OVER THE last few years people on the left have talked a lot about the ‘revolutionary peasants of the Third World’. It was splendid to bask in the glory of their struggles, much more pleasant than the mundane jobs that had to be done at home.
But most of us had a pretty vague picture of what these ‘revolutionary peasants’ actually looked like. If we tried to conjure up a picture of them, all we got was a cross between Che Guevara and a Vietnamese on a bicycle, with maybe a touch of Oxfam advert thrown in.
We should therefore be grateful to Merlin Press for republishing a novel which puts some flesh and blood on to the bones. The price is a bit high, but make sure your library gets it.
Ciro Alegria, a left-wing politician and novelist from Peru, died in 1967 after spending over thirty years in exile. He wrote this novel in 1941. It tells of an Indian community in Peru. The peasants own the land in common, and they run their own affairs. Decisions are made by an assembly of villagers, who elect their officials. Their hopes are modest – to build a school, for example. Otherwise all they ask is to be left alone.
But the forces of ‘progress’ outside will not leave them alone. The Indians are robbed of their land by a legal fraud; those who resist are massacred. One young man who goes to work on a rubber plantation has his eyesight destroyed by burning rubber. At the end all that is left of the community is ruins:
‘The fallen, broken roofs revealed the inside of the houses, where grass and even bushes were growing ... around the village, where the planted fields had formerly been, weeds and a yellowish grass now flourished.’
Alegria does not idealise the peasants. The narrow confines of their life have stunted them in many ways. They are superstitious and ignorant; when they learn there is a war with Chile, they think Chile is a general’s name. And the bandit Fiero Vasquez, who joins forces with the villagers, is no Romantic Robin Hood:
‘He robbed the rich, but when he was hard pressed, he robbed the poor too.’
The Indians are fatalists. They say:
‘The rich are always rich, and for all its weight money never comes down. And if it does come down, it falls on the ground so that the poor man has to grovel to get it.’
But legends of revolt still live among them; in the evenings they tell stories of risings against oppression from more than forty years ago.
And when they have to fight, they do. They go down to defeat, but the questions they ask will be asked again and again, from Peru to Vietnam. As Rosendo Maqui, mayor of the village imprisoned as an ‘agitator’, asks in jail:
‘What was the meaning of justice? What was the meaning of the law? He had always despised them because he had known them only in the form of abuses and taxes: despoilment, fines, collections. Now he felt in his own flesh that it attacked the most perfect expression of life, the body of man.’
 







Part One of this article appeared in International Socialism 76, March 1975





1968 as a year offered unprecedented opportunities to the revolutionary left. Revolutionary ideas achieved widespread currency, indeed became trendy in some circles. Revolutionary socialists suddenly found themselves swimming with the stream – an alarming experience for those long practised in swimming against it.
Internationally it was a year of momentous events. In January the National Liberation Front in Vietnam launched the ‘Tet offensive’, in which they scored striking successes against the far superior military forces of the United States. The international movement against the war received enormous encouragement. In May student demonstrations in France led to a crisis which resulted in a general strike of ten million workers. The groups of the revolutionary left succeeded in gaining wide currency for their ideas. And in August the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia led to a deep internal upheaval in the world’s Communist Parties, a number of which dissociated themselves from Russian action for the first time in their history.
In Britain it was a year of both hopes and threats. The rapid decline of support for the Labour government meant that less and less people were looking to the Labour Party as a focus for political action. The main impetus for the left came from outside the traditional organisations. There was an upsurge of militancy among students – beginning with the London School of Economics occupation in 1967, and spreading throughout Higher Education in 1968. This was paralleled by the growth of a large and demonstrative movement against the Vietnam war.
But the vacuum left by declining support for Labour also produced more sinister developments. Enoch Powell, trying to find a racial scapegoat for economic discontent, made an hysterical speech in favour of tighter immigration control. He was promptly dismissed from the Tory Shadow Cabinet, but won considerable support among sections of workers. In particular, London dockers struck and marched in his support.
All this underlined two things. One, that there was now a real possibility of building a socialist organisation outside the Labour Party; and secondly, that it was becoming increasingly urgent to do so. Amid the frenzied activity of 1968, IS had not only to respond to events, but to transform itself in the process.
The student movement was an international phenomenon, produced by the massive expansion of higher education needed by modern capitalism. Thousands of young people were exposed to the contradictions between the ideals of education and the need for capitalism to train low-level functionaries.
The student movement generated more than its fair share of romantic nonsense. Some theories – ‘red bases’ and the ‘student vanguard’ – saw students as replacing the working class as the agency of social change; others – ‘the student-worker alliance’ – more modestly but equally unrealistically saw students and workers as equal partners.
But despite this the student movement could not be ignored by any serious revolutionaries. Firstly, because the majority of the students in struggle would go on to join the growing ranks of white collar trade unionists. And secondly, even if the majority of student revolutionaries would soon submit to social pressures and drop out, a number of them could be won to a revolutionary organisation and be integrated into it.
Before the London School of Economics occupation in 1967, IS students had played little systematic part in student politics, and certainly had no thought-out strategy for student work. But a number of IS comrades played a leading role in the LSE struggle, and a number of other student activists were recruited to IS. A similar pattern was repeated in the student battles which took place up and down the country during 1968 and 1969.
The overall political analysis that IS had developed was vital for the intervention in the student field. The two theses that IS had always stressed were self-activity and the primacy of the working class. IS’s stress on the working class prevented it from giving in to the theories of the ‘student vanguard’ that were widespread at the time. IS comrades always laid emphasis on the necessity for solidarity with working class struggles, and in general IS’s recruitment among students was on the basis of its orientation to the working class. At the same time, IS had no truck with those like the Communist Party, who used an abstract invocation of the working class as an excuse for keeping out of actual ongoing struggles, and continuing to immerse themselves in manoeuvres in the National Union of Students.
The student movement was not concerned solely with struggles inside the colleges; it was inextricably bound up with the growing movement against the war in. Vietnam. When the US bombing of North Vietnam began in 1965, the struggle against the war was initially co-ordinated by the CP-dominated British Council for Peace in Vietnam, the main activity of which was loving up to clergymen and Labour peers, rather than mass mobilisation.
Frustration at the failure of the BCPV to do anything led to the creation, in 1966, of the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign (VSC). This was originally set up by an uneasy alliance of the politics of The Week (subsequently the IMG) [24] and the finances of Bertrand Russell. IS members participated in the foundation of the VSC, but for the first year of its existence the presence was a token one only.
The initial mistake of the VSC was to centre its opposition to the BCPV on programme rather than method. It was, of course, quite right to attack the disgusting opportunism of the BCPV, which refused to raise the slogan ‘Victory to the NLF’ and centred its demands on peace. But merely to tail along behind the BCPV, shouting ‘correct’ slogans, did nothing to help build a mass movement.
By mid-1967 the mood was changing. The NLF, despite US terror bombing, was clearly gaining ground, and thus inspiring emulation rather than pity; the anti-war movement in the US was growing; and in Britain, the student movement was looking for a cause to adopt.
It was at this point that IS – which had argued for a solidarity position from the very beginning of the war – decided to make its intervention in the VSC rather more vigorous. IS comrades argued with the existing VSC leadership for a serious approach to mass work; for long-term preparation for a demonstration, with systematic work in the colleges combined with mass leafleting of factories and estates. IS branches in the localities helped to prepare the demonstration in October 1967. The result was some thirty thousand people in Grosvenor Square (outside the US Embassy), a confrontation with the police, and the VSC’s name firmly on the political map.
Two more massive demonstrations followed, in March and October 1968; the CP, which had originally opposed the VSC for ‘splitting the broad movement’, eventually tagged along behind. The movement brought a whole wave of young people – including a sizeable minority of young workers – towards revolutionary politics. A New Society survey of the October 1968 demonstration showed that 68 per cent of those marching were against, not only the war, but capitalism in general.
Within this movement, IS strove to recruit on the basis of linking the anti-war struggle to the struggle at home. As a leaflet distributed on one of the big demonstrations put it:
... the battle against wage freeze; against social service cuts; against bad housing and rent increases; against bad hospitals and schools; against unemployment; against the government’s racialist policies is the same battle against the Vietnam war ... In the factories workers are fighting against the wage freeze and unemployment. On the housing estates tenants are resisting rent increases. If we are to help the Vietnamese we must go on from Grosvenor Square to fight these struggles. “A blow against the boss is a blow against the Vietnam war”.
Amid the euphoria of the Vietnam movement, the emergence of Powellism among sections of workers was a stunning shock to the left. For some it was further confirmation of how bleak things were and the need to keep one’s head down; for others, it was further proof that the working class could be written off in favour of a student vanguard.
The Communist Party, which had some influence in the docks, declined to use it to fight Powellism. Danny Lyons, one of their leading militants, felt so little confidence in Marxist arguments that he brought along; two clergymen, one Catholic and one Protestant, to try and dissuade the dockers.
IS had one docker (Terry Barrett) in membership, but he made every effort to argue the point in class terms. Barrett, together with some IS members and other revolutionaries, signed and distributed to dockers a leaflet putting the class case against Powell:
Who is Enoch Powell?
He is a right-wing Tory opportunist who will stop at nothing to help his Party and his class. He is a director of the vast National Discount Company (assets £224m) which pays him a salary bigger than the £3,500 a year he gets as an MP.
He lives in fashionable Belgravia and writes Greek verse.
What does he believe in?

Higher Unemployment. He has consistently advocated a national average of 3 per cent unemployed.
Cuts in the Social Services. He wants higher health charges, less council houses, charges for state education and lower unemployment pay.
Mass Sackings in the Docks. Again and again he has argued that the docks are “grossly overmanned”.

It was the Powell affair, closely followed by the French general strike, which made it clear that it was possible to embark on the process of building an independent revolutionary party. Revolutionary parties are built, not proclaimed, and the task of transforming a small group into a party is one that requires a whole number of different stages of development. A revolutionary party has to meet criteria of size, class composition, programme and capacity to intervene. IS in 1968 could not begin to satisfy the requirement on any count.
The first step was to break with the small group tradition that had characterised revolutionary politics in Britain for the previous twenty years. Groups had been defined and separated from each other by fine points of analysis – natural enough in a period of propaganda organisation. Now it was necessary to bring to the fore the ideas of a combat organisation, defined not only by its analysis, but by what it fought for. It was in this spirit that IS issued an appeal to all other revolutionary groupings for unity around a basic agreement on four fundamental points of principle:


Opposition to imperialism; for the victory of all genuine national liberation movements.
Opposition to racism in all its forms and to controls on immigration.
Opposition to state control of trade unions; support for all progressive strikes.
Workers’ control of society and industry as the only alternative to fascism.


It is important to be clear what this move meant in the context of the period. There was a big movement of youth towards socialist politics in the VSC; many Labour Party activists were dropping out in disgust; sections of the CP were disillusioned with their Party’s passivity and impressed by the rise of the revolutionary left – a situation reinforced by the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968.
At the same time none of the revolutionary groups had the size or credibility to serve as a focus for these potential recruits. A united organisation could have picked up many people who would otherwise have been lost.
However, if such a unified organisation had come into being, it would have been middle-class and largely student in composition, and amorphous in politics. A long fight – and probably splits – would have been necessary to transform it into a real workers’ party. As it was the unity proposals failed, the grouplets did not respond. This was probably inevitable; but they did represent a declaration of intent, a clear indication that a new style of politics and a new form of organisation was going to be necessary.
However, to be precise, the appeal for unity was not quite unsuccessful. One grouplet on the left did respond positively – Workers Fight, a tiny sect whose orthodox Trotskyist politics were indistinguishable from those of Ernest Mandel’s ‘Fourth International’, but who were not prepared to join it organisationally. In the euphoric atmosphere of 1968 the unity was consummated rapidly without sufficient care being given to the conditions on which the unity was to be maintained.
In fact, there was never an effective fusion. Workers Fight maintained its own organisation – with its own discipline, subscriptions and even probationary membership – inside IS. The result could only be continuing friction, legalistic disputes about factional rights, and serious disruption of IS’s work in a number of areas. The whole unfortunate situation dragged on for three years until a Special Conference in December 1971 decided to end the fusion, and to give Workers Fight supporters the chance to choose which organisation they wanted to belong to.
The recognition of the need to start building the party now implied the need for changes in IS’s structure. Over the previous years IS had changed from a propaganda group into a group that engaged in agitation in a localised and fragmented manner. Now that generalised politics was back on the agenda, it was necessary to transform it into a revolutionary combat organisation. This meant reorganising the group according to the principles of democratic centralism.
In theory this meant recognising two important principles. Firstly, unlike either the Stalinist or Social-Democratic party, the revolutionary party in the Bolshevik tradition does not substitute itself for the class; it is a conscious minority which fights for its ideas within the organisation of the class (trade unions, soviets, etc). Therefore the kind of democracy we would demand in, for example, a trade union, is not appropriate to a revolutionary organisation. Secondly, a revolutionary organisation needs democracy in order to make a scientific evaluation of the situation; but when decisions have been taken, the minority must accept the need for unity in action.
In practice this led to some fairly modest organisational proposals. Firstly, that the leading body of the organisation should be elected on a political basis – that is, by election of a national body from a national conference. Hitherto there had been a ‘federal’ principle in operation; each branch sent a delegate. Secondly, the right of the organisation to impose discipline on all members was stated. A draft from the Political Committee (September 1968) put the matter in surprisingly moderate terms:
Branches must accept directives from the centre, unless they fundamentally disagree with them, in which case they should try to accord with them while demanding an open debate on the matter.
In retrospect all this appears more or less unexceptionable and uncontroversial. In fact it caused the greatest internal upheaval IS had ever had. Internal documents proliferated and at least five factions came into existence. It took two stormy conferences (in September and December 1968) before a new, democratic centralist constitution could be agreed.
The heat of the debate can be partly explained by the newness of the membership – a good half had been in the group only a few months, and by the fact that many of them had come straight from the heady atmosphere of student politics. But the issues at stake were more fundamental. When the main job had been struggle in the fragments, the need had been to encourage initiative; conditions for the tenants’ struggle varied so greatly between, say, Newcastle, Sheffield and London, that unified directives would have been of little help to anyone. It was, in fact, vital to stress that comrades should not wait for directives.
Moreover, if democratic centralism was to be meaningful, it depended on some degree of maturity and experience among those participating in the internal democracy. If there was no experience to be confronted, then there was little value in a centralised structure. (As one leading comrade put it, with perhaps unnecessary brutality, ‘if you have a bunch of idiots, they will elect an idiot to lead them.’)
It would be impossible to do justice here to the various arguments put forward, both by the libertarian opposition to democratic centralism, and by those who felt that the IS leadership was still being insufficiently ‘hard’ on the question. Although they were of vastly differing degrees of sophistication, the faction fight was on balance a positive experience. IS members, old and new alike, were forced to think and argue through the whole question of the revolutionary party. There were casualties – some good activists found themselves unable to take the change and left – but they were relatively few. More important, the vast majority of those who voted against democratic centralism in 1968 were won over to the position in the course of the following 12 months.
IS had grown dramatically in the course of 1968. It had begun the year with 447 members, and ended with something in excess of a thousand. (The pace of recruitment and turnover were so hectic that precise figures are hard to get). The monthly Labour Worker had given way to the weekly Socialist Worker with a vastly increased circulation. A number of full-time workers had been employed both for the paper and as regional organisers. The pace of growth had taken the members by surprise.
Yet in face of the objective tasks the group was still tiny. In the course of 1968 IS had pointed to the so-called ‘vacuum on the left’ – the gap in the working-class movement left by the demise of the Labour left and the bankruptcy of the Communist Party. Yet IS was still far too small to fill the gap; the tasks ahead were going to be even tougher.
 
1969–1970: Towards a Workers’ Party
BY THE middle of 1969 the wave of revolutionary euphoria had subsided, and it was much clearer that the struggle ahead was to be a protracted one. The last year of Labour rule saw massive trade union opposition to the proposals for trade union legislation, and a wave of strikes, especially among sections of lower-paid workers with few tradition of militancy. And with the return of Tory government in June 1970 things hotted up even more. Heath’s policies of confrontation and wage control led to a series of big official strikes – postmen in 1971, miners and Fords in 1972, various public sector groups in 1973 and the miners again in 1974.
The new level of struggle made things, in objective terms, much easier for IS. The experience of Labour government made the argument for an independent socialist organisation right outside the Labour Party very much more plausible. And the trend towards government intervention in industrial struggles was doing more than a bookshop of propaganda to break down the artificial barriers between politics and economics
But to take advantage of the situation IS had to transform itself as an organisation. IS had come out of the faction fight of 1968 with a principled commitment to the need for a revolutionary workers party but in terms of class composition the situation was actually worse than in 1967, a far higher proportion of the membership being students. And although these students who joined IS had done so on the basis of a commitment to the working class and a break with the more lurid forms of ‘student vanguardism’, there was still great confusion about what the role of students in relation to the labour movement actually was.
One expression of this was the rather frenetic leafleting of factories that took place. Students anxious to make links with the working class but not quite sure how to do it stood at factory gates with leaflets designed to ‘bring politics to the workers’. (In the present writer’s experience the worst example was a leaflet consisting of two tightly packed and badly duplicated sides on the question of the war in Biafra. Unfortunately for any worker who managed to read it at all, the leaflet came to no conclusion as to which side, if either, one should support in the war!)
The situation was also bad for the workers in the organisation. In a workers’ organisation a worker is judged, not for what he is, but for what he does. In this period of student domination in IS, it was often enough to proclaim that one was a worker to win admiration and flattery. At one IS conference an industrial worker denounced a document being circulated as ‘so bad it must have been written by a sociologist.’ He was cheered to the echo by the audience, a fair percentage of whom were sociology students.
What now had to be begun was a systematic transformation of the organisation. Very crudely, it is possible to see three main phases in this process:


the membership had to be re-orientated towards the industrial working class. Students in particular had to be told that, while they should not abstain from real struggles in the Colleges, their main priority should be making propaganda and finding contacts in the labour movement;
the composition of the organisation had to be changed by recruiting workers into the organisation;
the workers in the organisation had to take over the political leadership. This meant, not only transforming the national leadership, but also creating a local structure based on functional units – in particular at factory branches – in which workers would have the leading role.


In practice, of course, things did not go so smoothly. The stages of growth overlapped considerably (for example, the existence of a student base assisted IS’s credibility in intervening in the 1972 miners’ strike). Moreover there was inevitable friction and an overemphasis put on certain turns. Comrades often found difficulty in making the transitions from one stage to the next. For example, able propagandists tended to think of workers as being eternally ‘contacts’ rather than bringing them into membership. And those who had shown great talent at recruiting and organising found it hard to hand over leadership to those they had recruited and organised. Moreover, the changes had to be made in a world that did not give IS leisure to solve its internal problems, but forced it to move ever more quickly.
The first major crisis to hit the organisation came in August 1969. Following a year of mounting struggle in the North of Ireland, fighting erupted in Derry, and British troops were sent in, ostensibly to preserve the peace. This presented IS with serious problems of tactics and principles.
On the one hand, IS had campaigned consistently for the withdrawal of British troops from the North of Ireland. However, in the immediate situation, in which the Catholic forces were very much the weaker, neither the IRA nor the People’s Democracy was demanding the immediate withdrawal of British troops, IS had to combine its internationalism (its concern to have the same position as comrades in Ireland) with its responsibility to bring home to British workers the role of British imperialism. In the event it was decided not to make ‘Withdraw the Troops Now’ an agitational slogan. A minority of the leadership and of the membership dissented.
However, the main emphasis in Socialist Worker was on the need for Catholic self-defence and on the potential role of the troops. The week that the troops went in, Socialist Worker headlined [25]:
‘THE BARRICADES MUST STAY UNTIL
B-Specials disbanded
RUC disarmed
Special Powers Act abolished
Political prisoners released.’
The lead article expanded:
Certainly the mass of Catholics, after three days of bitter fighting, were relieved to see the RUC and the Specials withdraw, and to this extent were glad to see the British troops.
But it should not be thought that the presence of British troops can begin to solve their problems
... The role of the British troops is not to bring any real solution to the problems of the people of Northern Ireland, but to freeze a situation that looked like getting out of hand and damaging the interests of the British ruling class in Ireland.
By early 1970 the openly repressive role of the troops had become apparent to all, and since then IS has campaigned consistently for the withdrawal of all British troops. Nonetheless solidarity work on. the Irish question caused many problems. Partly this was because at times of downturn in the struggle, the united front bodies that IS worked within became little more than meeting grounds for representatives of small groups and an excuse for sectarian backbiting. Also, however, it took time to develop a clear perspective amid the complexities of the Irish situation. IS’s position was always one of unconditional support for the IRA in the struggle against imperialism, and of links with socialist groupings (People’s Democracy) and individuals (Bernadette Devlin) in Ireland. But what also needed to be made clear was the need for an independent working-class-based revolutionary party in Ireland as the only alternative to the dead-end nationalism of the IRA.
The main priority throughout this period, however, was industry. Indeed, IS was often accused of one-sidedness and ‘economism’ because of its neglect of other sectors (e.g. students) and other areas of work (e.g. international solidarity). But given the overwhelming difficulty of winning roots in the working class, and the overriding urgency of doing so, such lack of balance was justified. In the abstract it is fine to talk of ‘bringing politics to workers’; but if there are no workers to bring them to, then the discussion is futile.
The first stage in the transformation of IS was the so-called ‘Turn to the Class’ of 1969. In a sense this was a misnomer; IS had always been distinguished from other tendencies by its stress on the role of the working class. What the ‘Turn to the Class’ involved was, firstly, an attempt to divert the main energies of the organisation on to work around industry and the trade unions; and secondly, an effort to make this work more serious and systematic, rather than the random activity that was going on.
This meant essentially an effort of education and organisation. Comrades with no experience of the labour movement had to make great efforts to learn of its traditions and of the way the trade union movement actually operated. Groups were formed of comrades working around particular industries and combines. An attempt was made to establish the main priorities for industrial work. Leaflets had to be written in a responsible fashion, if possible with a contact inside the factory.
All this was still essentially work from the outside. There were still few industrial workers inside IS. The first job was to turn a largely student and middle-class membership into a cadre capable of making some impact in the industrial working class. This in turn provided a selection process; membership actually fell during 1969, though the group became stronger and more serious.
By the autumn of 1970, following the Tory election victory, the time had been reached for the next stage, the launching of a membership campaign. Systematic work around the factories and the production of a high standard of propaganda had won IS a considerable degree of credibility; but this was still expressed in the form of a periphery of support rather than actual worker members. The recruitment campaign launched in September 1970 aimed at five hundred new members over three months; it was followed by a further campaign in the summer of 1971. The aim was to transform the nature of the branches, to make them, in Trotsky’s phrase, ‘habitable for workers’. [26]
As had always been the practice in IS, the aim was to win recruits to the organisation on the basis of a minimum agreement on activity, and leave the question of education in the wider aspects of IS politics to be developed in the process of work inside the organisation. Many critics of the recruitment strategy, inside and outside IS, argued that the organisation should be more ‘selective’ and impose more control – such as probationary membership – on new entrants. This was to mistake the nature of the process. There was indeed a selection – a number of those who joined subsequently left again; in some cases it was because the organisation failed to hold them, in others because they were not ready to give the commitment required for membership. But there was no way this could be forecast in advance, no magic mark engraved on the foreheads of potential recruits. Only the experience of common struggle was able to show which comrades would last the pace.
The prerequisite for the recruitment campaign was considerable enthusiasm on the part of the membership. Large public meetings – some featuring Bernadette Devlin – were held. Obviously mistakes were made and some of the new members were lost. The important thing was to establish that IS was not a closed sect seeking to reinforce its own purity, but an organisation open to the working class.
There was, however, some resistance to the membership campaign within the organisation. Indeed, the whole exercise had to be fought through on two fronts, the struggle to make IS more credible in the outside world being paralleled by a struggle to convince the existing membership.
The main argument brought against a strategy of open recruitment was the danger of so-called ‘dilution’. Inexperienced comrades, it was claimed, could not participate effectively in internal democracy (though in fact many of the new recruits had far more experience of the class struggle than a lot of long-standing IS members). Moreover, it was suggested, IS was sacrificing programmatic correctness in favour of sheer numerical size.
In the abstract, this position had an element of truth, and could be backed up by selected quotations from Lenin. The real point was to evaluate what were the main dangers in the current period. Although revolutionary ideas were making some impact in the working class, so that a recruiting campaign was a possibility, it just was not true that there was any danger of a mass of potentially opportunist workers waiting at the gates for the chance to flood into IS for the worst possible motives. IS membership for a worker offered some onerous responsibilities (like having to be identified in his place of work with a paper which supported the IRA and opposed immigration control) and precious few consolations. The doors may have been open, but recruits still had to be dragged through.
The arguments were debated over a period at every level in the organisation. For the issue could not be decided by a simple vote. One cannot instruct comrades to recruit; the job can be done only by people who are convinced that they want to do it.
The results are shown by the figures. At the Easter 1970 Conference IS had a membership of 880; by Easter 1972 this had risen to 2,351. A break-down of the social composition at Easter 1972 showed 26 per cent manual workers and 31 per cent white collar workers.
IS had by now ceased to be a propaganda group. But this did not mean that propaganda had ceased to be important.
On the contrary, it was the continual flow of propaganda material that was central to its growing influence. Fundamental to this was the building of Socialist Worker. The paper had changed its name from Labour Worker to confirm the break with entry work in the Labour Party. In September 1968 the paper was launched as a weekly. It had four pages, cost two (old) pence, and looked somewhat scruffy. It was sold mainly by students outside the gates of factories and on council estates. Slowly the paper was improved; it grew to six pages in 1969, eight in 1970, twelve in 1971 and sixteen in 1972. The circulation rose from under ten thousand in 1968 to over thirty thousand some five years later. But it was not simply the sale of the paper or its journalistic quality that mattered, it was its political role. It was Socialist Worker which gave the political coherence to an organisation whose members were involved in struggles that differed widely from one another. It was Socialist Worker that provided the main line of communication between the centre and the membership and periphery. It was Socialist Worker that provided the political basis for the membership, the political line that every member had to defend to those he sold to.
Also of great importance in increasing IS’s credibility was Tony Cliff’s book The Employers’ Offensive [27], a study of productivity dealing and the strategy for fighting it. Two things made the work important. Firstly, Cliff was able to draw extensively on the experience of IS’s industrial membership and periphery; the work was really the result of a collective effort. Secondly, although the subject matter might seem technical, it raised crucial political issues. The trade union bureaucracy, including the ‘left’ bureaucrats supported by the Communist Party, were heavily implicated in productivity deals. The Communist Party, despite its much greater industrial influence, could not have produced the book.
The Employers’ Offensive offered a valuable way for IS branches to extend their influence and contacts. By collecting lists of local trade unionists it was possible to arrange widespread sales.
But this was still approaching the class from the outside. The problem now was to make IS part of the working-class movement. IS was greatly assisted in this by the continued. decline of the Communist Party. The Communist Party was increasingly unable to carry through any co-ordinated strategy in industry, because of the diverging interests of its rank-and-file militants and its members and friends in the bureaucracy. This led to it taking a passive role in many struggles, and to a great reluctance to participate in any rank-and-file movement. [28] For example, when the five dockers were jailed in the summer of 1972, the Communist Party, and its industrial front, the Liaison Committee for the Defence of Trade Unions, were more or less inactive. The possibility for IS to take the lead in an increasing number of struggles was now open. But for this further changes in the structure of the organisation were necessary, which once again had to be fought for against considerable resistance.
Despite IS’s orientation to industry, its organisational structure in 1972 was still a geographical one; members belonged to branches according to the areas they lived in: Such a structure is, of course, fine for an organisation whose main concern is electoral politics; for an organisation based on struggle in the trade union and the work-place the structure was a positive impediment. The aim had to be two-fold; to develop effective union and industrial fractions, and to move, where possible, to workplace branches.
The development of effective fractions was intimately linked to the perspective of building rank-and-file movements inside the trade union movement. The ultimate aim was to repeat the successes of the Minority Movement of the 1920s, though it was clearly recognised that this could only be done with a much bigger base than was at present available.
The model was provided by the work carried out since 1967 in the National Union of Teachers. Here a small group of IS teachers had come together with some Communist Party members who were disillusioned by the increasingly conservative role of the Communist Party within the union. As a result the paper Rank and File was set up; it rapidly became the focus for the militant left in the union, and succeeded in attracting support way beyond IS and IS sympathisers.
As the role of the trade union bureaucracy as the main obstacle to shop-floor militancy became more and more obvious in the early seventies, IS members were able to participate in, and in some cases initiate, the creation of similar papers in a number of unions and industries – The Collier, The Carworker, The Hospital Worker and several others. It was in turn a number of these papers which took the initiative in calling the first conference of the National Rank and File Movement in March 1974, attended by more than 500 delegates from over 300 trade union organisations.
On the question of factory branches there was more controversy. Factory branches had always been part of IS’s tradition; indeed the first factory branch – at ENV – had been set up as early as 1966. But the Conference at Easter 1972 passed a resolution declaring opposition to factory branches – though it was carried by an alliance of those who opposed factory branches in principle and those who simply thought it premature to establish them.
The main argument against factory branches was that they tended to segregate sections of the membership, whereas the aim of a revolutionary party should be to enable each member to transcend his sectional situation and participate in the totality of the party’s work. Against this idealist view, the argument for factory branches stressed that members had to be organised for action, not discussion, and that factory branches would enable a great increase in the recruitment of workers.
The Conference held in March 1973 resolved to go ahead with the building of factory branches. At the same time the defeat of a number of sections of workers who had fought against the Tory Phase Two meant that more workers were realising the need for revolutionary politics. IS entered another phase of rapid growth, and within months about forty factory branches were established.
But events were moving quickly in the world outside also. The oil crisis and Heath’s Phase Three strategy of confrontation led to the three-day week and the miners’ strike. The weeks leading up to the February 1974 General Election led to a period of hectic propaganda activity and Socialist Worker reached a peak sale of well over forty thousand. Despite the enthusiasm of the comrades, the organisation’s resources were strained almost to breaking-point.
Labour’s hairsbreadth victory in the election led to a different situation which required further adaptation. IS had correctly identified the organisational decline of the Labour Party and therefore rejected any such strategy as entry work or concentration on ‘exposure’ of the Labour leaders by putting demands on them. What was somewhat underestimated was Labour’s ideological influence, which enabled it to avoid any head-on confrontations for the first year in office. Although there were some big struggles, notably among sectors with no traditional links to Labour – nurses, teachers, local government workers – the situation was in general much more fragmentary than under the Tories.
IS’s growth and the changing circumstances meant the emergence of a new set of problems. While IS was still a small organisation, it was more and more confronted with tasks that required a much bigger organisation. IS members began to face problems for which there were no precedents within the experience of most comrades. As a result there were necessarily divergences, and in the months preceding the September 1974 Conference there was a sharp internal debate.
A number of issues became closely intertwined in this debate. One main issue concerned the perspective for growth. Were the potential recruits for the organisation to be found among those workers who had already some experience of the existing political organisations, or would they come from among young workers with few traditions and little experience of work in the labour movement. This in turn raised the question of how Socialist Worker should orientate its articles.
Linked to this was the demand for more workers to be actively involved as writers for Socialist Worker. This in turn raised the whole problem of putting more and more of the responsibility for leadership at every level into the hands of workers.
A parallel argument related to the question of work within the trade union movement. Some comrades argued for considerable importance to be given to working within the official union machinery, contesting elections etc. Others argued that the main priority must be given to building within the workplace.
These developments inevitably meant the replacement of some people who had a record of long service in the organisation. Roger Protz, who had made an enormous contribution to the development of Socialist Worker since 1968, resigned as editor following disagreements about the orientation of the paper. And the September 1974 Conference re-elected less than half of the outgoing National Committee.
Nonetheless, the task of building IS into a revolutionary workers’ party is still very far from being completed. But the political analysis and experience built up over the first quarter century of the group’s existence provides the base on which this can be done.

Notes
24. The Week of 1967 – cheerleaders for Fidel Castro and black power – had little beyond the name in common with The Week of 1964, with its list of sponsoring left Labour MPs. The change in politics was accompanied by a substantial turnover of personnel. But, like the brush that had three new heads and two new handles, it was ‘still the same old brush’.
25. 21 August 1969.
26. In Defence of Marxism (New York 1965), p.109.
27. London 1970.
28. Cf. articles by J. Townsend and C. Harman in IS 62 and 63 and S. Jefferys in IS 76.
 



India-China: Underdevelopment and Revolution
Nigel Harris
Vikas Publishing House, Delhi, (distributed in Britain by Prentice Hall, 66 Wood Lane, Kernel Hempstead, Herts), £4.50
AS the crisis intensifies, the various sectors of the world interlock ever more closely. African liberation struggles help to detonate workers’ revolt in Portugal; Middle East oil-producers upset the advanced countries’ economic carve-up. To guide us through the impending storm we need a theory; what Lenin wrote sixty years ago will not do, nor will the romantic guerrilla mythology of the sixties, Nigel Harris’s new book – a collection of essays, mainly published earlier in this Journal – is an important contribution to such a theory.
For many years the bitterly poor continents of Asia, Africa and Latin America have been politely described as the ‘developing countries’. It was thus suggested that, poor as they might be now, they would pass through the same development – that is, industrialisation – as Europe over the last two hundred years, and eventually make the big time into Western ‘affluence’. Against this Harris argues, harshly but persuasively, that it isn’t on; taking the two apparently widely differing cases of India and China, he shows that neither private capitalism nor state capitalism can bring off development.
Why? Because there is no such thing as – to quote another fashionable phrase – ‘the Third World’. The backward countries are an integral part of one world – a world dominated by imperialism and the nuclear arms race. Far from the advanced countries being dependent on the backward even for raw materials, there are many cases where the backward countries actually import food. The limits of development are rigidly imposed by the world market, as in the case of Cuba, whose economy became more and more dependent on specialisation in sugar after Castro came to power.
Internally, the failure to develop leads to a vicious circle. Poverty leads to discontent and threat of revolt; hence the need to strengthen the armed forces. But the ever-growing arms budget eats into the slender resources of a poor country and make the poverty worse. In India, Ceylon and China the process is remarkably similar.
Likewise, the failure to develop leads to constant conflict between central and local power. Harris shows the similarity between India and China in this respect too, and uses it to help explain the much misunderstood and misinterpreted ‘Cultural Revolution’.
Harris notes the important differences, historical and economic, between India and China, and he points out that, superficially at least, China offers the more attractive model. It has neither the extremes of wealth nor of poverty so obvious in India. Nonetheless, Harris shows, the effective economic performance is not all that different. To see India and China as variants of the same problem is far more illuminating than the tendency, by friends and foes alike, to see Mao’s China as an action replay of Stalinist Russia.
Economic crisis leads to political crisis, yet in a situation where the solution can only be international, Left and Right alike have given themselves over to nationalism. In India, war against Pakistan served, at least temporarily, to divert popular wrath from Mrs Gandhi. In China, appeals for effort and self-sacrifice, can be seen, behind a veneer of Marxist terminology, to be very like the appeals to the ‘national interest’ we know so well.
For, despite talk of ‘socialism’ and the proletariat’, politics in the underdeveloped world is dominated by the middle class, white-collar workers with a vested interest in the expansion of state power and employment Yet, in China in 1927, there was a real possibility of proletarian revolution. Trotsky’s theory of Permanent Revolution-which, contrary to common misinterpretation, is about available alternatives and not about inevitables-has had negative confirmation. If the proletariat does not take the lead, then capitalist development is still impossible, and the petty-bourgeoisie fill the social vacuum.
Within the nationalist spectrum,, there are many political variants, from parliamentary reformism to rural guerrilla warfare. Yet, as Harris argues, the divergences are not so great as they seem; reformism and guerrilla warfare are two faces of the same coin. Both accept the same nationalist framework; both seek to act on behalf of the masses rather than to mobilise among the masses. This is one of the most controversial theses of Harris’s book, yet it serves to explain many paradoxes of recent politics; for example, the vacillations of Indian Maoism, or how the Che Guevara fan club of 1967 became the Salvador Allende fan club of 1971.
However, one might have wished for a more thorough analysis of trends in guerrilla movements. Harris seems to put the Chilean MIR in the same bag as the Tupamaros or the Naxalites. Yet by 1973 the MIR had developed to very different work among peasants and urban workers. There are valid criticisms to be made of the MIR (see for example Prieto’s The Gorillas are Amongst Us), but they should be specific and concrete ones.
Likewise, the book could have been improved by a fuller account of working-class struggles in India, showing the positive alternative that could emerge. Harris does piece together, from the all too slender evidence, a picture of independent working-class action during the Chinese Cultural Revolution. This is indeed the key question. It was the Budapest workers who drove the first wedge into the Stalinist monolith. Maoism will continue to hypnotise the international left until the Chinese workers move against the regime.
Despite these reservations, the book should be read and ordered for libraries. But there is one further criticism – Harris’s unnecessarily obscure and contorted style. It is hard to know what to make of a sentence like: ‘If capitalism had still possessed the potential to develop the world, the Left might have remained either voices in their own wilderness – swallows without a summer – or charlatans, playing a Left tune but dancing a Right jig.’ Comrade Harris is a Marxist thinker of some talent. It is not outside his capabilities to learn to write English and he owes it to the movement to do so.
 



IN THE last year or two the International Socialists have grown into an organisation capable of small but significant interventions in the class struggle, and with a real possibility of laying the foundations for a revolutionary party in Britain. Many comrades who have joined IS in this period, or who have worked alongside us, quite rightly want to know where we have sprung from.
The following article will sketch out the history of the International Socialists (and their predecessor organisation, the Socialist Review group) over the last 24 years. The aim is not to answer all the slanders thrown at us by rival groupings; nor is it to prove that we were always right – we certainly weren’t.
‘Without revolutionary theory there is no revolutionary practice,’ said leninh in a much quoted phrase, But, as Lenin’s whole life shows, correct theory is necessary, but not enough. If the theory is not adopted and fought for by real workers, it is a worthless abstraction. The history of IS is teh history of the continued attempt to turn theory into practice.
 
The First Ten Years
THE ORIGINS of the International Socialists are in the Trotskyist movement. The historical achievement of Trotskyism was to keep alive the Marxist method and its insistence on the revolutionary role of the working class in the face of the barbarous distortions of Stalinism. Some excellent revolutionaries swallowed every barbarity and change of line from Moscow because there seemed to be no alternative; others were so sickened with Stalinism that they wrote off the Russian Revolution altogether and became social democrats or even drifted to the extreme right. The achievement of Trotskyism in preserving Marxist ideas and keeping together a small group of Marxist cadres far outweighs any theoretical errors or incidental absurdities.
But the 15 years that followed the Second World War offered a very hostile environment for revolutionaries, an environment in which throughout the world anti-Stalinist Marxists found themselves confined to tiny groups on the margins of the working class.
There were two main reasons for this. Firstly the Cold War, beginning in 1947, led to a massive political and ideological assault on the Left. While there was nothing comparable to McCarthyism in Britain, there was a systematic witch-hunt of Communists in the trade union movement, while publishing houses turned out floods of pseudo-intellectual ‘refutations’ of Marxism.
Secondly, and even more fundamentally, the prolonged post-war boom made it exceptionally hard to relate political ideas to the actual experience of workers. The political and economic struggles seemed to be totally separated. In the ten years from 1953 to 1962 there were only 30 ‘constitutional’ stoppages in the engineering industry, and in the five years from 1954 to 1958 there were none at all. As The Economist rather sadly commented [1]:
full employment since the war has not led to more strikes because the unions, now more highly organised than ever, have been getting their own way without recourse to them.
In short, workers were able to solve their immediate problems without any kind of generalisation. The fifties saw the growth of the shop stewards movement as we know it today, but they also saw the Tory Party re-elected with increased majorities at three successive elections.
Things had changed radically since the early years of Trotskyism, and the movement had to reconsider the basis of its politics. Very briefly, there were two main issues. [2] Firstly, Trotsky’s perspective for the immediate pre-war period had been that the coming war would end in a massive crisis with great revolutionary possibilities. He was wrong. In the short term the mass Communist Parties headed off revolution; in the longer term Marshall Aid and the development of the arms economy opened up a new period of capitalist expansion. This meant a need to re-examine radically theoretical views of modern capitalism.
The second question that confronted the movement was one that had already been much discussed – the so-called ‘Russian question’. Up to his death Trotsky had always argued that Russia, despite Stalin’s crimes, remained a workers’ state, though a ‘degenerated’ one; he rejected the view that Russia had reverted to capitalism, or that a new form of class society had grown up there. By the late forties, however, a new element entered the debate. Following the great carve-up of the world at the end of the Second World War, Russia had taken over a number of countries in Eastern Europe and established regimes there which were becoming more or less identical with the set-up in Russia. The question that arose was – were these too workers’ states? If not, how come they seemed to function in exactly the same way as Russia? If they were, then didn’t that mean you could have a workers’ state without a workers’ revolution and without an independent, revolutionary party?
It was in this situation that a grouping within the British Trotskyist movement developed the theory that Russia, and the East European states, were ‘state capitalist’. [3] The main theoretical elaboration was the work of Tony Cliff. The theoretical confusion in the Trotskyist movement was accompanied by a degeneration in the organisation and the standard of internal debate. As a result the comrades who held the ‘state capitalist’ position were either expelled or left, and late in 1950 began to publish a duplicated paper Socialist Review. The new group, taking its name from the paper, held its founding conference at Whitsuntide 1951.
To an outsider the debate about the ‘class nature of Russia’ often seems arid and almost theological: But the. issue was a very real one. The ‘state capitalist’ theory stressed that what was central to the class nature of a society was not formal ownership, but control. The absence of workers’ control in Russia was not a defect in an otherwise progressive system, it was a clear indication that the system was in no sense a workers’ state. The central position that ‘workers’ control’ always had in IS’s political analyses and industrial strategy derives directly from the theory of state capitalism.
It is sometimes alleged that the creation of the Socialist Review group represented some sort of concession to Cold War pressure at the time of the Korean War. In fact, the Korean War was not the issue at the heart of the split. Rather it was the shamelessly opportunist support for Tito’s Yugoslavia by the rest of the Trotskyist movement [4] from 1948 onwards that highlighted the principled differences. Moreover, anyone who in 1950 wanted to ‘capitulate’ to pro-American pressures had plenty of other and more comfortable openings available; one could become a right-wing witch-hunter in the Labour Party or trade union movement, or join the circles of Washington financed anti-Communist intellectuals.
And for those who resisted the pressure to give in to Western imperialism, there was still the danger of submitting to Stalinist pressure – of taking. a more or less uncritical attitude to Yugoslavia, North Korea or other Stalinist states. It was precisely this trap that the rest of the Trotskyist movement was falling into. By so doing it was abandoning the very essence of Trotskyism, namely, independence of both Western imperialism and Stalinism.
From the beginning the Socialist Review group made no concessions to the Western Alliance and the South Korean dictatorship it supported. ‘The Labour movement must oppose the alliance with Truman, Adenauer, Syngman Rhee and the other representatives of ‘Western Democracy’; they must fight for an alliance with the millions of toilers of Europe, Asia, Africa and the rest of the world.’ [5] It denounced the ‘full-scale colonial wars’ in Vietnam and Malaya. [6]
The logic of the position that the Eastern European states were ‘workers’ states’ was, of course, that revolutionary parties were not necessary for the establishment of workers’ states. The Socialist Review group, on the other hand, stressed that only the working class could establish socialism; and that it was necessary to build independent workers’ parties. As a resolution carried at an early national meeting of the group [7] put it,
Our grouping, based on the conception of Russia as a state-capitalist country, is the nucleus of that new Marxist party, and can be built firmly ONLY on the acceptance of party discipline in the tradition of Bolshevism under Lenin’s leadership.
The other essential component of IS’s basic theory was also developed at this time. This was the idea of the ‘permanent arms economy’ [8], which sought to explain how the prolonged post-war boom was possible. The argument that it was arms expenditure that was postponing capitalist crisis was vital for an argument on two fronts. On the one hand the Communist Party and most sections of the Trotskyist movement refused to recognise any significant change in the capitalist system; slump was predicted every time the unemployment figures went up a few hundred. On the other hand theorists of the Labour Party right – such as Anthony Crosland – argued that the. system had been fundamentally transformed and that expansion and reforms could continue indefinitely.
Against this the arms economy theory argued that the post-war boom was a prolonged and deep-rooted phenomenon, and that revolutionaries must plan their strategy accordingly. But against the reformists it argued that capitalist stability was bought only at the price of creating weapons that could destroy humanity itself; moreover, that the crisis could not be put off indefinitely:
The war economy may thus less and less serve as a cure for over-production, a stabiliser of capitalist prosperity. When the war economy becomes expendable, the knell of the capitalist boom will surely toll. [9]
Together with ‘state capitalism’ the arms economy theory equipped the meagre forces of the Socialist Review group to face reality.
Splits are not to be undertaken lightly in the revolutionary movement. Unity of action combined with full and fraternal debate is often a preferable solution. But when the whole question of political direction and strategy is at stake, a split becomes inevitable. In these terms the split of 1950 was justified.
Marxists are not fatalists, and in any historical period there is something for a revolutionary to do. But there are historical situations where objective factors prevent revolutionary ideas from reaching a mass audience. In such a situation small groups can play a vital role simply in keeping the revolutionary flame alight. Marx in a letter to Bolte wrote:
Sects are justified (historically) so long as the working class is not yet ripe for an independent historical movement. [10]
But to accept the necessity for a sect is not to justify sectarianism: A correct analysis, on its own, guarantees nothing. A number of other groupings with a state capitalist analysis of Russia emerged around this time in various parts of the world. Most of them either just disappeared, or got lost in the lunatic fringe of sectarian politics.
Such dangers were very real ones for the newly formed Socialist Review group. At the first recorded meeting (September 1950) there were just 33 members represented. Groups existed in London, Thames Valley, Crewe, Birmingham, Sheffield and Manchester. 19 of the 33 were in the Labour League of Youth. Although it was claimed this 33 represented a quarter of the total forces of British Trotskyism, it was nonetheless a minute force. 350 copies of the first issue of the paper were produced; sales were apparently sufficiently encouraging for the figure to be raised for the second issue ... to 375!
For any small group there are two opposite pitfalls. One is to see itself as the centre of the universe, and thus become obsessed with defending itself against its equally insignificant rivals. The other is to surrender to its own impotence, and therefore to project the job of making the revolution on to someone else – the colonial revolution, the left trade union leaders, or whatever. Examples of both errors abound.
The Socialist Review group was, throughout the fifties, a purely propaganda group; it was not able to make any meaningful intervention in the class struggle. But propaganda has to have an audience; and unless a revolutionary group remains in intimate contact with its audience, the dangers of falling into a complete fantasy world are great indeed. Throughout the fifties the Socialist Review group, despite its limited numbers, always strove to relate to the actual problems of the working class. Minutes of the discussion of the paper Socialist Review dating from 1951 [11] show a concern to make the paper relate.
The main points were that there was not enough on Britain, and editorials should be on British matters.
It was generally felt to be still too much composed of anti-Stalinist articles.
In practice this meant work in the Labour Party. All members were expected to be active in the Labour Party; before the 1951 General Election a directive was issued stating:
It is most necessary that our comrades become known to the working class in their local areas as the most energetic and anti-Tory Labour Party workers.
But Labour Party work was not undertaken on the basis of impending crisis; there was no expectation of imminent split, no hope of capturing the leadership of a section of the Party. In a period of stability, when the traditional Labour Left was declining in strength and power to mobilise, such a perspective could have led to dangerous opportunism (as was the case with Socialist Outlook – published by the forerunners of the Socialist Labour League [now the Workers Revolutionary Party] – which opened its columns to Party bureaucrats like Bessie Braddock9. The Labour Party was seen as an arena which made it possible to keep contact with the working class movement, and as a source oaf recruits. The latter was, of course, particularly applicable in the case of the youth movement. A resolution carried in December 1950 stated:
That we concentrate in the next period on recruiting, and direct our primary efforts towards the League of Youth, accepting all elements who will accept our theoretical position, even though their theoretical level is low.
Trade union intervention was necessarily very limited for a small group with few industrial workers. But priority was always given to the few opportunities that did exist. Minutes of the first few months of the group’s existence record discussion of the coming USDAW Conference, at which a comrade was to be a delegate, and the recommendation that a comrade should stand for the NEC of NALGO. There was regular work on the Birmingham Trades Council.
And in 1959 Geoff Carlsson, a founder member of the group and convenor at the ENV factory in North West London, ran for the Presidency of the AEU. The number of AEU members in the group could have been counted on the fingers of one hand, and there was no intervention other than the work of individuals. But candidates had the right to circulate an election address, and Carlsson used this to put forward an alternative policy for the union. After criticising the right-wing leadership of the union for failing to give a lead over wages or redundancies, he went on:
In the elections over the past years, members have bad to choose between candidates backed by the right-wing Labour or the Communist Party. The choice bas not been easy. Although most members owe allegiance to the Labour Party, they cannot accept the policies pursued by the right-wing of the Trade Unions and Labour Party when these have included wage-freezing, class-collaboration and “sell-outs”. Alternatively, although they respect the militant activities of the individual Communist Party member in the daily struggles on the shop floor, they cannot ignore the external loyalties of the Communist Party to Russia; nor forget the anti-working-class measures adopted by that country in East Berlin, Poznan, Hungary, etc.
That there was some response to this position was shown by the voting; Carlsson, without any machine at his disposal, got 5,615 votes out of a total of 91,400, against 57,127 for right-winger Carron and 19,799 for Communist Party member Birch.
It was not the concrete achievements of any of the activities of the fifties that mattered; they were, of course, quite negligible. What did matter was an orientation to the working class, an orientation that was to make intervention possible when things hotted up in the sixties.
 
1960–64: New Openings
IN 1960 the Socialist Review group was not significantly bigger than it had been ten years earlier. Its small size had prevented it benefitting from the events of 1956 – the radicalisation caused by the Tory invasion of Egypt and the split in the Communist Party following the Hungarian Revolution. But now new possibilities beckoned.
The nuclear arms race had brought relative stability to the Western economies. But, ironically, it was the nuclear arms race which sparked off what was to be the biggest mass movement on the left since the thirties. The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, calling for unconditional unilateral abandonment of nuclear weapons by Britain, was set up by a handful of intellectuals and pacifists in 1958. The movement grew rapidly out of the control of its launchers, and at Easter 1960 and 1961 about a hundred thousand people took part in the marches from Aldermaston – most of them young and a significant proportion working class. At the Scarborough Labour Party Conference in 1960 a resolution for unilateral disarmament was carried against the resistance of the Party leader, Gaitskell, and the right-wing platform.
Most important of all, the demonstrations and local CND groups provided an initiation into politics for a whole new generation of young people. Most of them had little experience of the Labour Party, though some of them later moved into its youth movement. The Communist Party, too, was absent in the early years of the Campaign, arguing that it was ‘divisive’. [12]
Of course it couldn’t last long. The 1961 Labour Party Conference saw the machine get back on top, and with the approach of a General Election the Labour Left began to retreat in the name of ‘unity’. By 1963 the Campaign was definitely on the decline.
For the Socialist Review group this new upsurge offered the chance to break out of the routine of Labour Party and trade union work. Without abandoning its fundamental orientation on the working class, Socialist Review (now printed fortnightly) tried to find an audience among those newly radicalised by the CND.
Socialist Review’s rejection of capitalism East and West – summed up in the slogan ‘Neither Washington nor Moscow but International Socialism’ – clearly meant that it condemned equally British, American and Russian H-bombs. This distinguished it from the Communist Party, and from certain ‘orthodox’ Trotskyist groupings – notably the SLL – which argued that the Soviet possession of H-bombs (and by implication their possible use against Western workers) was somehow different. The Socialist Review position was certainly closer to the impulsive reactions of the majority of CND supporters, even if most of them did not have a very clear analysis to back it up. As a result of its politics and activity, the Socialist Review group was able, in the early sixties, to recruit a new set of cadres to supplement the small number who had survived the pressures of the fifties.
But while Socialist Review supporters were active in all the work of CND, they were also concerned to direct the campaign towards the working class, the only force that could actually win the fight against war. The newly launched journal International Socialism (1960) welcomed the unilateralist victory at Scarborough, but pointed out that the Party machine could easily reverse the decision unless it was concretely related to the industrial struggle:
The Left is in no position to face Gaitskell’s machine with one of its own. Our organisational resources reflect our weakness in policy magnified by the greater stress we place on convictions and on the spontaneous recruitment of people to implement them. Our strongest weapon would be to link the issue of defence with the stuff of ordinary life on which workers have shown unshakeable convictions to the point of heroism.
From this angle, it is significant that those sectors of workers that have been engaged in industrial struggle latterly – railwaymen, engineers, transport workers – are in general the most outspokenly unilateralist. It is even more significant that the Central London busmen, highly critical as they are of Cousins’ leadership on industrial matters, are solidly behind him on the Bomb issue. It is obvious that progress for the Left lies in breaking down the high stakes of nuclear diplomacy into the small chips of class struggle. [13]
It is against the background of the growth of the CND that the decision by the Labour Party, in February 1960, to launch a new national youth movement, the Young Socialists, must be seen. The Labour leaders were deeply distressed by a decade out of office, a continuing inability to attract young voters, and the sight of thousands of energetic young potential canvassers wasting their time on anti-Bomb marches. They had no affection for youth movements, which were traditionally inclined to be well to the left of the Party. The League of Youth had been disbanded in 1955, and since then the local youth sections had deteriorated, so that by the late fifties there were probably only around four thousand members, mainly middle class.
So the bureaucrats gritted their teeth and launched the Young Socialists – and moreover gave it a relatively liberal constitution. In the short term it paid off – by the Spring of 1961 Transport House was claiming 726 YS branches, and the first national conference had over three hundred delegates. There was a large new pool of fresh fish, and every Trotskyist grouping in existence was getting its fishing rod ready.
The Socialist Review group’s intervention was through a paper called Young Guard. This was not the sole property of Socialist Review, it came into existence as a broad front of left tendencies within the Young Socialists. It first appeared in September 1961, following the fusion of two papers, Rebel and Rally, and was also supported by a group of young socialists who had been involved in the apprentices’ strike of 1960, mainly from Glasgow, and by a number of Tribunites and CND supporters. But Socialist Review provided the editor, and increasingly came to dominate the political line. The paper had a democratic constitution, and its columns reflected a wide range of views on political and cultural matters. The letters column debated such questions as whether Cuba was socialist and what should be a socialist’s attitude to religion.
It was part of the success of Young Guard that it was able to break out of the traditional milieu of revolutionary politics. The cultural atmosphere around Young Guard – characterised mainly by beer-drinking and folk-singing – may not have met the approval of revolutionary purists or puritans, but it enabled a new generation of young workers to move towards the traditions of Marxist politics.
But Young Guard did not merely adapt to a milieu; it also fought to relate this milieu to the class struggle. The young people who were turning to socialism in this period were mainly worker – manual or white-collar – but they had no traditions of trade union organisation. The typical political evolution of a young comrade at this time was as follows: first get involved in CND demonstrations, then join the Young Socialists, and, via Young Guard, come into IS. It was probably only after this that the comrade was persuaded of the importance of going to his union branch meeting. Recruits were being made on the basis of ideas rather than activity – indeed, IS did not have activity of its own as distinct from participating in the activities of the Young Socialists and CND. And the process was not, in strict terms, a radicalisation inside the Labour Party. Those who came to IS at this time were not longstanding Labour Party members, but young people who had come in around the CND mobilisation.
Despite the absence of any real links with the trade union movement, Young Guard tried to relate the political and industrial struggles. Throughout its existence it gave central importance to the apprentices’ movement, and the various struggles that developed between 1960 and 1965 for better pay, shorter hours, longer holidays, day-release and negotiating rights for apprentices. Despite the intrinsic difficulties of organising apprentices, and the confusion caused by various political tendencies trying to take over the movement, the apprentices’ struggles provided a vital bridge between the political and economic fights, and helped to save Young Guard from sinking into a morass of sectarianism.
For, from the very outset, the Young Socialists was a cockpit of embittered factional dispute. The main responsibility for this lay on the Labour Party bureaucrats in Transport House, who, hypersensitive about their electoral image, clamped down on left-wingers in the Young Socialists with proscriptions, expulsions and closures of branches.
But some share of the blame lies also on Young Guard’s main political rival in the Young Socialists, Keep Left. Keep Left had the same politics as the Socialist Labour League (already proscribed by the Labour Party) and was eventually itself proscribed. The politics of Keep Left and the SLL differed from those of IS [14] on a number of specific points. These included the Russian question; the SLL’s belief that Russia was a degenerate workers’ state led it to argue that Russian H-Bombs and even Russian nuclear tests were somehow a gain for the working class. Their perspective led them to see every flicker of the economy as an indication of impending slump and every outburst of racialism as an omen of imminent fascism.
But even more important than particular positions was the SLL’s style of politics. A concern about the need for leadership was transformed into a belief that the fight for leadership consisted of proclaiming the correctness of one’s own positions. This led at best to severe sectarianism making any practical co-operation impossible, at worst to a form of megalomania which put the SLL at the centre of the political universe:
From Transport House and the Communist Party headquarters at King Street, down to the much smaller groups of Mr Cliff and his so-called Socialist Review state capitalists and the tiny Pabloite fragments, there is unanimous agreement that the Socialist Labour League should be destroyed. [15]
IS comrades generally responded with a healthy, if ribald, cynicism. But any hope of a united struggle against the right wing was destroyed. By 1964 the factionalism had grown so poisonous that it threatened the very existence of the Young Socialists. Keep Left and Young Guard supporters could not meet without accusations of ‘political scabbing’, ‘collaboration with the right wing’, and so on. Whereas a couple of years earlier the Young Socialists had been a place where young people could receive a first introduction to revolutionary politics, a Young Socialists meeting was now such as to frighten away for life any uninitiated youth who might happen to stray in by accident.
In the end the Young Socialists tore itself to pieces much more effectively than the right wing could have done. Keep Left walked out just before the 1964 election, and the repeated rumours that the Young Socialists would be dissolved never materialised; it simply faded and became a rump.
For IS the experience in the Young Socialists had produced a qualitative advance. The group had grown numerically and by 1964 it had topped the two hundred mark. Even more important, the new recruits had played a leading role in what was, albeit briefly, a mass movement. They had rapidly acquired a degree of political sophistication, in some ways an excessive one.
The comrades also had to fight against a number of other currents of thought which, in general, stemmed from a sense of defeatism at the weakness of the left. For example, IS engaged in a polemic with the group which published The Week (forerunner of the IMG) about whether Marxists should give unqualified opposition to incomes policy. The Week argued that the left must not isolate itself from those workers who had illusions in the Labour Government and called IS’s uncompromising hostility to all incomes policies ‘sectarian’:
The left must find a way of opposing the incomes policy with slogans which will appear reasonable to those sections of workers. With due humility we would again put forward our particular slogan: “No negotiations on an incomes policy until the books are open to the workers”. [16]
it claimed.
Another manifestation of this defeatism was the ‘Third Worldism’ which flourished in many parts of the left. The dramatic struggles in Algeria, Cuba, etc became a substitute for the more down-to-earth tasks faced at home. New Left Review [17] published an article on The Third World by one Keith Buchanan. After praising the ‘royal socialism’ of Cambodia, Buchanan – writing from the vantage-point of a professorship in New Zealand – declared:
Having tasted the delights of affluence, European workers have tended to become “embourgeoisé” and ever more Europo-centric and parochial in their attitudes. A Fanon may cry that the well-being and progress of Europe have been built with the sweat and corpses of black man and yellow man, Indian and Arab – but the cry is unheard amid the distractions of a new and delightful opulence.;
Others, who attached some importance to Marxist orthodoxy, did not feel able to abandon the working class so lightly. Instead they solved the problem by changing the meanings of words so that a state established by a peasant-based national liberation struggle became a ‘workers’ state’:
The Algerian revolution has in reality entered into its decisive phase. Whilst revolutionary measures increase in the direction of a transformation of the country into a state having the economic and social structure of a workers’ state, the threats against the internal and external revolutionaries are becoming clearer. [18]
IS was certainly not free from tactical errors in this period; but the emphases and analyses derived from its basic theory enabled it to escape the more obvious pitfalls.
It was during this time that the political and organisational style which was to characterise IS began to develop. This had two main features. The first was a sense of proportion, of the relative insignificance of IS as an organisation. When IS had two hundred members, and the SLL, at best, twice that many, the question at stake was not the ‘crisis of leadership’, the struggle for control between groups of which 98 per cent of workers had never heard. It was the much more modest task of educating those who were around to listen and of striking roots in the class in a small way where this was possible.
IS members in this period were well aware of their own insignificance. (The present writer remembers posting the entire out-of-London circulation of Labour Worker in a pillar-box in Finsbury Park). Indeed, one of the things that distinguished IS from most other revolutionary groupings at the time was an ability to look at itself with a sense of humour, at times a self-deprecating one.
The second feature was an awareness that the revolutionary organisation had to be built inside the working class and not in isolation from it. The question was one of involving and developing comrades, not of building walls to preserve the purity of the embryonic party. Hence the flexible attitude to membership taken by the IS group. New comrades were involved in activity, participated in meetings and – somewhat unsystematically – were introduced to the group’s political positions. This was important in that the comrades, while being aware that they were in a tiny minority, felt themselves part of a broader movement – CND or Labour Party left – and thus never had the sense of isolation from reality so easily generated by sectarian politics.
But these positive characteristics had their negative aspect. It was from these years that IS members inherited a somewhat libertarian attitude to organisation, a tendency to distrust discipline or any kind of formalised or centralised structure. As the situation changed over the following years one of the obstacles IS had to overcome was the libertarianism of its own traditions.
Although the youth movement was at the centre of the arena during this period, IS never dropped its concern with the industrial struggle. More workers were being recruited to IS, though they were being recruited as individuals on the basis of general politics rather than on the basis of an industrial strategy, and most of them were too young to have any decisive influence at their place of work. But for the future they provided the basis for a new industrial cadre. .
The industrial orientation was also encouraged by the launching, in 1961, of a new paper, Industrial Worker, soon to be renamed Labour Worker, intended to be more agitational, more geared to ongoing industrial struggles, than Socialist Review had been. It was uneven in quality, and sometimes seemed to consist of nothing more than a series of strike reports. But at best it was lively and contained a significant number of articles by industrial militants (for example, the March 1964 issue contained signed articles by members of the TGWU [two], ETU and UPW). Its politics – unconditional support for unofficial strikes and total opposition to incomes policy even under a Labour government – distinguished it from most other publications on the left.
By 1964 Labour Worker had achieved a circulation of over 2,000, and in April 1964 the first Labour Worker conference was held in London, attracting about 150 people. [19] This put the main stress on the coming Labour government and the threat of incomes policy. Steps were being taken to prepare for the struggles to come.
 
1964–67: The Labour Government
THE ELECTION of a Labour Government in 1964 was greeted with considerable enthusiasm by ordinary members of the labour movement, who had endured 13 years of Tory rule, and now hoped, not for the socialist millenium, but at least for some radical reforms. Paradoxically, Labour’s arrival in power was also welcomed by large sections of the ruling class, basically because they hoped that Labour might be able to impose a successful incomes policy and keep the trade unions in their place. Clearly there was a contradiction here; and though Wilson was able to, obtain a massive victory in the 1966 election, the contradictions could not be permanently suppressed.
Incomes policy itself had been on the cards for quite a long time, but even many pro-Labour trade unionists could not stomach the forms it took. Many more of Wilson’s supporters were alienated by his vicious red-baiting attacks on the striking seamen in 1966, by the tightening up of immigration controls, and by the fawning support for US policy in Vietnam.
Since long before Labour came to power, IS had taken a firm position of unconditional opposition to all incomes policy under capitalism. This position left it almost completely isolated from the rest of the left. For example, at a Conference organised by the Institute for Workers’ Control in April 1964, the two IS members present were the only people to take a position of all-out opposition to incomes policy.
The importance of incomes policy was that it posed a direct threat to the forms of organisation that British workers had developed during the fifties. The shift from national to localised bargaining, with the consequent growth in importance of shop-floor organisation as against the trade union bureaucracies, had led to a rise in self-confidence among workers, but also to a fragmentation and relative lack of interest in broader political issues. But if the Labour government was to have an incomes policy, it had to take on the strength of the shop-floor organisations; and whether workers wanted politics or not, they were going to have politics rammed down their throats.
The most obvious organisation to give a lead in industry was the Communist Party, which ever since the Second World War had maintained a significant influence among industrial militants. But the Communist Party was in difficulties. It had already suffered serious blows in the mid-fifties at the time of the Hungarian Revolution, and though it had regained members in the early sixties, its composition had become more middle class. Now it was inhibited from an all-out fight against the Labour government by two factors. Firstly, a number of its members and supporters had won high places in the trade union bureaucracy. The Party was not prepared to defend shop-floor organisation to the extent of offending its friends in the bureaucracy. Secondly, the Party was committed to a strategy of strengthening the left wing in the Labour Party and thus pushing Labour to the left. At a time when the Labour ‘lefts’ were moving right as fast as they could, this was a difficult strategy to carry through. In any case it prevented the Party from trying to mobilise the industrial opposition to Wilson and turn it into an independent political force.
As a result many Communist Party militants became disillusioned with the Party. Even if they did not actually leave the Party, they tended to act more and more on their own initiative rather than in a co-ordinated way. A few turned to Maoism for an alternative, though this usually led to the sterile dead-end of competing splinter groups.
Of course IS was in no position to take over from the Communist Party. But the new situation did open up the possibility for IS to transform itself, providing it was ready to radically change its style of work.
This meant a reassessment of the group’s strategic orientation to the Labour Party. All along IS had pointed to the limits of Labour Party work. Workers were getting less and less interested in the traditional reformist organisations as their shop-floor power grew. IS had given little credence to the view that a revolutionary party could be built within the Labour Party, or by a split within that Party.
At the very same time, since the opportunities for trade union work were very limited for most comrades, the Labour Party – and especially the Young Socialists – had been seen as a milieu where revolutionaries could operate, and make contact with at least some of the more class conscious workers who were around. IS members fought for their ideas in the Labour Party and to earn the right to criticise they canvassed, collected subs, organised bazaars and participated, somewhat cynically, in the whole unpolitical routine of local Labour Party life.
As the anti-working-class nature of the Labour government became clear to more and more of its former supporters, the Labour Party as a membership organisation went into even sharper decline. Many Party activists left the Party (for example, in the London Borough of Haringey, no less than six Labour councillors resigned from the Party in the period from 1966 to 1968). But in the absence of any focus to attract them, there was no possibility of an effective left regroupment.
In short, the situation was one of crumbling rather than of split, and an appropriate response was called for. A simple decision to quit the Labour Party on a given day would have been easy but mistaken. There were huge differences between the active left-wing Labour Parties in some areas and the moribund or openly racialist parties in others; the pace of disillusion varied from one individual to another; and the situation was complicated by the fact that, following the departure of Keep Left, Young Guard found itself the effective leadership of the – admittedly much diminished – Young Socialists, and the comrades were, quite rightly, reluctant to abandon this role.
What was needed was a thorough-going reorientation of the group. An IS Conference in July 1965 carried the following resolution:
The IS Group rejects the Labour Party as an instrument for social change; rejects it as a milieu for mass conversion to socialist consciousness; and sees in it primarily an arena for ideological conflict, a link to a living working-class audience and a source of individual recruitment to a revolutionary programme.
What this meant on the ground was spelled out in an article in Labour Worker:
The plain truth is, that only a small minority of Labour’s millions are in any way politically active, and a large percentage of the active are masochistically obsessed with the tote tickets and marking up electoral registers ...
Obviously Marxists should take those positions which give access to the direct workers’ organisations. But in the wards and GMCs the practice of buying the right to discuss politics by overfulfilling the canvassing norms, should cease or be reduced to the minimum. For the left the Labour Party is a platform for political discussion and the winning over of individuals to a revolutionary programme. [20]
But a phased withdrawal from the Labour Party was only half the story. The struggle in Britain was fragmented, and revolutionaries had to find their way into the fragments.
The main struggle was to be in industry, and here the IS group’s forces were still pitifully weak. There was hardly any union where IS comrades were able to intervene. In the AEU there were a number of experienced militants but they were almost all concentrated in one factory – ENV in North London. The left in the AEU was on the ascendant, preparing to replace the right-wing Carron with Hugh Scanlon, but at the same time they were in some confusion, following Reg Birch’s break with the Communist Party.
It was out of this base in the AEU that the most significant intervention in the industrial field arose. The convenor of ENV, Geoff Mitchell, was involved in a legal dispute, and following action to support him, the ENV Shop Stewards Committee decided to broaden out the struggle and convened a meeting to launch the London Shop Stewards Defence Committee. The meeting was held on 16 January 1966 and attracted some two hundred people, about three quarters of them industrial workers, from 23 different unions.
The platform speakers included two IS members from ENV, Geoff Mitchell and Geoff Carlsson, and another IS member, Jim Higgins of the POEU. There were also two Communist Party members – Reg Birch, an AEU Divisional Organiser and long-standing Communist Party militant, now severely critical of the Party’s parliamentarism, and Jim Hiles, chairman of the building workers’ Joint Sites Committee.
The resolution unanimously adopted by the meeting was remarkable in bringing together what were to be the main issues facing British workers over the coming decade:
This Conference of rank and file Trade Unionists is deeply perturbed at the proposed, and actual, intervention by the Government into established wage negotiations.
We equally deprecate the threats of legislation against the Trade Unionists and rank and file militants who have been mainly responsible over the past years in improving the wages and conditions in Industry.
We are opposed to the Government’s Incomes Policy which has nothing in common with Socialist planning; as likewise we are opposed to those Trade Union Officials who support the Government on these issues.
It is our belief that the so-called Incomes Policy, the threats of legislation and the interference in wage negotiations can only strengthen the Employers in their efforts to smash the Shop Stewards and the rank and file movements.
The ability of IS comrades to take the initiative in helping to launch a venture of this sort was an important indication of the group’s development. But the venture itself was in some senses premature. The SSDC (and the counterparts set up in other parts of the country) aimed to unite a rank and file movement which did not yet exist. A general cross-union body of this sort is meaningful only if it brings together rank and file currents in a number of unions and industries. And in 1965 such currents did not exist. The SSDC itself was relatively short-lived, though its influence in inspiring other initiatives cannot be ignored.
One important thing which the London SSDC did achieve was the publication of the book Incomes Policy, Legislation and Shop Stewards. It was written by two IS members, Tony Cliff and Colin Barker, and had an introduction by Reg Birch, written between his break with the Communist Party and his retreat into sectarian Maoism.
The book set out in a clear and non-sectarian manner the main lines of the analysis IS had been developing over the previous couple of years. It began with a general consideration of the economic situation that had led the ruling class to start imposing incomes policy. It then looked at the existing situation on the wages front and in particular showed the importance of the phenomenon of wage drift in the preceding period. It contrasted the role of shop stewards with the full-time union officials who were shown to be becoming increasingly conservative and impotent. Finally it looked at the pattern of strikes over the preceding period, in which working-class strength had been reflected by the predominance of short, unofficial and generally successful strikes, and predicted that with the introduction of legislation against trade union rights the situation would have to change.
The book closed with a call to action, stressing the need for ‘a political as well as an industrial response’.
The first essential task for any worker is that of ensuring that his own immediate organisation is in fighting shape; that every factory and place of work has a joint stewards’ committee (including all stewards regardless of their union membership, and covering white-collar workers like draughtsmen too); that every company with different factories is covered by combined stewards’ committees to co-ordinate activities and prevent "splitting" activities by the employers. More broadly, the rank and file must find forms of organisation – area rank-and-file committees, etc, – that can do the job the Trades Councils used to do. Only the new organisations must be based on the factories rather than on geographical place of residence.
Most of these tendencies are in their infancy, but the threat to the shop stewards is now so acute that the implementation of these basic tasks must be accelerated and largely achieved in a relatively short time, creating the conditions for the formation of a national shop stewards’ movement – an idea which, since the First World War, has existed almost solely in the minds of some of those whom Harold Wilson calls “wreckers” and whom we see as the potential builders of the mightiest socialist movement yet in the history of Britain. [21]
The Incomes Policy book was an important step forward for IS. It was sold systematically by a process of visiting any discoverable contact in the labour movement. It was widely read and appreciated by militants and enabled IS to be recognised as part of a real movement, rather than as a group of talented but isolated theoreticians. But the very fact that the group was now engaged in the real world made it susceptible to defeat, and a very real defeat soon followed.
As has already been mentioned, one of IS’s few industrial roots was in the North West London engineering factory ENV. ENV had been known as a militant factory since the early fifties, and had an excellent record for wages and conditions. It had a strong and democratic shop stewards’ organisation. But if ENV was an excellent example of working class strength in the fifties, it also shared the weaknesses. ENV was more or less isolated from neighbouring factories. Indeed, most of them probably felt a sense of jealousy at ENV’s superior conditions.
For a long time the Communist Party had held the political leadership of the factory. Geoff Carlsson, a founder member of the Socialist Review group, had been a steward for many years, but it was only in the mid-sixties, following internal disputes and demoralisation in the Communist Party, that he was able to attract other stewards towards IS politically. By 1966, about the time of the founding of the SSDC, it was possible to establish an IS branch at ENV – IS’s first factory branch, and a relatively strong one, having about 12 members, including the convenor and several stewards.
But by this time the whole organisation was under attack. The Labour Government’s general attack on workers was being paralleled by employers’ moves to smash shop-floor organisation in various factories. ENV had been taken over by an American company. After attempts to introduce work study and productivity bargaining, the management launched an all-out assault on the various agreements established by the workers over the previous 20 years, and then, in 1966, announced that the factory would be closed. Despite the long record of militancy, the stewards were unable to mobilise an effective struggle against the closure, and eventually the leading IS militants were sacked. After this the management announced that the factory would remain open with a reduced labour force. [22]
The ENV defeat had some important lessons for IS. Firstly, it showed that in the changed situation, militancy and organisation within one workplace was going to be increasingly inadequate. Secondly, it suggested that in a quite legitimate reaction against substitutionist notions of ‘leadership’, IS had gone too far. The question of political leadership would have to be taken more seriously.
The rest of IS’s industrial intervention in this period was largely from the outside. And although the Labour Government’s policies were raising the political level, most struggles were still localised and fragmentary. This enabled IS comrades in the localities to intervene, even if the intervention was often at the level of turning duplicator handles and mobilising support for mass pickets.
IS members gave continuing support to the long strike of building workers on the Myton’s site at the Barbican, London, in 1967, where management made a consistent attempt to smash all union organisation on the site. IS comrades participated in several mass pickets, including the one in October 1967 when there were sharp clashes with the police during which 24 arrests were made (about one third of those arrested were IS comrades).
Another strike around which IS comrades organised in 1967 was that at the Roberts-Arundel textile machinery factory in Stockport. This was an official strike in defence of union organisation, but much of the most dynamic solidarity action – including demonstrations of several hundred workers and clashes with the police – was organised independently of the official machine.
In these disputes, and many similar if less dramatic ones which took place up and down the country, active participation enabled good contacts to be made and a few recruits won.
Another area of work which enabled IS to begin implanting itself in the working class was the tenants struggle. Some struggles were against private landlords. For example, the Islington branch of the Campaign Against Racial Discrimination (a body set up in 1965 to counter growing manifestations of racialism) with full and active participation of IS members, organised a campaign in 1966 against Mrs De Lusignan. This lady was the owner of some 25 houses in North London, mainly occupied by black people, notorious for high rents and bad conditions; she further aggravated the situation by describing her tenants as ‘Rubbish People’. A demonstration achieved both considerable publicity and some reduction in the rents. Though the issue was highly localised, it provided an example of a situation where IS intervention could actually make some difference and thus help to sink roots for the organisation.
More widespread was action on council rents. The Labour Government had decided to cut housing subsidies, and thereby force dramatic rent increases. In many big cities it was Labour councils who had to carry through the increases.
The experience of the North London borough of Haringey may serve as an example of the type of intervention IS members were able to make. When the Council announced rent increases in March 1967, IS had not a single council tenant in the area. It did, however, have a number of reasonably well-known Labour Party activists. These, together with other sympathetic Labour left-wingers, including four councillors, signed a public statement to the press deploring the increases. This incurred the wrath of the Labour Party, but enabled the setting up of an Action Committee which held meetings on the estates, distributed leaflets and circulated a petition. As a result Tenants’ Associations were set up on most estates, and the Action Committee itself disappeared in favour of a Federation of Tenants’ Associations. The movement culminated with a lobby of the Council by about 500 people; a few minor concessions were gained. While IS clearly could not take all the credit, the movement would almost certainly not have developed in the same way without IS intervention.
The period 1964–67 saw IS take a decisive step away from being a mere propaganda group. Indeed, in purely propaganda terms there was a scaling down of activity. The decision to make Labour Worker a fortnightly from January 1965 was a mistake; despite some lively issues, the paper was scrappy and often irrelevant to the changed activity of the group. The paper improved markedly after the return to monthly publication in late 1966.
But the changed style of activity did present serious problems. As long as IS was within the Labour Party there was a framework within which specific issues could be related to each other. Racialism, foreign policy, housing, education and incomes policy could all be located in the context of a struggle against the Party’s right wing.
Without the Labour Party to serve as a focus, there was a tendency for IS comrades to see each struggle in isolation, to submerge themselves in a particular ‘fragment’ and postpone the question of generalisation to a remote future.
Essentially this was a healthy situation. After 1964 there were two main dangers for IS. One was ‘resolutionary socialism’, a concentration on preserving political purity by passing correct resolutions in the GMCs. The other danger was syndicalism. In the short term this was a lesser evil, since it meant that IS was able to begin to immerse itself in the working class. To use a much overworked metaphor of Lenin’s, the stick had to be bent. [23]
By the end of 1967 the membership had increased slowly but significantly – over 400 as against 200-odd when Labour came to power. More important, it was a membership geared, not simply to arguing the line, but. to making interventions, albeit usually very low-level ones, and to servicing the ongoing struggle. Without the base, and even more importantly, the orientation established in this period, the breakthrough of 1968 could not have taken place.
 



Suppose you see a string of lights at night along the bank of a river. It’s a pretty sight. But when you know they light up cities where people are dying of hunger, they lose all their poetry, become nothing but a mirage. You’ll tell me I can write about other things, about those people who are dying of hunger, for example. But I’d rather discuss those things at meetings or in articles. [1]
In the first part of this article Sartre’s political development was traced up to the collapse of the RDR in 1949. The overriding concern in Sartre’s thought throughout this period was with the possibility of action. It was this concern that brought him to politics in the Resistance; yet the pragmatism it implied led him to a political dead-end.
A failure in politics was, however, an important factor in Sartre’s success in literature. Between 1943 and 1949 he published five plays, three novels and two film scenarios, as well as the long essay What is Literature? [2] and a number of shorter literary essays.
Not that literature was an escape from politics or a compensation for political failure. Sartre’s political and literary activities were closely linked, and he always felt the need to justify his indulgence in literature by political standards. In the long term this meant an increasingly direct commitment to politics; in the short term it led him to make a fundamental reappraisal of the nature of literature.
The scope of the essay What is Literature? is suggested by its title. It is a question which in a sense could not have been asked before the nineteenth century. In a society where the defence of aesthetic standards is an integral part of the ideology of the ruling group, literature needs no self-definition. But in a society based on production for production’s sake artists develop the theory of art for art’s sake. This in turn leads writers concerned with making literature politically relevant to propose a crude subordination of literature to political standards; the most obvious example being the Stalinist theory of ‘socialist realism’, Sartre opposed socialist realism in its practice rather than in its basic premises; but in attempting to go beyond the alternatives of aestheticism and politicisation, he was. forced to try to redefine the very essence of literature.
One important current in modern Marxist literary theory, represented especially by Lukacs and Goldmann, has concentrated on seeing literature as structure – that is, a work of literature is the embodiment and expression of the view of the world of a social group; the particular circumstances of its creation and its audience are merely secondary factors. Sartre, however, pursues a different (though possibly, in a fully Marxist aesthetic, complementary) theme. For him literature is above all action.
What is Literature? sees the writer in a concrete situation, addressing himself to a particular audience. By writing the writer reveals the world to his reader; he is exercising his freedom in a particular way. But if he is addressing the reader in this way, he must also by implication will the freedom of the reader. ‘One does not write for slaves’. In short, to write is to wish freedom. No worthwhile literature can serve oppression; and Sartre challenges his critics to name a good novel written in defence of racialism or similar oppression. A further confirmation is offered by the case of Drieu la Rochelle, who, a sincere fascist, was unable to continue writing under the German Occupation because his audience was not free to react to him.
In one sense, then, all writers are committed, by the very fact of writing, to certain values; but to accept this commitment, to produce a truly revolutionary art, poses further problems. Revolutionary literature must demonstrate the reality of freedom, and make no concessions to a determinist view of the world. This involves challenging many of the conventions of literary form. Sartre argues that in the. novel, a narrative in the past tense sets the action in a past which is already settled, and thus denies the action the sense of freedom. He sharply criticised novelists like Mauriacwho wrote from a God-like position of knowing everything about the characters. ‘God is not an artist; nor is M. Mauriac’.
 
The Theatre of Freedom
In What is Literature? Sartre had laid down the conditions for a revolutionary literature; in the plays he was writing at around the same time he tried to fulfil these conditions in practice, in what he himself called a ‘theatre of freedom’.
Sartre defined the possibilities of the modern theatre as follows:
If it is true that man is free in a given situation and that he chooses himself in and through this situation, then we must show in the theatre simple human situations, and freedoms which choose themselves in these situations ... The most moving thing the theatre can show is a character in process of creating himself, the moment of choice, of free decision which commits a morality and a whole life.
Revolutionary literature does not provide answers; it confronts the audience with a problem, with a task – as Brecht says in the epilogue to The Good Woman of Sezuan. it is the job of the audience to make the happy ending – outside the theatre. Sartre’s plays of this period hinge around the conflict between morality and effectiveness, around the necessity for compromise. The aim is to make the spectator more aware of his capacity for action.
The Flies (1943), performed under the German Occupation, takes its theme from a Greek myth. Orestes returns to his home town, Argos, to find that his uncle, Aegisthus, has murdered his father, the former king, and by marrying Orestes’ mother, has become tyrannical ruler of Argos. The people are oppressed, not so much by force as by the god Jupiter, who encourages the belief that all their sufferings derive from their own guilt. The people of Argos, like any oppressed people, accept the morality of the oppressors.
Jupiter tries to persuade Orestes that it will prove impossible to liberate the people of Argos. Orestes succeeds in proving the possibility of action, by killing the tyrant – but fails to awaken the people of Argos to their own liberation, so that they curse him for taking away the security of tyranny.
Francis Jeanson has said that this play contains the seeds of all Sartre’s later development. Certainly its problem is central to his work – does one wait for the mass to act “spontaneously” or take “exemplary action” (a theory now much in favour among Guevarists) on their behalf. The play poses the problem rather than answering; it presents a world with the isolated individual on one side, and the blurred mass on the other, with no bridge between them.
The Respectable Prostitute (1946) [3], prophetically dealt with the racial problem in the United States at a time when most European intellectuals still had great illusions about American ‘freedom’. But essentially it is concerned with the question of ideology, with the need for the oppressed to reject the terms of reference of the oppressors.
Lizzie, a prostitute, had seen a white man kill a black on a train. The cousin and uncle of the murderer, anxious to save a white from prison, try to persuade Lizzie to sign a statement that the black and another black, still at large, had attempted to rape her. She resists bribery and threats, but cannot stand up to the arguments of the boy’s uncle, the Senator, who tells her that the facts of the case are not so important as the maintenance of established values. To convict a white for killing a black would threaten these values; whereas blacks can be expected to be guilty. The Senator asks her:
‘Do you think a whole town can be wrong? A whole town, with its priests and ministers, its doctors, its lawyers and painters, with its mayor and his assistants, and all the charitable institutions?’
Lizzie has good intentions – she helps the remaining black to escape. But good intentions are not enough in face of the ideological apparatus of oppression. Without theoretical or organisational support, she is free only to recognise her own impotence.
In these two plays the problem of individual freedom is posed in an abstract way; the political channels through which an individual can act are absent. In two works of 1948, the political factors, the questions of the Party and state power, are concretely present.
In the Mesh, a film script, deals with a small oil-producing country on the frontier of a big power. Jean Aguerra, a revolutionary whose past is shown us through a series of flashbacks, becomes President. But he knows that to nationalise the oil-fields would be unacceptable to the big power; he is therefore compelled to rule increasingly repressively in order to prevent the people demanding nationalisation. Finally he is overthrown and replaced as President by François; in the final scene François meets the Ambassador of the big power, and guarantees that he too will not nationalise the oil-fields.
The story is a study in compromise. Obviously historical parallels could be found, from Lenin’s policy at Brest-Litovsk to Stalin’s opposition to Trotsky. But the work is not a defence of Stalinism. Jean is showed as an anguished alcoholic, as a real human being coming to terms with impossible choices. To Stalinist mythology in the age of the personality cult it was quite inadmissible that the policies of a revolutionary leadership should be seen as human choices and judged as such.
The French Communist Party, as well as many bourgeois critics, took the play Crime Passionnel [4] as being anti-communist, though Sartre himself explicitly denied this. Yet the cynical treatment of the Communist Party in the play hardly makes it comfortable reading for a Stalinist. The action centres around the disputes in the Communist Party of a small Eastern European country towards the end of the Second World War. The play is essentially a dialogue between the young bourgeois intellectual, Hugo, and the old Communist Hoederer. Hugo’s naive idealism is constantly confronted with an image of the revolutionary party that denies any idealism. He is told that the party is not an ‘evening class’ or ‘the boy scouts’; when he says he joined the party so that everyone might have the right to self-respect, he is brusquely informed by two militants that they joined because they were fed up of being hungry. The relation of the party to the intellectual is that the party uses him.
Only very briefly does Hugo get the chance to put a real political argument instead of uttering sentimental rhetoric:
‘For years you will lie, cheat, manoeuvre, you will go from compromise to compromise; you will defend to our comrades reactionary measures taken by a Government which you are participating in. No-one will understand: the hard ones will leave us, the others will lose the political culture they have just acquired. We will be contaminated, softened, disoriented; we shall become reformists and nationalists; in the end, the bourgeois parties will be able to liquidate us if they want to.’
This is a speech of the highest relevance to the policies of the French Communist Party, particularly in the Governmental period from 1944 to 1947; but in the play Hoederer’s only answer is: ‘If you don’t want to take risks, don’t engage in politics.’
Crime Passionnel is, of all Sartre’s plays, the one in which the organised proletariat is most directly present. Yet the possibility of action is still debated between individuals – the idealist Hugo and the manipulator Hoederer. Sartre’s theatre of freedom did not allow for the possibility of the working class itself as the active subject. It is not too much to say that even in the theatre it is the absence of a concept of the party that brings Sartre to a dead end.
 
Stalinism and Pragmatism
Yet not quite a dead end. By the outbreak of the Korean war in 1950, when the fortunes of the European Left had reached their lowest point, Sartre had abandoned most of his original existentialist positions. But his faith in the possibility of action remained with him. If he did not make the right choices at this time (and the individuals and groups who did can be listed in a very small space), he was at least able to avoid the grotesquely wrong choices of many of his contemporaries.
In 1952 Sartre wrote to Camus, busy taking up moral stances against East and West alike: ‘I can see only one solution for you: the Galapagos Islands’. [5] Sartre was never ready to retreat to the Galapagos Islands; he was concerned to explore what action was possible in France in the immediate future.
And however inadequate his reasons may have been, he went to the right place – the mass labour movement. In France at this time this could mean only the Communist Party. It was hardly the most comfortable place. On the world scale the Cold War was at its peak, with McCarthyism on the ascendant in the USA. The French Government, willing accomplices of US policy, stepped up its repression against the French CP. Leaders of the CP were arrested, most ludicrously Jacques Duclos, who was discovered with two dead pigeons in his car; such was the war hysteria of the time that it was suggested that they were carrier pigeons to be used for communicating with Moscow. Plans to ban the Communist Party were being openly discussed. As Sartre made his way towards the Communist Party, he must have risked serious injury from the flocks of ‘progressive intellectuals’ running away from it as fast as their legs would carry them. In his obituary of Merleau-Ponty Sartre describes his reaction to the Duclos arrest as follows:
‘The last links were broken, my vision was transformed: an anti-communist is a dog, I can’t get over that, I never will get over that.’
Sartre’s perspectives in this period are set out in two major essays published in the Temps Modemes – The Communists and Peace (1952-1954) and The Spectre of Stalin (1956-1957). [6] The Communists and Peace attempts an analysis of the changing nature of the French proletariat, and of the way in which the consciousness of the class is affected by technological change and the changing hierarchies within the factory. Much of the analysis anticipates, in a much clearer and more readable form, the ideas of the Critique of Dialectical Reason But the political point is that the working class faces a threat, both from fragmentation at the point of production and from the repressive machinery of the state. In this situation the class needed the party, to preserve its coherence in struggle and in its own eyes. Attacks on Russia were in effect attacks on the French Communist Party; attacks nn the CP were attacks on the working class. In concrete day-to-day practice one could not defend one without the other.
Sartre’s position was not pro-Communist so much as anti-anti-Communist. He did not join the Party; while considering that workers should join it, he argued that the place for an intellectual was outside, thus recognising that the French CP was not a party which could bring intellectuals into organic relation with the class. While Sartre cultivated friendship with the Party, he did not refrain from criticism of it. He attacked the crude sectarianism of certain articles by Kanapa, spoke out against the expulsion of Hervé and the physical attack on Lecoeur. But more significant is the fact that Sartre, if he defended Stalinism, did not do so for Stalinist reasons. What was seen by orthodox Stalinism as untarnished was for Sartre no more than the result of compromise.
Sartre was, therefore, able to come to terms, not only with the Cold War, but with destalinisation and the Hungarian Revolution. His basic position on Hungary was irreproachable; he condemned the Soviet action unreservedly, while denying the right of those who approved the Anglo-French Suez adventure to make political capital out of it.
The analysis behind the position was shakier; for Sartre had never developed an analysis of the nature of the Soviet Union. He rejected any theory that the Soviet Union was capitalist or a class society; this was largely because most of those he had come across who defended such analyses used it as a justification for anti-Soviet Cold War policies. In particular, at the time of the controversy over the Soviet labour camps, Sartre had, quite correctly, opposed the view that these camps were essential to the Soviet economy, and that therefore the Soviet Union was some kind of slave society.
Sartre comes much closer to the ‘orthodox Trotskyist’ view of the Soviet Union – a socialist economic form dominated by a privileged political bureaucracy. In particular he argues that while Western ruling classes do not accept responsibility for society, but attribute social phenomena to inhuman economic laws, the bureaucrats who control a socialist society take full responsibility for what they do as human choices. In his concern to avoid a schematic black-and-white analysis Sartre insists that the Hungarian Revolution was neither a fascist rising nor a proletarian revolution.
The aim is to show the area for manoeuvre, for active intervention. The bureaucracy is not a class which must pursue certain class interests, but a group subject to pressure and persuasion, which can be assisted to destalinise as rapidly and humanely as possible. And in particular, Sartre locates his own area of potential action in assisting the destalinisation of the French CP.
By orienting himself to the CP, Sartre came to accept its perspective, the reconstruction of the Popular Front, an alliance of the CP and other socialist and democratic forces. But no solutions are so Utopian as the ‘practical’ ones. Just eighteen months after the Hungarian Revolution, with the French working class still suffering from the defeats and demoralisation of the fifties, de Gaulle was brought to power by big capital, with the ultra-right military in Algiers acting as midwife. The majority of Socialist and Radical politicians – the supposed potential members of a Popular Front – flocked to de Gaulle. The Communist Party tried halfheartedly, and failed, to win even a token response from the working class. From de Gaulle’s departure in 1946 to his return in 1958 Sartre could look back on twelve wasted years.
 
A Dialectical Theatre?
Wasted, at least, for Sartre the politician. But for Sartre the dramatist and the philosopher? Sartre had been drawn to literature both by personal inclination (he tells us in his autobiography that he would rather read thrillers than Wittgenstein), and by the fact that his philosophy centred on personal situation – his philosophical works are full of illustrative anecdotes. But the pressures of the fifties were too much even for Sartre’s literary gifts. It was in his novels and plays that the contradictions and tensions that ran through his personality found their best expression; but as the contradictions became more bitter and called for more direct resolution, literature was forced into second place. This is perhaps to be regretted. A sequel to Roads to Freedom, dealing with the France of the fifties and sixties, might have been more instructive than much else that Sartre has written in the last twenty years.
But Sartre decided otherwise; Simone de Beauvoir tells us that in a fit of depression in 1954 he told her ‘Literature is shit’. But the fifties nonetheless saw the production of two major plays in which he tries to go beyond the simple choices of his early theatre to the more complex dialectic of ends and means involved in collective political action.
Lucifer and the Lord (1951) is set in Germany at the time of the Peasants’ Revolt. The ‘hero’, Goetz, a barbaric military leader, decides, for a wager, that he will do nothing but good. But, like other Sartrean heroes, he finds good intentions are far from enough. He gives his lands to the peasants, and tries to set up a Utopian community, the City of the Sun. He is warned that his generosity can only lead to other peasants rebelling prematurely and being defeated. The peasant revolt leads to the destruction of the City of the Sun; finally, Goetz agrees to take over the leadership of the peasant forces but on condition that he can institute iron discipline, hanging any man who tries to desert. The play ends with the issue of the battle still in doubt. (This summary does not do justice to the richness of the theme of means and ends in the play).
In one sense the play is a devastating critique of idealist morality and Utopianism, an advocacy of collective revolutionary action. Yet is is of some significance that the rebelling oppressed are peasants, not workers; Goetz has to lead them, as an outsider; he has to impose discipline to make up for their lack of consciousness. In the absence of a party to unite organisation and consciousness, action is still conceived on the individual level.
But Lucifer and the Lord is an optimistic play beside Altona [7], first performed in 1959, with de Gaulle in power and the Algerian war at its height. Frantz, a former Nazi officer, who had ordered the torture of Russian partisans in 1944, has hidden himself away in solitude trying to come to terms with his own past. He makes speeches to an imaginary tribunal; finally he kills himself – the first time in Sartre’s theatre that a hero chooses suicide as a solution.
The play drips with political allusions; both to modern Germany, enjoying an economic miracle and forgetting its past, and to the Algerian war, the crimes (especially torture) of which will appear to the future as comparable to the crimes of Nazism. But political action is not present within the play as an alternative; Frantz looks to the past and the future, not the present. Altona marks a move away from the possibility of a genuinely revolutionary theatre.
 
Marxism and Philosophy
The Critique of Dialectical Reason (1960) [8] attempts to present a theoretical framework for Sartre’s evolution towards Marxism, and the particular contribution he is trying to make to it. The Critique is long, and at times unreadably complex. It is possible here only to touch on some of the themes and relate them to Sartre’s development.
The Critique, for all its academicism, is a work of polemic, aimed at ‘orthodox’ Stalinist Marxism. Sartre was particularly concerned to exert an influence on those parts of the Stalinist movement where an intellectually liberalising tendency was showing itself. He had close links with the Italian Communist Party, which he saw as more liberal than the French, and the introduction to the Critique, Problem of Method, was first published in Poland in 1957.
Sartre accepts that it is not possible to go beyond Marxism in our period of history. What is required is to revive Marxism’s concern for action and radical criticism; here some elements of existentialism may be relevant.
So far, so good. Sartre can be devastating in his criticism of the dogmatism that passes for Marxism on both sides of the Iron Curtain. But how exactly did the most radically critical theory ever produced in human history turn into a sterile dogmatism, a cover-up for oppression and exploitation, dolled up with the mystique of an infallible ‘science’? Sartre never gives a convincing reply to this question; because such a reply would involve explaining that Marxism has been transformed into the ideology of a ruling class, in the Soviet Union.
Without such an attempt to understand the history of twentieth century Marxism, not as the history of ideas, but in terms of class forces, Sartre fluctuates wildly between Marxism and pragmatism, at his best when he is being critical, at his worst when laying the basis for a positive method.
Sartre’s main concern in the Critique is to go beyond the individualism of his earlier work, and establish the basis for a theory of collective action. He makes a basic distinction between a series and a group; a series exists when people are assembled together, but with each still pursuing, individual purposes, a group exists when there is a shared collective purpose. A bus queue is a series, the mob storming the Bastille is a group. Sartre’s analysis has much to tell us about the transformation of series into group and group into series that is relevant to the problem of fragmentation and class-consciousness in the working class. But where exactly does the working class stand? Is it just one example of a group, or is it a historically unique class, with the ability to achieve totality and universality in a way that no other class can? This point is not made clear. Sartre quite rightly challenges the Stalinist tendency to see workers as automata, acting according to their pre-determined essence. But in so doing he risks accepting the notion that, lies at the basis of all revisionism – that it is possible to establish socialism without the conscious agency of the working class.
Hence the often bizarre eclecticism of Sartre’s politics. He could write an effusive obituary of Togliatti and feel similar enthusiasm for Castro. He combined support for the. Vietnamese with strong sympathy for Israel. In recent writings he refers to the USSR as ‘imperialist’ yet also as ‘socialist’. [9]
Philosophically, the paradox emerges in the Critique itself. Sartre attempts to rescue the idea of practice from historical determinism and locate it in the real choices of real men. But by detaching practice from the conscious self-activity of the proletariat he ends up precisely seeing history as being made unconsciously.
‘It is true also that Marxist practice in the masses does not reflect or reflects only partially the sclerosis of theory. But precisely the conflict between revolutionary action and the scholastic of justification prevents Communist man, in the socialist countries as in the bourgeois countries, from becoming clearly conscious of himself. One of the most striking features of our period is that history makes itself without knowing itself.’ [10]
The value of the Critique as the basis for an analysis of Stalinism is therefore limited. Sartre insists on his criticisms of the so-called ‘socialist’ countries. He rejects any form of schematic determinism which argues that the existence of a socialist form of economy solves everything in advance. The dangers of scarcity, of alienation still exist under socialism. But if this line of attack is effective against the old-style Stalinists, it plays right into the hands of the new-style, reforming, destalinising bureaucrats.
For it is no coincidence that ‘humanism’ of one sort and another has been an important ideological ally of revisionism in in East and West alike. [11] Such humanism stresses the margin for freedom within ‘socialism’, it emphasises the moral aspect of problems. Thus it backs up the alibis of those who claim that everything can be solved by piecemeal reforms, who see intervention in Hungary and Czechoslovakia as ‘tragic mistakes’. It covers over the need for a structural and scientific analysis of class relations. To support humanism in the Eastern bloc in the fifties could be justified pragmatically, for it permitted the first steps towards critical discussion. But once such consistent Marxists as Kuron and Modzelewski emerged, reformist humanism became positively reactionary.
 
The Fifth Republic
To plot Sartre’s course in the sixties is a difficult task. Partly this is because his writings are more fragmentary, but the paradoxes are as much in the period as in him. Dramatic crises have alternated with spells of apparent stability; surprising outbursts of working-class spontaneity have been eventually held in check by the bureaucratic leaderships of the labour movements.
In this situation, Sartre’s pragmatic concern for the possible has led him through a series of sharp zigzags. Where a revolutionary mass movement exists, as briefly in France in May 1968, Sartre is cheek by jowl with those in struggle. Where it does not, he is prone to clutch at the straws of a ‘realism’ that is often all too Utopian:
Thus:
‘I don’t know of any real democracy. It might have been born in Czechoslovakia. Today they are trying to strangle it.’
Or even:
‘I don’t at all know why the Israelis should keep Jerusalem, for example; why Jerusalem shouldn’t be made a completely neutral zone and simply given to the four or five most eminent religious representatives, under UN protection.’ [12]
Not that Sartre has remained content to propose solutions to others; he has always involved himself in action. His courage and integrity must not be belittled. Throughout the period of the Algerian War he stood for unconditional opposition to French imperialism and support for Algerian national liberation. When in 1960 he signed the Manifesto of the 121, urging soldiers to refuse to fight in Algeria, he was not only threatened with death by the extreme right, but politely told by the CP that they could not ‘in any form approve the call for, and organisation of, insubordination’. More recently, Sartre has been Executive President of the Russell International War Crimes Tribunal. But if such actions are a rare example of a twentieth century intellectual prepared to assume his responsibilities in society, they fall far short of a revolutionary strategy.
Thus while Sartre opposed de Gaulle from the very outset and with more vigour than the CP, he failed to produce the necessary analysis of Gaullism. Sartre could be mercilessly satirical of de Gaulle:
‘I don’t believe in God, but if in this plebiscite I had to choose between Him and the present claimant, I would rather vote for God. He is more modest’. [13]
Such criticism, putting the emphasis on the irrational and buffoonish trappings of de Gaulle, fails to point to the fact that he was there to do a job for big capital.
For, Sartre’s actions are not organically derived from his theory, out are parasitic on it. Sartre can make the French police look foolish by challenging them to arrest him for an offence for which other militants have been charged. But he can do this only because he is already known as France’s greatest living writer. His actions, however courageous, do not offer a strategy for others to follow.
The politics of gesture have alternated with a reformism that owes much to the CP’s Popular Frontism. This can be illustrated by some extracts from an interview with Sartre on the War Crimes Tribunal [14]:
I oppose the de Gaulle Government with my vote but it would never enter my head to say that Gaullist policies were criminal, [as US policies in Vietnam are].
But who are we trying to convince? .... It is the petty-bourgeois masses which must today be aroused and shaken, since their alliance with the working class – even from a purely local political point of view – is to be desired.
The first point of a left programme would have to be the need to combat, by means of a policy of priority investments – a great proportion of them public ones – the invasion of American capital .... in my opinion, opposition to the Atlantic Pact ought to be the main criterion of a left policy.
Imperialism is thus seen as something which can, in part at least, be fought separately, while waiting socialist action in the more distant future.
The May events of 1968 were in one sense a vindication of Sartre’s politics. They broke the chains of the ideology of passivism by revealing the possibility of action:
‘The area of the possible is much more vast than the dominant classes have accustomed us to believe. Who would have thought that fourteen million peasants would be able to resist the greatest industrial and military power in the world? And yet, this is what happened. Vietnam taught us that the area of the possible is immense, and that one need not be resigned. It is this which was the lever of the students’ revolt, and the workers understood it. In the united demonstration of the 13 of May, this idea suddenly became dominant. “If a few thousand youngsters can occupy the universities and defy the government.why should we not be able to do the same?”’ [15]
May 1968 also clarified the role of the French Communist Party. After a quarter of a century of politics geared to ‘influencing’ the CP, the following was the state of the relationship on October 21st, 1970 at the Renault factory at Billancourt:
‘At 2.10 p.m. Sartre was due to speak in Bir-Hakeim square. The Maoists had announced him by leaflet that morning when the shift came out. The unusual time and place was based on the estimations of the Maoists, who had succeeded throughout last year, especially during the campaign for free transport, in winning widespread sympathy among the workers of the morning shift, where there are a large number of North African workers.
‘The same morning a CP leaflet headed “Warning” set the tone ...
‘WHO IS SARTRE?
He is the man who took the initiative for a statement by intellectuals, greeting the Israeli-American aggression against the Arab peoples. That is why he has been declared unwelcome in all the Arab countries ...’
‘So that this warning should have full effect, by 2.00 p.m. there was an array of CGT militants, CP members, posted at the Zola gate to call on the workers: “Beware. It’s a provocation. The Bir-hakeim square is crawling with cops. Don’t go there, take the Yves-Kermen road, etc.” And the cordon of CP members gently guided the workers to the Yves-Kermen road. The detour was obviously intended to avoid the Bir-Hakeim square, where there was no sign of any cops, but where Sartre was explaining to between one and two hundred people the meaning of the Geismar trial and Maoists from the factory – sacked! or on the way to being so – were calling for “popular resistance”.’ [16]
But the key problem posed by the May events, that of the revolutionary party, still resists Sartre’s honest attempts to grapple with it:
‘The party, on the contrary, develops as an eniemble of institutions, and therefore as a closed, static system, which has a tendency to sclerosis. This is why the party is always behind in relation to the fused mass, even when it tries to guide that mass: this is so because it tries to weaken it, to subordinate it, and may even reject it and deny any solidarity with it ...
‘No doubt, we are dealing here with a contradiction which is inherent in the very function of the party ...
‘If the cultural apparatus of the Communist parties is practically null, the reason is not that they lack good intellectuals, but that the mode of existence of the parties paralyses their collective effort of thought.’ [17]
Sartre is still haunted by the spectre of the Stalinist party, and is trapped by the false alternatives of spontaneity and tight organisation. The traditions of Lenin and Gramsci remain buried. [18]
 
Conclusion
How then is Sartre to be judged? As a writer, a philosopher or a politician? If as a writer, then much of this article’s criticism is meaningless. One would scarcely blame Dostoievsky for wasting his time writing novels instead of preparing the ground for the building of the Bolshevik Party. Sartre has set other standards for himself, however. When Bertrand Russell declares support for the Vietnamese revolution on the basis of a consistent application of liberal humanism, then a Marxist may co-operate with him on these terms. But Sartre demands to be judged as a Marxist.
As such his contribution is useful, and in some ways unique. Compare Sartre to one of the best Marxist thinkers among his contemporaries, Lucien Goldmann. Goldmann, recognising an era of defeat, devoted himself to the development of Marxism on the interpretative level, to a concrete application of the dialectical method in his studies of literature and philosophy, in order to keep the ideas of Marxism alive for a better day.
Sartre, on the other hand, insists on Marxism as a theory of action even in a period of working-class passivity. He thus has no truck with the Stalinist excuse of ‘waiting until the workers are ready’ – a notable alibi in May 1968. But he does not avoid the risk of encouraging illusions in the possibility of individuals or groups (students, peasants or bureaucrats) acting on behalf of the working class.
If the May events of 1968 open up a new period of advance for the working class, they also mark the limit of Sartre’s Marxism, along with that of many of his contemporaries. A new Marxism is now possible – a Marxism that will take over the insights of Sartre, Lukacs, Goldmann, Marcuse and many others, but will weld them into a strategy of working class action. The new Marxism will put the working class at the centre of the picture. It will give central importance to the revolutionary party as the embodiment of the conscious class in action, and to the understanding of Russia as a regime based on the exploitation of the working class – two vital points at which Sartre’s analysis broke down.
So, in the last resort, Sartre must be regarded as a failure. Twenty-five years of dialogue with and influence on French Stalinism has left the party more conservative, more of a drag on the activity of the working class than ever. Sartre has left us some books that will be valuable reading for a long time to come, but he has established no political programme or organisation.
Those on the other hand who took, in the late forties or early fifties, the unrealistic choice, the decision to build independent revolutionary organisations, condemned themselves, in the eyes of pragmatism or reformism, to impotence, But in May 1968 the gamble paid its first dividend, and they have not spoken their last word yet. If they achieve victory in Sartre’s lifetime, he will be the first to acclaim it. But it will be their victory, not his.
 



The Economics of the Common Market
D. Swann
Penguin, 8s.
European Political Parties
PEP – S. Henig & J. Pinder (eds.)
Allen & Unwin, 65s.
Towards One Europe
Stuart de la Mahotiere
Penguin, 8s.
Europe versus America?
Ernest Mandel
New Left Books, 35s.
The Common Market has probably caused more confusion in the British Labour movement than any other question. For the most part, the discussion now is little more advanced than it was ten years ago. The argument still centres around the wrong question – whether we should be for or against British entry. The real question, that of a revolutionary strategy, is still largely neglected.
For, strategy cannot precede analysis. And as yet we have no adequate analysis of what the Common Market is, of how the social, political and economic factors interact on each other. Certainly we shall not get such an analysis from the flood of commentary, polemic and pure public relations material that pours out from the publishers every time the question of British entry is raised. (The first three books under review fit into this category). For all these commentators, whatever their other merits or defects, are equally incapable of seeing the problem as a whole. They are prevented, not only by the narrow categories of the disciplines they adhere to, but by their identification with national and class interests.
Mr. Swann, for example, limits his concern to the economic aspects of the question. Yet his pretensions to develop a quantitative and ‘scientific’ approach do not help him to avoid ending up in the realm of pure imagination. He summarises the 1970 White Paper on the effects of British entry:
‘... the cost to the balance-of-payments of all these factors could be as little as £100 million or as much as £1,100 million.... On the subject of the contribution to the agricultural budget the optimistic estimate was a cost of £150 million, but the pessimistic view envisaged a £670 million drain.’
Likewise, the various learned authors wbo have contributed to the volume on the European Political Parties have assembled a great deal of information about party structures, electoral performances, etc. Yet the one theme that stands out clearly from the work is that in most countries of Europe, in or out of the Common Market, the traditional party patterns are becoming increasingly irrelevant; that new divisions and regroupings are emerging to correspond, on the one hand, to the divisions within the ruling class, and on the other to the increasing disaffection of the working class from traditional politics.
The Common Market has not, in any real sense, overcome national limits. The aim of the operation is to provide a bigger market and encourage competition. Yet to do this it is necessary to establish certain common policies, in, for example, agriculture and transport, and to aim at some degree of social harmonisation.
The results so far are a long way removed from the technocratic vision of a dynamic modern capitalism with all the irrationalities ironed out.
For example, from the beginning the Rome Treaty was committed to the principle of equal pay for women. But.one commentator as late as 1966 commented:
‘Where women are unorganised and their wages inadequately protected the Commission can do little except encourage the appropriate Government to take action.’
The problems of a common agricultural policy are well known. The reorganisation of the milk market alone in 1969 cost France as much as the Algerian war in 1959. To get rid of the embarrassing butter surpluses the Commission not only tries cut price sales to army barracks and old age pensioners, but actually considered using it as an ingredient in cattle feed.
Similarly, for the first eleven years of the Common Market’s existence, virtually no progress was made towards a common transport policy. As late as 1968 Germany imposed a licence system which led to long queues of Dutch lorries waiting at the German borders to pick up licences from lorries coming out. The Common Market is still very far removed from solving the problems of taxation and company law.
In short, the technocrats can neither predict nor plan. The food prices that British workers will have to pay depend on the development of the Common Market agricultural policy. But this development lies not in the hands of the Brussels planners, but will be determined by the level of militancy of the European, and especially the French, peasantry. And this in turn will be significantly affected by the development of the working-class movement.
One might have hoped that Ernest Mandel could have cut through the contradictions and offered the outlines of a revolutionary strategy. Unfortunately much of the book is a ragbag of undigested statistics, with only occasional insights into the total dynamics of the system. Mandel quite correctly stresses the underlying instability of European capitalism, and the way that this leads to social explosions, particularly in the traditional industrial areas. He also points out that if European (and Japanese) capitalism is able to make an attack on the American home market, the effect on the American working class could be fundamental.
But although at the end of his book Mandel unfurls the old banner of the ‘United Socialist States of Europe’, there is little indication of how this can be more than a stirring slogan.
British entry to the Common Market is not inevitable. But none of the alternatives have anything better to offer the working class. As the history of French attempts to resist ‘loss of sovereignty’ show, there is no longer a future for capitalism in one country. As Mandel puts it: ‘De Gaulle’s aversion to supranationality thus paradoxically became American Capital’s best ally in Europe.’
The technocrats are whistling in the dark; the Common Market cannot solve their problems, let alone ours. If the Labour movement reverts to nostalgic nationalism, or capitulates to ‘historical tendencies’, it can only prepare confusion and defeat. A Socialist Europe is not a romantic dream; it is the only way to solve the problem of an agricultural policy in the interests of workers and peasants; the only way to solve the massive discrepancies between regions. We need make no concessions to what passes as bourgeois ‘science’ – realism is on our side.
 



One important issue that has come up in the debate about the dissolving of the fusion with the Trotskyist Tendency is the question of ‘generalised opposition’, as distinct from opposition on specific issues. This problem is reflected in the Enfield and Brighton resolutions to the Special Conference and clearly reveals an anxiety that extends beyond those who give political support to the Trotskyist Tendency.
As an ex-member of the (now defunct) Democratic Centralist and more recently an opponent of the NC line on the Common Market – as well as being, according to members of the Trotskyist Tendency, ‘frightened to carry through the logic of my positions’ – I would like to make a few observations on this question.
Opposition in a revolutionary organisation is not a right. It has nothing to do with the right of free speech we demand in society as a whole, or within the trade unions. The revolutionary organisation is a voluntary association of those who share certain aims. Opposition is a duty. Any comrade who, after serious consideration, is convinced that the organisation is making a mistake which will be harmful to it, has an absolute duty to fight for the correction of such errors. Since no individual or group is infallible, it is only through such a process that correct positions can be evolved. Much of what passes for the defence of ‘democracy’ in IS is in fact an appeal to liberal principles, and nothing to do with democratic centralism.
If opposition is understood, not as a debating society exercise, but as part of a process of collective learning from the experience of struggle, :then all opposition involves generalisation. For instance, two years ago we made a serious mistake by underestimating the importance of the establishment of a hard revolutionary organisation in Ireland. If an understanding of this mistake is to enable us to avoid making similar mistakes in future, then we must understand not merely that we made the mistake, but why we made it. The documents by JH and others on the Common Market aim at precisely such a task of generalisation. To this extent the claim by the Trotskyist Tendency that every specific debate raises the question of method is correct.
What is the experience of attempts at generalised opposition in IS? In the 1968–69 period there were at least three groupings – the Democratic Centralists, Platform Four and the so-called ‘microfaction’ – who, faced with major changes in the objective situation and the group’s work, tried to develop a general critique of the group’s theory and practice. All of us were motivated by a serious concern to improve the group, and all of us made certain criticisms which have been accepted and acted upon by the group. But in the job of formulating a general critique and alternative strategy we all failed. And any grouping that claims to have a generalised critique without spelling it out in absolutely precise terms will inevitably attract a whole variety of discontented elements. As a result all three groupings disintegrated.
I am not saying that a generalised opposition platform is impossible – I am simply saying we have not yet seen one. Certainly the Trotskyist Tendency does not offer a generalised opposition. Its identifying features are not points of method or programme – they are historical identifications – the first Four Congresses, the Transitional Programme, and a glamourised myth of the SWP in the 40s and 50s. They have never even attempted to show how these historical reference points in any way relate to their rather modest and unoriginal proposals for action. The Trotskyist Tendency is not a generalised opposition, it is not an opposition of any kind, in terms of the definition I have tried to give. It is a clique, an amalgam of various disabused elements which, once liberated from the unifying force of hatred for the IS leadership, will disperse to the four winds.
On this interpretation the rampant Utopianism of the Enfield resolution (calling for a commission to establish conditions for any future generalised opposition) becomes apparent. Leave aside the fact that this resolution would involve us in not one but two special conferences and transform the group into debating society over a period of months. What it asks us to do is to make provisions for a generalised opposition not yet formulated but which one fine day may emerge. Obviously such an opposition could arise. If so, various developments could take place. The group as a whole might be persuaded by the superior analysis of the opposition and adopt it. Some elements of the opposition’s programme might be adopted. Or comrades might realise at the end of the day, that their differences were irreconcilable. A split would then occur. This would involve a prolonged period of debate in the group from which, at best, we would all learn a great deal. But to legislate in advance for it is a pure waste of time. And it has nothing to do with putting an end to an intolerable situation where one ‘democratic centralist’ organisation exists within another such organisation.
My own characterisation is that IS has the vices of its own virtues. What has enabled IS to survive and build for the last twenty years has been its sensitivity to reality, its ability to analyse changes in the objective situation, its concern for involvement in real struggle, its outward-looking and non-sectarian style. This has inevitably been accompanied by pragmatism – a concern with short-term needs at the price of a neglect of long-term issues. I would analyse as lapses into pragmatism most of the mistakes the group has made – over Ireland, the Common Market, the shop stewards’ defence committee, and for that matter the hasty and botched fusion with Workers’ Fight. In a sense this is the basis of a generalised critique. What I do not believe is that there is any formula which solves this once and for all. As revolutionaries we are walking a tightrope, with dogmatism on one side and pragmatism on the other. We shall not get off the tight-rope – not until the happy day when socialism is here and we are all lying in the long grass eating peaches. One does not walk a tightrope by taking an exact compass bearing in advance and then shutting one’s eyes. To believe that method – whether in the form of the Transitional Programme or of an abstract and formal account of dialectics – can absolve us from permanent vigilance, permanent criticism, is the most dangerous illusion at large in the group today.



 


BIRCHALL
Hornsey Branch



 



‘IT is not, however, the long-run effects that will occupy our movement in the coming months, but the threat to our traditional organisations and forms of struggle, the threat to full employment, of further fragmentation in the labour movement and the decanting of politics out of it, the threat that its weaker sections – the Old Age Pensioners, for example – will be passed over in the scramble and, most important of all, the threat to world peace implied in strengthening the economic base of NATO. These are part of cartel-Europe; how big a part must depend upon the action of the European working class ... For us the move to Europe extends the scope of class struggle in which we are directly involved; it worsens its conditions for the present. But it makes ultimate victory more secure.’ (Editorial, IS 6, Autumn 1961)
‘It is true that Wilson’s Common Market policy does involve a serious threat to working-class living standards, and is designed to strengthen the hands of the employers in the fight against workers’ defence organisations in the struggles over speed-up, rate fixing, and working conditions. But inside or outside the Common. Market, that particular battle is going to be fought – indeed, outside the battle is likely to be more ferocious.’ (Editorial, IS 28, Spring 1967)
In face of the attempts to enter the European Common Market by both MacMillan and Wilson, the editors of International Socialism once argued, clearly and consistently, that we must not carry out any kind of campaign against entry. Now that Heath appears to be about to succeed where his predecessors failed, Chris Harman argues that it is ‘imperative for us to oppose entry’.
Two kinds of argument are possible to justify such a sharp change of direction on a major issue of political policy. One is that the objective conditions have changed; that either the EEC itself, or British capitalism, or the predictable effects on the British Labour movement are sufficiently different now from what they were four years ago to mean that opposition to entry is a central part of opposition to British capitalism. The other possibility is that the subjective factor has changed; and indeed it is true that while in 1961 and 1967 the International Socialists were a small tendency within the Labour Party whose activity was very largely confined to propaganda, we now have a small but growing independent organisation, with the perspective of establishing a revolutionary party and the possibility of significant areas of political intervention. In such conditions a merely passive commentary would have to be replaced by agitational slogans.
It is my view that Harman has not demonstrated the need for a change of position in terms of either of these arguments. This is not to deny that there have been changes; and I am certainly not claiming that all that is required of us is to reprint our old editorials. Indeed, I shall attempt to suggest some of the slogans and demands we should try to raise in the present situation.
The least substantial of Harman’s points is (3), the suggestion that the Common Market aims to create an ‘effective independent arms potential’. This is supported merely by a quotation from the woolly rhetoric of the White Paper. The failure of the Common Market to achieve integration in other fields is argued elsewhere in this journal; there is no reason to expect a frightening success in the military sphere. Indeed, the view of the Common Market as essentially a Cold War military alliance rather than an economic bloc is normally confined to the fantasy world of the Communist Party.
Point (2) likewise depends on a piece of rather obscure logic-chopping. It would indeed be a correct refutation of the argument that the Common Market is historically progressive, because it lays the basis for socialist internationalism. This position has been argued by Eric Heffer, and still is by Paul Rose. But it has never been the position of any of the genuine left. Beyond this Harman’s position seems to be that capitalism cannot solve its problems any more, and that we should stop it trying. It is, of course, true that the very nature of capitalism means that it cannot achieve a genuine international organisation; this is shown by the failure of the Common Market to exert any real control over the international companies or to solve the problems of such underdeveloped regions as Southern Italy. This does not, however, mean that capitalism is incapable of making any technical or administrative innovations which could not be taken over by a socialist society. We do not oppose either automation or mergers as such; we oppose them if and when they cause attacks on workers, through redundancies, etc.
Point (2) is therefore only valid if seen as a rider to point (1). The real theme that does emerge is that we have to argue that the fundamental problems of Europe – the international companies, economic backwardness in Southern Italy and Scotland – can be solved only by international socialist planning, and that the only social force capable of doing the job is the European working class. To argue this is to develop the concrete content of the ‘United Socialist States of Europe’ slogan.
Point (1) is the more substantial argument, and Harman marshals some considerable evidence in its favour. Much of this is unexceptionable on the factual level, though some comments should be made. While one can hardly go wrong with a prophecy of price rises, in a situation of world inflation it is going to be difficult to disentangle those rises due to Market entry from those we would get anyway. On the question of taxation too the argument is a little thin. The Tory government was, of course, committed to Value Added Tax before Common Market entry was negotiated and if we stay out for some reason we shall still get it. The more general process of shifting a heavier proportion of the tax burden on to the less wealthy section of the community has, of course, been going on for some time already (see Jim Kincaid’s article in IS 43).
But for Marxists prediction is not separated from action. One reason why the whole range of bourgeois economists are able to make only the most vague and diverging estimates of the effects of Market entry is that to some extent at least these effects depend on the response of the working class to the various attacks on its conditions. The White Paper is quite clear on this:
‘The influence on wage movements of the increase in the cost of, living is not expected to have any significant effect on the costs of industry, nor, therefore, on our balance of trade.’ (Paragraph 43.)
In plain English – we hope we can put through the attacks deriving from entry without the working class fighting back. The timing of the entry negotiations after the defeat of the postmen’s strike and the Croydon TUC was far from coincidental. It is possible to stigmatise the slogan ‘In or out of the Market it’s all the same for workers’ as being ‘abstentionist’. The slogan ‘In or out of the Market the working class must not be made to pay’ is not, and it is one that could be central to our agitation.
One suspects that Harman’s ‘fourth, subordinate reason’ is in fact more central to his argument than he suggests here. It is hard to know what is the precise point of Harman’s assertion that ‘many rank and file militants instinctively distrust the government’s entry policy’. It is undoubtedly true that working-class opposition derives from a sort of class consciousness. It is equally true that, for example, hostility to foreign workers in Britain derives from a form of class consciousness – concern to defend employment and conditions, recognition that immigration is manipulated by the bosses in their own interests. We have to relate to these forms of distorted class consciousness; we certainly do not adapt to them.
As far as the political crisis caused by the question of Market entry is concerned, it is possible to agree with Harman on one thing at least. ‘We are for the defeat of the Tories and for purging the labour movement of those sections of the Labour leadership whose votes help to keep the Tories in power’. In the remote possibility of a referendum we would vote against the Government; a revolutionary MP would vote against, after doing his (or rather her) best to speak on the issue to show the vote was cast as a vote of no confidence in Toryism. If the votes of revolutionaries at Labour Party conference and the TUC were so numerous as to affect the outcome we would be able to formulate our own resolutions in opposition; in the present state of affairs to cast our few votes for blatantly nationalist resolutions would not seem to contribute much either way. In any case, Harman rather overestimates the nature of the crisis. Whatever manoeuvres Wilson may go through to ensure his own survival as leader, it is quite clear that the Labour Party has no serious intention of forcing the defeat of the Tories on this issue. (Transport House is not even allowing constituency parties to select candidates yet.)
There is a danger that, within the revolutionary left, the fake ‘great debate’ of bourgeois politics will be mirrored by our own ‘little debate’ – opposition versus abstention. This would be a pity, and a waste of the opportunity to fight for what is significant and unique in our own politics. For the real weakness of Harman’s programme is that it is not an interventionist one. In the present state of forces, revolutionaries can only intervene by means of the united front. And as Harman quite correctly points out, we cannot have a united front with the CP or Tribunites against the Common Market because their nationalist illusions would be spread thereby. This leaves us with very little to do except sell our own propaganda and vote for other people’s resolutions. If on the other hand we raise a series of concrete demands in the context of Market entry then we can seek allies in agitation around them.
Clearly we are in no position to formulate an international programme. As Harman quite correctly says, capitalism is not yet sufficiently internationalised, nor is there any international workers’ organisation to formulate such a programme. But there are concrete issues – the international companies, labour migration, etc. – which call for international action here and now. What we can and must do is present an internationalist programme – this is something that no-one else is doing and which is much more important than how we cast (or decline to cast) our votes on confused resolutions. We must then approach other sections of the Labour movement around these demands. Of course, when we ask Labourites for a consistent opposition to price increases, or the official trade union movement what it is doing to link workers in international companies, we shall get embarrassed retreats into simple opposition to Market entry.
A further consideration in this context. Over the last few years the International Socialists have developed some useful contacts with revolutionaries in Western Europe and last year was joint sponsor of an international conference. While our main audience is the British working class, we must remember our responsibility to work towards the formulation of a genuinely international strategy.
The following, then, is the outline of a possible internationalist programme:

Opposition to all attacks on the working class, all attempts to make workers pay for entry (or non-entry) via rising prices, taxation changes, unemployment, etc. For a strong shopfloor organisation as the only way to defend workers’ conditions.
 
Parity with the best available conditions in the Common Market. It is essential in this context to smash the myth of the docility and industriousness of European workers, and to show that where conditions are better they have been won in struggle (e.g. of French workers’ four weeks’ annual holiday, three were won by general strikes, in 1936 and 1968).
 
International cooperation of workers. Combine committees in the international companies. Transferability of union membership and development of union facilities for migrant workers. All international contacts must be developed with maximum rank-and-file participation and with no ideological discrimination between the various trade-union bodies in Western Europe.
 
For the United Socialist States of Europe as the only way to overcome the anarchy of international capitalism.

Such a programme may not get much of a hearing during the slogan-shouting of the ‘great debate’ (though more workers than we think might recognise its relevance), but it will be a programme that will still be meaningful when the rest of the opposition has rolled up its union jacks and admitted defeat. The essence of it will be relevant even if British entry should still somehow be obstructed. As such it must be central to the work of revolutionaries.
 



THE failure of the left coup in the Sudan at the end of July was more significant than the power struggles that occur regularly in that country. Nimeiry aimed to behead the organised working-class movement by executing Shafia El-Sheikh, General Secretary of the Sudan Workers Trade Union Federation, and Joseph Garang and Abdul Mahgoub, leaders of the Communists Party.
The Sudan has never achieved political stability since independence in 1956. Each successive ruling clique has been faced by three main problems. Firstly, the economy is dominated by one product – ginned cotton; difficulties in finding export markets have a catastrophic effect. Secondly, there has been the problem of relations with the rest of the Arab world, especially Egypt, which has traditionally aimed to dominate the Sudan. And thirdly, the southern territories, much poorer than the north, and, unlike the north, neither Arab nor Muslim, have been in almost permanent rebellion and have faced severe repression.
Such problems are not unique in Africa. But what distinguishes the Sudan from most of its African and Arab neighbours is the existence of a long-standing and well-organised labour movement, despite the fact that 87 per cent of the population are engaged in agriculture. The key sector was the railway workers (who had great strategic strength in a country with virtually no cross-country roads), and following the railway strike of 1947 the Sudan Workers Trade Union Federation was created. Although trade unions were banned following the 1958 military coup, the SWTUF was strong enough to continue to function until the government was forced to accept a scheme of registration of trade unions. A further general strike of workers, university staff, etc., in 1964 led to the establishment of a new civilian government, in which Shafia El-Sheikh played the traditional poacher-turned-gamekeeper role of labour leaders and became Minister of Labour.
The claim that the SWTUF has organised 800,000 workers may be an exaggeration, but there is no doubt that it has represented a very powerful organisation. The SWTUF has been closely linked to the Sudanese Communist Party; though this has been illegal, it is claimed to have 50,000 members with a hard core of 5,000. In the 1965 elections the CP won 11 out of 15 seats in the graduates’ constituency, which implies a sound base in the intelligentsia as well as in the working class.
Nimeiry came to power in a bloodless coup in May 1969. His first 21-man government contained five Communists, and among other politicians holding the rank of Assistant Prime Minister were Al-Atta and Al-Nur, leaders of this summer’s coup. Numeiry proclaimed that the policy of his government would be ‘Sudanese socialism’; the essence of this was a hard line against Israel and state intervention in the economy. In June 1969 Nimeiry announced plans to train Southern Sudanese for eventual positions of responsibility; but these were rejected by the Southern nationalist leaders. A year later he nationalised foreign banks and the principal trading companies.
At the same time Nimeiry was systematically trying to weaken the Communist Party and exclude it from participation in the regime. His aim was to integrate those of its leaders who could be won to his nationalist programme, and smash those who still aimed to maintain an independent political organisation. On the second anniversary of his regime in May Nimeiry denounced the CP for having initially opposed his seizure of power.
The attempted coup by the ‘left’ on July 19 was essentially a defensive move in face of Nimeiry’s consolidation of power. The political programme of the coup’s leaders was, if anything, more timid than Nimeiry’s; one of the few things Colonel Al-Nur had time to announce before being deposed was that no foreign industry would be nationalised.
The role of the CP in the coup is not clear. Certainly Nimeiry was not able to produce any evidence before launching a massive witchhunt against the Communist Party. Over 1,000 militants were detained (Iraqi sources claim 10,000), and the public were urged by television to hunt out Communist leaders. The ‘show-trial’ of Mahgoub, secretary-general of the CP, was noteworthy for its sheer incompetence. The one witness called had no evidence to offer, and the prosecutor was reduced to alleging that Mahgoub had had an affair with his wife. When Mahgoub asked to interrogate the witness the public and press were excluded, and after a secret session he was immediately hanged. Nimeiry is clearly for the moment in a strong position, and has dropped from his government even those two CP members who were expelled from the party for remaining in the government.
The Sudanese CP had put its own head in the noose. Its line had always been to support nationalist politics and to participate in any government it could. In 1956 Mahgoub organised the sending of volunteers to fight in Egypt; and in November 1964 the CP participated in a transitional government of all parties including the Muslim Brotherhood, which prepared the way for a right-wing electoral victory the following year. Perhaps the most scandalous case of the CP offering a left cover for repressive policies was that of Joseph Garang, a popular Southern leader who was Minister of State for Southern Affairs in Nimeiry’s government, and stayed there despite Nimeiry’s break with the CP and the continuing repression in the south. The CP’S only reply to Nimeiry’s attacks on it in February of this year was to accuse him of ‘weakening the regime’.
The role of Libya and Egypt, including the active help of the Egyptian military academy in the Sudan, in helping Nimeiry regain power is well-known. The role of the Soviet Union is equally noteworthy; though it could hardly refrain from some colourful criticisms of the executions, Nimeiry was not named in these. Russia did not attempt any such available sanctions as the withdrawal of technicians. It was Russian-built tanks that were used to hunt CP militants through the streets of Khartoum.
The position of China is even more striking. The Nimeiry regime sets great store by its friendship with China, with whom it has an agreement for 45 million dollars of aid. On August 5 the new Foreign Minister Mansour Khaled expressed gratitude for the fact that at the time of the coup on July 19 the Chinese-Sudan friendship society had organised demonstrations in Peking in support of the Nimeiry regime.
The pattern of a CP preparing the way for its own butchering is the same as that seen in Iraq in 1963 and Indonesia in 1965. The bloodbath appears to have been much smaller, though the full effect of Nimeiry’s declared intention to reorganise the trade union movement on a ‘revolutionary basis’ remains to be seen. Whether the Sudanese CP can survive is as yet unclear. What is more important is whether a section of the battered labour movement will now see the need to organise on independent class lines, instead of tail-ending nationalist politicians. Otherwise the future for the Sudan is bleak.
 



Dear Comrades
Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no. 3 contains a hostile review by Al Richardson of Tony Cliff’s book Trotsky: The Darker the Night, the Brighter the Star (Bookmarks, 1994). Since this follows similarly hostile reviews of earlier volumes of the same work, and since it raises questions of substance, methodology and tone which are relevant to the whole project of Revolutionary History, I should like to respond to some of the points raised.
Richardson’s basic complaint is that Cliff has harnessed history to ‘current factional concerns’. (This echoes the suggestion by Ted Crawford (Revolutionary History, Volume 4, no. 2, p. 100) that the second volume of this series related to an ‘internal dispute’ in the Socialist Workers Party; an internal dispute none of the members seem to have noticed.) Richardson graciously concedes that Cliff is not guilty of ‘anything like the scale of Stalinism’s monstrous distortions’, neatly implying that Cliff’s affinity with Stalinism is qualitative rather than quantitative.
This is a serious charge, but what does it in fact relate to? That Cliff sees his work as an historian as inextricably bound up with his involvement in building a revolutionary organisation in the 1990s. I thought that the whole point of Revolutionary History was that we should learn from the past in order to shape the future. Of course, if we don’t tell the truth about the past, we can’t learn from it; but in fact the only ‘monstrous distortion’ Richardson has found in Cliff’s work is that he disagrees with Richardson’s interpretation on certain questions.
In an earlier review, Richardson refers to the ‘painful impression’ caused by a comparison between Cliff’s work and Pierre Broué’s Trotsky (Paris 1988) (Revolutionary History, Volume 2, no. 3, p. 46). Broué’s book is certainly an important piece of historical scholarship. But in its final section, it evades the central issues of Trotsky’s perspective in the late 1930s, and in particular the question of the founding of the Fourth International. One gets the impression that Broué is not prepared to defend the detailed political perspective that lay behind the founding of the Fourth International, but that he is also not willing to subject it to rigorous criticism. Since he has been arguing that the building of the Fourth International was the central task of Trotsky’s life, this produces a bizarre inconclusiveness. Cliff, on the other hand, makes no attempt to evade the difficult questions raised by Trotsky’s strengths and weaknesses.
Richardson touches only in passing on what is one of the most important themes in the volume, the ‘gaping abyss’ between Trotsky’s ideas and the tiny organisations that tried to put them into practice. The question of size is discussed in relation to Stalinist infiltration, to the tendency for organisations to be dominated by internal discussion, and to the appropriateness of organisational forms to different sizes of grouping. This discussion of the relation of theory to practice is rich in lessons; much of the history of the Trotskyist movement has consisted of heated debates about the ‘correct line’ when there was nobody there to implement the line even if it was correct. Of course, Richardson would be quite right to relate this discussion to Cliff’s belief in the importance of building a substantial revolutionary organisation over the next few years. But no apology need be made for that.
Richardson chooses instead to focus on Cliff’s alleged shortcomings on the question of ‘entry’. He laments Cliff’s ‘strange omission’ of any discussion of the question of entry in relation to the British labour movement. Perhaps it is a pity that Cliff did not discuss this question. But his omission is scarcely ‘connected with the SWP’s self-proclamation as a revolutionary party’. For whatever Trotsky might have said, it has no immediate relevance to strategy in the 1990s.
The question of revolutionary entry is a concrete one, to be judged in terms of the size of the revolutionary nucleus, the nature, organisation and base of the party to be entered, and the historical conjuncture. (Richardson concedes that entry is a question of tactics and not principle when he points out that Trotsky would have preferred entry into the French Communist Party, but recognised that it was impossible in practice.) We cannot simply quote Engels, Lenin or Trotsky, and apply their words directly to the Blair-led Labour Party of today. If learning from history were that simple, we could all do it. What is needed is a concrete study of the past combined with an equally concrete evaluation of the present. (To take one example among very many, the Pivertist left in the SFIO in 1935 had armed anti-Fascist squads; when my local branch of the Campaign Group organises armed patrols against the BNP, I’ll rethink my position on entry.)
Richardson condemns Cliff for suggesting that it is an ‘eternal truth’ that ‘if entry were not seen as a short-term tactic it must lead to opportunism’. But as Richardson himself points out, all Trotsky’s strategy was directed towards the impending war; he certainly never envisaged the case of entry extended over a period of several decades. Now that we can evaluate the impact of such long-term entry, and see its effect on political strategy and on the education and training of cadre, we don’t need quotations from Trotsky to tell us that long-term entry leads to opportunism.
Entry is in fact only a minor theme in Cliff’s book; it is Richardson who elevates it to such central importance. There is an obvious reason for this. Richardson is a man with a key to history. Already in 1989 he told the world:
‘On this question the verdict of history is universal and conclusive. Except in countries where there was no working class parties of any sort already in existence, there has never been a revolutionary party created by recruitment in ones or twos to a sect. All the mass parties of the Third International – not excepting the Russian – issued from splits inside previously existing working class parties.’ (Revolutionary History, Volume 2, no. 3, p. 49)
Would that life could be so simple! Outside Russia there were at least half a dozen ‘mass parties’ in the Communist International – France, Germany, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Italy, Bulgaria. Moreover, in the case of the French Communist Party, the people whom both Lenin and Trotsky thought should be the leadership were precisely those – the revolutionary Syndicalists – who had refused to enter the mass working class parties before 1920. At no other time than the historically unique conjuncture of 1919-22 have mass revolutionary parties been formed in this way. That’s rather a shaky basis for the establishment of a ‘universal and conclusive’ verdict. In this concern to teach the left the correct methods of party building, Richardson rather reminds me of those people who publish books advising us how to win the lottery. One wonders why they don’t just go ahead and win.
Richardson also complains at Cliff’s state capitalist analysis of Russia. It is a well-rehearsed argument, and not one, I suspect, that will cause much anguish to a new generation of revolutionaries. But again it must be related to the question of party building. If I ask Richardson whether in the Russian workers’ state under Stalin, the actual workers in factory, mine, dock and office controlled the state machine, he will answer ‘of course not’. As he points out in his reply to Willie Thompson, the state that jailed the Guildford Four is rather more favourable to workers than the state which conducted the Moscow Trials (Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no. 3, p. 277). And he is on record as saying that ‘the very term “workers’ state” is a dialectical contradiction’ (Revolutionary History, Volume 3, no. 4, p. 34).
Now this is all very well if one spends one’s entire life talking to veterans of the Trotskyist movement. Most workers do not speak Richardson’s esoteric dialectical language, and want to know who is on their side and who is the enemy. If I tell Socialist Worker buyers at Edmonton Green Shopping Centre that Russia under Stalin was a workers’ state, they will assume that I mean that people like them controlled the state. An organisation with the workers’ state position must either stay condemned to isolation or capitulate to Stalinism.
Richardson also muddies the water by alleging that Cliff’s position is the same as that of the Socialist Party of Great Britain. This is not a mere slip – he has made the same accusation in the past (Revolutionary History, Volume 2, no. 3, p. 46; Volume 3, no. 4, p. 36, in the latter case twice on the same page!). Now the SPGB’s position is that ‘the Bolshevik Revolution ... was not and could not have been a proletarian revolution’ (The Russian Revolution: Its Origin and Outcome, Socialist Party of Canada, distributed by the SPGB, p. 12). Cliff’s position is that there was a proletarian conquest of power, but that this was followed by a counter-revolution. The SPGB repudiates Bolshevism, Cliff endorses Bolshevism. Richardson is entitled to criticise and reject both positions, but he cannot refuse to admit that they are different. A vegetarian may refuse both beef and mutton, but he would be singularly obtuse if he couldn’t tell a cow from a sheep. This looks remarkably like what Richardson describes as the ‘time-honoured Stalinist tactic of the amalgam’ (Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no. 3, p. 278).
Two other smaller points call for comment. Firstly, Richardson claims that Cliff ‘told his followers that with another few thousand on their section of the last miners’ demonstration they could have made a bid for power’. What Cliff actually said is rather different:
‘Imagine if we had 15,000 members of the SWP and 30,000 supporters: the 21 October miners’ demonstration could have been different. Instead of marching round Hyde Park, Socialists could have taken 40 or 50,000 people to parliament. If that had happened, the Tory MPs wouldn’t have dared vote with Michael Heseltine. The government would have collapsed.’ (Socialist Worker, 23 January 1993)
Cliff used virtually the same words at a number of public rallies.
Nothing about a ‘bid for power’. The collapse of the government would, presumably, have led to a Labour success in the ensuing general election. I assume that Richardson is not so warped by years of entry that he can’t tell the difference between a Labour election victory and an SWP ‘bid for power’. Richardson has a justified reputation for his works on British Trotskyism, but he seriously imperils his reputation as an historian with misrepresentations of this sort.
Secondly, there is the fantasy about the footnotes. From the fact that Cliff follows the fairly standard scholarly practice of footnoting original texts rather than translations, Richardson deduces a conspiracy to prevent SWP members ‘reading more widely in the contributions of others’. I can assure Richardson that no such totalitarian regime exists in the SWP, and that Cliff does not attempt to limit anybody’s readings. (Does Richardson imagine that the bands that played at the ANL Carnival were Tony Cliff’s personal favourites?) In fact, quite a lot of SWP members read Revolutionary History, and more would do so if the editor could curb a regrettable tendency towards sectarianism.
For these last points can only be explained by sectarianism, a sectarianism so entrenched that it finds the recognition that Edward Thompson was a first-rate historian ‘embarrassing’ (Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no. 3, p. 287). And it is a sectarianism that does not even have the excuse of a sect to justify it.
Twice in the most recent issue, Richardson rejoices that ‘our movement’ greatly outnumbers the remnants of Stalinism (Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no. 3, pp. 234, 277). But while wishing to ride on the success of the revolutionary left, Richardson cannot resist a contemptuous dismissal of its various components, describing the largest British revolutionary organisation as ‘a couple of thousand or so students, civil service clerks and team leaders on job creation schemes’ (Revolutionary History, Volume 2, no. 3, p. 49). He can’t have it both ways.
I am not asking the editor of Revolutionary History to abandon his political independence. I am not against vigorous polemic, and I am certainly not against humour. I am against a style of unsubstantiated sniping that prejudices the credibility of the journal.
There is an old American song about a character called ‘Bill Bailey, the ultimate sectarian’. Having refused all recruits to his organisation on the grounds of political inadequacy, Bill finally dies and goes to heaven. But when Karl Marx himself comes to open the gates, Bill slams them in his face, saying:



‘You may be a friend of Karl Kautsky, and a pal of Ferd Lassalle,
You may get along with Wilhelm Liebknecht and the First International,
You may have inspired every radical movement from the Hudson to the Rhine,
Yes, you may be a comrade to all of those folks, but you ain’t no comrade of mine.’



If Revolutionary History plays its rôle as a serious historical journal, respecting the facts of past and present, if it exercises a rôle of independent but constructive criticism, it can make a real contribution to the development of the British left. If it becomes a journal of Bill Baileys, I see no future for it.



 


Fraternally
Ian Birchall






The Editor replies:
Paragraphs 2–3: Did I accuse Cliff of ‘monstrous distortions’? Please read my review again. Are polemics against ‘squadism’, for example, a strategic concern for the construction of a revolutionary party? Were Islington street politics really a topic of burning interest to Trotsky while Hitler was rising to power?
Paragraph 4: Broué and Trotsky support the formation of the Fourth International. Cliff, having built a peculiarly British organisation, tries to clone it into other countries, with less than startling success. Which of them has the ‘strengths’ and which the ‘weaknesses’ on this point?
Paragraphs 6–8: Come off it, Ian! Don’t the facts that Cliff’s reference to your organisation’s 16 years in the Labour Party occupies part of a tiny footnote in his 426-page book about it, and entrism in Britain is wholly omitted in his Trotsky book, remind you just a teeny weeny bit of the historical methods of the notorious Short Course? And if learning from history were so ‘simple’ for your comrades as you make out, why do they describe the formation of the Independent Labour Party as a result of a ‘defeat’ for the movement, when Engels applauded it and became a card-carrying member? And would they have succeeded quite so easily in blacking out from their historical memories the fact that during the whole period of Trotsky’s last exile the Trotskyist groups in Britain were supposed to be entrist organisations, first of all in the Communist Party, then in the ILP, and finally in the Labour Party, a foresight that was so dramatically confirmed in 1945? You are quite right, learning from history can be ‘simple’ – providing you are allowed to get to know about it in the first place. As for size being a criterion for judging the viability of entry, I wouldn’t be so quick to invoke it if I were you. Trotsky called the ILP and the POUM sects when they had tens of thousands of members, the overwhelming majority of them workers, and were far better implanted in the class than you are. Where are they now?
Paragraph 9: Have mass revolutionary parties been founded at any other time than in 1917–22? Well, perhaps. In Vietnam and Ceylon the Trotskyist parties were formed precisely in the same circumstances – from splits inside previously undifferentiated organisations. The possible exception of Bolivia obviously does not count against this historic pattern, since before the rise of the POR there was no real working class party in that country at all. Should serious revolutionaries utterly disregard this whole history, as well as the entire theory of the united front applied to the mass organisations, the essence of the revolutionary experience of Lenin and Trotsky?
Paragraph 10: Obviously myself and Sam Bornstein should not have spent 13 years researching the material for our books on the movement’s history, or wasting the time since in doing the work for this magazine. We should have contributed to the revolutionary movement in more concrete ways – promoting feminism, black power and political correctness, attacking Jewish student clubs for racism, apologising for Islamic fundamentalism, selling Socialist Worker on Edmonton Green, or assaulting the odd seller of Socialist Organiser.
Paragraph 12: I am sorry that you find Lenin’s definition of a workers’ state as ‘a bourgeois state without a bourgeoisie’ to be ‘esoteric dialectical language’. If you don’t understand it, of course I can’t expect any better of your Edmonton Green revolutionaries. Perhaps when you have read Lenin’s full argument about this in the book In Defence of the Russian Revolution that is about to go to the printers, we can have a real discussion about it. But be that as it may, whilst rejecting self-mystifying pseudo ‘dialectics’ of the Healy variety, I do not think in general that revolutionaries should hold its theory of contradiction up to ridicule, for it is vital for us to understand the difference between its contradictions and those of formal logic. A contradiction of this type in formal logic is an error in reasoning; in dialectics, a necessary aid to understanding. If, for example, I were to say ‘I have seen Cliff lie and manipulate in a quite outrageous fashion, but I have accepted it because I am totally convinced of his absolute revolutionary integrity’, that would be a straight logical absurdity. But if I said ‘I support the formation of a particular type of state, because in the long run I am against all states and want them to wither away’, that would be a perfectly acceptable dialectical contradiction. I am pleased to note that your comrade Paul McGarr takes a very different attitude to this question than you do.
Paragraphs 13–14: Again, a bit of reading is required before we can discuss this topic, too. The first theory of state capitalism applied to the Soviet Union within the British Trotskyist movement was worked out by Jock Haston, who learned his Marxism from the Socialist Party of Great Britain, and Cliff was put up to counter this from the workers’ state position by Mandel and Pablo. In the course of the discussion they changed sides. When you have read Haston’s argument in the Internal Bulletin of the RCP and in the series of articles in Socialist Appeal, I feel sure that you will see immediately the stamp of the SPGB’s reasoning. They certainly recognise the affinity between their views and yours, for they have reprinted my previous remarks about this in the Socialist Standard. If you haven’t the time to look all this up, at least read the little summary in War and the International, pp. 182–5.
Paragraph 15: Can the government of a bourgeois democracy collapse as a result of one demonstration? Did Cliff call for a Labour government in the event of a collapse of the Tories, or is it something you have tacked on yourself? From the remarks you made at our AGM that the Labour Party constitutes the same sort of problem for revolutionaries as do the Tories, I find this dialectical reasoning a bit mystifying – too esoteric for me to cope with.
Paragraph 16: I am not a lecturer in foreign languages, so I will have to take your word for this. But I would have thought that systematically avoiding a mention of English translations where they do exist, and quoting from a German quotation of something written originally in French (of which an English version had been around for a year or two) was a bit on the tortuous side. Why otherwise was it done? Perhaps there is a simple explanation for it. You tell me.
Paragraph 17: Of course E.P. Thompson was a superb historian. So were Thucydides and Gibbon, but we would not dream of taking our politics from them. And I do not think that Marxists and internationalists should add to the mass media’s fawning on Thompson’s memory at this time, especially as his political legacy includes an openly expressed hostility to Trotskyism, support for respectable Popular Front-style pacifism in END, and a cosy little English radical tradition contrasted with horrible foreign innovations. Moreover, this is by no means the first time your comrades have gone out of their way lately to praise the traditions, not only of the Communist Party historians’ group, but even of the party itself. In the last few years your party has promoted the myth of Cable Street in its paper, and one of your high profile comrades has even written to the national press in praise of that gruesome old Stalinist (and suspected GPU man) Bert Ramelson. Isn’t this an odd posture to be taken up by a state capitalist tendency? And as for Stalinist and Stalinist-derived historiography in general, I think that we have to admit that its usefulness for revolutionaries today is rather limited. It does, after all, diminish in truthfulness the closer we get to the present.
Paragraph 18: Obviously I am proud of the success of the British Trotskyists in replacing Stalinism as the main force to the left of the Labour Party. But if I wanted to ‘ride on the success’ of the SWP, I might be in for a bit of a steeplechase. I would certainly not like to crash against such a fence as you did in 1975, when your group purged a whole layer of seasoned industrial militants, including entire committees of convenors and shop stewards, along with some impressive second-rank cadre that included one of the founding fathers of British Trotskyism. And while your horse’s energy and grit are to be applauded, I don’t think much of its staying power. The turnover of your members is proverbial. And with your numbers, shouldn’t you by now have a higher working class content (not to mention a firmer implantation in the institutions of the industrial working class)? So why shouldn’t I be allowed to celebrate the fact that we Trotskyists are at least back in the race again, even if I have my doubts about the quality of some of our trainers?
PS: I am not against humour either. I like your little song. Sectarianism, as you know, is defined by our attitudes to the mass movement. Which of your comrades was Bill Bailey? Did I ever meet him?
 



Al Richardson (ed.)
In Defence of the Russian Revolution
Porcupine Press, London, 1995, pp. 287, £12.95
‘NO REVOLUTION resembles those that preceded it’, wrote Karl Radek in 1917 (p. 22). History does not repeat itself, and the one thing we can be sure about any future revolution is that it will correspond to nobody’s predictions. The study of history is valuable in that we can see how revolutionaries confronted unique concrete circumstances in the past, in order to prepare ourselves to confront unique concrete circumstances in the future.
Porcupine Press has thus done us a service by producing this volume of writings by leading Bolsheviks from the 1917–23 period. Too often the history of the Russian Revolution is presented as though there were only three actors – Lenin, Trotsky and the masses. This book presents substantial amounts of hitherto unavailable material from Zinoviev, Kamenev, Radek, Bukharin and Tukhachevsky, thus helping to give a fuller picture of how the collective leadership of the Revolution viewed events.
The volume opens with four pieces by the acute but erratic Radek. We are able to see the theory of Permanent Revolution as formulated by Radek, together with an extended quotation from the pre-war Kautsky showing how he viewed the prospects for revolution in Russia. These texts help to show that the theory of Permanent Revolution was not Trotsky’s personal property, but was integral to the Marxist tradition.
In a later section Trotsky advises friends of Soviet Russia to practise honest reporting – ironically addressing his words to the young Anna Louise Strong! There is a shorthand report of a speech by Lenin on the war in Poland that is not included in the Collected Works, and Tukhachevsky shows how completely the pioneers of the Red Army had broken with nationalism: ‘The army must have forgotten of what nationality it was in its majority composed. It must be aware that it is the army of the world proletariat, and nothing else.’ (p. 173)
There is also a delightful piece of dialogue, written by Trotsky, about the national question. The protagonists are a naive young Communist who has fought in the Red Army, and a more sophisticated comrade. The youngster believes that all forms of oppression can be dealt with by means of simply repeating ‘the class question ... is incomparably more important’ (p. 175). The species is still extant, and not all its members are young. Trotsky cuts through the confusions by advocating a non-uniform attitude to Great Russian and to Muslim nationalism: in relation to the former, ruthless struggle, stern rebuff, especially in those cases when it is displayed in the administrative and governmental sphere; in relation to the latter, patient, attentive, painstaking educational work (p. 181). They are words that should be pondered by those Marxists who saw fit to line up with the French bourgeois state against veil-wearing Muslim schoolgirls.
In a review it is only possible to skim the surface of this valuable and well-presented book. The notes are thorough and unobtrusive, though inevitably a few errors have been included. Alexandre Millerand was not the first French Socialist to enter a bourgeois government; that honour goes to Louis Blanc and Albert in 1848. And it seems odd to describe Fourier as being ‘famous for his asceticism’ when he planned to turn the ocean into lemonade (though I appreciate that some comrades would have preferred real ale) (p. 20).
Unfortunately, it is not possible to be so complimentary about the editor’s introduction. Richardson has rather overreached himself here, trying to use a collection of texts from the 1917–23 period to construct an explanation of events up to 1989. He points out, quite correctly, that no-one on the left predicted the cataclysm of 1989, but since there is no record of Richardson having predicted it either, the mildly messianic tone in which everyone but the editor is pronounced to be out of step is not really justified.
Thus we are told that ‘the present debate between supporters of the workers’ state theory and the proponents of state capitalism’ is ‘a puerile exercise, unworthy of the attention of serious Marxists, as well as being a waste of time and effort’ (p. ix). That puts us all neatly in our places. But is not Richardson, the foremost historian of British Trotskyism, being a little ‘light-minded’ in thus dismissing a debate that preoccupied the movement over at least six decades? As Victor Serge testifies, it was a debate which was carried on amongst Russian oppositionists in face of imprisonment and death. And for a very simple reason. They wanted to know what the enemy was.
And that is a question that Richardson’s analysis will not answer. He tells us that from the outset of the Revolution Russian society contained features of both the workers’ state and state capitalism. Of course he is quite correct in this claim – in fact Lenin saw post-revolutionary Russia as containing no less than five socio-economic structures: patriarchal, small commodity production, private capitalism, state capitalism and socialism (Collected Works, Volume 27, pp. 335–6). From this he deduces that ‘there is no such thing as a healthy workers’ state. It is a necessary, temporary, social evil.’ (p. vi) Again, there is no problem with following Richardson in this, but it does not take us very far. There is no human body free from germs; but some of us walk around quite cheerfully, while others lie on trolleys in the corridors of NHS hospitals. A workers’ state will be contradictory until the day it withers away, but that does not excuse revolutionaries from perpetual vigilance in the struggle to keep it as healthy as possible.
And identifying the contradictions that lay at the heart of the new-born workers’ state does little to assist in the understanding of Stalinism and its aftermath. What made Russia a workers’ state in the first place was the existence of soviets, or organs of direct working class power. They were fragile and imperfect from the outset, but they nonetheless account for the peculiar attractive power that October 1917 had for a whole generation of revolutionaries.
The original soviets were short-lived, as the working class itself was eroded by the course of the Revolution. But in the early 1920s there was still a government committed to restoring the principles of workers’ democracy as fully and rapidly as was possible, as is shown in Trotsky’s article The Rôle and Tasks of the Trade Unions in this volume. And Russia remained, at least until 1923, a base from which revolution might spread to other countries. But by 1929 what ‘gains of the Revolution’ actually survived? Why should any worker, in Russia or elsewhere, have risked his life to defend the Russian state? Surely not state ownership, since Richardson himself concedes that the Russian experience ‘has all but discredited the very concept of public ownership’ (p. i). That is the question that Richardson’s neither-flesh-nor-fish analysis cannot resolve.
Richardson has some inkling of the difficulty. He recognises that there is ‘more than an atom of truth’ (what? a whole molecule? thanks!) in Tony Cliff’s account of the turning-point of the late 1920s, but refuses to recognise it as a qualitative change (p. xii). (Richardson gives no footnote for this reference to Cliff; one wonders why he does not want to encourage his readers to consult the original source.)
This is the crux of the argument. The post-revolutionary Russian workers’ state was indeed contradictory. But the later period of Stalinism was characterised by quite different contradictions – the contradictions of capitalism. As Marx showed in the Communist Manifesto capitalism is a profoundly contradictory system; it is both revolutionary and oppressive. Failure to grasp the contradictions of Stalinism produced the twin errors of Mandel, who saw Russia as economically superior, and the Critique school, who could not explain the very real economic successes (the sputnik) that existed alongside the failures of the so-called ‘planned economy’. Richardson dismisses the state capitalist analysis of the 1989 crisis with the ‘cheap jibe’ that ‘few monopoly capitalists dream of being small shopkeepers’ (p. ii). He should find the time to study Chris Harman’s article The Storm Breaks (International Socialism, no. 46), with its analysis of the transition from state capitalism to multinational capitalism on a world scale. He would find the argument a little more complex than he imagines.
Ironically, Richardson’s analysis defeats his own purpose. He sets out to refute the notion that Leninism led to Stalinism. But by claiming that Stalinism can be explained solely in terms of contradictions inherited from the Revolution of 1917, rather than from the counter-revolution of the late 1920s, he plays straight into the hands of those who seek to establish the Lenin-Stalin continuity. Fortunately, the texts will stand very well by themselves; the introduction may be discarded.
 



1. Positive or Negative?
In the period 1961-62, when the entry of Britain into the European Common Market was last on the agenda, this journal adopted a position of neither ‘for’ nor ‘against.’ It was heatedly accused by many sections of the Left, and even by members of its own Editorial Board, of a negative and isolationist attitude. Now, as Britain once more edges its way towards Europe, it is crucial to analyse our position rigorously so that we may try to avoid the recurrence of old confusions on the Left. However, it should be said that there are in fact two opposing but equally negative approaches to the Common Market on the Left. Both are equally inimical to international socialism, since both divorce internationalism from socialism. There are some, like Tribune, for example, who want socialism now, internationalism later; who fear that the Rome Treaty will inhibit Britain’s ability to ‘plan her own economy’ in security. On the other hand, many continental social-democrats have praised the Common Market in the name of the ancient proletarian abstraction of ‘internationalism,’ putting off for the distant future the question of who should control internationally. The course of events has exposed both these negative positions as illusory. Those who believed that ‘socialism in one country’ was a viable alternative for Britain have now had the opportunity of seeing the socialist potential of a Labour Government. Meanwhile, the commitment of European social-democratic parties to corporatism and neo-capitalism has killed any hope of a gradualist transition from internationalism to international socialism.
Hitherto, the battle between these two viewpoints has been so keenly fought that there has been no opportunity for the development of a genuine positive European policy for the working-class movement. International Socialism has offered little more than a symbolic curtsy in the direction of ‘The United Socialist States of Europe.’
Discussion in the trade union movement usually falls into two categories – issues are either ‘trade union’ or ‘political.’ While wages and conditions are examined in terms of worker against capital on the shop-floor, other questions – especially foreign affairs – are seen in national rather than class terms, and a trade unionist’s attitudes tend to be governed more by his position in the Labour Party spectrum than by his industrial situation.
The need now is for discussion of the European Common Market to be couched in ‘trade union’ and not ‘political’ terms. Workers must leave aside Britain’s economic situation and political role in the world, and think in terms of common demands and action between workers’ organisations internationally. This article will attempt, in broad and approximate terms, to delineate some of the problems facing European workers in the coming years.
 
2. The Unions and Europe
Attitudes to the Common Market within the European trade union movement have tended to fall into the ‘political’ rather than the ‘trade union’ category. In 1955 the European Regional Organisation of the ICFTU [1] organised a conference for the revival of the European idea. The statement it issued set the tone for most discussion on the Common Market among the free trade unions.
‘The necessity of raising living standards and securing full employment in all countries is the reason why the free trade unions seek European-wide solutions of economic problems. The free trade unions demand that every step towards economic co-operation and integration should be accomplished within the framework of a policy of full employment and social progress in general, including an upward adjustment of social conditions.’ [2]
This mood of acceptance of capitalist rationalisation, along with a failure to build international workers’ organisations, persisted in 1963, when the ICFTU-affiliated unions of the EEC countries, meeting at Dortmund, made their main demand the transformation of the existing community into a United States of Europe. [3]
The Fourth General Assembly of free EEC trade unions in 1965, however, noted with some regret that ‘social policy carried out so far has not kept to the timetable laid down by the Rome Treaty.’ But the main solution offered was to call upon the Commission of the Common Market to ‘improve consultation between workers and employers.’ A more significant event, albeit still on the level of abstraction and without any consideration of the methods of struggle, was a report by Otto Brenner of the German metal-workers, calling for a common programme of demands, including the forty-hour five-day week, longer holidays, and equal pay for men and women. [4] The International Federation of Christian Trade Unions, too, puts ‘Europeanism’ well ahead of the defence of workers’ interests. Its General Secretary wrote in 1957:
‘Nor will it be possible to speak with force and pride of Europe and her mission in the world, so long as Europe does not understand that her centuries-old experience in the economic and political field, like her cultural inheritance, is of no value if it is not placed at the service of the other continents, with a view to raising them to a higher level, instead of being wrongly used to hamper their development.’ [5]
In contrast, the opposition to the Common Market of the WFTU seems closer to working-class militancy. In fact, its view was just as much motivated by Cold War politics, and led to a distortion of working-class perspectives. In 1957, Louis Saillant, speaking for the WFTU executive, said:
‘With the active backing of the United States monopolies, the European capitalist monopolies are using the European Common Market as a means to overcome the contradictions which stand in their way, and to co-operate in exploiting the resources of Western Europe and certain countries in Africa. Under these conditions alignment of the social and economic policies of the six European countries concerned can only lead to levelling down of living conditions for the workers as a whole.’ [6]
The obvious short-term falseness of this last prediction, especially as far as Italian workers were concerned, led the EC of the Italian CGIL in 1957 to issue a statement which, while expressing deep economic and political reservations about the Market, concluded that it was generally a ‘good thing.’ This statement led to great debate and gradual reorientation within the WFTU, and at its 1965 Conference, the WFTU favoured work with other union bodies in the institutions of the Common Market.
Thus, there is still a long way to go before we can speak of a working-class strategy for Europe. The two main questions that have to be answered are: first, what sort of demands can be made on a European scale and, second, how can workers’ organisations achieve a greater degree of co-ordination and unity?
A. Common Demands
3. Wages
Article 117 of the Rome Treaty says: ‘Member States hereby agree upon the necessity to promote improvement of living and working conditions for labour, so as to permit the equalisation of such conditions in an upward direction.’ Further provisions lay down the principle of equal pay, and the principle that overtime rates should come to correspond with those in France. [7] This principle of ‘upward harmonisation’ was welcomed by many European trade-union bodies. Its basic unreality under capitalism, however, was quickly seen by Ludwig Erhard, who wrote:
‘With the catchword of “harmonisation” the demand went so far as to suggest that at the end of the transition period, the level of wages in the individual member States should be equalised, and that their total working costs should be “equivalent.” It would be possible to ignore this demand, since economically it is simply unrealisable, for between Sicily and the Ruhr equal productivity does not exist, and there cannot therefore be “equal” working costs. Wage costs at their respective levels are determined by productivity, and not by an assumption of equal performance.’ [8]
Only the Italian trade unions, faced with wage levels well below those in other Common Market countries, have shown any enthusiasm for international bargaining on wages. Complexities of prices, hours worked, overtime pay and exchange rates between currencies make the principle of comparability almost impossible to operate. But in any case the principle of ‘upward harmonisation’ could very easily conceal a pretext for holding back the wages of better-paid workers – thus, of course, weakening the combativity of workers throughout Europe. There is some evidence to suggest that wage rates are increasing fastest in those countries where they had hitherto been lowest [9]:



 


Ratio of
labour
costs


Average increase
in employers’
expenditure on wages
and related costs
1961-1964,
per cent




Germany


100


32




Belgium


  94


36




Luxembourg


  94


19




France


  91


25




Italy


  88


57




Netherlands


  82


42



Nonetheless, wage levels remained substantially different in different countries of the Market. The yearly average net earnings for an underground coal worker with no children have risen as follows (1954=100) [10]:







1956


1960


1963




Germany


123.8


128.2


143.6




France


111.2


123.5


128.2




Italy


103.0


116.5


127.7




Holland


111.6


115.3


123.5




Belgium


107.8


102.2


124.1



Some comparative net yearly incomes of married male wage-earners with-no children in 1962 show the following picture [11]:



 


(Figures in thousands of Belgian francs)




Spinning
and weaving
of wool


Manufacture
of machine
tools


Ship-building
and
repairing




Germany


61.6


76.0


73.4




France


60.2


89.4


83.4




Italy


52.0


65.8


64.1




Holland


66.8


67.1


75.9




Belgium


60.5


81.0


97.1



To this should be added the fact of sharp regional variations within particular countries. Thus it has been estimated that during the 1950s per capita income in the South of Italy was about 45 per cent of what it was in the North. [12]
Upward harmonisation, then, can be no more than a soothing platitude, except in two situations. First, where labour mobility is a practical reality (increasingly important); and second, where organised labour is prepared to fight. To take examples:

In the early 1960s, Holland, attempting to enforce an incomes policy, was faced with a critical labour shortage. This was aggravated by the fact that many workers were crossing the frontier to Germany in pursuit of higher wage rates. On 31 March 1963, 24,229 Dutch workers were employed abroad (24,000 in Germany) as against 4,628 in March 1960. [13] Faced with strikes and labour shortages, the Dutch employers themselves broke the incomes policy.
According to the Rome Treaty, equal pay for men and women was to be realised by 31 December 1961. This was later postponed to 31 December 1964. By February 1966, women workers at the Fabrique Nationale d’Armes de Guerre, at Herstal, near Liege, Belgium, decided they had waited long enough. 3,000 women struck for eleven weeks. Not one of the 5,000 men employed at the factory scabbed. Banners were carried reading ‘Women of the Common Market, forward to a decent wage,’ and the Rome Treaty (for the first time on record) was cited in negotiations. Finally equalisation, as from 1 January 1967, was won. [14]
 

4. Conditions
While upward harmonisation of wages seems unlikely, the standardisation of conditions throughout the Common Market is a popular target. As long ago as 1955, the Italian CISL called for a common European standard of daily working hours, overtime payments and holiday pay, though it later dropped this. [15] The French FO too has looked forward to international agreements on holidays and hours. [16] The 1960 variations in hours and holidays in the European metal-working industries are shown below [17]:



 


Normal
weekly
hours


Total
days of
holiday


Estimated
annual
hours




Britain


37   


18 minimum


1797




Belgium


42½


28 minimum


1981




Germany


41¼


29 minimum


1931




Holland


41¼


20 minimum


1987




France


45   


33 minimum


2087



It is, of course, unreasonable to expect ‘upward harmonisation’ to be given out of charity by the EEC authorities; gains will be won only where workers are strong enough to force them. Nonetheless, the demand for an all-round increase to the best existing conditions in any country provides a useful rallying-point which may help to raise expectations and encourage workers to think in international terms.
 
5. Control
The struggle for wages and conditions brings workers up against the basic fact of capitalist society – the fight for control. A key example of this sort of struggle was the Italian metal-workers’ strike of 1962-63. This was fought on two parallel sets of demands – for considerable increases in the basic wage, but also for extension of the rights and powers of the unions in the factory. Although the employers expressed willingness to negotiate on the wage demands as early as September, 1962, the strike continued, on a partial basis, till February 1963, when the unions won considerable rights on such questions as the classification of skills, work speeds, rates of pay for piece-work and the organisation of production. [18]
This is, of course, only a beginning; and demands for union rights are meaningful only if combined with a struggle for genuine inner-union democracy. This struggle for democratis-ation in the unions is being waged in Holland and elsewhere. [19] In the long run, it may in fact turn out that, while regional variations in wages and conditions make a common programme of demands impossible, the demand for workers’ control will be the central feature of a common strategy for European unions.
 
6. Planning and Trade-Union Integration
But it is not only for the purpose of making demands that trade unionists throughout Europe need to coordinate their activities: it is also for the defence of trade-union independence. Throughout the six countries, trade unions face a twin threat. On the one hand they (or at least their leaders) are offered a share (albeit a minority share) in the planning mechanisms of capitalism; on the other hand, trade unionists contemplating militant action to defend and advance their positions are threatened with legal deprivation of their hard-won traditional rights. The whole argument on trade-union independence cannot be set out here. [20] Trade-union support for incomes policy in Holland, State subsidies to the trade unions in France, bonuses to unionised workers in some industries in Belgium – all form part of the same pattern. Two particular examples of union integration are to be found in the French planning machinery and the German Works Councils.
In the various commissions making up the French planning structure – the most advanced in Western Europe – there is about nine per cent representation of trade unionists as against forty-one per cent of employers. Nonetheless, Parliament must accept or reject the plan as a whole. The German Works Council Law legally imposes the principle of co-operation between workers and employers; workers’ representatives are not only enjoined to secrecy about confidential information, but are forbidden to agitate politically, and must remain neutral during strikes. [21]
Regrettably, almost all European unions take an ambiguous attitude to integration, despite verbal insistence on the necessity for trade-union independence. A prominent CFDT leader has advocated being ‘present in order to fight.’ [22] At one time the CGT refused participation, but the line changed with a statement on 7 January 1963:
‘We must put an end to indefensible discrimination, and assure our representation in the ILO, the European Steel and Coal Community, the EEC and all the administrative councils of the nationalised industries.’ [23]
By participating in the planning machinery at firm, national or international level, unions are associating themselves with decisions they cannot control, and weakening their own members’ will to fight. The nebulous advantages claimed in return are outweighed by secrecy provisions; any information that may be won cannot be freely communicated to the rank and file. Union militants intent on an aggressive European strategy must therefore constantly demand of their leaderships whether cooperation with national employers and the national state is more fruitful than international co-operation with European workers.
 
7. Defence of Trade-Union Rights
Legislation and threats of legislation against the right to strike also exist on a European-wide scale. [24] Coordination and exchange of information between workers is here more than ever necessary; for battles have been won on this front. Thus in Belgium a series of draft laws were put forward which would have seriously reduced workers’ rights. The Left of the Belgian Socialist Party and the FGTB fought these vigorously, and eventually article 421, strengthening central control over the police, was withdrawn, and other clauses were amended. This was only a partial victory, but shows that struggle can be successful.
Sometimes, too, evasion may pay off. In 1963 the French Government passed a law that all strikes in the public sector must be notified at least five days in advance; this would seriously weaken the effect of strikes, for this would give the Government time to prepare to send in troops, or make other arrangements. However, workers realised that it was possible to give notice without going on strike, and so regain the advantage of surprise over the authorities. International discussion on concrete tactics to defend trade-union rights and independence must be a priority wherever international meetings of trade unionists from the Common Market countries occur.
 
B. Organisation for Unity
8. The Existing Bureaucracies
If European workers are to unite in demands and in self-defence, international organisation is a prime necessity. There are, of course, international trade-union bodies in profusion already. Three have substantial membership in the six countries of the EEC; the ICFTU leads with nearly eleven million affiliated workers; the WFTU follows with around five million, while the IFCTU has something short of two-and-a-half million. The inadequacies of the three union bodies are threefold – political, organisational and financial.
(a) The commitments of the ICFTU and the WFTU to cold-war politics are well-known. The history of the creation of the ICFTU by dividing the European trade-union movement in half, liberally aided by American money, needs no repetition, any more than does the WFTU devotion to Russian foreign policy, and its attendant reluctance to discuss trade-union questions at all, for fear of giving the wrong ideas to its Eastern European members. [25] As for the IFCTU, its attempt to set up a separate Christian trade-union centre in post-war Germany must label it as an enemy of working-class unity. [26]
(b) The hierarchical nature of international bodies makes them particularly cumbersome as a means of linking workers. Any communication must rise and sink through several layers of bureaucracy, being well filtered in the process. A sympathetic observer is sceptical of the value of the ICFTU European Regional Conference:
‘The fact that Conference meets only every two years tends to lessen its direct influence on policy issues, and a meeting as heterogeneous as an international trade-union conference is rather more unwieldy than the average delegate conference. This is accentuated by the language problem.’ [27]
In modifying their organisations to meet the needs of the EEC, both ICFTU and WFTU have concentrated more on representation in the official bodies than on co-ordinating workers’ struggles.
(c) Much of the finance for the International Solidarity Funds of both ICFTU and WFTU comes from outside Western Europe, and both have been seriously weakened financially in recent years. [28]
The ICFTU, IFCTU and WFTU may for some time continue to serve as one channel of contact, and as a platform for policies; but it would be foolish to have higher hopes of them.
 
9. Industrial Link-Up
If the official international bodies do not meet the purpose, what alternative to them can be realistically proposed? The ideal of an international shop-stewards’ or rank-and-file organisation must be seen as Utopian for the moment. The difficulties which beset stewards trying to link up within their own industry and country are well-known. But almost insuperable difficulties would be added in the case of international link-up: problems of language, time and expense of travel, as well as the fact that the forms of rank-and-file industrial organisation differ greatly from one country to another. [29]
The real hope for a practical development of European working-class co-operation seems to lie along the lines of linking workers in the same industry in different countries. Sometimes this may be done through the existing trade sections of the ICFTU or the WFTU; often a fresh initiative may be necessary. This should ensure that the discussions of workers are concrete and related to practice. When European workers gather together, their discussion is usually about the European spirit, or about Vietnam; when European metal-workers assemble, they will probably discuss the engineering industry. Maximum rank-and-file participation in such meetings is of course vital. What needs to be explored, then, is the possibility of linking workers, particularly those employed in the growing number of large international companies, and workers involved in the same industry, particularly those industries beset with special problems in the Common Market. This must include improving communications between workers in different countries, and studying the possibility of genuine solidarity action.
 
10. The Tactics of International Capitalism
The Common Market is not just the legal provisions of the Rome Treaty. These are just one aspect of a profound transformation in Western European capitalism. In 1961, the Financial Times described the effects of the Common Market on French industry in these terms:
‘One basic reason for the confidence is that French industry has been stimulated by the Common Market to transform its structure. Almost every day there is news of a merger or a take-over ... Even more results are to be expected from agreements between French and foreign firms. Many American firms, rather than setting up subsidiaries, now prefer to buy their way into minority holdings of French firms. Old established French firms ... are now assiduously courting new American capital. There has been a similar influx of German capital – an estimated DM65 million in the first half of 1959, four times the corresponding figure for 1958.’ [30]
European capitalism is being forced to think more and more in supra-national terms. Many of the newer industries – electronics, nuclear power, synthetic fibres, etc – show far-reaching international specialisation. [31] In 1964 Ernest Mandel wrote: ‘In the last four years we have seen every year about 1,000 conferences of employers’ groups from the six EEC countries and Great Britain.’ [32] The growth of international firms, producing the same product in several countries, poses a particular threat to workers. Examples from the car industry will show the extent to which this problem has developed. By 1964, General Motors was producing 578,300 vehicles a year in Germany, and 250,000 in Great Britain; Ford produced 384,550 vehicles in Germany, and 588,000 in Great Britain; Chrysler 170,000 in Great Britain and 273,000 in France. [33]
Michael Barratt-Brown has outlined the challenges made to workers by the giant international companies, including ‘switches of production made between plants in different countries to offset the influence of strikes, wage claims, taxation charges, tariffs and other restrictions. The “appraisal” of new techniques and new products “in good time” is a euphemism for a whole network of commercial and industrial espionage to watch new research and developments, and ensure that patents and licences are effectively policed. Finally, agreement can be reached among the giants themselves – tacit or explicit – that the most damaging forms of competition, particularly price competition, may be avoided.’ [34]
 
11. Problem Industries
The need for international union co-ordination on the level of specific industries is made clear by looking at the problems of some of the major industries in the Common Market. In many industries the problem of overproduction, with consequent sackings, is a constant one. This is particularly true in the coal industry. European overproduction of coal has hit West Germany and Belgium especially hard. German coal production in 1965 was reduced from 142 million tons to 135 million tons, but the stockpile increased from 8 million tons to 16 million tons and showed no sign of diminishing. Cuts in production of 10 million tons were planned for 1966 and 1967, leading to the dismissal of 60,000 miners. [35] The violence in the Belgian coalfields in February 1966 followed pit closures leading to the sacking of 60,000 Walloon workers and 4,000 Flemish workers. [36] In cotton textiles too, there have been mill closures in Italy and Belgium, and reduced output in France and Holland. In Italy it is estimated that one third of spindles are surplus to requirements. [37] As for the automobile industry, it has been estimated that by 1970, European car production will have reached a capacity of eleven million vehicles a year, while the market will be able to absorb at the most eight millions. [38] If workers of different nationalities are not to be set at each others’ throats by the decline of these industries, international union co-ordination is essential.
Modern industries such as electronics present quite different problems. Jean Auger outlines them thus:
‘Decision making centres have shifted: stage one – from Lyons, Nantes, Bordeaux to Paris; stage two – from Paris to Eindhoven, Milan, Zurich, Detroit, New York. Decisions and enterprises are in America or in other countries while the remainder of work is divided between several factories located in different European countries; thus technological and economic crises will weigh necessarily on the European workers. Employers will not hesitate to exploit this division of labour to exercise pressure on their workers ... Electronics is one of the sectors of French industry where the most advanced units of production are employed. The technique used has been called saupoudrage (sprinkling) – not more than one factory per zone, with each factory being on an average about fifty miles away from the next one. The purpose of this is to avoid competition for labour, and to make it easier to discipline employees.’ [39]
Finally, of course, international union co-operation is crucial in the international transport industries. The Air France strike of 1965 was broken by hiring aircraft from foreign operators [40], and more recently there has been talk of legislation to permit Air France to recruit foreign staff [41], which could be a means of strike-breaking.
 
12. Progress So Far
Faced with these problems, the initiative so far taken by trade unionists to establish international link-ups seem pitifully inadequate. Nonetheless, there has been over the last few years a perceptible quickening in the growth of international contacts. For many years the Italian CGIL has complained that the official machinery of the WFTU is of little use for dealing with concrete trade-union problems, but is good only for political phrase-mongering. Now a series of meetings have been held between the CGIL and the French CGT to discuss the specific problems of the Common Market. However, they have so far confined themselves to rather vague general demands, and with concern to get themselves accepted into the official Common Market bodies. A more concrete theme animated the conference on automation, organised by the German union IG-Metall in 1965. [42] However, this conference too confined itself largely to hearing learned papers, including some from governmental representatives, and did not come to any specific proposals for action.
The most interesting developments are those linking unions of the ICFTU and WFTU. In February 1966, the Italian CGIL participated in a conference on trade-union liberties in Spain sponsored by leaders of the Belgian ICFTU-affiliate FGTB. [43] Even more significant was the decision, in 1964, of the Federation Fransaise des Travailleurs du Livre, a printing union belonging to the French CGT, to request affiliation to the International Graphical Federation, the printing section of the ICFTU. It gave as its principal reason for seeking affiliation the need to co-ordinate with other Common Market printing unions. [44]
The French CFDT has extended its pragmatic approach to work with other unions to the international field. It participated in the London conference on the Concorde airliner, attended by British trade unionists, and representatives of the CGT, CFDT and FO; it contacted CGIL officials and militants from Olivetti factories; and participated with the CGT in conferences on Mediterranean agriculture, together with Italian, Yugoslav and Algerian unions. [45] Fragmented and bureaucratic as such conferences may be, they must be supported as breaking the shell of national self-sufficiency.
 
13. Exchange of Information
In most official statements on European union co-ordination, the ‘exchange of information’ is given prominence, probably because it seems harmless enough, and does not commit anybody to anything.
In fact, the exchange of information is a crucial need. Two sorts of information are required. First, general information about the problems of capitalism in the six countries, and about the nature of working-class organisation. Second, specific information on details of wages, conditions, holidays, etc, for use in bargaining, as well as facts about tactics used against measures taken by employers and governments, such as antitrade-union legislation.
One vital need is an international workers’ press. The official union internationals, and especially the International Trade Sections of the ICFTU, do collate and spread information, but inadequately. Various publications of different sorts exist giving valuable information to militants. Trade Union Press, published fortnightly in Prague, [46] gives selections from the trade-union press of many countries; the pro-Soviet rhetoric can be disregarded. The International Union of Food and Allied Workers’ Associations News Bulletin is a model of an international trade-union paper, giving details of bargaining and gains throughout the food industries. An independent magazine, the International Socialist Journal, published simultaneously in English, French and Italian, gives useful analyses, despite some over-concentration on leadership rather than rank and file. But the field is still wide open for a practical, factual journal specifically geared to the Common Market. As an incitement to action, we might notice that an advertisement in The Times [47] offers, for only £75 a year, Opera Mundi Europe, a special weekly bulletin on the Common Market. How long before the workers have a similar organ of information?
 
14. Solidarity Action
Ever since the CGIL resolution on the Common Market of 1957, militant trade unionists have been calling for united action by workers to combat the increasingly close-knit front of the European employers. But although, as we have seen, contact between workers has greatly developed, solidarity action, has not as yet reached any significant level. Partly, this is a question of communications. With the short, unannounced, unofficial strike, increasingly important nowadays, there is little practical possibility of summoning aid from overseas. But even in cases of prolonged and massive struggle, such as the Belgian general strike or the French miners’ strike, international solidarity is limited. A perceptive article from the trade union press analyses the situation.
‘During the month-long Belgian general strike in the winter of 1960-61 workers all over the world showed their sympathy with the Belgian strikers by sending money and aid in kind. Let us say that this aid covered at the most the cost of one day of the strike. Joint action by all European trade unions to prevent the undermining of the strike would have been far more effective. The real problem was to prevent electric power, stopped at the Belgian power plants, from nevertheless reaching Belgian industry through the neighbouring countries, to prevent the ships which the Antwerp dockers refused to unload from being unloaded anyway at Rotterdam, Southampton or Hamburg, and so forth.
‘The same applies to the French miners’ strike: we have heard of funds being collected and sent to the French unions, but we have not heard of co-ordinated action to stop coal and fuel shipments to France. Press reports indicate that the dockers of Gdynia (Poland) and Odessa (USSR) were instructed not to load coal shipments to France. Whilst we welcome any move that will strengthen the French miners’ position, we also recall that a Polish ship docked at Gijon in the midst of last year’s miners’ strike in the Asturias and insisted that the coal the Spanish dockers refused to handle be loaded by the Spanish army.’ [48]
Leaving aside this last aspect – the bad faith of certain so-called workers’ representatives – a deep problem remains. Improved channels of communication and internationalist education will not alone solve the problem for international solidarity is not a question of ‘sympathy’ but of real self-defence.
 
15. The Problem of Migrant Workers
One field in which the question of internationalism is raised concretely for trade unions of the Common Market is that of migrant workers. The Rome Treaty explicitly encourages labour migration, and the acute labour shortage in some regions, coupled with the surplus of unemployed in areas like Southern Italy, makes it necessary. In addition to migration within the Common Market, there has also been a vast influx of labour from outside.
The Belgian coal-mines have 46,146 foreign workers out of a total labour force of 90,639, including 17,325 Italians. German coal-mining employs over ten thousand Turkish workers, while French iron and steel manufacture employs thirteen thousand Italians and eight thousand Algerians. [49] Germany employs l,300,000 Italians, Spaniards, Portuguese, Greeks and Turks in all. [50] In France, the Fourth Plan’s target of 350,000 immigrant workers was surpassed over a year before the five-year spell was completed, and 1965’s immigration figures are higher than 1964’s. There are over two million Algerians, Spaniards, Italians and Portuguese in France. Illegal entries rose to 76,921 in the first seven months of 1965. [51] The Italian Government runs a special training scheme for workers intending to emigrate within the Common Market.
These figures give an idea of the magnitude of the problem. The difficulties raised by migrant workers for trade unions are threefold:

Undercutting of wages. In France, for example, immigrant workers have been encouraged as a source of cheap labour. Most immigrant workers live in extreme poverty.
Reluctance to organise. Even with internal migration, where language and cultural differences are not so great, it is noticed that in Italy (migrants from the South) and Germany (refugees from the East) migrant workers are difficult to unionise.
Dangers of racialism. In France, over 50,000 immigrant workers live in virtual apartheid in bidonvilles around the great towns, in rough shacks without gas, electricity or sanitation. In Belgium, the dangerous national friction between Flemings and Walloons is accentuated by the presence of large numbers of foreign workers.
 

16. The Unions and Migrant Workers
In general, the response of the European unions to migration problems has remained on the level of abstraction. The ICFTU platitudinously welcomes labour mobility, while the DGB has expressed chauvinistic fears that unplanned immigration may threaten German wage-levels.
However, it seems that the problems will become more acute. An article in Le Peuple (official organ of the CGT) in January 1966 expresses alarm that among the CGT rank and file demands are growing for suspension of immigration, and, among building workers, for priority dismissal of immigrants. [52] Two changes small in themselves, are worth noticing. At the beginning of this year, after news of dismissals, expulsions, arrest and imprisonment of Italian workers in Belgium for their part in the Limbourg miners’ strike, and associated struggles, the CGIL sent a delegation to Belgium to meet the Belgian miners’ union affiliated to the FGTB; talks were held, and plans made for a continuation of the discussions, which bridged both national and ideological barriers. [53]
In June 1964, the French CGT organised a national conference of Algerian workers, attended by 234 Algerians and 142 French workers. Although this was followed up locally in only a few regions, it marked the start of a campaign for complete equality of social benefits for immigrant workers. [54]
 
17. Political Barriers
Constant obstacles to trade-union co-operation and co-ordination throughout the Common Market are, of course, the political and religious divisions running through the Western European labour movement. Only in West Germany are the majority of unionised workers organised in the same federation. [55] The causes of these divisions are many. In Belgium, the divisions between Catholic and Socialist unions can be explained, not only along national lines, but in terms of the history of industrialisation in Belgium since the late nineteenth century. [56] In France too, regional factors are important, the FO being strongest in the Centre and South, while the East and West show a greater following for the CFDT. But divisions in the working-class have been encouraged and fomented by its enemies. The story of the splits in the European trade unions in the immediate post-war period, the role of George Meany (aided and abetted by the Pope), is well known. In Italy, private employers, the State and foreign unions cooperated against CGIL.
‘For many years the American unions have contributed money to UIL and CISL, especially the former. Fiat and Montecatini, the two largest Italian companies, allegedly long helped support these same confederations as part of their fight against GGIL, and it is likely that UIL still receives subsidies from this source. The Ministry of Labour makes some funds available to the unions for vocational training.’ [57]
In the pre-war period it is arguable that union divisions were not wholly harmful. Mandel writes of Belgium: ‘Open rivalry developed, each trade union trying to outbid the other, which incidentally did much to improve the living standards of the workers.’ [58] But in the modern situation, divisions obviously weaken. Where more than one union federation exists, the closed shop is virtually impossible to obtain; in the Netherlands, for example, it is unknown. Union divisions are certainly one cause of the low level of union membership in most Common Market countries; workers are willing to follow any leadership for concrete demands, but do not see the point of paying dues. For many years sectarian hostility between union bodies was high. The WFTU called the ICFTU ‘the splitters of the working class,’ while Social-Democratic union leaders saw Communist-dominated unions as mere ‘transmission belts’ for Party policy. Recently, however, under the influence both of the decline of the cold war and of pressure from ordinary workers for unions that will give priority to trade-union problems, a new climate has developed.
 
18. Unity in Practice
The evolution towards trade-union unity in the Common Market countries has been a long and halting one. As long ago as 1953, the UIL and CISL in Italy signed a pact of co-operation – but a major item was ‘common opposition to international communism.’ [59] Relations between Communist and non-Communist unions have involved at worst sectarian strike-beating, at best cautious pragmatism. Thus until recently in France:
‘As one CFTC activist put the matter, the FO is really a State institution and it would scarcely affect its participation in negotiation if it were to lose its rank-and-file membership entirely. Since the CFTC does not wish to stand alone, it allies itself with the FO. On the factory level, however, the CGT is the main force. Its support there is easily as large as that of the other confederations put together. The same logic which dictates co-operation with the FO at the national level calls for the choice of the CGT as the proper partner on the local scene. The CFTC is nothing if not pragmatic.’ [60]
In Italy, the position has been the reverse of this; while the Catholic CISL long refused any co-operation with the CGIL, the social-democratic UIL accepted unity of action. In Holland, the Catholic NKV and the social-democrat NVV have recently worked closely together, and all three federations have reasonably friendly relations.
Moves towards unity have gone much further at the bottom than at the top. In some French factories – for example Machines Bull at Saint Quentin – CGT and FO have long had cooperation. [61] In 1957, a campaign for a ‘Mouvement Syndical Uni et Démocratique’ (a united and democratic trade-union movement) was launched by rank-and-file militants from CGT, FO and FEN (teachers’ union), and has existed ever since. Big industrial conflicts foster unity. The French miners’ strike was supported by all three union federations. At the beginning of 1966, for the first time since 1948, all three metalworkers’ unions in Italy joined in the submission of a common list of demands to the employers’ associations. [62] In the Belgian General strike, many CSC members joined the strike despite Archbishop Van Roey’s violent condemnation of it. [63] Within the last year, significant moves have been made towards unity from the top. On 10 January 1966 the French CGT and CFTD signed a joint communique. This spoke of five common demands: better wages and conditions; protection of trade-union rights; reduction of non-productive expenditure; guarantee of the right to a job; reform of the fiscal system. It concluded with the promise of further meetings. [64] Bergeron, secretary-general of the FO, saw this as a Communist plot to ‘absorb and destroy democratic organisations such as ours.’ [65] But in May 1966, all three Italian unions met together, although they went no further than to promise further discussions of collective agreements and trade-union finance. [66]
No illusions need be created about such meetings. They are the product, not of a bureaucratic change of heart, but of working-class weariness with ideological wrangling. Thus far they have not gone beyond pious professions of faith, and they may actually facilitate union integration by the State. But they at least create a climate where the cold war theology can be seen as irrelevant to working-class activity.
 
19. The Myth of Political Unity
The struggle for a genuine unified working-class movement must not, however, be confused with some of the demands for ’political unity’ raised on the Left. The Communist Parties, pursuing a ‘Popular Front,’ perpetuate this confusion. [67] A united Left in the present situation cannot be a revolutionary Left; but a non-revolutionary united left serves only to obscure the issues. Thus in France, since de Gaulle took power, three figureheads – each associated with the disreputable Fourth Republic – have been raised to unite the opposition. Each has sought to obscure, in a flood of rhetoric about ‘democratic planning,’ the central issue facing French workers: the integration of the unions into the planning machinery of the State. Thus M. Mendes-France:
‘If subsequently other elements in the nation do not respect the plan, if they try to evade any of its disciplines, the unions are there to enforce what has been agreed, what has rightly been called a contract.’ [68]
And M. Gaston Defferre:
‘Our duty is to use planning and the possibilities of a genuine market economy ... I don’t believe we can proclaim at the same time the shortening of the working day, the lowering of the retirement age, the raising of wages, and the increase in the rate of expansion.’ [69]
Finally M. Mitterand managed to gain Communist and non-Communist support – at Renault all three unions united to work for him [70] – mainly by the device of having virtually no explicit programme at all.
In Italy, the recent unification of the PSI (Nenni socialists) and PSDI (Saragat Social-Democrats), a logical consequence of PSI participation in the Centre-Left Government, may cause serious tensions in the CGIL, where PSI members have long worked alongside Communists. PSDI members belong mainly to UIL:
‘Viglianesi, the head of UIL, accepted De Martino’s suggestion that the members of the new unified party should be allowed for a certain time to choose between the two unions, but he stressed that the final goal was to form a “Socialist trade union” by which he meant that PSI members should leave the CGIL and join the UIL.’ [71]
The West European trade-union movement is undergoing a complex dialectic of depoliticisation and repoliticisation. On the one hand, trade unionists, and even trade-union leaders, are realising the growing irrelevance of traditional political alignments. In 1961, Novella, the Communist President of CGIL, said:
‘In our opinion it is not useful that the trade unions should adopt political slogans or diplomatic positions which are not generally shared and which, as experience shows, are subject to revision.’ [72]
Even before the CFTC took the step of laicising itself to become the CFDT, its teachers’ section had strongly opposed State subsidies to Catholic schools.
But simultaneously, the trade-union struggle for wages, conditions and control is increasingly opposed centrally by the State and international capital; and hence the need for political solutions. This process can only be hindered by premature and opportunistic calls for a united Left.
 
20. Conclusions
This survey has been, of necessity, superficial. Each section deals with topics which are worth a whole article, even a book, to themselves. Some of the recommendations for action put forward here could be put into practice now; many will be relevant to British workers only when Britain enters the Common Market. But at least this article may help to open a dialogue oft European tactics and a European policy. In particular, the views of our European readers on the caricature of themselves here presented would be very valuable.
The European working class has remained nationalistic for the same reasons that it has remained wedded to reformism: in the short-run capitalism is able to satisfy its demands and aspirations within these limits. The day has not yet come when revolutionary internationalism is on the agenda. Until then, the task of building a framework of international contacts and cooperation presents itself with increasing urgency.
 



Ian Birchall writes: André Breton, who died at the end of September, will be remembered primarily as one of the founders of the Surrealist movement, but he should be mourned also by revolutionary socialists. Breton described surrealism as ‘absolute non-conformism,’ and his pursuit of liberty and revolt in art necessarily involved him in politics. The fact that, unlike his fellow surrealist, Aragon, he was not willing to hand himself over to the French Communist Party (of which he wrote, as early as 1930: ‘How can one fail to be terribly disturbed by such a decline in the ideological level of a party formerly so brilliantly armed by two of the greatest thinkers of the nineteenth century?’), does not mean that he was not a revolutionary, a Marxist even, albeit an unorthodox one. He was ready to oppose with equal vigour oppression on both sides of the Iron Curtain.
Breton’s view of revolution was always a total one. In the second Surrealist Manifesto, he called for a study, in revolutionary perspective, of ‘the problems of love, dreaming, madness, art and religion.’ In an attempt to bring together Marx and Freud, he turned back to the most visionary of the Utopian Socialists, Charles Fourier. Breton was personally associated with Leon Trotsky, and in February 1938 visited him in Coyoacan. There, in collaboration with Trotsky and Diego Rivera, he prepared the manifesto, Towards a Free Revolutionary Art, for the launching of the International Federation of Independent Revolutionary Art. (Published Partisan Review, autumn 1938; reprinted Labour Review, autumn 1962). The manifesto stated:
’We believe that the supreme task of art in our epoch is to take part actively and consciously in the preparation of the revolution. But the artist cannot serve the struggle for freedom unless he subjectively assimilates its social content, unless he feels in his very nerves its meaning and drama and freely seeks to give his own inner world incarnation in his art.’
The IFIRA was still-born; but the problem of authentic revolutionary art, rejecting both ‘socialist realism’ and the modern apology for art for art’s sake, remains. Breton will serve us, not because he succeeded, but because he raised the issues.
 



Politics in England
Richard Rose
Faber, 30s
In this book Rose claims to give a ‘sociological’ analysis of political structures ana attitudes in modern Britain. What we get is a string of assertions, platitudinous or impressionistic about the British (ourselves?), curranted with some quite useful statistical material, mainly taken from such works as Almond and Verba’s The Civic Culture.
Rose’s definition of politics is a narrow one; he accepts on its face value the survey finding that 85 per cent of the population are not ‘very interested’ in politics. He is interested in form rather than content; thus the same paragraph on pressure groups can compare the National Union of Mineworkers and the Automobile Association. CND rates a few bewildered mentions; the relation of the Bomb to the political power structure is not within Rose’s compass. He is struck by the fact that half the electorate read pro-Labour papers – but not by the fact that virtually the whole press is anti-trade-union. The relation of economics to politics is summed up in the inane sentence: ‘Money does not have the same weight in politics as in business, because though it may purchase goods in business, it cannot be used in politics to purchase votes’ (p.110).
As a result, Rose is impressed above all by the degree of consensus in British society. ‘Wildcat strikes’ get one brief mention. (Rose doesn’t want a demarcation dispute with the industrial sociologists.) Society is stable because of the ‘general socialisation process.’ Thus ‘for the Etonian, the goal may be going into politics; for a boy at a local secondary modern school, becoming an apprentice engineer in a motorcar factory. Such individuals do not compete with one another for advancement in society; they do not meet’ (p.123). Except in the non-political struggle for wages.
Some day soon Rose’s cardboard model of England is going to explode in his face.



La Question Chinoise dans l’Internationale Communiste
(1926-1927)(presented by) Pierre BrouéÉtudes
et Documentation Internationales, 16.10F
Readers of French will find great interest in this collection of
documents on the Chinese question in the Communist International in
the period 1926-1927. It contains texts by Stalin, Trotsky, Zinoviev,
the Chinese left oppositionist Chen Du-xiu, and others, as well as
the letter from Shanghai by the mission of the Communist
International to China. Stalinist opportunism during this period
meant neglect of building an independent workers’ movement in
favour of work within the Kuomintang. The Chinese Communist Party
opposed strikes by non-industrial workers so as to preserve a front
with the petty-bourgeoisie, and the German Communist Press even
presented Chiang Kai-schek as the leader of the Chinese workers. The
outcome was the massacre and destruction of the Chinese proletarian
movement.
The texts by Stalin are an object-lesson in how to transform
dialectics into bourgeois relativism; any opportunism or betrayal is
justified by ‘specific national conditions.’ Trotsky, on
the other hand, makes a lucid adaptation of the permanent revolution
theory to Chinese conditions. The Chinese question posed
internationalism in a concrete form, for the betrayal of the Chinese
workers was closely linked to the smashing of the left opposition in
Russia. Two questions remain with the reader. Firstly, have those
Maoists who today revere the memory of Stalin any knowledge of this
period? Second, how many revolutionaries in underdeveloped countries
will be betrayed because they trust Mao in the way the Chinese Party
trusted Stalin?
 



Histoire du Parti Communiste II (Vingt-cinq ans de drames 1939-1965)
Jacques Fauvet
Fayard, Paris, 19.75 F.
In 1947, a conference was held, of delegates from nine European Communists Parties. Eighteen years later, the only party both of whose delegates survived with untarnished reputations was the French. As Britain lurches towards Europe, we need a deeper understanding of the French Communist Party, dogmatic, chauvinistic and tortuously opportunistic in its political line, but firmly rooted in the working class. To demonstrate the non-Marxist nature of the PCF is like taking toffee from kids – which is not to say that it should not be done clearly and often. One need only cite the Wilsonian rhetoric of Thorez at the Liberation: ‘We wish to participate enthusiastically in the battle for production. As under the occupation, to win the war, we will cooperate with all good Frenchmen, workers, industrial or white collar, peasants, employers, intellectuals’ – and even worse: ‘I was told the other day that in one pit about fifteen young miners asked to stop work at six to go dancing. I say this is impermissible.’ In face of the PCF’s recent grovelling promiscuity in organising a popular front against de Gaulle, it is as well to remember that in 1946 L’Humanité was disciplined by the party secretariat for criticising de Gaulle who had just left the Government. But the real problem is that of the relation of the party to the class. Since 1945, the Party’s membership has been halved. Nonetheless, with the solitary exception of 1958, it has maintained a vote of over four million, over 20 per cent of votes cast. It is estimated that in Paris and Marseilles, around two thirds of all workers vote Communist, and the party is not noticeably weaker among the so-called ‘new working class.’ Yet the party has less factory cells than in 1945, and its greatest growth has come in rural areas. If the fact that large numbers of Communist voters supported de Gaulle in 1947 and 1948 can in part be explained by the Party’s flirtation with the General at the Liberation, the loss of votes directly to Poujade in 1956, indicates quite clearly that many PCF votes are for ‘change’ pure and simple rather than proletarian revolution.
The relation of the Party with the CGT also deserves examination. In 1947 there was disagreement between party and union leaders on wage increases; in recent years a substantial opposition has developed in the CGT.
M. Fauvet’s book does not deal with all these questions. To answer them, we should need, not only more sociological studies like those done by Charles Micaud on CGT militants, but also the Secret Diaries of Benoit Frachon. In the meantime M. Fauvet offers a readable journalistic account of the ups and downs (should one says lefts and rights?) of this puzzling aspect of working-class history.



The Twelve Chairs
Ilf and Petrov
Muller, 25s
The Golden Calf
Ilf and Petrov
Muller, 21s
The translation of these two novels will be welcomed by all those whose knowledge of Ilf and Petrov has previously been of a few short stories, such as the brilliant Soviet Robinson Crusoe (order your back numbers of IS now).
The plots of the two novels, built around the charming crook Ostap Bender – the search across Russia for twelve chairs, one of which contains a fortune in jewellery, and the attempt to relieve a Soviet millionaire of his clandestine fortune – are unremarkable, but they provide the opportunity for a string of brilliant sketches and observations. Often they ridicule the bureaucracy: the abstracted official who asks a young couple whether they have come about birth, death or marriage; the state humourist desperately looking for ‘something funny and at the same time socially useful about the unfair tariff rates on slow-delivery goods consignments;’ the old man composing riddles, charades, conundrums and picture puzzles on ideologically correct themes. But they are equally at home with scenes of knock-about farce, or with such details as the man who eats cold soft-boiled eggs.
It is often asked why Ilf and Petrov remained unscathed while left oppositionists and old Bolsheviks were being murdered all around them. The key to their philosophy of life is to be found in a remark of Bender’s: ‘Did you know, Zosya, that everyone, even Communists, are subjected to an atmospheric pressure of four hundred and seventy pounds?’ The real object of Ilf and Petrov’s satire is human nature; their standpoint one of warm but apolitical common sense. This is their strength – they are an oasis of humanity in a period when Marxism was being transformed into a close-knit system for the oppression of the working class. But it is also their weakness. Searching comments (‘In Russia there are Jews, but no Jewish problem’) are made, but not followed up. The purges are briefly mentioned, then we are diverted into the hilarious story of a lunatic asylum where potential victims of the purges take refuge. Ilf and Petrov seem sometimes to share the nostalgia of the old caretaker for his former master who promised him a medal, or of the confidence trickster for the days when the police could be bribed. One suspects they find ludicrous, not only bureaucratic perversions of Marxism, but Marxism itself.
The French court of the seventeenth century applauded Molière, who presented absurd aristocrats – as one aspect of the absurdity of human nature. Similarly, Stalinism could permit Ilf and Petrov to purvey satire which, however amusing, has no basic social content.



Intellectuals in Politics
Joseph Hamburger
Yale, 56s
This book tells the story of the group of philosophers around John Stuart Mill who were active in Parliamentary politics in the years following 1832. It is interesting in that it shows the interlocking in practice of political history and the history of ideas. Mill and his friends belonged to the mainstream of bourgeois liberalism. They drew on the utilitarianism of Bentham and James Mill, which in turn owed much to the French philosophes of the eighteenth century; they were also influenced by the élitism of Comte and Saint-Simon.
The duality of liberalism and élitism runs right through the theory and practice of the Philosophical Radicals.
Their basic demands were an increase in democracy by an extension of the suffrage. But this was an essentially paternalist move; they considered that by constitutional change the people could be ‘made better, morally or intellectually,’ and that the working class were the ‘most teachable’ section of society. Mill shared the positivist view that politics could aspire to scientific objectivity. A politician should be like a doctor; a man is free to choose his doctor, but not to instruct him what to prescribe.
Class conflict was therefore explained away as the product of ignorance; working class and ‘middle rank’ had interests in common, and only the anti-intellectual aristocracy was an obstacle to good Government.
Hence, with the rise of Chartism, the Philosophical Radicals faded away; even though their programme was in many ways similar to the political demands of the Chartists, they could in no way be reconciled to the class content of Chartism. So Mill wrote his Logic, and the group collapsed. Liberalism, utilitarianism and positivism had confirmed their inability to unite theory and practice.
 



Ian Birchall writes: The Belgian situation of the last few months, with prolonged Parliamentary crisis and spasmodic outbreaks of nationalist violence, has been a complex and confused ones but the economic factor is a unifying thread.
It is ironic that, while the Common Market presents the main challenge to European workers, the Fleming-Walloon split still persists with such violence in Belgium. But the interpretation in purely racial terms is a superficial one. It is true; that the linguistic question is taken highly seriously by many, including students; true that neo-fascist groupings like the Flemish Volksunie have a marked influence; true that many Flemings still regard Nazi collaborators with affection.
But the real conflict is to be explained historically and economically. The Southern, Walloon area was industrialised nearly half a century before Flanders. It has a deeper socialist tradition, and provides the backbone of support for the social-democratic Fédération Générale des Travailleurs Belges. It has also given birth to movements like the left-wing but ambiguously nationalist Mouvement Wallon Populaire. Flanders, without the same socialist traditions, is under Catholic influence, and furnishes die strength of the Centre Syndical Chrétien. The situation is complicated by the rapidly increasing Flemish population, which will be twice that of Wallonia by 1980; and by the presence in Belgium of over half a million foreign workers (six per cent of the total population, ten per cent of the population of Brussels, and 14 per cent of that of Liège.)
The, violence at Limbourg in January, when two miners were murdered by the police, arose From the overproduction of coal in Western Europe (which affects Germany, NOW facfcdu with a stockpile of 16 million tons), as well as Belgium. In the days before the Limbourg incident, pit closures cost the jobs of 60,000 Walloon workers, and of only 4,000 Flemings.
At the same time, Belgium faces economic problems. The high level of public expenditure and the budget deficit threaten inflation; the national debt is expected to rise by 15 per cent in 1967.
While taxes for workers increased, the doctors took advantage of the situation to demand 25 per cent increases in medical charges. This was the immediate cause of the fall;of the Socialist-Social Christian Cabinet. Mr Van den Boeynants’ Liberal-Social Christian coalition confirms the basic law for Social Democratic parties; no reforms can be won by entering coalition governments, and you finish up out anyhow.
Many years ago, Rosa Luxemburg urged the workers of Europe to team to ‘speak Belgian’; it is now even more urgent that the workers of Belgium learn to speak European.
 





 


Dear Socialist Review,
Noel Halifax’s article The Sounds of Struggle (SR 52) marked a welcome break from the recent cultural policy (or non-policy) of Socialist Review. When a boring ex-Trotskyist called Ted Grant was thrown out of the Labour Party, Socialist Review dissected the manoeuvre with loving care. But when an exciting black singer called Eddy Grant got to number two in the charts with a record openly advocating street violence, Socialist Review did not deign to notice.
Or again, asked to vote for what they considered to be ‘event of the year’ for 1982 New Musical Express readers put the Falklands War second and Greenham Common third. What came first? The breakup of The Jam. The most prestigious bourgeois newspaper in Europe, Le Monde sent its correspondent to London specially for The Jam’s farewell concert. Once against Socialist Review was looking the other way.
Certainly Noel’s article was a cut above other recent Socialist Review contributions on music. Jennifer Batchelor’s defence of Wagner (SR 48) was just a rerun of the tired old argument about ‘taking over the best of bourgeois culture’ (though why Wagner’s anti-Semitic pretentiousness should be the ‘best’ I don’t know). Opera used to be for the elite but now ‘we’ can all see it on television. Jennifer should ponder Brecht’s remark that ‘literary works cannot be taken over like factories.’
The other side of the coin to Jennifer’s paternalism is Marta Wohrle’s liberalism in defence of disco music (SR 49). Disco is as good as anything else because it is ‘quite good fun’. This attitude is nothing but passive consumerism. Many years ago, back in the good old days when he was half-way to being a Marxist, Edward Thompson wrote a crushing rejoinder to this sort of cultural liberalism:
‘The imagery is that of the prospectus of a new self-service store. Mr Wollheim will draw Proust and Mr Jones will draw Seventy Splendid Nudes and Mr Brown will draw the ‘Book of Revelations’ and I will draw the Niebelungenlied – and what the hell shall we all do with what we draw?’
As against all this Noel asserts quite clearly that music is political, and that the only music worth bothering with is that which comes out of the rock tradition. At the risk of seeming ungrateful, I nonetheless feel obliged to express some reservations about Noel’s arguments.
First of all, is it really still necessary in 1983, to prove one’s Trotskyist credentials by belabouring the Proletcult? The Proletcult was a far richer and more complex phenomenon than Noel’s caricature would suggest. I would commend to Noel’s attention Victor Serge’s 1925 essay Is a Proletarian Literature Possible?; this gives a vivid account of what the Proletcult actually meant in practice:
‘... the fifty workers in the Workers Springtime group have been turning out “extensive work in the last period, having tackled 15 plays, 76 short stories, 261 poems and 20 lectures, in 96 evening meetings attended by 450 writers.” Don’t laugh at these laconic statistics. Remember that two-thirds of these workers walk in the winter snows of Russia with holes in their boots. They don’t go to the cafe. They work and write with the lovely candour of children determined to grow up.
‘The Vagranka Group in the Rogoysko-Siminovsky suburb of Moscow is made up of sixteen workers who write for the press. Perkati-Pole, an old Bolshevik writer, a forgotten man, blind and dirt poor, gathers them in his comfortless lodgings and teaches them how to get rhythm into their verse and prose. There are not enough chairs; they crouch in a circle on the floor. They arrive smelling of tar, machine oil and metallic dust.’
As far as the claim that Socialist Realism somehow descends from the Proletcult, this is nothing but an unfounded smear. In any case the relevance of the Russian debate is limited. The cultural level of the Russian working class in 1917 was utterly different from that of the British working class in 1983, and there can be no real comparison as far as cultural struggle is concerned.
I am likewise unconvinced of the relevance of the German experience which Noel discusses. There is nothing unique about the way in which the German SPD used cultural organisations in order to consolidate its base. In 1926, for example, our very own Herbert Morrison had organised twenty London Labour choirs – though the projected London Labour Symphony Orchestra never got off the ground.
Morrison, incidentally, was adept at using music in a manipulative way. His biographers tell us that at Party socials he
‘rationed the dances to one person, and never concentrated on the gay young “flappers”, but flirted with the more elderly ladies. In this way he built up a core of devoted admirers, his “key women” ... He knew how to charm them and was proud to have them almost fighting each other to get a dance with him.’
But all this belongs to a bygone age of reformism; we can scarcely imagine the Labour Party developing such cultural practices again. Its lack of an actively involved working class base makes it impossible.
Which leaves us with the question of what is to be done. Here I found the latter part of Noel’s article rather disappointing. Noel seems to be so busy looking over both shoulders simultaneously to prove that he is both a swinger and a Bolshevik that he doesn’t offer any perspective for intervention. Yet the important thing to be learnt from Trotsky’s writings of the twenties is not his critique of the proletcult, and not his defence of the autonomy of art (we have bourgeois critics in profusion carrying that argument), but his insistence on the role of the Party in cultural struggle. Trotsky argues that the Party must intervene sensitively and intelligently with artists groping for new forms to express new situations and new values – but it must intervene.
‘The domain of art is not one in which the Party is called upon to command. It can and must protect and help it, but it can only lead it indirectly ... The Party stands guard over the historic interests of the working class in its entirety. Because it prepares consciously and step by step the ground for a new culture and therefore for a new art, it regards the literary fellow travellers not as the competitors of the writers of the working class, but as the real or potential helpers of the working class in the big work of reconstruction. The Party understands the episodic character of the literary groups of a transition period and estimates them, not from the point of view of the class passports of the individual gentlemen literati, but from the point of view of the place which these groups occupy and cam occupy in preparing a Socialist culture ... The Party will repel the clearly poisonous, disintegrating tendencies of art and will guide itself by its political standards.’
Noel is quite right to stress the roots of music in working class creativity and self-activity. (The point might well be studied by Colin Sparks, who in the same issue of Socialist Review uses the analogy of the orchestral conductor in a rather sinister defence of the necessity for managers under socialism. A cursory glance at Top of the Pops will reveal that it’s quite possible to get by without a conductor).
But the problem of ‘selling out’ is not simply one of an eternal contradiction between working class creativity and the capacity of bourgeois culture to co-opt and defuse radicalism. It may be true that Elvis Presley, John Lennon and Tom Robinson all ‘sold out’. But they were not all the same sell out. The trajectory of an individual artist will depend on the state of ideological health of the system, the general level of the class struggle, and the alternative forms of organisation offered by the working class movement.
To take one example among many. Listen to The Jam’s Little Boy Soldiers (on the Life in the European Theatre LP) and ask yourself why performers with that degree of analysis and sheer hatred of the capitalist war machine aren’t in some sort of organised relation with the revolutionary left. It’s no good saying they’re too rich or that Polydor wouldn’t let them; Paul Robeson and Charlie Chaplin weren’t exactly short of a bob or two. The answer must lie in the relative isolation of the revolutionary left and its lack of adequate structures for cultural intervention. It may well be that, Rock Against Racism, like the Rank and File Movement, is too ambitious a form of organisation for the present phase of the downturn. But the fact remains that the task of the Party is cultural struggle, not cultural-commentary.
As one of the Redskins put in on Channel Four a few weeks ago: ‘There are too many rock and roll philosophers interpreting the world; the point is to fucking change it.’
Now shouldn’t he be in the SWP?
Ian Birchall
* * *
Editor’s Note: Chris Moore of the Redskins is a member of the SWP. As we said before, socialists argue over music – any other contributions to this debate, or any other would be welcome.
 



Ian Birchall reviews André Gorz’s new book Farewell to the Working Class (Pluto, £3.95).
André Gorz has not so much written a book as failed to write two different books, each of which might have been useful in its own way.
The first book Gorz has failed to write is a study of the effects of new technological developments on modern capitalism and the class struggle. Such a study would be of enormous importance for socialists. But Gorz gives us no more than the random impressions of a literary intellectual bemused by technological advance. Startling facts (‘In the post office, automation has reduced to three the number of employees required to sort and cancel 27,600 letters an hour’) are quoted out of context in a style more appropriate to an advertising copywriter than to a serious political commentator.
The second book Gorz has not written is a critique of Marxism. Again, Marxists should always welcome the opportunity to sharpen their wits on an intelligent criticism, which challenges the internal logic or the contemporary relevance of Marxism. But Gorz has done no more than pick up one of the tiredest of Cold War clichés – Marxism is a ‘religion’, with ‘priests, prophets, martyrs, churches, popes and wars of religion’. Working class militants are denounced for their ‘rigidity, dogmatism, wooden language and authoritarianism’.
 
Aborted books
Gorz has rammed the two aborted books into one. The confusion is compounded by a wilfully pompous style and a style of argument that consists in attributing to one’s opponents views they have never held, and then spectacularly demolishing them.
However, the working class is not exactly trendy among certain sections of the Left at present, and Gorz’s book may enjoy a vogue in certain circles. So it may be worthwhile to try to disentangle some of the arguments and examine their validity.
Gorz begins from the changes wrought in the social system by technological innovation:
‘Automation and computerisation have eliminated most skills and possibilities for initiative and are in the process of replacing what remains of the skilled labour force (whether blue or white collar) by a new type of unskilled worker. The age of the skilled workers, with their power in the factory and their anarcho-syndicalist projects, has now to be seen as but an interlude which Taylorism, “scientific work organisation”, and, finally, computers and robots will have brought to a close.’
This is all right as far as it goes; but it doesn’t go very far. Gorz is remarkably vague about when this change occurred; anarcho-syndicalism was largely dead by the 1920s and certainly none of the skilled workers I know has an ‘anarcho-syndicalist project’.
From this Gorz goes on to claim, rather sweepingly, that modern society has reached the end of a process ‘making work virtually superfluous’. When he actually quotes sources the predictions are more modest – for example that by 1990 major production centres in the USA will have achieved a 32-hour week.
But facts are the least of Gorz’s worries; he continues with broad assertions:
‘... the abolition of work is a process already underway and likely to accelerate ... it is absolutely impossible to restore full employment by quantitative economic growth.’
Now of course there is some truth (and pretty obvious truth) in all this. Automation is one of the causes of unemployment. But there are others. One is a world recession, where workers go idle while workers’ needs are unfulfilled. Another is the deliberate will of the ruling class to use unemployment to break trade union organisation. Any serious attempt to analyse the current crisis has to begin by relating these three factors, not by abstracting one of them.
Instead, Gorz prefers to use his one-sided analysis as the launching pad for a moralising attack on a ‘socialist morality’ which, he alleges, ‘equates morality with love of work’. And from this he goes on to identify the ‘traditional working class’ (’unionised, stably employed workers, protected by labour legislation and collective agreements’) as being no more than a ‘privileged minority’. Once again a very old half-truth (the conservatism of the most skilled layers of workers has been a recognised problem in the labour movement since the late nineteenth century) is dolled up as a new insight.
In place of work, which is disappearing, Gorz puts a rather ill-defined notion of ‘autonomous production’, with a number of gestures in the direction of cooperatives, the women’s movement, etc. And on this basis Gorz is able to consign Marxism to the dustbin. All that Marx did, apparently, was to translate Hegel’s history of Spirit into an equally idealistic history of the working class. The historical role attributed by Marx to the working class has no ‘empirical verification’.
 
Historical role
Now it is obvious that Marxism cannot be ‘proved’ empirically; otherwise there would be no need for any argument. Marxism will only be ‘proved’ when we make the successful socialist revolution. But when Marxists attribute a certain historical role to the working class, they base themselves on a century and a half of experience, from the Paris rising of 1848 to the Polish struggles of 1980. All this is simply ignored by Gorz; a couple of quotations from the Grundrisse suffice to erect a straw person who can be easily demolished.
At this point some of my more perceptive readers may be beginning to get a glimmer of a suspicion that Gorz is an intellectual charlatan. Despite his arrogance in dismissing most other socialists, Gorz is far from original. Almost every point of value made in his book was already made a full hundred years ago by one of the very first French Marxists, Paul Lafargue, in a pamphlet called The Right to Idleness. Lafargue condemns the love of work as ‘madness’, looks forward to a three-hour working day, and hails machinery as the Redeemer of Humanity.
Another striking indication of Gorz’s intellectual confusion is his use of sources. He picks snippets from all points of the political compass, with no apparent regard to the contradictions between them. Thus he quotes with approval Antonio Negri (falsely accused by the Italian state of inspiring Red Brigade terrorism) and a few pages later hails the ‘path-breaking’ achievements of Roy Grantham of APEX. Indeed a strange pair of bedfellows.
It must also be pointed out that Gorz’s past record is not impressive. In 1966 Gorz delivered a lecture which began with the prophecy:
‘It is unlikely that in the foreseeable future there will be a crisis in capitalism so acute that, in order to protect their vital interests, workers will resort to a revolutionary general strike or armed insurrection.’
When, two years later, ten million French workers proved him wrong, Gorz leapt on to the bandwagon, becoming an ardent advocate of the views of the Italian ultra-lefts in Lotta Continua. Now that the promises of 1968 are beginning to fade, Gorz is making sure that his descent from the bandwagon will be noticed on all sides.
 
In moderate measure
But beyond all this, the real key to Gorz’s position is that he is a Utopian. He has, in moderate measure, the virtues of Utopianism; that is, he shows us the possibilities of an alternative to the present social order. He outlines the feasibility of a two-hour working day, or a ten-year working life. He shows how an economy geared to highly advanced technology could be combined with a society in which there was a very considerable degree of decentralisation and self-organisation.
But on the key question of how we get to this desirable state of affairs, Gorz has nothing to say. Having abandoned the agency of the working class, Gorz has nothing to replace it with but a ‘non-class of non-producers’, whatever that might be. And the extravagant flourishes of Utopianism give way to the most abject reformism in Gorz’s conclusion, when he declares that:
‘In the social and postal services, in local government, the hospitals and health care centres, all that is needed is a simple ministerial directive to ensure that work in one’s own freely chosen time becomes a reality. It is a fundamental reform that will cost practically nothing.’
In bidding farewell to the working class, Gorz also seems to have bidden farewell to the world economy, the ruling class and the state. Economic trends in France and the USA are abstracted from the growth of the working class in the Third World (which rates scarcely a mention). There is no recognition of the fact that the class struggle is the product, not of a few dogmatic Marxists, but of the determination of the existing ruling class to preserve their privileges.
Gorz blithely quotes an opinion poll in which, offered the choice between higher wages and more free time, a majority opted for more free time. That, unfortunately, is not the choice before us. Those who rule at present want both more sackings and wage cuts (the Economist recently argued that wages in the advanced countries are between 8 percent and 24 percent higher than they ‘ought to be’). And, despite Gorz’s hairsplitting about what constitutes the ‘state’, it is clear they will use the whole repressive machine to get their way.
When it comes to more practical issues Gorz shows incredible naivety. He hails job-sharing and flexible working hours as inroads into the new society, although as he himself notes, they lead to greater productivity, which is presumably why the employers permit and encourage them.
Yet amid all the talk of the ‘abolition’ of work, Gorz does not seem to have noticed the devastating effects that workers can still have when they refuse to work. The ruling class, their governments, and their associated lackeys still spend a good deal of their time breaking or avoiding strikes – but the word ‘strike’ does not appear one single time in Gorz’s book.
Likewise, Gorz is quick to dismiss the possible role of workers’ councils:
‘Workers’ councils – which were the organs of working class power when production was carried out by technically autonomous teams of workers – have become anachronistic in the giant factory of assembly lines and self-contained departments.’
Such a formulation simply ignores the historical experience that in the major upsurges of workers’ councils (Russia 1905 and 1917, Germany 1918, Hungary 1956) these bodies were not primarily concerned with the organisation of production, but with the general crisis of society.
 
Political flexibility
Yet for Gorz the overriding advantage of bidding farewell to the working class is the political flexibility it permits. On the one hand one can appear infinitely radical, breaking with old dogmas. Yet at the same time one can latch on to anything that moves – ecology, feminism or any other flavour of the month. Socialism may come at the behest of the Virgin Mary ... or of Francois Mitterrand.
It is noteworthy that among Gorz’s sources, cited with a reverence seldom shown to the Marxist classics by their devotees, are Jacques Attali and Jacques Delors. Now these men are not just any old academic hobbledehoys. Attali coached Mitterrand in economics before the elections and is now one of a select trio who breakfast with the President every Tuesday. Delors, an ex-Gaullist, is generally recognised as one of the most right-wing ministers in Mitterrand’s cabinet. These men, Gorz would have us believe, understand the realities of modern society. Yet the Mitterrand regime has run away from even the modest goal of the thirty-five hour week, and has contributed to the workless society by cutting dole payments. There is a lesson to be learnt here; but we can be sure that Gorz won’t learn it.
 






Shaw was one of the backbones of Fabianism. Yet his biting social satire makes modern reformists appear mealy-mouthed. Ian Birchall assesses the basis of Shavian politics.





Slagging off George Bernard Shaw has long been popular among British Marxists. In the thirties Christopher Caudwell labelled him a ‘Social Fascist’; in the eighties Terry Eagleton dismissed him as ‘the grandfather of all naturalists.’ The lesser fry have followed suit.
And certainly Shaw’s political record invites denunciation. In 1882, at the age of twenty-six, he discovered Marx and rapidly became a socialist activist. He was well-known as an open-air speaker, adept at dealing with hecklers.
But this was a short phase of his career. On 13 November 1887, ‘Bloody Sunday’, Shaw took part in a demonstration viciously attacked by police. This seems to have shaken his faith in mass action. He broke with his old friend William Morris and became openly identified with Fabianism. There can be no doubt that it is Morris, not Shaw, who represents the best tradition in British socialism. For Shaw it was downhill all the way. Fabianism meant a contempt for trade unionism and all forms of working class self-activity and a belief that reform would be carried through by benevolent intellectuals.
In 1914 the First World War left Shaw confused; his position is so contorted that it is hard to say if he was for or against the war. (Yet such was the graven capitulation of his fellow-writers that Shaw’s position is still better than, any other member of the British literary establishment, with the solitary exception of Bertrand Russell.)
About his last years the less said the better. In Back to Methuselah Shaw looked forward to an extension of the human life-span – but if his own had been thirty years shorter his reputation would have been sweeter. Support for Stalin, vilification of Trotsky and flirtations with Hitler and Mussolini marked his long decades of senile decline from the twenties to his death in 1950.
But there remains the Shaw that Lenin and Brecht admired, Shaw the writer of plays, prefaces and political polemics. And from this Shaw there is still something to be learnt.
First of all there is Shaw’s unashamed partisanship. Unlike so many mealy-mouthed writers of today’s left, Shaw made no attempt to conceal the fact that he was writing for a purpose. The Preface to Widowers’ Houses, his first – and finest – play states that the work is ‘deliberately intended to induce people to vote on the Progressive side at the next County Council election in London.’ (Where is the radical playwright today who would do as much for Ken Livingstone?) Shaw even claimed that he wanted to bring a blackboard on stage in Widowers’ Houses in order to explain value theory to the audience.
This partisanship is a major merit in Shaw – but what makes him truly valuable as a writer is his ability to write effectively, to fight for his ideas in prose that is both powerful and entertaining. As Brecht put it:
‘He knows that there is nothing more time-wasting and distracting than a particular kind of seriousness which is popular in literature but nowhere else ... He gives the theatre as much fun as it can stand.’
It is here, above all, that we can learn from Shaw. Most left propaganda today comes in drab journals, carefully edited to ensure political orthodoxy and stylistic anonymity. Shaw’s indictment of bourgeois society remains as true today as in 1883, when he wrote An Unsocial Socialist.
 
Unfavourable impressions
‘Modern English polite society, my native sphere, seems to me as corrupt as consciousness of culture and absence of honesty can make it. A canting, lie-living, fact-hating, scribbling, chattering, wealth-hunting, pleasure-hunting, celebrity-hunting mob, that having lost the fear of hell, and not replaced it by the love of justice, cares for nothing but the lion’s share of the wealth wrung by threat of starvation from the hands of the classes that create it.’
And as Thatcher prepares to complete the destruction of the National Health Service, it is well worth looking again at the Preface to The Doctor’s Dilemma (1906), where Shaw explains what private medicine really means:
‘It is not the fault of our doctors that the medical service of the community, as at present provided for, is a murderous absurdity. That any sane nation, having observed that you could provide for the supply of bread by giving bakers a pecuniary interest in baking for you, should go on to give a surgeon a pecuniary interest in cutting off your leg, is enough to make one despair of political humanity. But that is precisely what we have done. And the more appalling the mutilation, the more the mutilator is paid. He who corrects the ingrowing toe-nail receives a few shillings: he who cuts your inside out receives hundreds of guineas, except when he does it to a poor person for practice.’
Shaw was a Fabian. But compare the fire and wit of Shaw’s prose to the mincing evasive liberal platitudes of one of today’s Fabians, Tony Benn. Nothing could more graphically illustrate the historical decline of reformism. The only alternative is revolution – the revolution Shaw ran away from in 1887, but which haunted him for the rest of his life.
 



Part 1: HOBSBAWM’S POLITICAL EVOLUTION
(i) The Thirties
(ii) The Post-War decade
(iii) 1956
(iv) The Rise of the New Left
(v) Eurocommunism
(vi) The downturn

Part 2: HOBSBAWM AND THE WORKING CLASS
(i) Stalinism
(ii) Hobsbawm and the British working class
(iii) Party and class
(iv) Economism
(v) Nationalism
(vi) The limits of historical objectivity


At the Tribune Rally at last year’s Labour Party Conference Neil Kinnock came under sharp attack from the Labour left. In defending himself he referred to the recent writings of a long-standing member of the British Communist Party, Professor Eric Hobsbawm [1], a man who he lauded as “the most sagacious living Marxist”.
Hobsbawm’s views have in the last few years aroused widespread discussion on the left. His Marx Memorial Lecture for 1978, provocatively entitled The Forward March of Labour Halted? produced numerous critical comments, both within the Communist Party and from other sections of the left. [2] And over the last year two further articles in Marxism Today, The State of the Left in Western Europe and Falklands Fallout have reached a wider audience by appearing, in shortened form, on the Guardian’s Agenda page. [3]
The voluntarist euphoria that gripped the Labour left in 1981 has now given way to a post-Falklands pessimism; and Hobsbawm’s recent writings on working-class nationalism and the decline of the traditional working class fit the mood well. His views on the working class in many ways parallel those of Andre Gorz, though they are markedly more coherent and literate. [4] And his opinions on working-class nationalism were greeted with approval by the Guardian pro-SDP columnist Peter Jenkins, a fact which will doubtless warm the hearts of those CP members currently seeking alliance with the SDP and progressive Tories. [5]
Hobsbawm’s eminence as a historian is unquestionable. He is the author of a number of works of broad historical synthesis (Industry and Empire, The Age of Revolution, The Age of Capital) as well as many more detailed articles on a range of subjects, notably the nineteenth century working class. As well as a British professorship Hobsbawm has broken through Cold War barriers by becoming both a Professor-at-large of Cornell University and an Honorary Member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Among British Marxist historians only Edward Thompson and Christopher Hill can claim comparable achievements.
Nor has Hobsbawm confined himself to academic history. He has commented regularly and profusely on contemporary issues, both in Communist Party publications and in journals of the left and centre (New Statesman, New Society, etc). He has written about historical figures from Robin Hood to Ramsay MacDonald, about countries from Peru to Austria. Under the name Francis Newton he became a respected jazz critic. A recent bibliography of his work lists several hundred items.
Hobsbawm’s current status as guru to a section of the left would in itself justify a critical assessment of his work. But beyond that Hobsbawm is a representative figure; one of the most talented members of the generation that came to Communism in the era of fascism and the Popular Front, and stayed to face a very different set of issues. The following account will outline Hobsbawm’s political evolution and try to assess the foundations of his current position.


Part 1: HOBSBAWM’S POLITICAL EVOLUTION
(i) The Thirties
Hobsbawm himself has described the social circumstances which brought him to the Communist movement:
I belong ... to a milieu which is now virtually extinct, the Jewish middle class culture of central Europe after the first world war. This milieu lived under the triple impact of the collapse of the bourgeois world in 1914, the October revolution and anti-semitism.
For this milieu liberalism and social democracy were dead ends; the only possibilities were Communism or Zionism. And those who, like Hobsbawm, chose the former, had ‘the sense that the old system was breaking down ... and the belief that the Soviet revolution was the positive alternative.’ [6]
Hobsbawm became a Communist as a fifteen-year-old schoolboy in Berlin in 1932; when his family left Germany to escape Hitler he came to Britain, and appears to have joined the British Communist Party in 1936. [7] To become a Communist under such circumstances clearly laid the foundations of a life-long commitment. But it is important to recognise the particular quality of that commitment. The Thirties was the era of the Popular Front; an era of defensive struggle and defeat. The dominant themes were the threat of fascism and the sense that Russia was the only viable bulwark against it. It was this, and not a belief in the self-activity of the working-class, that drew Hobsbawm to Marxism. In this respect he is typical of a whole generation. Popular Frontism, in one form or another, was to characterise his politics over five decades.
At Cambridge in the late thirties Hobsbawm combined academic success (the party slogan laid down that ‘the first task of the communist student was to be a good student’ [8]) with prominence as a socialite – he edited the University paper Granta and contributed many articles on films, jazz and books.
Yet behind the glitter Hobsbawm had clearly become a dependable party member. The Nazi-Soviet Pact seems to have caused him little anxiety. Soon after the outbreak of World War II Hobsbawm and a fellow Cambridge student, Raymond Williams, were assigned to write a pamphlet on the Russo-Finnish War ‘which argued that it was really a resumption of the Finnish Civil War of 1918 which had been won by Mannerheim and the Whites.’ [9] At a time when Harry Pollitt himself was temporarily removed from the Party secretaryship for disagreement with the Comintern line of the war, such a task would surely be entrusted only to one whose loyalty was unquestioned.
 
(ii) The Post-War decade
After completing wartime military service, Hobsbawm continued his academic career in parallel to work as a Party activist. The Communist Party Historians’ Group provided a vital link between the two.
‘Our work as historians,’ Hobsbawm has written of this Group in the period 1946–56, ‘was embedded in our work as Marxists, which we believed to imply membership of the Communist Party. It was inseparable from our political commitment and activity.’ [10] The Group was engaged in Communist Party education and propaganda through conferences, meetings, pamphlets and bulletins, and in collective theoretical development through its four ‘period sections’ which thrashed out a party line on subjects as diverse as sixteenth century absolute monarchy and the standard of living of the working class under industrial capitalism.
But the Communist Party Historians’ Group was far from inward-looking, and deliberately cultivated relations with non-Marxists within the academic history establishment who were opposed to the prevailing right-wing tendency of historians such as T.S. Ashton and Hugh Trevor-Roper (now Lord Dacre). In 1952 they set up the journal Past and Present as a forum for ‘scientific history’ in the midst of the Cold War. This began with a CP majority on the editorial board but allowed the non-Marxist members a veto on articles. The journal has been extremely successful, especially since the explicit aim of a non-Marxist majority on the editorial board was achieved in 1958.
The Popular Front idea was essential to the outlook of the Historians’ Group. Looking back on the experience of the Group Hobsbawm wrote in 1978: ‘Both we and the Party saw ourselves ... ideally as leaders of a broad progressive movement such as we had experienced in the 1930s ... In a sense we saw ourselves as continuing the major national tradition of history, and many non-Marxists as prepared to join us in this task.’ [11]
In an article written in 1949, reviewing the history of the British working class over the last century, Hobsbawm was optimistic about the prospects for socialism. Again, the Popular Front was central to his perspective:
Throughout the ups and downs of actual Labour policy, the alternative of class-conscious fighting socialism has made headway ... The inter-war years saw the birth of a Communist Party and, in the later thirties, a significant increase in its influence. The war and post-war years have seen, for the first time in labour history, communist leadership strike firm roots in the trade unions. That this process has not been a smooth one is natural; but the reality of the general trend cannot be in doubt ... The change in quantity may, in our time, turn into one of quality. The time for it is rapidly growing ripe. Much will depend on the initiative and leadership of British Marxists. [12]
Hobsbawm has recently claimed that Party membership in this period did not impose any strong intellectual restraints, except in the particularly sensitive area of Party history. To say the least, this scarcely coincides with what we know of Party life from other sources. [13]
Be that as it may, Hobsbawm seems to have learnt to live with the Party’s requirements. One would search his work in vain for eulogies of Stalin or denunciations of the fascist Tito; although he appears to have co-existed quite happily with those who indulged in such things. [14]
Between 1948 and 1951 Hobsbawm contributed some twenty articles to a fortnightly journal called the New Central European Observer, a Communist Party controlled journal devoted to reporting events in the ‘People’s Democracies’. All his articles are marked by an impeccable orthodoxy; defence of Russian foreign policy, criticism of Tito and repeated warnings about the dangers of West Germany being mobilised against the Russian bloc.
What characterises all Hobsbawm’s writings on current events during this period is the firm belief that Russia and the East European states embody a new and higher level of social organisation, and that the prime duty of anyone claiming to be on the side of the working class is to defend them. Thus in a otherwise unexceptional piece in World News showing how piece-work has always been a weapon of employers against workers, he feels obliged to add: ‘Under Socialism, of course, where there is no exploitation, payment by results appears in a different light.’ [15] And on occasion he is led into true gems of strained logic, as when he compares the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 to the events of the 1940s:
Led as it was by a new class, the workers, and with foreign intervention ruled out by the presence of the Soviet Army, the national movement of the 1940s avoided the errors of the 1840s. [16]
In 1954 Hobsbawm published an article in the Political Quarterly in which he described to the outside world the workings of the Communist Party. In particular he was at pains to defend the Party’s internal democracy:
Discussions of party policy, based on a stream of reports, proposals and other material issued at all levels of leadership, is almost continuous ... There has been very little disagreement on the fundamentals of party policy in the past ten years, and almost certainly there is now widespread feeling that the machinery for criticism and suggestion is inadequate ... Hence there has been little difficulty in maintaining party discipline, especially the rule that holders of minority views carry out majority policy and that party policy must be carried out until a decision to change it has been reached. [17]
Two years later this amazing complacency was to explode in his face.
 
(iii) 1956
The 1956 crisis in the British Communist Party was a tangled and complex one. As one might imagine of a membership jolted out of a quarter century of routinism, a variety of intermediate and contradictory positions emerged. [18] Three separate issues were intertwined in the complex debates of the year: the Khrushchev ‘secret speech’ and the Hungarian Revolution; inner-party democracy; and the strategy of the Communist Party in relation to the Labour Party.
Hobsbawm intervened in all three discusions. On the Russian invasion of Hungary his position was set out in a letter to the Daily Worker: [19]
All Socialists ought to be able to understand that a Mindszenty Hungary [Mindszenty was the Catholic cardinal in Budapest], which would probably have become a base for counter-revolution and intervention, would be a grave and acute danger for the USSR, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia and Rumania which border upon it.
If we had been in the position of the Soviet Government, we should have intervened; if we had been in the position of the Yugoslav Government, we should have approved of the intervention.
But Hobsbawm went on to make various reservations – there was a popular movement in Hungary, the Hungarian CP had made mistakes, and to crush a popular movement is at best a ‘tragic necessity’. From this he concluded:
While approving, with a heavy heart, of what is now happening in Hungary, we should therefore also say frankly that we think the USSR should withdraw its troops from the country as soon as this is possible.
This should be said by the British Communist Party publicly if the British people is to have any confidence in our sincerity and judgement; and if they have not, how can we expect them to follow our lead?
And if they don’t follow our lead, how can we hope to help the cause of the existing Socialist states on which we know that Socialism in the world, and in Britain, largely depends?
This equivocal position – support the Russians, as long as you look miserable about it [20] – was of a piece with the comments Hobsbawm made a little later in reply to G. Matthews, the Assistant Secretary of the Communist Party:
We have presented the facts wrongly, or failed to face them, and unfortunately, though we have kidded few other people, we have kidded ourselves. I don’t mean primarily the facts revealed at the Twentieth Congress and others of the kind. Many of us had strong suspicions about them, amounting to moral certainty, for years before Khrushchev spoke, and I am amazed Comrade Matthews had none. There were overwhelming reasons at the time for keeping quiet, and we were right in doing so. No, the facts we really failed to face are those about Britain, our tasks and our mistakes. [21]
However, Hobsbawm also made some incisive comments on the internal life of the Communist Party. Many of those who in 1956 rebelled aginst the bureaucratic monolothism of the CP were happy to abandon democratic centralism altogether. Hobsbawm, in a number of contributions to the Party’s discussion journal World News insisted that ‘our Party ought to stick to democratic centralism’, but argued that the particular practices of the Party should be modified to make them more susceptible to pressure from below; thus panel voting should be abandoned; debates should be initiated by discussion statements rather than agreed EC drafts; there should be more discussion in the press; a defeated minority should have the right to continue arguing while implementing the majority position; and the leadership should show willingness to admit that it might be wrong. [22]
Much of this was good practical common-sense, and contrasted well with both the authoritarian Stalinism and the rampant liberalism which characterised much of the heated debate on inner party democracy. Yet to centre the criticism of the Party leadership on inner-party democracy had two great weaknesses. Firstly, it was clear that the conduct of many CP members in late 1956 – attacking the Party in the bourgeois press, establishing factional journals was clearly in breach of anything that could normally be described as ‘democratic centralism’; it could be justified only by the wholly extraordinary circumstances of a so called ‘socialist’ army crushing a workers’ rising. Secondly, Hobsbawm’s defence of a more liberal regime was argued in openly opportunist terms. In an article headed Lenin on Party Congress he pointed out – correctly but doubtless to the surprise of many Party members – that Lenin had favoured the right to form blocs in a pre-congress situation. Yet his main argument in favour was simply that this could prevent loss of membership:
... the Party is split ... it will be hard to avoid the impression that the Executive Committee ... is rigging the Congress. This is no doubt untrue. But we must face the fact that if the impression does get round, even more comrades will resign than have already left the Party. [23]
Hobsbawm also raised some telling points in his criticism of CP strategy. Here the brunt of his argument was that the Party was not following the logic of what was required by a policy of broad left unity. Thus he argued that since the Party considered left advances in the Labour Party important, it should not seek to recruit members out of the Labour Party:
Let us ask ourselves frankly: if we were active Labour men whose work lay in shaping the local Party, selecting candidates, perhaps standing for council, would we be anxious to join the Communist Party? [24]
Secondly he pointed to the failures of the Party in the peace movement and blamed them on sectarianism:
... we failed to recognise until too late that we could mobilise masses on the basis of opposition to war and American war-mongering, but not also on the basis of agreeing with us on a lot of other points, e.g. our interpretation of Tito and Soviet policy. [25]
But Hobsbawm’s reforming ardour was now cooling. He contributed one further piece – an article on The British Party System. Here he argued that the British two-party system stifled democracy, but that it could be changed by mass pressure if there was a solid core of electoral support for a third party. In other words the CP’s electoral strategy was justified. [26]
The CP Historians’ Group was badly shaken by the 1956 crisis. Hobsbawm says that historians were ‘forced to confront the situation not only as private persons and Communist militants but, as it were, in our professional capacity, since the crucial issue of Stalin was literally one of history: what had happened and why it had been concealed.’ [27]
But the Group was split, and many of its leading members – including Christopher Hill and the Thompsons – left the Party. The Group continued to exist, but its activity within the party was much reduced for many years. The long-term effect was that the Group had a new set of ‘allies’ to relate to: Marxist historians outside the Communist Party, such as Edward Thompson and Christopher Hill, with whom friendly relations and professional solidarity continued to exist despite a political bitterness which has survived into the present.
 
(iv) The Rise of the New Left
In the aftermath of the 1956 crisis two new journals were established – The New Reasoner and Universities and Left Review. Hobsbawm contributed to the first issue of each of them; to the former an anodyne account of attitudes to Marx in the Victoran academic establishment, to the later a piece arguing that ‘Marxism is not a single detailed doctrine, but a family of interpretations, based on a common method.’ [28] Such consorting with renegades can hardly have pleased CP headquarters, but Hobsbawm’s position had a plain logic. He had not wanted a split, but since it had taken place, he would try and maintain such unity as was possible. For Hobsbawm continued to be a Popular Fronter, but a Popular Fronter with a difference. The classical Popular Front was always open to ever new layers of allies on the right, but it could tolerate no rivals to its left. Hobsbawm, however, shrewdly recognised that, in the period after 1956, a new and as yet non-Party left – in many cases to the left of the CP itself – was emerging, and that it would have some part to play in the left’s eventual re-alignment.
During the 1960s Hobsbawm showed a striking sensitivity to the new influences that were to shape the next generation of the left. He hailed the Cuban Revolution, analysed the US black movement and wrote a trenchant prediction of US defeat in Vietnam. He spoke at the first Vietnam teach-in at Oxford, organised by elements from the emerging reolutionary left, among them Peter Binns and Tariq Ali. [29] He even appreciated Bob Dylan: ‘... a thin, child-faced chansonnier from the US, a cross between a curlier James Dean (minus death wish) and a politically conscious Holden Caulfield.’ [30]
Hobsbawm perceived the student movement of the sixties as a ‘primitive rebellion’. [31] From the mid-1950s he had been working on the history of a variety of social movements in pre-capitalist and early capitalist society, ranging from Robin Hood-type bandits through peasant revolts, millenarianism and pre-industrial city mobs to the revolutionary secret societies of Marx’s youth. He saw such movements as a fascinating and valuable part of the revolutionary tradition, but considered that there was a crucial dividing line between ‘pre-political’ movements and those led by a modern political party, such as the Communist Party in Southern Italy and Sicily, which took over a long tradition of peasant resistance. [32]
Looking back on these studies in 1979, Hobsbawm claimed that what they proved was the necessity for a ‘strongly organised party’, while showing that ‘there were all sorts of other things happening that we should have taken note of.’ [33] The student upsurge, therefore, was to be neither supported nor denounced, but co-opted and transcended by the guiding hand of the Party.
As early as 1960 Hobsbawm was writing of the new student movement in the US:
Where are these kids going? Since they have only just begun to move, it is perhaps too early to say, just as, at the present stage, it would be unfair to lay too much stress on their obvious intellectual and political immaturities, confusions and deficiencies. [34]
By the mid-sixties Hobsbawm’s own growing prestige and the declining credibility of the Party enabled him to be more openly critical. He wrote for New Left Review a devastating criticism of James Klugmann’s History of the Communist Party of Great Britain, which he saw as neither ‘serious’ nor ‘scholarly’. [35] And in 1965 he launched a full-scale attack on the dogmatists within the Party with a lecture to a Discussion Conference organised by the Marx Memorial Library, later published as The Dialogue on Marxism. In this plea for greater openness of discussion he stresses that since 1956 it has been impossible to insist that there are no Marxists outside the Communist Party. Some of his older listeners must have felt a shudder when he enquired: ‘How could we discuss say, the history of the Soviet Union, if we left Trotsky out of it, or thought of him as a foreign agent?’ And he insisted: ‘In fact today it is impossible to make the simple statement on which many of us were brought up: there is one and only one “correct” marxism and it is to be found in Communist Parties.’ [36]
All of this was still basically Popular Frontism. The storms of 1968, however, blew him momentarily off course. On 1 June 1968 an article by Hobsbawm appeared in Black Dwarf, journal of the 1968 ultra-lefts and student vanguardists, commenting on the events in France:
What has happened in France is marvellous and enchanting ... Does it show the way to the rest of the world? It would not be the first time that Paris had done so. I think it may do so now.
The French Communist Party was mentioned only to be accused of ‘feet-dragging’.
But the euphoria soon went sour. By the next year he was telling New Statesman readers about ‘the young ultras of 1969, whose idea of revolution is, if not actually to stand on a barricade, then at least to make the same sort of noise as though standing on one.’ [37]
Increasingly in the late sixties and early seventies Hobsbawm became impatient with the “ultra-left”. More and more he saw his task as being to correct the various heresies that proliferate on the left, and to defend the ‘Communist’ (ie Stalinist) tradition as the true orthodoxy. Thus he protested vigorously against the attempts by hippies and the New Left to claim Che Guevara as a hero:
Bolshevism was a hard style, and Guevara made himself into a hard man. Rebellion was useless without discipline, organisation and leadership. [38]
Yet at the same time Hobsbawm was insisting that Guevarism was not a viable alternative to the orthodox Communist Parties of Latin America. [39]
One phenomenon of the late sixties and seventies that Hobsbawm found it harder to handle was the rise of the women’s movement. Until the sixties he happily littered his work with macho comments such as:
Jazz, for the fan, is therefore not simply a music to be enjoyed as one enjoys apples, or drinks, or girls. [40]
Just as there are some women who are only fully themselves in bed, so there are men who only realize themselves in action. [41]
By 1978, Hobsbawm was admitting that the neglect of women by male historians was justly criticised, and to make amends he wrote an article on images of men and women in nineteenth century socialist iconography. Unfortunately this venture into new territory was less than successful, since what Hobsbawm described as a ‘powerful image’ of woman turned out to be a rather nasty drawing of a naked women by Félicien Rops, a Belgian pornographer. [42]
 
(v) Eurocommunism
In the mid-seventies two factors confirmed and accelerated Hobsbawm’s drift to the right. The first was the right-wing coup in Chile in 1973. For Hobsbawm the lesson was not that Allende had failed to smash the state apparatus in time, but rather that Allende had provoked the coup by moving too fast. ‘... the choice of “revolution”, rather than “legality” was not on.’ Allende had turned the armed forces against him by requiring them to intervene in social struggles on the government side. He endorsed the analysis of the Italian CP that:
... Allende failed not simply because his Popular Unity was unable technically to defeat the military, but because it alienated large sectors of the population which it ought to have carried with it. [43]
The second was the rise of Eurocommunism. Hobsbawm was particularly impressed by the evolution of the Italian CP, and as early as May 1974 he was advocating:
... what the Italian Communists now call an “historic compromise” – i.e. governing down the pace of social change to what is acceptable to the potential allies or the potential neutrals among the middle strata. [44]
In 1975 and 1977 Hobsbawm conducted a series of interviews with Giorgio Napolitano, a leading member of the Italian CP. In these the latter argued that ‘the only path that is realistically open to a socialist transformation in Italy and Western Europe – under peacetime conditions – lies through a struggle within the democratic process’ involving broad alliances and the gradual modification of society. [45] Hobsbawm seems to have regarded himself as being largely an impressario promoting Napolitano. In the British Party, Hobsbawm seems to have allied himself with the Eurocommunist faction. In October 1979 he joined the Editorial Board of Marxism Today, along with Bob Rowthorn, when the journal adopted a revamped format and became more openly the voice of British Eurocommunism.
Eurocommunism was doubly welcome to Hobsbawm for, not only might it deliver the goods in the present, but it also reestablished a link with orthodoxy. For it was easy to see Eurocommunism as a continuation and development of Popular Frontism; and the Popular Front, as Hobsbawm repeatedly insisted in the seventies, was
... more than a temporary defensive tactic, or even a strategy for turning retreat into offensive. It was also a carefully considered strategy for advancing to socialism. [46]
 
(vi) The downturn
But the brief dream of a new Communism, renovated yet founded on tradition, intellectually open yet broadly united, did not survive the seventies. By the end of the decade Eurocommunism was in disarray. The Italian CP had abandoned the ‘historic compromise’; the French and Spanish Parties were suffering serious electoral decline while the British CP was firmly set in its protracted terminal illness. And on top of all this the movement was clearly in a serious downturn. Hobsbawm, to his credit, knew a downturn when he saw one, unlike those overly impressed by Labour Party resolutions. But the conclusions he drew were, to say the least, alarming.
The Forward March of Labour Halted? originally delivered as a lecture in 1978, can be seen as a polemic on the side of the British Eurocommunists against ‘economism’ and the ‘turn to industry’ being advocated by the likes of Mick Costello. Not suprisingly Hobsbawm was sharply criticised by such Neo-Stalinists as Ken Gill and Kevin Halpin, but supported by Pete Carter (who earlier this year called for the People’s March to ‘unite the bishop and the brickie’). [47]
But, from a critique of the alleged ‘left advances’ to be won from the CP’s industrial strategy, Hobsbawm rapidly developed to an overall pessimism. His 1982 article on The State of the Left in Western Europe [48] sets out bleakly the picture of decline and retreat that characterises almost all the Communist and Socialist parties of Western Europe. The Left, he argues, is not profiting from the crisis because,
... unlike the 1930s, the Left today can neither point to an alternative society immune to the crisis (as the USSR seemed to be) nor to any concrete policies which hold much promise for overcoming it in the short term (as Keynesian or similar policies seemed to promise then).
Reformism and Mother Russia have both failed to deliver; and since working-class self-activity was never in the picture to begin with, there is not much left. As the traditional parties crumble, so, for Hobsbawm, does the working class itself:
The manual working class, core of traditional socialist labour parties, is today contracting and not expanding. It has been transformed, and to some extent divided, by the decades when its standard of living reached levels undreamed of even by the well-paid in 1939. It can no longer be assumed that all workers are on the way to recognising that their class situation must align them behind a socialist workers party, though there are still many millions who believe this.
And if the left is in disarray, the right is triumphant. In Falklands Fallout [49] Hobsbawm laments the resurgence of nationalism, describes the Falklands war as ‘a very brilliant operation’ and says of Thatcherite nationalism ‘I hesitate, but only just to say a semifascist direction.’ (Hobsbawm is clearly too intelligent to fall for the current illiteracy that Thatcher is a fascist, yet knows that there is nothing like a hint of fascism to revive the Popular Front).
For in the end Popular Frontism is what it is all about. And the only answer to defeat and decline is to broaden the front yet wider. Hobsbawm hails the ‘very able politican’ Mitterrand because he won power by ‘mobilising all possible support against a reactionary and anti-democratic regime which was unpopular as such.’ [50] (Hobsbawm was writing barely a month before Mitterrand emulated Ramsay MacDonald by cutting unemployment benefit). Hobsbawm insists that most British Social Democrats ‘belong to the Left’, and that the secession of the SDP is to be regretted as ‘the loss of a significant section of the left-of-centre middle class, which long looked to Labour.’ [51] Clearly the SDP lure billed as part of the new ever-so-Popular Front (though it is not clear whether Hobsbawm, like his fellow Eurocommunist Bob Rowthorn, would also welcome progressive Tories like Edward Heath). After many years telling us that revolution is impracticable, Hobsbawm ends up tailing a political party which is already in electoral decline and which at all events would not touch the Communist Party with a barge-pole. There is nothing in his analysis that could be legitimately described as Marxist; indeed Hobsbawm’s position is well to the right of classic reformism. Such are the bitter fruits of political realism.


Part 2: HOBSBAWM AND THE WORKING CLASS
(i) Stalinism
Hobsbawm was formed by Stalinism. To say this is not to indulge in random abuse, but to observe, quite simply, that his first twenty years as a Communist were spent in a movement in which the dogmas of Stalinism were scarcely questioned.
What did it mean to be a Stalinist? First and foremost it was the sense of belonging to an international movement, a movement which could mobilise millions of workers in the continents of the world, a movement led by first one, then several ‘socialist countries’.
Hobsbawm himself frequently evokes the power of this sense of belonging to a mass international movement, not without a certain romanticism, as when he recalls ‘that sense of total devotion which made the party in Auschwitz make its members pay their dues in cigarettes (inconceivably precious and almost impossible to obtain in an extermination camp)’. [52] As a historian he is especially sensitive to the historical legitimacy he ascribes to this movement; thus Stalinism becomes modern-day Jacobinism; when he writes of Robespierre we feel the figure of Stalin looming behind him:
The process which, during the Spanish Civil War of 1936–9, strengthened Communists at the expense of anarchists, strengthened Jacobins of Saint Just’s stamp at the expense of Sansculottes of Hébert’s. [53]
As we have seen, the events of 1956 led Hobsbawm to no systematic critique of Stalinism, but at best to a few pragmatic reservations. Any attempt at a class analysis of the ‘socialist’ countries was dismissed as ‘a game with words’. [54]
Yet slowly Hobsbawm’s faith in the Eastern bloc evaporated. It might be possible to swallow the political monstrosities of Stalinism if they were none the less founded on a superior economic system. But by 1975 he was conceding that this was not the case:
We thought that declining capitalism would be unable to compete success fully with the rising rival socialist economy, especially one so much larger than before. But the opposite happened. Capitalism outproduced socialism and even began to re-infiltrate and re-integrate socialist economy from outside by virtue of its technological superiority and greater wealth. [55]
Likewise the sense of a world movement has faded. In discussions with an Italian Communist Hobsbawm said he was ‘not sure whether one can even speak of a world Communist movement at this point.’ [56]
Yet the Marxism Hobsbawm acquired in the Stalinist period was a fatalistic and mechanical Marxism, which above all left no place for working-class self-activity. And so, when the certainties of Stalinism faded, nothing remained but a vacuum – a vacuum which today is at the heart of Hobsbawm’s pessimism.
 
(ii) Hobsbawm and the British working class
This process of disillusion is closely interwoven with Hobsbawm’s writing as an academic historian. The range of his work has been almost incredibly wide, taking in subjects as diverse as seventeenth century feudal society, Peruvian land occupations and secret societies in early nineteenth-century Europe. But his work on British working-class history must be regarded as the central core. In this field his reputation has been greatest, his achievements have been most notable, and his political perspectives have acquired shape and confirmation. And at the heart of this work lies the same development from the optimism of the post-war decade to the pessimism of the eighties.
Hobsbawm was in the forefront of the movement to win a place for the serious study of labour history in British universities. While insisting that such study should become academically sound and respectable – by contrast with what he regarded as the mythology of the ‘heroic moral epic’ which has been ‘especially ... passed on by word-of-mouth tradition in lodges, branches and classes’ – he believed that commitment was also necessary. Researching and writing for the labour movement should be combined with sound scholarship: the task of academic historians should be ‘to consolidate the new territories won by the committed.’ [57]
By 1974 he could claim that the new labour historians had successfully established themselves in Britain and America. They were ‘increasingly preoccupied with the rank-and-file as well as with the leaders, with the unorganised as well as the organised, with the “conservative working man” as well as with the radical or revolutionary: in short with the class rather than with the movement or party.’ [58]
Some of Hobsbawm’s own writings are outstanding examples of this kind of labour history, particularly those collected in the volume Labouring Men (1964). His studies of early nineteenth-century machine-breaking, Primitive Methodism, and general unions in Britain, for example, broke new ground and inspired a generation of Marxist labour historians.
There is, however, a central problem for Marxist historians of the working class which Hobsbawm has never been able to confront or explain satisfactorily. This is the question of why the revolutionary potential of the working class – the lynchpin of Marxist analysis – has been realised at some times and in some places, and not at other times or in other places. Explaining the defeats which socialism has suffered and the persistence of reformism is vital to understanding both the past and the present, and to formulating strategies for the future.
Hobsbawm’s starting-point for examining British working-class reformism seems to have been the various remarks of Marx, Engels and Lenin on the British ‘aristocracy of labour’. But he never believed that the existence of a stratum of better-paid, better-organised and usually skilled workers provided a satisfactory explanation, except perhaps for the period 1850–1889, and in 1970 he provided an interesting re-examination of Lenin’s remarks on the subject. [59]
As we have seen (section I ii above), in his 1949 article on Trends in the British Labour Movement since 1850, Hobsbawm did not believe that reformism precluded the possibility of a qualitative leap from the Popular Front to socialism. By 1963, when he rewrote the article, his optimism had evaporated and he was looking much more seriously for explanations for the persistence of reformism. He came up with three: the ‘spontaneity’ or ‘economism’ of trade union struggles and trade union consciousness as described by Lenin in What is to be Done? [60]; the partial incorporation of the trade union structure into the state (‘In Britain, where the working class has been for almost a century too strong to be wished away by the ruling classes, its movement has been enmeshed in the web of conciliation and collaboration more deeply, and far longer, than anywhere else’); and the non-revolutionary traditions of the British working class. [61]
This 1963 passage on the importance of tradition is worth quoting, especially for the extraordinary metaphor of individual psychological formation which Hobsbawm uses:
A higher degree of political consciousness, a special effort, is needed to prevent the movement from drifting into mere reformism ... a conscious socialist movement, and notably a communist party, provide such a special factor. If the working class attached itself to such a movement at the crucial phase of its development when it forms such attachments, it will have some built-in guarantee against the drift into reformism ... But if, as in the British case, it attaches itself to a movement largely formed in the pre-Marxist mould, it will not. The loyalty and theoretical inertia which it derives from its spontaneous experience will maintain its traditional attachments, and – unless quite extraordinary catastrophes occur, and even then by no means lightly or rapidly – it will stay with them. [62]
Hobsbawm was to return many times to this argument of the self-justifying ‘traditions’ of the British working class, for example in an article on the absence of an insurrectionary tradition in England comparable to Jacobinism in France. [63] The full implications, which would deprive Marxist history of any critical value other than the most trite and superficial, were brought out in an attack on ‘counterfactual’ labour history:
History is what happened, not what might have happened ... Now sometimes probabilities are so high that we can speculate with some realism, normally about what couldn’t have happened rather than what could. For instance, in assessing the development of the British labour movement since the 1880s we can exclude the possibility that a mass Marxist party could have developed instead of something like the Labour Party, before or after 1920, and we can therefore criticise the SDF or the CP not for what what they could not seriously hope to have achieved, but within the limits of what it was not so impracticable for them to achieve – e.g. greater success in local government election. [64]
Why did Hobsbawm become so convinced that the dead weight of tradition on the British labour movement was irremovable? Partly because his perspective on British working-class history is, for all his erudition, one-sided. In rejecting the ‘heroic moral epic’ style of labour history and deciding to concentrate on the long-term social and economic background of the movement, Hobsbawm ruled all revolutionary and near-revolutionary situations out of consideration. Thus he has very little to say about the high points of working-class struggle such as Chartism, the peak of the new unions in 1889–93, the waves of militancy of 1910–14 and 1919, or the General Strike of 1926.
While it is quite true that Marxists need to understand periods of downturn and slow development, the high points are also part of the story. To justify his one-sided perspective, Hobsbawm explicitly plays down the insurrectionary element in Chartism, for example, and defines the General Strike as belonging to the class of ‘sympathy and solidarity strikes’ rather than that of ‘political strikes’, such as the Marxist-led strikes in support of electoral reform in some European countries. [65] (He seems unaware of Rosa Luxemburg’s arguments against this false distinction in The Mass Strike.)
But Hobsbawm’s denial of any revolutionary potential to the British working class is also due to the complete absence from his writings of any concept of the self-activity of the working class as a revolutionary force. Working-class self-activity being purely ‘spontaneous’, ‘selfish’ and ‘economistic’, waves of struggle and militancy can be due only to left leadership. Thus he defines periods of radicalisation, not by working-class action, but by the appearance of ‘socialist leadership’ at the head of major trade unions. The consequence of this is that he can put the ‘rise of a left leadership’ in the unions in 1957–62, or even the ‘somewhat unexpected succession to the throne of F. Cousins’ in the Transport and General Workers Union on a level with the great waves of militant action of 1889–93 and 1910–14. [66]
The contribution of Marxism to the British labour movement has been to provide ‘groups of cadres or potential cadres, of leaders and brains rather than of followers.’ [67] The tradition of a ‘working-class elite and vanguard, rather than of a mass movement: of the thinking, reading, militant workers who put in a great deal of time on the cause, rather than of the average man’, is recognised as the main heritage passed on by the Social Democratic Federation to the Communist Party. [68] And given the non-revolutionary nature of the British working-class movement, this left vanguard ‘has always had a real if non-revolutionary function within the movement, namely that of making reformism effectively reformist.’ [69]
So Hobsbawm contrives to make a virtue out of what he sees as historical ‘necessity’ and replace the Marxist perspective of revolutionary working-class struggle by a permanent Popular Frontism, in which the Marxist cadre becomes a ginger group to the left of the Labour Party and in the trade unions.
 
(iii) Party and class
As a historian Hobsbawm has stressed the importance of studying the rank-and-file rather than the leaders. None the less, as a lifelong Communist militant he is well aware of the necessity for party organisation, and he frequently reminds us that no revolutions can be achieved without discipline. Yet the concept of party he uses seems irreparably distorted by Stalinism. In the Leninist tradition the party organises the active minority of the class, and fights for the leadership of the class within the mass organisations – trade unions or soviets. It does not substitute itself for the class or seek to take power on its behalf. Stalinism thoroughly buried this tradition. In Eastern Europe parties captured state machines without any active involvement of the working class, while in Western Europe mass CPs have described themselves as ‘the party of the working class’, thus blurring the distinction between party and class.
In many of Hobsbawm’s writings the blur remains. Thus:
In fact, as we know, where socialism has been victorious it has led to and been achieved by the transformation of parties into states ... [70]
It is not the working class itself which takes power and and exercises hegemony, but the working-class movement or party, and (short of taking an anarchist view) it is difficult to see how it could be otherwise. [71]
On this view soviets (of which Hobsbawm has remarkably little to say at any time) must have been an anarchist adventure. Of course, Lenin’s State and Revolution, which drew substantially on the experience of the Paris Commune, was also dismissed by many contemporary social democrats as ‘anarchist’. Hobsbawm would apparently have agreed with them. [72]
Admittedly Hobsbawm has shown some awareness of the dangers of the party substituting itself for the class:
In the extreme case of what left-wing discussion has baptised “substitutionism”, the movement replaces the class, the party the movement, the apparatus of functionaries the party the (formally elected) leadership the apparatus, and, in well-known historical examples the inspired general secretary or other leader the central committee. [73]
This in fact is virtually a paraphrase of a passage from Trotsky’s Our Political Tasks, though Hobsbawm does not deign to draw this to his readers’ attention. More fundamentally, without any notion of workers’ self-organisation and workers’ democracy, he has no solution for the problems it poses.
As we saw in the previous section, the corollary of Hobsbawm’s substitutionist view of the party is a fatalistic view of history. In The Age of Capital, the Paris Commune, which one might expect to be the high-point of the age for any Marxist historian, is dealt within a few sad little paragraphs. We are told that Marx’s
... attitude to the only attempt to make a proletarian revolution, the Paris Commune, was notably cautious. He did not believe it had the slightest chance of success. The best it might have achieved was to make a bargain with the Versailles government. After its inevitable end, he wrote its obituary in the most moving terms, but the object of this magnificent pamphlet (The Civil War in France) was to instruct the revolutionaries of the future, and in this he succeeded. However, the International, i.e. Marx, remained silent while the Commune was actually in being. [74]
This, in fact, is a travesty. Marx can scarcely be equated with the International when at least twenty-nine members International were elected to the Commune; while most accounts suggest that Marx made every effort to keep in close touch with events in Paris during the Commune. [75]
 
(iv) Economism
As we have seen above, a persistent theme in Hobsbawm’s discussions of the working class past and present is the insistence on the strict limits of ‘spontaneous’ working-class struggle, of what he often calls ‘economism’:
... a movement is not necessarily less economist and narrow-minded because it is militant, or even led by the left. The periods of maximum strike activity since 1960 – 1970–72 and 1974 – have been the ones when the percentage of pure wage strikes have been much the highest – over 90 per cent in 1971–2. And, as I have tried to suggest earlier, straightforward, economist trade union consciousness may at times actually set workers against each other rather than establish wider patterns of solidarity. [76]
Now of course this position has impeccable credentials. Lenin’s analysis of ‘trade union consciousness’ is an obvious source, and Gramsci – that peculiar milk-and-water Gramsci beloved of Eurocommunists – can be invoked to defend the view that ‘even the most militant trade unionism remains a subaltern part of capitalist society.’ [77]
And of course any Marxist must agree that economic militancy alone will never smash capitalism, that a party fighting for socialist ideas is necessary. But nonetheless Hobsbawm’s critique risks throwing out the baby with the bathwater. What is missing from the equation is, once again, working-class self-activity. For if the emancipation of the working class is the task of the working class itself, then any form of working-class self-activity, no matter how limited, is a part of that process. And it is an inescapable reality that most workers initially go into action around questions connected with their own exploitation – i.e. wages, working conditions, etc. Now it is of course the job of revolutionaries, not simply to applaud but to try to generalise them, by seeking solidarity through collections, blacking, respect for pickets, etc. It is equally true that many trade union functionaries have a vested interest in preventing struggles from being generalised, in keeping ‘outside elements’ away from picket lines, etc. All this raises many tactical questions. But if such struggles are dismissed as ‘economistic’ in the first place, the questions cannot even be raised.
As a result, Hobsbawm’s work often seems to lack a sense of struggle, past or present, to be unaware of the potential within even small and sectional disputes. Thus in a broadcast on ‘shop-stewards’ in 1972, Hobsbawm commented on the dock strike then in progress:
In the docks dispute, the fact can’t be blinked that here are two lots of workers trying to do each other out of a job. The ones who win in such a situation are not necessarily those who represent what is best for the working class or the nation: they are simply the strongest. [78]
One would hardly guess from this melancholy account that the self-same dispute involved five dockers being jailed for illegal picketing; and that the resultant display of solidarity forced the TUC to call a general strike and obliged the Tory Government to invent a legal pretext to free the men.
The logic of a rejection of economism in Hobsbawm’s terms is wholly reformist. On the one hand it leads to situations where workers are asked to remain passive while their elected representatives act on their behalf (for example the economic sacrifices demanded of workers by the Italian CP). On the other hand it means writing the whole concept of ‘workers’ control’ out of the labour movement. Thus reviewing B. Pribicevic’s book on The Shop Stewards’ Movement and Workers’ Control 1910–1922 Hobsbawm states:
He shows clearly that, for both the militant activists and the rank-and-file, “workers’ control” was unreal. The militants did not know what they meant by it, except that capitalism must be overthrown for the benefit of the workers. Most of them turned to Communism in the end, which was logical, for their real concern was with class power. The rank-and-file did not care what it meant, so long as it gave their representatives a greater say in the determination of conditions in the workshop. The slogan died with the militant movement of those years and has remained dead ever since. About “workers’ control” itself Mr Pribicevic is also sensible, holding (a) that it cannot possibly seek to replace hierarchical management and decision-making and (b) that it ought probably not to be conducted through the trade unions. [79]
 
(v) Nationalism
In the foregoing we may find some clues to Hobsbawm’s strange ambivalence towards nationalism. In his own personal experience, as a Central European exile, speaking several languages fluently, there is little that could incline Hobsbawm towards, say, the kind of maudlin nationalism to which Edward Thompson is on occasion prone. As he wrote in 1969:
I, who belong to a people of refugees whose experience has been such as to make me still vaguely uneasy if I don’t possess a valid passport and enough cash to transport me to the nearest suitable country at short notice, can understand the situation of the Kenyan Asians and feel horrified by British immigration officials in a more profound and visceral way than those for whom the question is primarily one of equal rights and civil liberty in general. [80]
But within the Communist movement internationalism became divorced from the reality of the objectively international nature of capitalism and the equally objective interest of the working class in internationalism. Rather it became a tactical question. Internationalism meant loyalty to a Moscow-centred organisation; indeed, since the invasion of Czechoslovakia, ‘internationalism’ has within most Communist Parties become a code-word for pro-Russian policies. Nationalism, on the other hand, has become a means for Communists to relate to a broader audience: the ‘national traditions’ hailed by the British CP during the Second World War, or the ‘national culture’ to which the CP Historians’ Group devoted so much attention.
Against this background we can see the development of the contradictions within Hobsbawm’s work. On the one hand he has done valuable work showing the origins of nationalism. He has reminded us that in the nineteenth century the nation was ‘not a spontaneous growth but an artefact’ which had to be constructed. [81] And in 1977, reviewing Tom Nairn’s The Break-up of Britain, Hobsbawm warned that ‘the real danger for Marxists is the temptation to welcome nationalism as ideology and programme rather than realistically to accept it as a fact’, and he concluded with Lenin’s words: ‘Do not paint nationalism red.’ [82]
Back in 1952, Hobsbawm wrote an article called The Fight Against War in Britain’s History. Written at a time when British troops were fighting in Korea, it surveyed anti-war movements since Victorian days, and concluded:
This survey has deliberately stressed the strong, rather than the weak points of the anti-war movements of the past 150 years or so of British history. That is because it is today important to strengthen confidence in our own power. As James Connolly said in 1914: “Our curse is our belief in our weakness. We are not weak, we are strong.” [83]
How do we explain the fact that someone capable of such triumphalism at the height of the Cold War could flip so completely over a little war like the Falklands? The only reason seems to be that then Hobsbawm believed in the solid existence of a ‘socialist’ bloc: now he has no alternative point of reference. In any case there can be no doubt that he has flipped. So far from believing that the working class is objectively internationalist, Hobsbawm now puts what little faith he has left in the enlightened middle classes:
I hesitate to say that it was a split of the educated against the uneducated; although it is a fact that the major hold-outs against Thatcherism were to be found in the quality press, plus of course the Morning Star. [84]
Little evidence is adduced for this claim; certainly our eminent historian had made no attempt to examine the problem comparable, for example, to Sue Cockerill’s excellent article The War and the Workplace, [85] which actually sets out to analyse the level of consciousness in various workplaces and to assess the problems of fighting for an internationalist line. But then, such an article could be produced only in the framework of a party committed to organising in the workplace.
Instead, Hobsbawm hastens to make a virtue out of a necessity which he has not demonstrated to be such:
As the anti-fascist war showed quite dramatically, the combination of patriotism in a genuine people’s war proved to be politically radicalising to an unprecedented degree ... Michael Foot may be blamed for thinking too much in terms of “Churchillian” memories – 1940, Britain standing alone, antifascist war and all the rest of it, and obviously these echoes were there in Labour’s reaction to the Falklands. But let us not forget that our “Churchillian” memories are not just of patriotic glory – but of victory against reaction both abroad and at home: of labour triumph and the defeat of Churchill. It’s difficult to conceive this in 1982 but as an historian I must remind you of it. It is dangerous to leave patriotism exclusively to the Right. [86]
It is hard to see the precise logic of this tirade. Perhaps if the Morning Star had headlined GOTCHA! in bigger letters than The Sun, the broad democratic alliance might have won the election. At all events it looks suspiciously like ‘painting nationalism red’.
 
(vi) The limits of historical objectivity
Hobsbawm frequently seeks to mobilise his immense academic prestige in support of his political judgements. He repeatedly backs up assertions by reminding us that he is speaking ‘as an historian’. In his writings on the past Hobsbawm’s scholarship is solid – though not, as we have seen, infallible – and his claims are reinforced by well-documented evidence. But when he ventures into the present, Hobsbawm’s pretended objectivity can often be seen to be no more than impressionism.
Indeed Hobsbawm often admits to being impressionistic in his judgements. Thus:
There is no equally simple way of measuring the highest degree of class consciousness, namely socialist consciousness, but if we are to take the active membership of all socialist organizations as a very rough criterion as distinct from trade union activism – then I also suspect that from some time after the early 1950s there is a decline, perhaps broken in the late 1960s. [87]
For a man who knows how many miles of telegraph lines there were on the European continent in 1869, [88] suspicion is a weak source of evidence. But the Falklands Fallout article is worse; here he tells us that the Argentinian invasion produced ‘an almost universal sense of outrage.’
How do we know?
This I think was a public sentiment which could actually be felt. Anybody who had any kind of sensitivity to the vibes knew that this was going on, and anyone on the Left who was not aware of this grass roots feeling, and that it was not a creation of the media, at least, not at this stage, but genuinely a sense of outrage and humiliation, ought seriously to reconsider their capacity to assess politics. [89]
How does it happen that one of our most distinguished Marxist intellectuals is having to rely on ‘vibes’? The answer can only lie in the argument developed above, that the Communist movement of which Hobsbawm was so long a member has now disintegrated beyond recovery. One of the tasks of the revolutionary party is precisely to enable us to grasp changing moods and patterns of consciousness; as Brecht might have written:



The individual has only two vibes
The Party has a thousand vibes



Now that the British Communist Party has become a small federation of disparate groups, it can no longer play this role.
As a result, Hobsbawm’s attempts to grasp contemporary reality often become pathetic. Thus he solemnly admonishes us:
The future of Labour and the advance to socialism depends on mobilizing people who remember the date of the Beatles’ break-up and not the date of the Saltley pickets. [90]
This was written in 1981, the year that the Specials’ Ghost Town reached number one during the month that riots spread through the country. But Hobsbawm is still back in the sixties with the lovable mop-tops. Hobsbawm’s thesis of the shrinking working class has been dealt with elsewhere. [91] It is easy to show that he neglects the growing role of blacks and women in the labour movement; fails to analyse the role of white collar workers in the working class; does not consider the working class on a global rather than a national scale.
But behind this lies an even more fundamental point. The working class that Hobsbawm now sees vanishing never really existed; it was a myth of the Stalinist era. For Hobsbawm is not so much a prophet as a casualty, the product of an age which distorted Marxism until it became unrecognisable. From Hobsbawm the historian we can still learn much, though his work needs a more critical assessment than it has yet received. But we should be extremely unwise to take him as a guide in the present struggle.

Notes
We should like to thank several SWP comrades for invaluable advice and comments. The Bibliography of the Writings of Eric Hobsbawm, prepared by Keith McLelland (in R. Samuel & G. Stedman Jones (eds.), Culture, Ideology and Politics (1983)) is an indispensable guide to anyone trying to study Hobsbawm’s evolution. We are also grateful to the staff of the Marx Memorial Library for assistance in tracing some of the more obscure items.
1. Labour Weekly, 8 October 1982.
2. Collected in M. Jacques & F. Mulhern (eds.), The Forward March of Labour Halted?, 1981.
3. Marxism Today, October 1982 and January 1983; Guardian, 27 September 1982 and 20 December 1982.
4. Cf. A. Gorz, Farewell to the Working Class, 1982, and review by I. Birchall in Socialist Review 50, (1983).
5. Guardian, 29 December 1982.
6. E. Hobsbawm, Revolutionaries, 1977, pp. 250–2.
7. An Interview with Eric Hobsbawm, Radical History Review 19, 1978–79; World News, 13 October 1956.
8. Marxism Today, July 1979.
9. R. Williams, Politics and Letters, 1981, pp. 42–3. Unfortunately we have not been able to trace this pamphlet. Neither the British Museum nor the Marx Memorial Library has any pamphlet answering this description, and Keith McLelland, whose comprehensive bibliography was compiled with Hobsbawm’s assistance, has also been unable to locate a copy. Professor Williams has not replied to a request for further information.
10. E. Hobsbawm, The Historians’ Group of the Communist Party, in M. Cornforth (ed.), Rebels and Their Causes, 1978, p. 26; see also B. Schwarz, “The People” in History: the Communist Party Historians’ Group, in R. Johnson et al. (eds.), Making Histories, 1982; R. Samuel, British Marxist Historians, 1880–1980: Part One, New Left Review 120, 1980; An Interview with Eric Hobsbawm, op. cit.
11. C. Hill, R.H. Hilton & E.J. Hobsbawm, Origins and Early Years, Past and Present 100, 1983, pp. 3–14; The Historians’ Group, pp. 32–3.
12. Trends in the British Labour Movement since 1850, Science and Society 13(4), 1949.
13. Cf. The Historians’ Group and An Interview with Eric Hobsbawm. For a different view see E.P. Thompson, Cauldwell, in R. Miliband & J. Saville (eds.), The Socialist Register 1977, or E.P. Thompson, Edgell Rickword, Poetry Nation Review 9, 1979. Or, to take one example among many, see Vol. 6 No. 1 (Winter 1950–51) of The Modern Quarterly (a journal to which Hobsbawm contributed several articles). This contains a letter from La Pensée (a French CP journal) criticising The Modern Quarterly for neglecting the work of Zhdanov and enquiring: ‘Does it understand sufficiently the real role, the leading role of the USSR?’ The same issue contains a note from the Editor, John Lewis, apologising for the defects criticised by La Pensée, saying ‘We are aware, however, that much remains to be done, and we invite the assistance of our readers in the task of improving this journal.’
14. He did make some bows in the direction of orthodoxy. In reviewing Paul Sweezy’s Socialism he comments on Sweezy’s account of dialectics that ‘neither Lenin nor Stalin would agree’ (Science and Society, XIV 1, 1949–50). And in reporting the debate on Lukacs’ work in Hungary in 1949, he tells us that ‘the habit of overstressing the more purely Hegelian works of the Marx of the 1840s (which he himself did not publish) has its pitfalls, as Zhdanov pointed out’ (New Central European Observer, 26 November 1949). In 1950 Hobsbawm wrote a preface to the English translation of an attack on Lukacs by Joszef Revai, a member of the Political Bureau of the Hungarian Workers Party. Justifying such a political intervention in a literary debate, he writes ‘the Marxist differs from earlier champions of the writer as “architect of human souls” (Stalin) in seeing the re-creation of literature as a consciously and collectively planned piece of work under the leadership of the Communist Party.’ (Introduction to J. Revai, Lukacs and Socialist Realism, 1950).
In addition the pressures of loyalty led to some strange evasions and distortions. In an extensive book review of a history of the German Social Democratic Party between 1914 and 1921, Hobsbawm contrives never to mention the name of Rosa Luxemburg (New Central European Observer, 16 September 1950). In a perceptive study of Bernard Shaw’s Socialism, he shows how, when Shaw abandoned the working class, he filled the gap with two other things – a faith in bureaucracy and a fascination with ‘supermen’. Yet when he comes to deal with Shaw’s turn to Russian Communism in the thirties, he is obviously unable to show this as a continuation of the earlier trends and trails off into embarrassed confusion (Science and Society, XI, 4, 1947). Finally, he reports with approval the attacks of the Hungarian CP on Lukacs for developing the ‘dangerous’ theory that ‘it is not necessary that a society, standing on a higher level from an economic point of view, should necessarily have a higher literature, art (or) philosophy’. As Hobsbawm doubtless well knew, the theory in question was not Lukacs’ at all, but was developed by Marx in the General Introduction to the Grundrisse (New Central European Observer, 26 November 1949).
15. World News, 16 January 1954.
16. New Central European Observer, 18 March 1950.
17. The British Communist Party, Political Quarterly, 25(1), 1954.
18. Cf. D. Widgery, The Left in Britain 1956–1968, 1976; R. Miliband & J. Saville (eds), The Socialist Register 1976; I. Birchall, The British Communist Party 1945–64, International Socialism (1st series) 50, 1972.
19. Daily Worker, 9 November 1956.
20. We hold no particular brief for Edward Thompson, but Hobsbawm’s ‘heavyhearted’ defence of the Russians stands in sharp contrast to such writing as: ‘The Polish and Hungarian people have written their critique of Stalinism upon their streets and squares. In doing so, they have brought back honour to the international Communist movement. These revolutions have been made by Communists; not it is true by those who arrogated to themselves all wisdom and authority, but by Communists just the same. Wherever this wind of Stalinism has been sown, Communists have also sown good socialist seeds. The crop of human brotherhood will prevail, when the winds have passed away.’ (Edward Thompson, Through the Smoke of Budapest, The Reasoner, November 1956).
21. World News, 26 January 1957.
22. World News, 13 October 1956.
23. World News, 1 December 1956. Hobsbawm’s presumption in quoting Lenin against his own Party naturally evoked the wrath of the orthodox. One horny-handed daughter of toil, Joan Simon, declared that ‘most intellectuals don’t really know what class solidarity means, and so expressing their anger with the Party if it does not meet their individual demands becomes almost an occupational disease at times of crisis.’ Hobsbawm was accused of being ‘most jesuitical’ and of ‘taking tags out of books and mechanically accepting them as directive doctrines.’ (World News, 15 December 1956).
24. World News, 16 June 1956.
25. World News, 26 January 1957.
26. World News, 9 February 1957.
27. The Historians’ Group, pp. 39–42.
28. Dr Marx and the Victorian Critics. New Reasoner, I, 1957, reprinted in Labouring Men, 1964; The Future of Marxism in the Social Services, Universities and Left Review, 11, 1957.
29. Cuban Prospects, New Statesman, 22 October 1960; Crisis in the Ghetto, Labour Monthly, September 1967; Vietnam and the Dynamics of Guerrilla War, New Left Review 33, 1965.
30. New Statesman, 22 May 1964 (under name Francis Newton). Rock and roll, however, proved too much for him; he attributed its appeal to ‘infantilism’ and commented that ‘the habitual rock-and-roll fan, unless mentally rather retarded, tended to be between ten and fifteen years of age.’ (F. Newton, The Jazz Scene, 1961, p. 62).
31. Revolutionaries, pp. 241, 243. We have a colleague at Middlesex Polytechnic who remembers Hobsbawm addressing a student meeting and ‘telling us we were all primitive rebels’, which caused much laughter.
32. Primitive Rebels, 1959.
33. An Interview with Eric Hobsbawm, p. 116.
34. New Statesman, 17 September 1960.
35. New Left Review 54, 1969.
36. Revolutionaries, pp. 109–120.
37. Ibid., p. 13.
38. New Society, 4 April 1968.
39. Guerrillas in Latin America, in R. Miliband & J. Saville (eds.), The Socialist Register 1970.
40. The Jazz Scene, p. 224.
41. Bandits (1972 edition), p. 115.
42. E. Hobsbawm, Man and Woman in Socialist Iconography, History Workshop 6, 1978, pp. 130–31 and R. Richardson, In the Posture of a Whore? a reply to Eric Hobsbawm, History Workshop 144, 1982.
43. New Society, 20 September 1973; Marxism Today October 1974 and July 1976.
44. Lecture to Birkbeck College Socialist Society, printed in Marxism Today, October 1974.
45. E. Hobsbawm with G. Napolitano, The Italian Road to Socialism, 1977.
46. Marxism Today, July 1976.
47. The Forward March of Labour Halted?, pp. 20–37.
48. Marxism Today, October 1982.
49. Marxism Today, January 1983.
50. Marxism Today, October 1982.
51. Marxism Today, October 1982; The Forward March of Labour Halted?, p. 180.
52. Revolutionaries, p. 6.
53. The Age of Revolution, p. 94.
54. Cf. review of M. Djilas, The New Class in The Cambridge Review, 7 June 1958.
55. Marxism Today, October 1975.
56. The Italian Road to Socialism, pp. 96–7.
57. Commitment and Working Class History, Universities and Left Review.
58. Labor History and Ideology, Journal of Social History, 7, 1974.
59. Trends in the British Labour Movement since 1850; see also Revolutionaries, pp. 121–29. Cf. T. Cliff, The Economic Roots of Reformism, Neither Washington nor Moscow, 1982, pp. 108–117.
The fact that Hobsbawm had in the meantime been largely responsible for establishing a ‘labour aristocracy industry’ among historians, concerned with defining and describing the material conditions and political inclinations of this elusive upper stratum of the nineteenth century working class, did not alter the fact that he considers it an inadequate explanation of reformism, as he has recently been at pains to point out. (Society for the Study of Labour History Bulletin, 40, 1980, pp. 6–8).
60. See also Revolutionaries, pp. 121–129.
61. Labouring Men, pp. 316–343. The final sections of the 1949 article, Trends in the British Labour Movement since 1850, were rewritten for this volume.
62. Labouring Men, p. 335.
63. Ibid., pp. 371–385.
64. Labor History and Ideology, pp. 376–7.
65. Society for the Study of Labour History Bulletin 45, 1982, pp. 6; Labouring Men, p. 381; May Day 1926: Nine Days that Shook Britain, Comment, 2 May 1964.
66. Labouring Men, pp. 327–8, 332; the unexpected element in the succession of Frank Cousins was the sudden death of his predecessor.
67. Revolutionaries, p. 105.
68. Labouring Men, p. 236.
69. Ibid., pp. 332–3.
70. Marxism Today, July 1977.
71. Class Consciousness in History, in I. Meszaros (ed.), Aspects of History and Class Consciousness, 1971, p. 17.
72. Cf. A. Rosmer, Lenin’s Moscow, 1971, p. 46.
73. Meszaros, op. cit., p. 16.
74. The Age of Capital, 1977, p. 140.
75. Cf. M. Winock & J.-P. Azéma, Les Communards, 1964, pp. 182–3, and, inter alia, Y. Kapp, Eleanor Marx, Vol. I, 1979, pp. 125–8.
76. The Forward March of Labour Halted?, pp. 18.
77. Marxism Today, July 1977.
78. The Listener, 27 July 1972. On a smaller scale we may note that in 1973, at the time of the strike by shopworkers at Dillons University Bookshop in London, Hobsbawm approached the picket line asking to be allowed to cross as he needed a book for an important seminar. It took twenty minutes to persuade him not to cross, and he left, not offering to pass round collection sheets in London University, but telling the pickets that shopworkers were very ‘difficult to organise’ (something they doubtless knew already). (Eyewitness report)
79. New Statesman, 20 June 1959.
80. New Society, 2 October 1969.
81. The Age of Capital, p. 117.
82. New Left Review, 105, 1977. Yet in a sense nationalism has distorted even some of Hobsbawm’s best work at a historian. Thus in Industry and Empire (1968) the absence of an international perspective makes him unable to give an adequate explanation of the ‘decline of Britain’ since the 1870s. Nigel Harris has characterised the result as a combination of ‘naive nationalism and its inevitable complement, folksy moralising economics’ (International Socialism (1st series), No. 36, 1969). That it remains the best modern economic history of Britain shows the poverty of the competition.
83. Communist Review, October 1952.
84. Marxism Today, January 1983.
85. Socialist Review 7, 1982. Another smaller indication that Hobsbawm’s assessment is false is the fact that in February this year the Oxford Union voted that it would fight for Queen and Country. A Radio One phone-in the previous day showed a clear majority who would not fight.
86. Marxism Today, January 1983.
87. The Forward March of Labour Halted?, pp. 16, emphasis ours – NC/IB.
88. The Age of Capital, p. 76.
89. Marxism Today, January 1983.
90. The Forward March of Labour Halted?, p. 181.
91. Cf. Steve Jefferys in The Forward March of Labour Halted?, pp. 103–13; D. Hallas, Is the Class Contracting? Socialist Review 10, 1982; C. Harman, Farewell to the Working Class?, Socialist Worker, 16 April 1983.
 







The death in April of Daniel Guérin robbed the left, not only in his native France but throughout the world, of a prolific writer, an original socialist thinker and tireless revolutionary activist. Ian Birchall looks back over his life.





DANIEL GUÉRIN was born in 1904 into a right wing bourgeois family, but he was proud of the fact that one of his ancestors had been a follower of the pioneer socialist Babeuf during the French Revolution.
He originally intended to pursue a literary career (he published his first volume of poems at the age of 18), but a visit to Indochina in 1930 showed him the brutal reality of French imperialism at first hand and he abandoned literature for politics. He joined the French Socialist Party and began to publish a series of articles on the French role in Indochina and Morocco.
Guérin was one of the first Marxists to make a detailed study of fascism, at a time when many on the left were still hoping the problem would simply go away. He recalls that one Socialist Party member told him that talking about fascism would simply encourage the fascists; she later died at the hands of the Nazis. A couple of months after Hitler came to power Guérin cycled round Germany, observing Nazism at first hand and concealing illegal leaflets inside his bicycle frame.
On the basis of his studies Guérin published in 1936 Fascism and Big Business, a pioneering study developing some of the themes in Trotsky’s writings, and a work which remains relevant today. In it he demolishes the idea that fascism can be explained by national characteristics – Italian backwardness or the German temperament – and shows that it can potentially spread to any country.
He also rejects the myth that fascism was in some sense “anti-capitalist”, arguing that it is “an instrument in the service of big capital”, sponsored in particular by owners of heavy industry. While recognising fascism’s ideological power, he shows that this is firmly rooted in material circumstances. He concludes that the only effective way to fight fascism is by opposing it with the socialist alternative.
Inside the Socialist Party Guérin aligned himself with the most left wing current – the “Revolutionary Left” led by Marceau Pivert. He played an active role as a party and trade union militant during the great wave of factory occupations in 1936. The Revolutionary Left was well to the left of the Communist Party, characterising Stalinism as the “syphilis of the working class movement” and sympathising with the POUM in Spain.
But, though Pivert and Guérin had a high regard for Trotsky, Trotsky quite rightly characterised the Revolutionary Left as centrist. When the Socialist Party entered the government in 1936, Pivert was offered governmental office. He consulted the executive of the Revolutionary Left; Guérin was the only one to vote against.
Guérin’s own analysis was that the Popular Front had a double nature. While he rejected the idea of governmental alliances, he believed the Popular Front had also created a popular movement drawing poor peasants and petit-bourgeois behind the working class. In a sense this was true, but while Guérin stood on the extreme left of the Revolutionary Left, he was too late in seeing the need for independent revolutionary organisation.
In 1938 the Revolutionary Left was expelled from the Socialist Party and Guérin was among the founders of the PSOP – Workers and Peasants Socialist Party. But a current which in 1936 could mobilise tens of thousands of supporters now only gathered together 6,000 members.
In March 1939 Trotsky wrote a letter to Guérin – whose revolutionary integrity he respected – urging him to persuade the PSOP to turn to the Fourth International. But it was too late and the loose organisation of the PSOP collapsed at the outbreak of war.
The tragedy of war contained some elements of farce. Pivert had appointed Guérin to a clandestine leadership which would take over the PSOP in the event of war; but in the interests of secrecy he did not tell Guérin about this! As a result Guérin was in Norway at the outbreak of war and did not return to France until 1942. Pivert went on to appeal to de Gaulle to assist with the distribution of socialist propaganda.
Guérin now broke with Pivert. He was unwilling to participate in a resistance movement based on nationalism and class collaboration and so, while maintaining some differences with the Trotskyists (he had opposed the foundation of the Fourth International) he worked closely with them during the occupation. As he put it, he refused:
“to enter a resistance which aimed at the defeat of one of the two imperialist blocs, preferring to participate with the Trotskyists in a clandestine working class action, fighting simultaneously the occupying forces and French capitalism.”
While never joining the Trotskyists he worked closely with them; his archives became one of the main sources for study of the underground Trotskyist press.
Guérin also devoted the war years to writing a massive study of the French Revolution, first published in 1946. (A much abbreviated version exists in English under the title Class Struggle in the First French Republic.) Guérin was not an academic historian and his study of the past was quite unashamedly intended to illuminate the present. By showing the class tensions within the bourgeois revolution, he was helping to undermine the myths of national unity and the “progressive bourgeoisie” which underlay the Popular Front and the Resistance.
By using the past to illuminate the present Guérin found himself the object of accusations of anachronism – of bending the past to make it fit the patterns of the present. In feet his aim was simply to show that within the bourgeois revolution a working class with its own interests was already beginning to emerge; as he put it, he was trying “to bring to light the embryos of anti-bourgeois revolution concealed within the womb of the bourgeois revolution”.
Guérin’s work on the French Revolution continues to be a matter of controversy; he claimed that later historians such as Soboul and Cobb had confirmed his findings but failed to acknowledge their debt to him.
In December 1946 Guérin went to the United States for two years, and wrote extensively to explain the USA to a European audience. At a time when many, not only on the right but also on the left (for example Herbert Marcuse) were arguing that there was no class struggle in the United States, it was vital to point to the deep-rooted class and racial divisions in American society.
Already in 1950 Guérin was writing of the “black revolt” in the USA. His short history of American trade unionism (translated into English as A Hundred Years of Labor in the USA) remains a useful introduction to the subject. Written from a revolutionary standpoint, it is sharply critical of both governmental anti-communism and the manoeuvres of the American Communist Party.
Guérin first came into politics as an anti-colonialist and this was to remain a constant theme in his writing and activity. In the thirties he corresponded with the leading Vietnamese Trotskyists (later murdered by the Stalinists) and in the fifties and sixties he campaigned actively on behalf of independence for the West Indies.
Above all Guérin worked tirelessly in support of Algerian independence. He first met the Algerian nationalist leader Messali Hadj at the time of the Popular Front (Algerian workers participated in all the main anti-fascist demonstrations in the 1930s) and he published articles on North Africa before 1954.
In December 1954, one month after the outbreak of the Algerian War, while most of the French left had not woken up to the situation, Guérin was involved in a joint Trotskyist-anarchist initiative to set up a committee against colonial repression. The first meeting was banned by the minister of the interior ... a certain François Mitterrand.
Defence of Algerian rights was not a comfortable activity. On one occasion Guérin was on the platform of a meeting when it was attacked by fascists with steel clubs and tear gas. In 1961 he signed the Manifesto of the 121 expressing support for those who gave practical assistance to the Algerian liberation struggle. While the most prominent signatories such as Sartre were not prosecuted, Guéin was one of 29 who were charged with incitement to disobedience and desertion. Like so many other revolutionaries Guérin felt the pressures of the long years in the wilderness between 1945 and 1968. The warring sects of French Trotskyism could not hold him. But while so many others drifted to the right, Guérin’s undying revolutionary integrity took him to the ultra-left. He increasingly identified himself with the anarchist tradition, of which he wrote a historical study.
But for Guérin anarchism was always a current within socialism, not something to be counterposed to it. He was far from uncritical of the great anarchists and continued to find much that was positive in the Marxist tradition. He defended Marx against anarchist criticism, edited writings of Rosa Luxemburg and praised Lenin’s “libertarian moments”, among which he numbered State and Revolution. The fairest description of his position is probably “libertarian communist”.
In the sixties Guérin started to discover virtues in the “workers’ control” practised in Yugoslavia and post-independence Algeria. But he did not go completely overboard for them, undoubtedly seeking signs of hope when nothing was happening at home.
He reacted immediately and enthusiastically to the upsurge in 1968; as early as 8 May he issued a statement, with Sartre and others, urging all workers and intellectuals to support the students.
Guérin was bisexual and while for a long time this was no more than a minor current in his literary work, he welcomed the birth of the gay movement, in the early seventies. He played an active role in the FHAR – Homosexual Front for Revolutionary Action.
Guérin never abandoned his revolutionary commitment and remained active until his final year; in one of his last articles he linked the French Revolution to the spirit of 1968. He was non-sectarian and would cooperate with whoever shared his basic goals. He wrote for Sartre’s journal Les Temps Modernes and spoke at the annual fêtes organised by Lutte Ouvrière.
Guérin’s work on fascism remains a valuable contribution; his analysis of the French Revolution will undoubtedly continue to be a cause of controversy. But more importantly than for any particular text, Guérin should be remembered for the totality of his life – theory and practice united by a commitment to fighting against racism, colonialism, fascism and war, and for the emancipation of the working class. Whatever specific disagreements there may have been, Guérin belongs to our tradition, and we mourn him as a comrade.
 







A major upturn in struggle always presents the left with a crucial test. It requires organisations to adapt their analysis and their strategy – often in a period of days or even hours – to deal with new and often wholly unpredicted circumstances. Ian Birchall looks at how the left responded to such an upturn in May 1968.




THE MOST significant organisation of the French left in 1968 was undoubtedly the Communist Party (PCF). For over 20 years it had taken around 20 percent of the vote in virtually every election, and it tightly controlled the biggest trade union federation, the CGT.
When the student movement erupted in the first days of May 1968, the attitude of the PCF was one of sectarian hostility. On 3 May Georges Marchais, already grooming himself for the party leadership, wrote an article in the PCF’s daily paper, L’Humanité, in which he viciously attacked the revolutionary groupings active among the students, dismissing them as children of the rich who would soon “dampen their ‘revolutionary flame’ to go and run Daddy’s business”.
Of course the PCF recognised that, given the massive expansion of higher education, not every student could be the son or daughter of a factory owner. But this merely led the Union of Communist Students (UEC) to issue a leaflet stating that:
“The ultra-left leaders are using the failings of the government as a pretext and are playing on the discontent among the students in order to obstruct the functioning of the universities and prevent the mass of students from working and taking their examinations. Thus these false revolutionaries are behaving objectively as allies of the Gaullist government and its policies which are harmful to all students and especially to those from the humblest backgrounds.”
Behind this solicitude for the interests of working class students trying to revise for their exams lay a deeper concern. The PCF still had a virtual monopoly in the industrial working class, but among the students its political rivals were gaining ground. To the PCF leaders the rising tide of struggle was less important than the need to preserve their grip on the movement.
There was also a secondary factor. The PCF numbered many university teachers among its members. The demands for “student power” posed a threat to the established practices and privileges of these people. Hence the PCF took a highly conservative line even on the purely academic issues at stake. On 15 June L’Humanité carried an article denouncing the slogan of “student power”, which claimed,
“A student in the first or second cycle (secondary school and first year of university) cannot judge the scientific value of a professor. He can and ought, naturally, possibly to criticise his technique in transmitting knowledge, but his criticism must stop there.”
 
WITH the struggle rising even the PCF leaders found themselves embarrassed by this conservatism. In order not to lose all credibility with the student movement, they had to shift the line somewhat.
Marchais was temporarily pushed into the back seat and Roger Garaudy was dragged out to state the modified position. In the 1940s and 1950s Garaudy had been the most slavishly Stalinist of the PCF’s intellectuals, but by 1968 he was developing something of a reputation as a “liberaliser”. A couple of years later he was expelled from the PCF for taking his liberalism too far. He then renounced Marxism in favour of Christianity and has subsequently become a Muslim. In L’Humanité on 15 May Garaudy wrote
“We who pride ourselves on belonging to a revolutionary party, far from taking on the role of the mourners of history, joyfully welcome this human ferment ... The fact that the student movement is troubled by attempts at deception and adventures, and by provocations which divide it, weaken it and facilitate repression, must arouse our vigilance but must in no way obscure this movement’s innate and profound link to the workers’ movement ...”
When the movement spilled over from the student milieu to become a massive and initially spontaneous general strike the PCF had to be even more cautious. For years its policy had been to prove that it was a responsible and moderate organisation, fit to do deals with social democratic politicians and eventually – it hoped – participate in a government coalition. It could not afford to seem to be advocating direct action, let alone insurrection, yet at the same time it could not cut itself off from its traditional base.
Thus on 17 May Georges Seguy, leader of the CGT and a long standing PCF member, told a press conference, “This general strike is developing without our having called it, and it is developing under the responsibility of the workers themselves.” This was undoubtedly true, but it was also a total abdication of leadership for the head of a mass workers’ organisation to simply decline responsibility for a general strike of ten million workers.
The day before die CGT had issued a carefully worded statement in which its members were told not to spread the struggle and raise the stakes, but rather to wait and see, but at all costs to keep a grip on the movement. When the return to work began in early June, the PCF actually connived with a situation in which workers settled for much less than would have been possible. What was at best a rather unsatisfactory compromise was hailed as a triumph. On 7 June the front page of L’Humanité announced that, “strengthened by their victory, thousands of workers have returned to work”. The PCF leaders stressed their respect for parliamentary legality.
But when the PCF had staked everything on elections and achieved only a crushing electoral defeat, die wheel came full circle. Again the answer was blame die revolutionary students. An editorial in L’Humanité of 24 June declared,
“The extravagances, the provocations, the useless violence – naturally deliberately magnified and expanded in the government’s propaganda – committed by the leftist groups manipulated by the Minister of the Interior, resulted as could be expected ... Each barricade, each automobile set on fire, turned several hundred thousands of votes over to the Gaullist party.”
The Socialist Party, with which the PCF was so keen to do an electoral deal, played little role in the events. In order to mislead a movement of rising struggle it is necessary to show a left face. But the Socialist Party, compromised by decades of coalition government and support for colonial war, no longer had a left face to show.
 
SOME social democratic politicians outside the Socialist Party had slightly more credibility. Of these the most significant was one Francois Mitterrand. Mitterrand recognised which way die wind was blowing rather earlier than the PCF. On 5 May he changed die subject of a public meeting to speak of the problems of youth and the universities. While the PCF feared any rivals on the left, Mitterrand rather more shrewdly recognised that in the absence of a revolutionary party most of the young revolutionaries could eventually be dragged back into the camp of reformism.
But if Mitterrand expressed sympathy with the student revolutionaries, his solution remained wholly reformist. At a press conference on 28 May he declared,
“Those who, rightly, do not accept the established order must find the true means of ensuring their victory by accepting a cohesive and disciplined approach.”
In practice this meant that Mitterrand was calling for fresh presidential elections – and that he was announcing that he would be a candidate for the presidency. Amid the turmoil of May, Mitterrand’s bid vanished without trace, but it undoubtedly stood him in good stead for the future.
Mitterrand recognised that he had no parliamentary future without the PCF’s five million voters, and he took good care that his occasional flattery of the students did not cut him off from his allies in the PCF.
 
UNFORTUNATELY there was no credible revolutionary alternative to the left of Mitterrand and the PCF. Revolutionary ideas spread rapidly among students and even, to some extent, among young workers. But the organisations of the revolutionary left counted their members at best in hundreds, and they were deeply divided – anarchists, Maoists and Trotskyists all existing in a variety of groupings.
The most obvious dangers were sectarianism and ultra-leftism. Amid an unprecedented upsurge of struggle it was easy to believe that reformism had simply evaporated. After the massive demonstration on 13 May the anarchist Cohn-Bendit told the press, “What pleased me this afternoon was to be at the head of the demonstration while the Stalinist scum were tailing behind.”
However richly the PCF deserved condemnation, such self-indulgent ultra-leftism could only make it more difficult for the revolutionary left to win rank and file PCF members away from their leaders.
One obvious danger for leftist groups was to accommodate to the student milieu. But there was another danger; that was to use an abstract invocation of the working class as a means of evading the need to give a lead among the students. This was a trap that some of the Maoist groups fell into. It was also a problem for one of the main Trotskyist groupings, the OCI.
The OCI undoubtedly had a working class base of some sort, but it became notorious for withdrawing its student members from the famous “night of the barricades” and publicly denouncing “the irresponsibility and backwardness of petty-bourgeois of the Cohn-Bendit stripe”.
For a revolutionary group to intervene effectively it had to have both complete theoretical clarity about the centrality of the working class and an active presence within the student movement. If no organisation wholly met these criteria, the nearest approach was made by the JCR (Revolutionary Communist Youth – the youth organisation of the French section of the Fourth International and forerunner of today’s LCR). Thus a leaflet distributed widely by the JCR on 21 May set out a basically sound perspective for advancing the struggle:
“We must create rank and file Strike Committees in the factories and Action Committees in the universities and neighbourhoods that will encompass all the workers in struggle ...
“We must force de Gaulle’s withdrawal and the establishment of a workers government.
“The government we want is not simply a leftist government in place of a rightist government ...
“The government we want must spring from the strike committees and action committees of the workers and students.”
The JCR did not confine itself to general political slogans. It also issued very practical advice to demonstrators. The day after the “night of the barricades” JCR medical students issued a leaflet reading:
* Wear thick clothes.
* Put on woollen socks.
* Protect your hands.
* Protect your head.
* Protect your eyes.
COPS OF ALL GOVERNMENTS RECEIVE OUR INTERNATIONALIST COBBLE-STONES.
But the JCR’s political traditions meant that it was very susceptible to infection by the Third-Worldism rampant in the student milieu. This was dangerous because it led all too easily to a fatal underestimation of the grip of reformism. Thus a JCR statement of 9 May declared:
“The heroes of this new generation of militants are not Mitterrand or Waldeck Rochet. They are Che Guevara and Vo Nguyen Giap ... To the dull reformism offered by the PCF they prefer the heroic determination of the Vietnamese revolutionaries. To the tarnished image of socialism offered by the workers’ states, they prefer the active internationalism of the Cuban revolution.”
The other main Trotskyist organisation was Voix Ouvriere (the forerunner of today’s Lutte Ouvriere). VO took the centrality of the working class much more seriously than the JCR, and its practice centred on systematic, indeed routinist, intervention around factories to the virtual exclusion of other areas of activity.
VO did not make the OCI mistake of counterposing an abstract working class to the reality of the student struggle.
But VO’s workerism meant that it had no presence in the student movement. Its press described student action from the outside. Students were referred to as “they” – outsiders to be supported by the worker readership VO was attempting to address.
To some extent VO and the JCR could have corrected each other’s weaknesses. The formation of a joint coordinating committee by VO and the JCR on 18 May was undoubtedly a step forward towards the united revolutionary organisation that was so badly needed in the situation. But it was too little, too late. The fruit of the coordination seems to have been no more than a jointly issued leaflet.
 
ACROSS the Channel in Britain the events in France also put the organisations of the left to the test. The Communist Party of Great Britain, still heavily monolithic, stood in absolute solidarity with its French comrades. The Morning Star contemptuously dismissed the revolutionary left as “a handful of anarchists”, and at a “solidarity” meeting with France on 30 May Jack Woddis declared, “Anti-communism from the more fashionable ‘leftist’ position is no more progressive in its results than die more traditional anti-communism of the right wing.”
The Labour left was rather more sympathetic and flexible in its response. On 24 May Michael Foot told the House of Commons, “there are many millions of people in this country who greatly welcome the development of democracy in France as instanced by the occurrences of recent weeks”.
Tribune too saw the French events in a positive light – but was unable to see an outcome outside of the electoral framework. On 24 May, as ten million workers struck and occupied, Tribune’s response was to look to Mitterrand’s chief political accomplice:
’’There is only one established political figure who commands the popular confidence and respect necessary to canalise the discontent of France into specific political demands. Only Pierre Mendes-France could unite behind him the democratic and socialist forces in France.”
The Labour politician who had the most sensitive grasp of what was going on in 1968 was Tony Benn, at the time Harold Wilson’s Minister of Technology. In a speech at Llandudno on 25 May Benn showed an acute awareness of the implications of the French events, as well as of the rising student movement in Britain:
“It would be foolish to assume that people will be satisfied for much longer with a system that confines their national political role to the marking of a ballot paper with a single cross once every five years.
“People want a much greater say. That certainly explains some of the student protests against the authoritarian hierarchies in some of our universities and their sense of isolation from the problems of real life.”
And Benn prophesied ominously:
“If adjustments are not made to the parliamentary system, discontent expressing itself in despairing apathy or violent protest could engulf us all in bloodshed.”
Benn’s concrete proposals were anodyne – participatory democracy; a better informed government; referendums; re-examination of communications; the strengthening of representative organisations. None the less, in the rather tense climate produced by the French situation, he evoked some sharp reactions.
Quintin Hogg (Lord Hailsham) declared that Benn was “talking cod’s wallop” while the Daily Mail declared that he had made “one of the most foolish, dangerous and irresponsible speeches ever to come from a cabinet minister”.
Elsewhere on the British left the enthusiasm for the French events was wholehearted. On 1 June the newly launched revolutionary paper Black Dwarf caught the mood of many militants with a headline that filled its front page:
We Shall Fight
We Shall Win
Paris London Rome Berlin
But Black Dwarf was stronger on mood than analysis, and a subsequent issue bore the more dubious headline “Students: The New Revolutionary Vanguard”. (Some of the editors claimed that the printer had omitted a question mark.)
Revolutionary euphoria spread further. The Black Dwarf carried a piece by Eric Hobsbawm in which he accused the PCF of “feet dragging” and declared:
“What has happened in France is marvellous and enchanting ... Does it show the way to the rest of the world? It would not be the first time that Paris had done so. I think it may do so now.”
The New Statesman’s editor, Paul Johnson (now a right wing Tory), sharply criticised the PCF for its lack of revolutionary fervour. When criticised by the Morning Star’s Paris correspondent, Johnson replied by citing the pamphlet Paris: May 1968 by the anarcho-Marxist Solidarity group. The pamphlet was indeed an excellent eye witness account but it was odd to see it recommended by someone who two years earlier had made a passionate defence of the Wilson government’s wage freeze.
 
ENTHUSIASM for the French events also came from Socialist Worker. The June issue carried a special eye witness report from an International Socialist (forerunner of the Socialist Workers Party) delegation to France. This recognised the positive role played by the students, and showed how it had opened up the situation for the rest of the world.
“Revolution in the advanced countries is the order of the day. Today France is in turmoil, tomorrow it could be Spain, Britain or Italy. The role played by the students has also become clear. Although they can never be the agents of social change they can act as a catalyst in the process. The activities of the French students provided the flashpoint for the frustrations of the workers; their demands for a new social order voiced the feelings of many workers.”
But Socialist Worker also recognised the colossal obstacles in the way of the movement; the continuing grip of reformism and above all the absence of a revolutionary organisation that could challenge that grip.
“The most serious problem for the French workers is the complete absence of any revolutionary organisation capable of articulating and generalising the revolutionary implications of the mass strike. The field is therefore wide open for the French Communist Party.”
For Socialist Worker the key lesson was that euphoria was not enough; if the hold of reformism was to be broken, a revolutionary organisation capable of offering an alternative was necessary. And that lesson was as valid for Britain as for France. It is a lesson which, twenty years on, has lost none of its relevance.
 



LAST month’s savagely repressed riots in Algeria may mark the beginning of a new phase of social struggle in a country which, for a century and a half has suffered bitterly from the effects of imperialism.
Algeria was colonised by France in the early nineteenth century, but by a legal fiction was not considered a colony but an integral part of French territory. This did not deter Algerian nationalists from launching a struggle for independence; in November 1954 the National Liberation Front (FLN) began the insurrection which was to lead to eight years of harsh warfare.
French imperialism did not give up easily. FLN militants faced napalm, concentration camps and torture, but they maintained their struggle, losing at least 140,000 dead in the course of a war.
It was one of the great epic liberation struggles of the twentieth century.
In 1962 De Gaulle’s France conceded defeat, and Algeria gained its independence. The legacy of war and imperialism could not easily be overcome, and from the outset there were disputes among the FLN leaders. The first president of the independent state was Ahmed Ben Bella, one of the historic leaders of the FLN who had spent much of the war in jail.
For a year or two Ben Bella enjoyed great prestige among the international left. He was hailed as taking the revolution in a socialist direction.
In fact the FLN smashed opposition in the trade unions and packed them with loyal government supporters. Women were excluded from the campaign to extend literacy.
The real power remained in the hands of the army, and however superficial Ben Bella’s “socialism” was, it was too much for some of them.
In the spring of 1965 one of the most powerful army leaders, Boumedienne, staged a coup and removed Ben Bella from power. There was virtually no resistance to the coup, despite Ben Bella’s alleged popularity. (An acquaintance of mine was having his hair cut in Algiers on the day of the coup and was told by the hairdresser in the course of casual conversation: “By the way, there’s been a coup.”) For Ben Bella it was back to jail.
Boumedienne had one thing going for him – the rise in oil prices in the seventies. Oil and gas constitute 98 percent of Algeria’s exports, and as long as the oil boom lasted the deep-lying economic problems could be concealed.
When Boumedienne died in 1978 he was replaced by President Chadli. Chadli made a few liberal gestures – for example releasing Ben Bella from jail in 1979 – but in essence he continued Boumedienne’s line. The army remains the backbone of the regime – roughly a fifth of the delegates to the party congress are soldiers.
In December 1985 the fall in the price of oil cut Algeria’s foreign currency earnings by 40 percent. Instead of re-scheduling its foreign debts the government cut imports. Working people were faced with shortages and empty shops, while the rich continued to display their wealth ostentatiously.
In this situation the October riots are no surprise. Naturally enough it was the youth who took the lead. Over half the rapidly growing population of Algeria is aged under twenty – they have no memory of the struggle against the French and show no deference to those who still derive their legitimacy from that struggle. The young, too, bear the burden of the economic crisis – 50 percent of those aged between 20 and 24 have no job.
Even more threatening for the government is the fact that behind the rioters looms the power of the working class. The Algerian working class is now far bigger and stronger than at the time of the liberation struggle; around 60 percent of the population live in towns. In the week just before the riots there was a wave of strikes. Thirteen thousand car-workers struck in the former Berliet plant, now nationalised, and the strike spread to postal workers and airport employees.
The riots produced results. Chadli promised reforms, although he was extremely vague as to what their content would be, since the economic situation leaves him little room for manoeuvre. More significantly, hi the days after the riots, the shops were conspicuously well stocked – an object lesson for all that struggle pays.
A presidential election is due next January, and it is not clear whether Chadli will stand. To remove the President would undoubtedly be a symbolic victory, but his replacement would be unlikely to have politics of a significantly different nature.
For the moment no authentic political alternative exists. Certainly the Islamic fundamentalists have played a major role in the riots. Chadli had sought to outflank the fundamentalists by giving greater recognition to Islam in his policies, but as the crisis deepens the fundamentalists seem certain to grow in influence. But they are no more than the other side of the coin to the nationalists – they have no policies to confront the needs of the working people, the youth and the unemployed.
Two of the founding leaders of the FLN, Ben Bella and Ait Ahmed, now both in exile, have issued statements denouncing the Chadli government. (In 1985 Ben Bella and Ait Ahmed issued a joint appeal for democracy in Algeria – a surprising line-up, since when Ben Bella was in power he sentenced Ait Ahmed to death.)
The “historic” leaders of the FLN certainly retain a degree of credibility, and may have some following. But they too have no solution.
The real hope is that among the thousands of students and unemployed who took to the streets last month, a few have begun to draw the lessons and are beginning to discuss the need for the organisation that can offer a way ahead – a revolutionary party rooted in Algeria’s growing and militant working class.
 



Campaigns for Peace
Richard Taylor & Nigel Young (eds.)
Manchester University Press, £29.50
MODERN warfare, nuclear or conventional, is the filthiest obscenity produced by modern capitalism. So it is not surprising that throughout the twentieth century women and men, starting from Christian, feminist, liberal or socialist principles, have been driven to protest and campaign against it.
But such protestors have had to choose between two paths: simply to keep their own hands clean by refusing to participate, or to look for an effective way of mobilising mass opposition to war.
This collection of twelve essays attempts to look at some of these problems. The result is very uneven. Several of the articles have little of value.
There is a lightweight introduction from Mary Kaldor and a pedestrian account of the churches and nuclear arms; and the editors have yielded to a misplaced liberalism to allow a Mr van den Dungen to present a collection of right wing smears and slanders against the peace movement. When this and similar dross is swept aside, you don’t have much left for your £29.50.
Nonetheless the book contains a few useful pieces dealing with Marxist and other opposition to the two world wars and with the history of CND (though there is not much evidence of original research). What is lacking, however, is any theoretical framework that can help us to deal with the central question of how to mobilise against war.
Martin Shaw, in a muddle-headed piece called War, Peace and British Marxism argues that it is important that “war should be seen as a central and constitutive process of modern society, not as something marginal or derivative.” He therefore criticises Marxists before 1914 because they “tended to argue their case on the class character of the state rather than the death and destruction which was to come”.
Precisely the opposite is true. Only by understanding the class nature of war and the war-making state is it possible for socialist internationalists to win the support of masses of ordinary workers who are influenced by nationalism and immersed in the problems of everyday life.
Thus in World War One the vast majority of the labour movement defected to patriotism, leaving the genuine internationalists a tiny, isolated minority. But (as Ken Weller has shown in his excellent study of the anti-war struggle in Islington, Don’t be a Soldier!) it was possible for a class-based anti-war movement to win a hearing and make effective propaganda.
Towards the end of the war mutinies began to erupt in the army; tragically, many of the militants who could have taken the lead in these were at home as conscientious objectors rather than with their fellow workers at the front.
In World War Two the situation was even more complex. For most on the left the anti-fascist nature of the war seemed paramount; only a handful of hard-line pacifists refused to fight. Yet strikes, by-elections and other phenomena showed that the class struggle had not gone away. The agitation, led by CP members, for better air-raid shelters involved primarily people who wanted to win the war, maybe even wanted to bomb Germany in revenge.
But the shelter issue offered the real possibility of mobilising such workers against the state that was making war.
There are similar lessons from the history of CND in the sixties. Unilateralists won a paper victory in the Labour Party in 1960. They lost it again when the right organised at grass roots level while the left failed, in Mike Kidron’s words, to “break down the high stakes of nuclear diplomacy into the small chips of class struggle”.
The Direct Action Committee against Nuclear War did make a serious attempt to take the struggle into the workplaces. The result – a one hour token strike in Stevenage. The achievements were limited precisely because the DAC saw industry as no more than one site among others for “direct action” and failed to link the nuclear question to the day-to-day preoccupations of workers.
This book was conceived in the early 80s. It contains several euphoric references to the rise of the European peace movement in the first half of the decade, but no explanation of its subsequent disintegration. In a world permanently threatened with nuclear destruction, peace movements will rise again, but Marxists must learn the lessons of the past if they want to intervene effectively. Unfortunately there is not very much to learn from this book.
 



Jean Marc Schiappa
Les babouvistes
Les Amis de Gracchus Babeuf, Saint-Quentin 2003, pp. 606, Є55
OVER 200 years on from the French Revolution it would seem impossible to say anything new on the subject. The currently fashionable revisionist historians largely content themselves with recycling what was said much better by de Tocqueville. But Jean Marc Schiappa’s new book undoubtedly breaks new ground in the study of one of the most significant episodes of the Revolution, the so-called ‘conspiracy’ of Babeuf in 1796. The distinguished historian Michel Vovelle has hailed it as marking ‘a turning-point in the understanding of Babouvism’.
The book is based on Schiappa’s doctoral thesis, presented in 1992, and is published, fittingly, by the ‘Friends of Gracchus Babeuf’, a group of historians independent of any academic institution based in Saint-Quentin, Babeuf’s home-town, who in 1997 organised a splendid conference to celebrate Babeuf’s bicentenary.
Schiappa’s study is based, among other sources, on the study of 20,000 police files in the National Archives. By the remorseless accumulation of detail, he aims to show the true extent of the Babouvist organisation, and to make clear, in the words of Vovelle’s preface, that the conspiracy was not an ‘accident’ or an ‘insignificant epiphenomenon’. Moreover, Schiappa is not just a conscientious researcher; he is also an active socialist, and the whole work is infused with a sense that we are here recovering an important part of the authentic socialist tradition.
Schiappa shows that, contrary to the impression often given, the conspiracy was not a purely Parisian affair. He concludes that the conspiracy was ‘an attempt, very often a successful one, to build a communist organisation on the whole national territory’. Schiappa backs up the assertion with close analysis of different areas of France. He is scrupulous not to claim a more substantial implantation for the conspiracy than can be demonstrated, and admits that the picture across France was extremely uneven. (It is a pity that the publishers were not able to include maps which would have made the argument much easier to grasp.)
Thus the departments of Nord and the Pas-de Calais in North-Eastern France could legitimately be described as ‘bastions of Babouvist activity’; these were the areas most threatened with foreign invasion, there was a substantial and impoverished proletariat, and it was Babeuf’s own native region, where he had been active in the early years of the Revolution. But there was also substantial Babouvist influence in the South-East, organised around two main axes, one running along the Rhône from Lyon to Marseille through Avignon and other towns, the other running along the Mediterranean coast from Béziers and Montpellier to Toulon and Nice. In Marseille, he argues, ‘Babeuf’s friends, numerous and well-organised, formed a real political tendency with its own newspaper’. Other areas were much less affected. From the Pyrenees to the Massif Central, the conspiracy made little impact in South-Western France; there were no Babouvists in Toulouse, and very little influence in Bordeaux. To the North, Normandy was uneven, and Brittany untouched except in coastal areas.
Certainly the geography of Babouvism shows great weaknesses as well as strengths, but the overall picture is impressive. After all, in 1848 and in 1871, the militancy of Paris was largely isolated (there were Communes is several provincial cities, but none lasted more than two or three days).
Secondly, and even more interestingly, Schiappa draws out the links between the Babouvists and the emergent working class in revolutionary France. Drawing on the approach developed by Edward Thompson in The Making of the English Working Class, Schiappa shows that during the revolutionary decade there was the significant development of a wage-earning class which began to act in its own class interests, and using its own characteristic means of struggle. There were significant concentrations of workers in both Paris and the provinces. Thus there were 2,400 workers in the Toulon arsenals; 800 workers from these arsenals and elsewhere in the area were reported to have gathered to hear reading from Babeuf’s journal.
Schiappa cites industrial disputes around particular problems posed by the revolutionary decade. In Dunkirk, workers demanded to be paid in bread rather than in the highly unstable currency of the time. At Sèvres workers voted for a day off every seven days rather than just once in the 10-day week imposed by the new revolutionary calendar. The strike weapon was widely deployed, often with a high level of consciousness. Schiappa cites a letter sent by printers to two scabs; it informs them that their names can be made public, so that they will find it difficult to get work in future, but since they are young and inexperienced they are being given a warning before the threat is implemented.
Schiappa shows from Babouvist literature that Babeuf and his followers were well aware of the particular situation and problems of wage workers. What is much more dubious is whether the Babouvists played any significant rôle in instigating or organising strike action. But even if they were unable to do so, it is still clear that Babouvism was clearly linked to the ideas and interests of an emergent class. Writing of strikes after Babeuf’s arrests, Schiappa goes so far as to claim: ‘It is probably the first time in history that there is a correlation between workers’ strikes and the communist endeavour.’
Schiappa also confronts the widespread argument that the main impetus behind Babouvism came from former Jacobins who had been ousted from power after Thermidor. Certainly there were links between Babeuf’s organisation and the former Jacobins (he needed allies), but Schiappa makes it clear that the Babouvists always stood firmly for their own principles, and placed no excessive trust in their allies. As Darthé put it, the former Jacobins ‘don’t want democracy, they want aristocracy for themselves and nothing more’. The Babouvist demand for the abolition of private property was a fundamental point of division on which there was no compromise. The language of socialism had not been developed as yet, but terms such as ‘common happiness’ were widely used to indicate a society without private property. Babouvist literature bore the slogan ‘Liberty, Equality, Common Happiness’, with the final term in larger characters.
Finally, Schiappa provides a great deal of detail about how the Babouvists actually organised. The ‘conspiracy’ was caught between contradictory pressures; state repression enforced clandestinity, yet the politics of Babouvism required popular involvement. But despite persecution, the centre succeeded not only in distributing propaganda, but in receiving reports of its impact. For the Babouvists, the ‘party’ did not aim to act on behalf of the people, but rather to show the people ‘where and how’ it should go. Schiappa is quite honest about the weaknesses of the conspiracy, and shows how, to a considerable extent, these derived from objective circumstances; as he puts it, the Babouvists ‘wanted to be like fish in water, but, quite simply, there was no more water left’. Since the Babouvists were the first grouping to take a clear step beyond Utopianism and organise to achieve their ends, this is of enormous interest. Certainly this was not a ‘conspiracy’ (as its enemies labelled it), but a broadly based popular movement.
Long before Lenin, Babeuf recognised the importance of the newspaper as an organiser. Schiappa has studied in detail the list of subscribers to Babeuf’s paper, Le Tribun du peuple, both in Paris and in the provinces. While this gives us important indications of how the organisation functioned, it is inadequate. Some key figures were not subscribers; some subscribers were inactive. Moreover, Le Tribun du peuple was both expensive and difficult to read. Many subscriptions were on behalf of whole groups of supporters. Cafés provided an important location for meetings, speeches and readings from journals. They were also a place for singing; songs were an important part of the Babouvist propaganda machine, especially for reaching those who could not read.
Schiappa is thus able to correct the judgements of historians from all parts of the spectrum. He undermines the claims of R.M. Andrews that the conspiracy had little support and made no real impact. As he points out, Andrews has the advantage of hindsight, from which it is easy to sneer at the ‘amateurism’ of the Babouvists, but such an approach fails to appreciate the situation of real human beings confronting the real difficulties of their own time. Schiappa also challenges the views of Communist historian Albert Soboul who underestimated the originality of Babouvism in relation to the struggles of 1793–94. It is, however, slightly disappointing that Schiappa cites Daniel Guérin’s 1946 study of class struggle during the First Republic only in order to point to mistakes. Certainly Guérin’s theses require correction in the light of fuller research, but he deserves credit for first developing the study of independent working-class action in the Revolution. Schiappa’s notion of a ‘working class in gestation’ is only a variant of Guérin’s metaphor of an embryonic working class.
It may seem churlish to wish a 600-page book even longer, but there are important omissions in the study. The section on the part played by women in the organisation – less than a page – is disappointingly short, especially in view of the fact that the Babouvists were one of the few groupings in the Revolution to advocate full citizenship for women. Schiappa makes very little use of the material from the Vendôme trial of 1797; this lasted 96 days, and the full stenographic record remains a rich resource to be exploited by historians. And he is surely wrong to refer to the ‘absolute silence’ of Darthé and Lapierre at Vendôme; Darthé indeed refused to cooperate with the procedures of the court, but he was able to make a substantial speech in defence of his position, while Lapierre led the defendants in song at the end of sessions.
These minor quibbles in no way detract from a recognition of the importance of Schiappa’s work. No future historian, of the Revolution or of the origins of socialism, can neglect Schiappa’s work without being seen as culpably ignorant.
But its relevance is not only to specialists. Schiappa shows clearly that Babouvism was not marginal or accidental, not the work of a few eccentrics. The French Revolution laid the foundations of the modern world of capitalism and bourgeois democracy. Schiappa has shown beyond doubt that Babouvism was an integral and significant current within that Revolution. The system which we still face today was born within the presence of its gravediggers, and those gravediggers were not simply an oppressed mass, but already had a conscious doctrine of common ownership. To understand this fact about our past can only make us more confident of ultimate victory.
 



Nigel Harris has written what is in many ways a moving and well-researched obituary of Duncan Hallas; it reflects the great affection felt for Duncan, while also containing much information unknown even to those of us who were Duncan’s comrades over many years.
Unfortunately, Nigel has seen fit to set his account in a framework with which many will be in strong disagreement. There are a number of important questions here, which cannot be discussed adequately in a brief response; the debate that will undoubtedly follow Nigel’s forthcoming book will be a more appropriate setting for a full critique.
I would, however, like to comment briefly on two themes in Nigel’s obituary: the alleged disappearance of the working class, and Duncan’s continuing commitment to the revolutionary cause.
For Nigel, Duncan’s death was ‘the end of an age’, and he more specifically insists that ‘the working class had gone; the vehicle of revolution had been dismantled behind our backs’. Now unfortunately the abandonment of the proletariat is not an optional element in Marxism – without it, Marxism becomes nonsense. That last sentence is not mine, but Nigel’s own (International Socialism, first series, no. 30). Nigel has, of course, every right to renounce Marxism, though it seems a little odd to do so from the platform of an obituary for an old friend of whom Nigel was obviously very fond, but who would have vigorously contested Nigel’s new views.
It is of course true that a specific historical period in which the core of the working class consisted of miners, engineers and railway workers is now over (though rail strikes can still cause chaos). But whether that one phase of history can be identified with the working class as such is much more questionable – and certainly Duncan Hallas never believed it could be.
As early as the mid-1970s, Duncan was grappling with the problem of major changes in the working class. In his educational column in Socialist Worker, he argued that ‘for Marxists, a worker is someone who does not own means of production and so is forced to sell his labour-power … in order to earn his living’. In particular, he insisted that the working class included both manual and white-collar workers, both productive and non-productive workers (Socialist Worker, 22 November 1975). As he pointed out in another article ‘surgeons and sewermen are typical unproductive workers … they are also indispensable’ (Socialist Worker, 15 January 1977).
When Eric Hobsbawm first propounded his thesis that the forward march of labour had been halted, Duncan responded with a Socialist Review piece entitled Is the Class Contracting?, which drew much of its information on the changing nature of the working class from an article by Nigel Harris. He argued that the ‘golden past’ evoked by Hobsbawm was a myth, and that we should reject ‘the view that the only “real” proletarians are manual workers in industry’ (Socialist Review, November–December 1982). These were not the words of a man who confused his own roots with the still incomplete totality of the history of the working class.
Most important of all, in 1974 Duncan wrote a major article on white-collar workers. The IS Opposition (of which Duncan had originally been a member) was strongly opposed to the proposed branches for teachers and students, insisting that ‘factory branches’ should be reserved for manual workers; one of the ISO’s leaders, Jim Higgins, later described the proposals as a ‘laughable piece of froth’ (More Years for the Locust, p. 114). Duncan argued clearly and carefully that the working class was changing, and that revolutionary organisation must change with it. He began by noting the massive expansion of white-collar employment and the relative decline of the traditional manual working class, and went on to examine the Rank and File group in the NUT in whose building he had played a significant rôle. His conclusions, as always, were sternly operational: ‘It is no use looking with vicarious pleasure at members working in a big car plant or a steelworks if you work in a civil service office. The job is to build in that office.’ (International Socialism, first series, no. 72)
In so doing he was not alone, but very much part of the IS/SWP tradition. Chris Harman may indeed hiss in his teeth irritatingly, but he has written a number of articles in which he carefully analyses the way in which the working class has changed, in Britain and internationally, but remains a working class. (Among many others, see The Working Class after the Recession, International Socialism, no. 33; The Workers of the World, International Socialism, no. 96.)
Nigel is quite right that to situate Duncan as an individual it is necessary to place him in the Lancashire working class of the 1930s and 1940s. In terms of culture and lifestyle, he always remained to some extent of that world, untouched by Bill Haley, let alone the Clash. I recall that when the Executive Committee was agitated by the problem of members smoking dope at branch meetings, he growled to me: ‘Why can’t they stick to beer like I do?’
But when Duncan rejoined the IS in 1968, the bulk of the members were young workers and students (often from working-class families) who had grown up since 1945, and knew nothing of the poverty and unemployment of the 1930s. They belonged to a cultural universe wholly remote from Duncan’s. But Duncan won their respect, not by making concessions to their lifestyle, but because of his political experience, and his willingness to argue at whatever length necessary.
Nigel says nothing of the Anti-Nazi League (although he himself played a significant rôle in it), the first time at which an IS/SWP initiative made a real impact on mainstream politics by blocking the rise of the far right. The ANL was possible because of the convergence of a creative and undogmatic application of Trotsky’s writings on fascism and a sensitivity to new developments in youth culture, especially the punk movement. Because politics was central rather than the superficialities of lifestyle or culture, two such diverse individuals as Duncan Hallas and Dave Widgery could coexist in the same party with mutual respect. That educational columns by Duncan were a popular feature of Socialist Worker at this time shows that he was not wholly limited by his Wythenshawe roots.
To a careful reader, Nigel is scrupulously honest in not attributing to Duncan any of his own views or analyses. Yet he certainly does suggest that Duncan may have had doubts about the validity of the SWP analysis in his last years. Now none of us can claim to have access to Duncan’s thoughts, but all the evidence is that he remained a committed and enthusiastic revolutionary till his death. Certainly, as an advocate of the ‘state capitalist’ theory, he was in no way depressed by the ‘collapse of communism’, but saw it as opening a new period of revolutionary opportunities.
Nigel reports that Duncan said that there were ‘no lessons’ to be drawn from the Comintern experience. Certainly Duncan was always impatient with those, like Sean Matgamna of the Trotskyist Tendency in the IS after 1968, who saw the ‘first four congresses’ as providing a recipe for all the world’s ills. And he was a man of great modesty, who undoubtedly underrated his little book on the Comintern, which remains an excellent introductory outline. Perhaps he overstated his point.
Nigel also cites Duncan’s obituary of Cliff in Revolutionary History (Volume 7, no. 4). Here the responsibility is entirely mine. Anxious that Revolutionary History should contain at least one obituary of Cliff by someone still within the SWP tradition, and remembering what a splendid job Duncan would have done a few years earlier, I badgered him into writing it when he was tired and ill and didn’t want to be bothered. Blame my stupidity and insensitivity, but don’t read any hidden political message into it. After all, in his Socialist Worker comment at the time of Cliff’s death, Duncan had described both Cliff’s ‘extraordinary consistency’ and his ‘remarkable ability to sense when the outside world was changing’ (Socialist Worker, 15 April 2000).
When I and other SWP comrades visited him in his last years of debilitating illness, he was always anxious for news of the party. Certainly he asked questions, but in the framework of a very firm commitment. The only significant point on which I remember him disagreeing with the SWP was that he thought we should not have called for a vote for Nader in the US presidential election in 2000 – because he was ‘not part of the working-class movement’. I think he was wrong – but it was not the position of a man who saw the working class as a thing of the past.
Just a year ago, in January 2002, he asked Andy Strouthous for assistance in filling in his SWP registration form so that he could increase his subs. Before Marxism in July 2002, I asked his advice on a talk I was preparing on Orthodox Trotskyism. His succinct comments showed that he still fully accepted the SWP view of the Marxist tradition. Despite his physical deterioration, he attended Marxism 2002 for a few hours, perhaps sensing that this would be his last chance to see old comrades.
Duncan was always a believer in left unity, providing that it meant unity in action and not just a paper fiction. He was keenly interested in the growth of the Socialist Alliance, and, as a resident of Hackney, was enthusiastic about Paul Foot’s campaign in the election for Mayor of the Borough. Even in his last weeks in Homerton Hospital, when he was often barely conscious, he had leaflets for the Foot campaign on his bedside table.
Duncan went to his death proud to be a member of the SWP. All those SWP comrades who knew him were proud to be members of a party for which he was a leading spokesperson for so many years.
 



Jean-Pierre Hirou
Du trotskysme au communisme libertaire
Editions Acratie, La Bussière 2003, pp. 279, Є25
JEAN-PIERRE Hirou, whose obituary appeared in Revolutionary History, Volume 8, no. 2 (2002), joined Voix ouvrière, the predecessor of Lutte ouvrière, in 1963 at the age of 15, and soon became a regular contributor to the organisation’s paper. He and his partner Michèle left LO in 1979, and he subsequently called himself a ‘libertarian communist’, though he never again joined an organisation. He was best known for his insightful book on the pre-1914 French left, Parti socialiste ou CGT? (1905–1914) (Editions Acratie, 1995), which savagely undermines some widespread myths about the pre-1914 French left. He died at the shockingly early age of 53. His comrades have edited this collection of articles and letters as a tribute to his memory and as a contribution to continuing debates on the left.
The first section, consisting of articles published in Lutte ouvrière, is the least interesting. The articles, mainly on international and historical topics, are of the sort to be found in the left press the world over – clear, well-researched commentaries on current events, but basically second-hand accounts with few new insights. Since Hirou was a member of a tendency that considers innovatory analyses of the world as petit-bourgeois self-indulgence, this is no surprise. Many of the articles end with the familiar refrain that a revolutionary party is absent – undoubtedly true, but equally undoubtedly inadequate. However, the article on socialist election strategy before 1914 shows a scholarship rare in this kind of left journalism, while a piece on child torture reveals a controlled anger that gives us a glimpse of what made Hirou a revolutionary in the first place.
The latter part shows Hirou in a much more free-thinking mode. However, anyone looking for revelations about the inner life of Lutte ouvrière will be disappointed. In recent years a flood of articles have appeared in France concerned to ‘expose’ LO’s effective leader, Hardy (Robert Barcia). Hirou had the elementary decency not to contribute to this process; while he knew that there are grave problems with LO, they were very different from the ones pointed to by ignorant and sensation-seeking journalists. In some ways he remained attached to LO; he supported Arlette Laguiller’s election campaigns, and noted that LO had, in general, made far smaller concessions to social democracy than either the Ligue Communiste Révolutionnaire or the Lambertistes. He was clearly deeply hurt at not being allowed to present his book to a forum at the LO fête. He took a deep interest in the various small splits from LO, hoping to engage them in political dialogue. But he was strongly critical of Hardy’s authoritarian style of leadership, and from his new, ‘libertarian’ standpoint, he regarded LO as being essentially centrist.
Hirou was a student in the period leading up to May 1968, and he has some interesting recollections of the movement. His memory of Daniel Cohn-Bendit at Nanterre in 1966, failing to sell a single copy of his magazine, will give a spark of hope to all frustrated paper-sellers. And he recalls something of which I for one had hitherto been unaware, that in June 1968 LO proposed to other far left groups that they should run a joint slate of candidates in the general elections. The idea came to nothing as everybody else was denouncing bourgeois elections. At the time, I should undoubtedly have rejected LO’s proposal, but in retrospect I think that LO were right; a revolutionary election campaign could have given a focus to the far left as the movement disintegrated.
Some of Hirou’s judgements of more recent events are more dubious. Thus he repeatedly refers to what he calls ‘Islamic’ fascism. This is not the playground abuse of a Hitchens or an Aaronovitch; he invokes the work of Daniel Guérin, whom he admired greatly, in support of his stance. Yet nowhere does he effectively make his case for believing that, for example, Osama bin Laden can meaningfully be described as a ‘fascist’. There are undoubtedly some very nasty Islamic fundamentalists, but many of them are hiding in caves while the equally nasty Christian fundamentalists are sitting in the Pentagon with nuclear weapons.
On his specialist area of French labour history, Hirou is much more perceptive. It is particularly good to read his devastating critique of Jaurès, a name still much admired on the reformist left. As Hirou argues, it was only the assassin’s bullet that saved Jaurès from joining Guesde and Hervé in support for the First World War. Like Charles Kennedy, Jaurès was against war until the fighting actually started: ‘Jaurès always clearly anticipated that his tactical “pacifism” would turn into fierce strategic warmongering as soon as a foreign army had crossed the frontier.’ Hirou claims that both Trotsky and Luxemburg (impressed by Jaurès’ powerful intelligence and formidable oratory) had illusions in him, and only Lenin clearly evaluated him for what he was.
But whatever specific agreements or divergences one may have, Hirou’s book shows an active mind using the past to understand the present and prepare the future. Today, as in the early years of the Comintern, the border-line between Marxism and ‘ultra-leftism’ of various varieties is becoming the locus of crucial debates in the movement. All the more pity that Hirou is not with us to contribute to them.
 



Sylvain Pattieu
Les camarades des frères: trotskistes et libertaires dans la guerre d’Algérie
Editions Syllepse, Paris 2002, pp. 292, Є19.50
THE ‘civilising mission’ of an imperialist power pitted against Islamic nationalism; a treacherous and arrogant social democratic leader spearheading a colonial war; guerrilla warfare, terrorism and torture. The Algerian war for national independence (1954–62) has many parallels with our own day, as is shown by the impact which Pontecorvo’s movie The Battle of Algiers still has on audiences born long after the events it depicts took place.
There have been a number of studies of the courageous French men and women who gave material support to those fighting for independence, notably Hamon and Rotman’s Les Porteurs de valises and Martin Evans’ The Memory of Resistance. But Pattieu’s is the first full account of the rôle played by the French Trotskyists. It is a thorough and well-balanced account, based on extensive documentation as well as on interviews with a number of the key survivors. It thus provides an important addition to our knowledge of anti-imperialist struggles in metropolitan countries.
In 1954, French Trotskyism was scarcely in a position to meet the huge challenge presented by the Algerian insurrection. Of the 500 or so members of the main grouping in the immediate postwar period, a half were lost in an unnecessary split in 1948. The usual wear and tear of a difficult period took more, and in 1952 these was a major international split. That left two tiny groups, which for the sake of convenience we can call after their main leaders, the Frank group (‘Pabloites’) and the Lambert group. In the early years of the war, the total number of organised Trotskyists in France was around 100.
In the first year or so of the war, it was therefore the anarchists, with perhaps over 300 militants, who made the running. One of their activists, Pierre Morain, served a jail sentence for articles he published in opposition to the war. The conscript revolts of 1955, when there was a genuine possibility of large numbers refusing to fight, got no significant support from the organised left. The Communist Party (PCF) failed to support such action, invoking the allegedly ‘Leninist’ principle that revolutionaries should work inside the army. But while the Leninist tradition did oppose individual desertion and ‘conscientious objection’, mass revolt against war was a different matter; as long ago as Eugène Pottier’s Internationale (‘Appliquons la grève aux armées’) revolutionaries had called for mass disobedience in the armed forces.
There was a further complication in that the independence movement was split. The National Liberation Front (FLN) which launched the 1954 insurrection was a newly-formed organisation, challenging the more long-standing Algerian National Movement (MNA), led by the veteran Messali Hadj. The FLN, though hardly itself homogenous, was determined to impose its hegemony on the struggle, and there was a savage internecine struggle between the two movements.
While the Frank group backed the FLN, Lambert’s supporters lined up with the MNA, at least during the earlier part of the war. This was not some lambertiste aberration, as is often alleged; the MNA had an honourable history, a working-class base, especially in metropolitan France, and some sort of commitment to socialism. It was backed, not only by Lambert, but by the anarchists, the Shachtmanites and by such knowledgeable individuals as Daniel Guérin. The Frank group were justified by history, in that the FLN led the independence struggle to victory, while the MNA was increasingly weakened and politically disoriented. But the FLN’s campaign of brutality and murder against its rival is hardly the most glorious page of its history.
An additional problem for the Frank group was that, in accordance with the Pabloite perspective, many of its members were doing entry work in the Communist Party. Entrism in a Stalinist party was not like the same strategy in the British Labour Party, where one can say more or less what one likes provided one has no influence on policy. It required absolute clandestinity. An additional hazard was the rôle of the poisonous Michèle Mestre, a former Trotskyist leader from the 1940s pursuing her own entry tactic which would end up with enthusiastic support for the Russian tanks in Prague in 1968; she happily fingered to the bureaucracy any Trotskyist entrists she discovered.
In 1957, the 16-year-old Alain Krivine, a loyal and enthusiastic Communist Party member, was surprised that when he arranged a meeting with FLN representatives he was reprimanded by his own party (which had recently voted in favour of ‘special powers’ to pursue the war). What he didn’t know was that his two brothers (including his twin Hubert) were already secret Trotskyists working in the PCF.
The question of strategy led to a further split. After the Hungarian events of 1956, a small number of PCF members made a break with Stalinism. Other individuals were being drawn towards opposition to the war. Some members of the Frank group felt a broader organisation was required and joined with ex-Communists to form the journal La Voie communiste. This enjoyed some success in providing a public focus for opposition to the war as well as offering practical solidarity to the FLN. However, this involved a breach of discipline in the Frank group, and Denis Berger and others were expelled.
The Frank group had only a handful of industrial workers, but these played a specially noteworthy role, since they had to win support for opposition to the war among their fellow-workers, as well as giving what assistance they could to their Algerian comrades. Many Algerian militants worked in large factories, and the authorities found it easier to locate them there than in their homes, since they moved around constantly. Henri Benoîts, a member of the Frank group working at Renault-Billancourt, was able to give assistance to the FLN organisation within the factory. When an attempt was made to arrest a leading FLN militant at Renault, various trade union activists succeeded in causing a work stoppage which confused matters, and then hid the militant in the factory, later enabling him to escape … after collecting his pay! Later Benoîts was advised by his group to join the newly-formed Parti Socialiste Unifié (PSU), since this party contained many well-known journalists and politicians, and it was far harder for the authorities to victimise its members than isolated Trotskyists. Benoîts succeeded in winning over the PSU branch at Renault to support Algerian independence and practical support for the FLN, policies which the PSU majority rejected. When a group of intellectuals produced the Manifesto of 121, calling for support to the FLN, the Trotskyists gave out copies at the factory gates, often meeting physical violence from PCF members.
Nonetheless there were contradictions inherent in solidarity work. That revolutionaries should shelter Algerian militants on the run was an elementary act of solidarity. That they should ‘carry suitcases’ was equally natural, since white French people were far less likely to be searched and manhandled by the police than those of North African appearance. (The suitcases generally contained, not weapons, but money collected by the FLN from Algerian workers in France.) But such tasks could run counter to what should have been revolutionaries’ main priority, winning support in the workplaces for withdrawal of French troops.
The weakness of the Frank group’s strategy became clearer when other more ambitious solidarity actions were undertaken. Workers engaging in clandestine activity obviously had to make themselves inconspicuous, and this detracted from the primary task of campaigning publicly against the war. Pablo and Santen were jailed for forging money for the FLN. As practical aid to the FLN, this was legitimate if adventurist; but the hope that it might help to destabilise the French economy was pure fantasy. Later a group of Fourth International militants moved to Morocco to work in a factory making weapons for the FLN. Again a worthy action, but one which diverted from the main responsibility, especially when several of those concerned were skilled workers who could have played an important rôle in trade union activity. At the same time, Pablo and his associates nurtured illusions that there was a real and immediate socialist potential in the Algerian revolution.
The one serious omission from Pattieu’s account is the Socialisme ou barbarie group, which is dismissed as merely a grouping of intellectuals. But the group’s leading industrial militant, Daniel Mothé of the Renault factory, describes in his book Journal d’un ouvrier (1956–1958) how he attempted to organise against the war, meeting opposition from both employers and the PCF-dominated trade union. Meanwhile in the pages of Socialisme ou barbarie, Jean-François Lyotard was developing the most thorough analysis of the FLN and its potential to become a new ruling bureaucracy. (His writings are reprinted in the book La Guerre des Algériens.) A fuller treatment of this Trotskyist-derived group would have been very welcome.
Pattieu notes that the last years of the war produced ferment among students and the PCF youth, leading to the emergence of a new generation of revolutionaries. Just six years after the end of the war they were to become key cadres in the events of May–June 1968, helping to spark off the biggest general strike in human history. Let us hope that in this respect, if in no other, history repeats itself.
 



In 1952 George Allen and Unwin published Tony Cliff’s first
book, Stalin’s Satellites in Europe (under his real name,
Ygael Gluckstein), in which he applied the theory of state capitalism
to the ‘people’s democracies’ of Eastern Europe. The work was
an extension of his 1950 document On the Class Nature of the “People’s Democracies”. [1] The following year the book was published in French by the ëles d’or publishing house, which specialised in critical studies of Communism.
In November 1953 Cliff’s book was reviewed in the French journal Preuves by Alfred Rosmer. [2] Rosmer was a veteran of the movement. A revolutionary syndicalist, he had been one of the few to
oppose the First World War from the first day. After the war he
played a leading role in the Communist International and the Red
International of Labour Unions. He was expelled from the French
Communist Party in 1924, was for a time a Trotskyist, and remained a
close friend of Trotsky even after his political break with
Trotskyism. [3]
Preuves was the journal of the Congress for Cultural
Freedom, parallel to Encounter in Britain. This was a pro-US
and anti-Communist outfit, but in France especially it sought to give
itself credibility on the left by associating with anti-Stalinist
leftists. It was only in 1967 that it became public that it was
financed by the CIA. (The Communist Party had made accusations
earlier, but since they also accused Preuves of being ‘fascist’,
which it certainly was not, their criticisms were not taken seriously
outside their own ranks.) Rosmer had some rather loose links with
Preuves in the early 1950s, although by 1954 he seems to have
resumed a fully non-aligned position. [4]
Rosmer already knew of Cliff’s work. In 1949 the Cuban
Trotskyist Group wrote a letter to the French journal Socialisme
ou barbarie (which had recently split from the Fourth
International on a state capitalist basis) urging them to study
Cliff’s 1948 internal document on Russia. [5] It went on to state
that Rosmer was translating Cliff’s document into French, though
nothing seems to have come of this. [6] However, it is clear that
Cliff’s work was making some impact on the international movement.
Cliff recalls in his autobiography that he met Rosmer when he
visited Britain [7], but there is no reference to Rosmer’s review,
of which I have never seen mention previously. [8]
That Cliff’s work should have been recommended by Rosmer, one of
the veterans of the Communist movement, and a man universally
recognised for his honesty, integrity and commitment to workers’
democracy, is itself significant. But Rosmer’s review is very
perceptive. He begins by referring to the show trials and executions
of Slansky and Clementis in Czechoslovakia, but concludes by
identifying the central strength in Cliff’s analysis.
In the circles around Preuves it was common to describe
Russia and the East European states as ‘totalitarian’. While this
identified the regimes as oppressive, it said little about the
dynamics of their development. By insisting that they were
capitalist, Cliff was also asserting that the oppressed were not
slaves but workers, that they would rebel just as workers had done in
the West, and that they would emancipate themselves rather than
requiring ‘liberation’ from the Western powers.
To Rosmer, who had been politically active since the Dreyfus Case
of the 1890s, and who had seen over 50 years of ups and downs,
Cliff’s optimism seemed wholly plausible. In fact even before
Rosmer’s review appeared, East Berlin building workers had launched
a revolt in June 1953, to be followed in 1956 by the massive risings
of Polish and Hungarian workers. For Cliff, as for Rosmer, it was
workers’ capacity for self-emancipation that was paramount.

Notes
1. See D. Hallas (ed.), The Fourth International,
Stalinism and the Origins of the International Socialists (London 1971).
2. Rosmer refers to the original, rather than the translation, and
the review may have been written before the translation appeared.
3. On Rosmer see A. Rosmer, Lenin’s Moscow (London 1987) and Revolutionary History, vol. 7, no. 4 (Autumn
2000) (special issue on Alfred and Marguerite Rosmer).
4. See letter of 2 November 1954 to Stan Newens of the Socialist
Review Group, reproduced in Revolutionary History, as above.
5. Reproduced in T. Cliff, Marxist Theory after Trotsky:
Selected Writings, Volume 3 (London 2003), pp. 1–138.
6. Socialisme ou barbarie, no. 4, (October–December 1949), p. 93.
7. T. Cliff, A World to Win (London 2000), p. 57.
8. It is not mentioned in the standard biography of Rosmer, C.
Gras, Alfred Rosmer (1877–1964) et le mouvement révolutionnaire
international (Paris 1971).
 



Andrew Collier’s Partisanship and Realism in Art [1] raises some important points [2] about the Marxist theory of art and the cultural tasks of the revolutionary party. Some of the formulations in my original article were undoubtedly cryptic or unclear; moreover, I assumed – perhaps wrongly – a familiarity with some of the better-known remarks of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky, and thus gave a one-sided presentation of the issues. Collier is quite right to draw attention to these inadequacies.
My article was not, of course, intended to be a rounded account of the Marxist aesthetic. It was intended simply as a rather polemical attempt to confront some problems of current concern in the movement; in particular two points: firstly, how does the theory of state capitalism illuminate our understanding of Stalinist cultural practice; secondly, what should be the intervention of present-day Marxists in the cultural struggle?
First of all, let me make it quite clear that the intervention I am concerned with is party and not state intervention. Unlike either the Stalinists or the Social-Democrats, Leninists do not see the transition to socialism as consisting in a capture of the state by the party. The party does not substitute itself for the working class, but fights for its politics in the class. A workers’ state will indeed encourage freedom of artistic expression, using censorship only as a regrettable necessity. But that does not mean that the party can abdicate its role to fight for its own viewpoint, a consistent proletarian perspective. To take an analogy; a workers’ state will guarantee freedom of worship, but a Marxist party will not abandon its responsibility to carry out a propaganda and educational campaign for materialism.
The confusion of party and state lie at the heart of Stalinism. But Collier, despite his fervent professions of anti-Stalinism, evades the issues. He writes, amazingly, that the Eurocommunist CPs are ‘coming round belatedly to just such a position as Trotsky’s.’ [3] Now the Eurocommunists (at best out of sincere reformism, at worst from electoral opportunism) have developed a critique of aspects of Stalinism; but the one thing they will not touch with a barge-pole is a class explanation of Stalinism. Instead they retreat into a mystifying haze of ‘mistakes’, ‘relative autonomy of the superstructure’, ‘role of ideological factors’, ‘specific conditions’, etc. To compare this impressionistic floundering with Trotsky’s determined attempt to provide a Marxist framework for understanding Stalinism is a grotesque piece of political misjudgement. All I sought to do was to suggest that Trotsky’s analysis, the political inadequacies of which have been brought out in the International Socialist tradition, also has weaknesses in terms of its cultural implications.
The crux of the argument, however, is the question of how Marxists should approach literary production. Collier seeks to counterpose my position to that of the ‘classical Marxists’, Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky. In my article I gave a certain number of quotations from their work; Collier, believing me to be ‘ignorant’ of this work, provides some counter-quotations. Now it is possible to prove just about anything by judicious quotation, and to an outsider the debate must seem pretty Talmudic. In principle there is no reason why we should regard the views of the ‘classical Marxists’ on aesthetic questions as having any particular importance. If art is to be conceived as ‘pure enjoyment’ [4] then there is really no reason why Marx’s views of art should relate to our political practice any more than Engels’ delight in fox-hunting affects our strategy towards the Hunt Saboteurs. I am not very interested in the fact that Marx had ‘such a passionate devotion to literature, and such wide tastes in it.’ [5] Indeed, I do not even believe some of the accounts; when Wilhelm Liebknecht tells us that Marx read Goethe, Lessing, Shakespeare, Dante and Cervantes ‘every day’ (sic!) we are observing an early and relatively innocent manifestation of the personality cult. [6]
Indeed, an emphasis on the fact that the classical Marxists were ‘cultured’ men may be less than innocent. For some time now, since it has become plain that Marxism cannot be simply refuted and eradicated, there has been an ideological campaign to co-opt Marxism, to render it passive and anodyne. To stress that Marxism has a, capacity for respecting and interpreting the cultural heritage of class society is a significant component of this campaign. George Steiner, citing the same bit of Engels’ letter to Margaret Harkness as Collier, claims that there are two ‘camps’ of Marxist criticism, the ‘orthodox’, in which he sets Lenin together with Zhdanov, and the ‘para-Marxists’ who reject ‘tendentious’ literature. Steiner’s preferences are openly for the latter. [7] Peter Demetz finds a conflict within Marx himself – between ‘his theory of the dependence of art upon economics and his personal faith in the timeless value of the Greek achievement.’ [8]
The campaign finds an echo within Marxist criticism, notably in the work of Georg Lukacs, who remarks: ‘Those who do not know Marxism at all or know it only superficially or at second hand, may be surprised by the respect for the classical heritage of mankind which one finds in the really great representatives of this doctrine by their incessant references to that classical heritage.’ [9] Once again, Lukacs’ point was not politically innocent; the assertion of a continuity between Marxism and bourgeois culture was integrally linked to the class-alliance politics of the Popular Front.
We should not be surprised that there are inconsistencies in the aesthetic pronouncements of the classical Marxists. All of them were far too busy to construct a systematic theory of art. But the richness of what they did have to say derives precisely from the fact that they did not study literature and art in a vacuum, but constantly related it to their overall revolutionary preoccupations. It is only by asserting, against the thinkers, bourgeois and ‘Marxist’ alike, who seek to dilute it, that Marxism is a theory of combat [10], that we can begin to make sense of what they had to say on artistic matters.
Collier (like Steiner, Demetz and Lukacs) puts great stress on the well-known fact that Marx and Engels admired Balzac [11], and that Lenin wrote in praise of Tolstoy. Nothing I wrote goes against accepting this as one aspect of a Marxist approach to literature. My sole objection is that all too often the ‘Balzac paradox’ is elevated into the central proposition of the Marxist aesthetic. [12]
But Marx’ and Engels’ admiration for Balzac must be seen in perspective. Two points should be made. First, the value of Balzac as a witness must be placed in historical context. At the time Balzac was writing (1830–1848) the intellectual left in France was still heavily under the domination of Utopian socialist ideas. Those writers most sympathetic to the working class – George Sand, Victor Hugo [13] – radiated belief in class harmony, in reconciliation. Balzac, just because he identified with reaction, saw no possibility of such reconciliation. Hence he grasped the reality of class society, the structural economic opposition between classes in a way that the ‘progressives’ could not. That is why Marx and Engels read and learnt from him.
Secondly, Marx’s admiration for Balzac must be set against his attempts to win other writers to active support of the socialist cause. The point becomes much clearer when we look at Lenin, Tolstoy and Gorky. Lenin indeed wrote explaining how revolutionaries could learn from Tolstoy, despite the latter’s misguided political views. The first article, quoted by Collier, was written on the occasion of Tolstoy’s eightieth birthday; four more pieces were written two years later after Tolstoy’s death. [14] In short, Lenin was dealing with a work that was already complete and finished. All he could do was to suggest how it might be profitably read. When it was a question of a near-contemporary such as Gorky, still in the middle of his active life, Lenin’s attitude is very different. In turn he encourages, cajoles, reprimands, denounces [15] – never content to leave matters to Gorky’s ‘creative freedom’, but always determined to try and influence and orient Gorky’s work so that it might best serve the interests of the revolution.
If we bring the point up to date it becomes even clearer. It is undoubtedly true that – despite his grotesquely reactionary opinions – Solzhenitsyn is one of the greatest living novelists, who tells us a great deal about Russian society that more ‘liberal’ dissidents have missed. But how do we apply this fact? If a promising young novelist comes close to the SWP, what do we tell her or him? ‘Buy an icon, support the Chilean junta and trust in the depths of your individual genius.’ Unfortunately the abstentionist logic of Collier’s position would lead to just such a position.
Likewise, when I criticised the concept of literature as ‘reflection’, I was in no way arguing that literature does not have a content of truth, that it does not act as a mirror to the reality of society. What I was challenging was the view that sees the superstructure as lagging behind the reality of the ‘base’, and therefore fit only for passive interpretation. On the contrary, the artist only achieves reality through active involvement in the world. In Sartre’s words ‘I reveal the situation by my very project of changing it’. [16] In the past some reactionaries have produced works which we can read with profit. (Though we should stress the word some; we can still learn from Balzac and Tolstoy, but should we really be urging comrades to read Wordsworth, Trollope or Jane Austen?) But as the old ruling class declines more and more, we can less and less hope that it will throw up work of value. We have to fill that gap with a culture which tells the truth because it has absorbed the experience and understanding of revolutionary struggle.
But the basis of my disagreement with Collier lies even deeper. It is in the question of what the nature of literature itself is. Collier accuses me of ‘crude politicisation of art’. [17] But the notion of politicisation itself depends upon a concept of politics. If one accepts the bourgeois norms of ‘politics’ (corrupt intrigues for the minority, a vote every five years for the majority) then the best thing art can do is to turn its back contemptuously on the whole mystification. But there is another sense in which, in Gottfried Keller’s phrase, ‘everything is politics’. [18] Collier, in stressing the biological constants of human experience, underestimates the extent to which social revolution means a total revolutionising of human sensibilities. As Trotsky put it:
‘If nature, love or friendship had no connection with the social spirit of an epoch, lyric poetry would long ago have ceased to exist. A profound break in history, that is, a rearrangement of classes in society, shakes up individuality, establishes the perception of the fundamental problems of lyric poetry from a hew angle, and so saves art from eternal repetition.’ [19]
Collier reaches the peak of indignation at my argument that Lenin (in Party Organisation and Party Literature) was making no distinction ‘between Literature (with a capital L) and other forms of writing’. This, according to Collier ‘makes Lenin out to be some sort of cretin, failing to see distinctions which are clear enough to most ordinary mortals.’ [20]
Now it will doubtless confirm Collier’s view of my sub-human status, but I have to admit that when I read, say, Shaw, Brecht, Serge, Orwell, Sartre, Valles, Voltaire, ... I find it more or less impossible to draw a neat line between ‘creative’ Literature [21] and reportage/propaganda etc. My claim is that literature can be measured against the same standards of evaluation as other human activities. The ‘classical Marxists’ have often appeared to agree with me. Thus Trotsky calls Malraux’s novels ‘lying reports from the fields of battle’. [22] Indeed, I should not have dared to face the wrath of Collier by making such a philistine judgement as to say: ‘A machine which automatically manufactures bottles is at the present time a first-rate factor in the cultural revolution, while a heroic poem is only a tenth-rate factor.’ Fortunately it was Trotsky, and not I, who made this comparison. [23]
Against this position Collier counterposes his call for ‘free artistic production and consumption’. It is hard to know what this abstraction means. From what is the artist (or the reader) to be free? From repressive censorship or the profit-motive which dominates publication? Well and good, but these are only negative constraints. The artist cannot be free from the society he or she lives in or the struggles that beset it. She or he cannot create in a vacuum, but must produce in the context of a particular society. In a very real sense all art is a collective product.
Finally Collier berates me for attributing importance to the ‘political correctness’ of the artist. [24] This raises two important points, one theoretical and one practical.
Collier’s position seems to be, at least as far as artistic production is concerned, that conscious intention is of little importance. The work will be produced (as in the Balzac paradox) despite rather than because of the author’s intention. If we extend this to other areas of human activity (and there seems to be no clear reason why we should not, unless art is somehow different because it results from divine inspiration or something of the sort) then we end up with a thoroughly fatalistic position. Men and women are simply the ‘bearers’ of historical forces; what they wish and intend is of little relevance. The conclusion is undoubtedly fatalistic (and probably elitist as well, since it tends to imply that there are a few of us who do stand outside, as it were, and know what’s going on).
The opposite error, of course, is to assume that human beings know exactly what they are doing, and that actions can be reduced directly to their intentions. [25] This position simply evades the whole question of ideology and ‘false consciousness’. The political implications are clear; no need for propaganda, no need for political persuasion, hence no need for the revolutionary party.
Marx’s position seeks to avoid both traps. ‘Men make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please; they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but under circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted from the past.’ [26] Intentions are neither irrelevant nor omnipotent; hence the need for constant political and ideological struggle.
For where Collier’s article really breaks down is that it fails to point to action. The main problem at the present moment is not whether we should admire Tolstoy; it is the fact that the anti-fascist struggle has led to the emergence of a variety of forms of politicised art. Rock Against Racism, the resurgence of political theatre, the range of cultural activities developed by the Anti-Nazi League: all these pose a direct challenge to revolutionary socialists.
Of course we do not seek to bully or to manipulate; we do not issue ultimatums; we seek to learn at least as much as we teach. Yet the fact remains that we have a political analysis – of the present crisis, of the nature of fascism and so on. As we come into contact with poets, playwrights etc trying to confront these same problems, we cannot – if we take our politics seriously – simply abstain, simply say ‘You’re an artist, trust in your inner self. We have to argue for our politics in this context as in any other, believing that the best, most realistic art in the present epoch must absorb the understanding of Marxism, though it will embody its own specific form. Trotsky hints at the process when he writes of Silone’s Fontamara: ‘He knows how to see life as it is, to generalise what he sees by means of the Marxist method and then to embody its generalisations in artistic images.’ [27]
Indeed, Trotsky may be our best guide for the present period. [28] Literature and Revolution gives a number of concrete indications of how socialists should relate to artistic ‘fellow-travelers’ (used in the proper sense of those who will travel some of the way with the Party, not in the Stalinist sense of those who follow the line but who don’t – publicly – hold a card). In criticising the ‘Lef’ group, Trotsky stresses that what is needed is ‘to influence and to assimilate’ over a long period. This requires sensitive but clear political criticism, there is a model example of this in Trotsky’s critique of Mayakovsky’s The 150 Million, where political and literary criticism are subtly intertwined. Collier may note that Trotsky also praises the conscious revolutionary writers: ‘Biedny ... is a Bolshevik whose weapon is poetry.’ [29]
Collier quotes Trotsky as saying that ‘those writings of Pilnyak’s which are closer to communism are feebler than those which are politically further away from us.’ But Trotsky, unlike Collier, is not imply contemplating a contradiction in bemused fashion; he is seeking to resolve it, to discover how Pilnyak could put his talents fully at the service of the revolution. [30] Moreover, the passage which Collier cites from Class and Art should be set alongside the much more interventionist passage in Literature and Revolution:
‘Pilnyak is not an artist of the revolution, but only an artistic "fellow-traveller". Will he become its artist? We do not know. But at present he is not. ...Somehow Pilnyak must answer the question, what is this all for? He must have a philosophy of revolution of his own.’ [31]
To conclude, it must be said that, whatever contradictions there may be in the classical Marxists, their overriding priority is always for political intervention in the perspective of working-class power. It is precisely this organising priority that is missing from Collier’s work, and in its absence he cannot help but drift into an abstract and idealist concept of art.

Notes
Note by ETOL: In the printed version there are two notes numbered “5” – this has been corrected and the following notes renumbered in this online version.
1. International Socialism 2:2, written in reply to my article The Spectre of Zhdanov, International Socialism 2:1.
2. As well as some very silly ones, which are not worth more than a footnote.
Collier (op.cit., p. 7) seeks to make an amalgam by referring to the ‘Zhdanov-Birchall view’. Perhaps Collier believes I wish to have his article suppressed from publication, and himself expelled from the SWP or even deported to the Hebrides. I can only assure him that such is not the case.
Moreover, Collier sees the fatal flaw of my theoretical position as deriving from machismo (op.cit., p. 9). This is based on the somewhat flimsy evidence of my use of the terms ‘red-blooded’ and ‘decadent ponces’. At one point in Literature and Revolution (Ann Arbor, 1960, p. 59) Trotsky finds it necessary, for the benefit of some Soviet Collier, to add a footnote reading ‘Attention! This is irony!’ Next time I use the word ‘red-blooded’ I will be careful to do the same. As for Proust, let me set the record straight. I used the word ‘ponce’ in its extended sense of parasite, or one who lives on the efforts of others. To describe Proust’s characters as ‘decadent ponces’ is to state the simple but often obscured fact that the central subject of A la Recherche du Temps Perdu is a parasitic social group at the end of its historical life. All Proust’s other themes (time, memory, etc.) must be related to this central core. This is in no way to deny the value of Proust as a witness to this world.
3. op.cit., p. 2.
4. op.cit., p. 9.
5. op.cit., p. 3.
6. Karl Marx, His Life and Work. Reminiscences by Paul Lafargue and Wilhelm Liebknecht, cited in Marx & Engels, Literature and Art, p. 125.
7. G. Steiner, Language and Silence, London 1969, pp. 271–4.
8. P. Demetz, Marx, Engels and the Poets, Chicago 1967, p. 70.
9. G. Lukacs, Studies in European Realism, London 1972, p. 4.
10. Collier says that my position is ‘bound to attract the cowboys amongst us’ (op.cit., p. 9). This passage is italicised for their benefit.
11. Though in the Confessions Marx lists as his favourite prose-writer, not the conservative Balzac, but the radical Diderot. (Marx & Engels, Literature and Art, p. 128)
12. A particularly crude case is A. Swingewood, The Novel and Revolution, London 1975, which states baldly: ‘Marx saw writers who directly expressed class interests in their work as mediocre artists.’ (p. 11)
13. The reference to Zola in Engels’ letter to Margaret Harkness should be taken with a pinch of salt. In the whole of Engels’ correspondence there are just two other references to Zola (Marx-Engels, Werke, Berlin, XXXVI, 682, XXXVIII, 88). It seems highly likely that Engels knew little or nothing of Zola, but had picked up the name from Paul Lafargue.
14. V.I. Lenin, On Literature and Art, 1970, pp. 28–33, 48–62.
15. The volume Lenin & Gorky, Letters, Reminiscences, Articles (Moscow 1973) makes fascinating reading in this respect.
16. J.-P. Sartre, Qu’est-ce que la Litterature?, Paris 1964, p. 29.
17. op.cit., p. 9.
18. Collier rightly challenges my description of the Popular Front writer who makes ‘a few anti-fascist declarations’ and carries on writing about ‘sex and religion’, (op.cit., p. 8) Collier is right to say that it is ludicrous to suggest that the topics are of no interest to a socialist. What I meant was that such writers could go on expressing reactionary views on sex and religion, and providing they lined up with the Popular Front, the CP would not criticise them. Henri Barbusse, who wrote a biography of Christ and one of Stalin, may serve as an example.
19. Literature and Revolution, p. 12.
20. op.cit., p. 5.
21. The French Marxist Pierre Macherey (Pour Une Theorie de la Production Litteraire, Paris 1970) has made out an interesting case for the proposition that we should drop the term ‘creation’ (with its supernatural overtones) entirely and speak instead of literary ‘production’. It is not necessary to go all the way with Macherey’s Althusserian position to recognise a certain validity in this argument.
22. L. Trotsky, On Literature and Art, New York 1970, p. 123.
23. ibid., p. 90. Collier also objects to my use of Trotsky’s formulation: ‘Art is one of the ways in which man finds his bearings in the world’ (op.cit., p. 2). He alleges I quote this out of context. For the record, Trotsky continues: ‘in this sense the heritage of art is not distinguished from the heritage of science and technique – and it is no less contradictory than they. Unlike science, however, art is a form of cognition of the world not as a system of laws but as a group of images, and at the same time it is a way of inspiring certain feelings and moods.’ (On Literature and Art, p. 86) There is nothing here that contradicts my position.
24. op.cit., pp. 7–8.
25. For a rather crude example of this approach, see the letter from D. Widgery, R. Gregory, S. Shelton and R. Huddle in Socialist Review, July–August 1978. Discussing the ANL Carnival of April 1978 they assert: ‘“Youth” ... have ten times more idea what’s going down than your pretty average Marxist Editor’.
26. The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, section I.
27. On Literature and Art, p. 206.
28. Since so much has changed since Marx and Engels wrote. Thus Engels’ celebrated letter to Minna Kautsky (November 26, 1885, in Marx & Engels. Literature and Art, pp. 38–40), where he criticises openly tendentious art and suggests that the purpose of a novel is to shatter ‘the optimism of the bourgeois world’, makes the point that ‘in our conditions the novel appeals mostly to readers of bourgeois circles.’ Obviously where there is the possibility of a substantial working-class audience the whole problem has to be rethought.
29. Literature and Revolution, pp. 140, 152-7, 212.
30. op.cit., p. 7; On Literature and Art, p. 77.
31. Literature and Revolution, pp. 83–4.
 



‘In Portugal, there is no possibility of evading for more than a few months (at most) sharp, armed clashes between the classes.’ [1]
‘The revolutionary left failed to take account of several factors. The first was the adaptability of existing institutions, especially of the reformist organisations within the working class movement. [2]
It is now four years since the hot revolutionary summer of 1975 in Portugal. The Portuguese experience (together with the Italian elections of 1976 and the ‘social contact’ in Britain) marked a crucial turning-point for the European revolutionary left, whose ‘crisis’ Chris Harman analysed in Number 4 of this journal. It may therefore be useful at this time to review some aspects of the Portuguese experience, and the attitudes taken to it by the revolutionary left, in particular our own tendency. What follows is envisaged only as an initial contribution to some aspects of the necessary discussion.
In particular this article will focus on the main agency of re-stabilisation in the 1975–76 period, namely the Socialist Party. This was a factor in the situation which we gravely underestimated at the time. Inasmuch as this article is an attempt to redress the balance, it will neglect other questions which would require extensive treatment in a fully rounded analysis. Two of the most important of these are the land question and the role of the Communist Party. It should therefore be stressed that the amount of space devoted to these topics is not intended to reflect their importance.
Another important question touched on only incidentally in this article is the role of the PRP-BR (Revolutionary Party of the Proletariat-Revolutionary Brigades). In the 1974–76 period the International Socialists attempted to develop links with this party, practical solidarity being complemented by fraternal criticism. A full critique of the politics of the PRP-BR (in particular its ambiguities on the role of the Armed Forces Movement and the nature of the revolutionary party) is needed, and hopefully will appear in a future issue of International Socialism.
One point, however, must be made here. It is easy to make retrospective criticisms of the PRP-BR and IS’s relations with it. But in 1975 time was short. Proletarian revolution was an objective possibility – however remote – and it was our clear obligation to try and assist what appeared to be the best organisation going. To have stood on the sidelines lamenting the absence of the ‘revolutionary party’ might have enhanced our reputation for ‘correctness’: it would not have assisted the struggle.
To begin with, what were we right about? We were right to see the working-class upsurge of 1974–75 as being (alongside Hungary 1956 and France 1968) one of the high points of class struggle since 1945, a rich fund of workers’ self-activity and creativity from which innumerable lessons can be drawn. We were right to see this situation as one which could, under certain conditions, have developed within a relatively short space of time into a conjuncture in which proletarian revolution was a real and immediate possibility. [3] We were right, therefore, to insist on the urgency of building independent workers’ organisations, and to reject any talk of ‘stages’ in the struggle for working-class power. As against those (soft Maoists and others) who had illusions in the revolutionary potential of the Armed Forces Movement, those (’orthodox’ Trotskyists of diverse varieties) who fetishised the traditional workers’ parties, and those (Lutte Ouvriere) who said nothing much was happening anyhow, our position [4] has stood the test of time well. But if we were 90% right, we made certain misjudgments.
Up to the 25 November 1975 the analysis that lay behind IS pronouncements on the Portuguese situation seems to have been as follows:
‘But the revolution cannot stand still. It can go forward to a successful overthrow of the bourgeois state, and the introduction of a workers’ democracy leading to a socialist society. Or it can go back to a brutal and reactionary dictatorship and the rule of capital. There is no middle way. Portugal is too poor, and the working people, too well organised, for there to exist the possibility of a “peaceful” introduction of Western European style “democracy”.’ [5]
Hence the situation in Portugal in the summer of 1975 was seen as being at ‘the same point as Chile ... two or three months before Allende fell’. Before the solidarity demonstration of 20 September Socialist Worker headlined ‘Portugal must not become another Chile.’ [6]
In such a crisis there could be no long-term role for the Socialist Party:
‘The Socialist Party is the party with whose aid capitalism preserves the hopes of the petty bourgeoisie and the backward workers in a progressive improvement of their situation. The deepening crisis of Portuguese capitalism will inevitably undermine the power of this party, and it will deliver its supporters either to the revolutionary proletariat or to the extreme right – to the fascist forces. So long as the masses hesitate between revolution and reaction, they continue to support the Socialist Party. But this situation of hesitation cannot last long.’ [7]
The IS analysis (though not the tactical conclusions) coincided with that of the PRP-BR which in November 1975 spoke of the imminent threat of ‘an authoritarian regime that will assume fascist forms’, but which then concluded that ‘for us, at this moment, there is no solution except armed insurrection’. [8]
What was missing in all this was the ability of Mario Soares and the Socialist Party to pull the bourgeoisie’s chestnuts out of the fire for them. Of course the role of the Socialist Party in the 1974 to 1978 period was less than a spectacular success, in anybody’s terms. None the less it was rather more impressive than any of us would have given it credit for in the Spring of 1974.
At the time of the overthrow of fascism in 1974 the Socialist Party scarcely existed:
‘As for the Socialist Party, it has virtually no base at all. It consists of a group of lawyers, doctors, etc, gathered around Soares. Soares himself is a moderate Social Democrat, distinguished by personal courage and honesty; he is un-compromised by fascism and has been jailed 12 times. His role will be to act as mediator between Spinola and the Communist Party.’ [9]
The Armed Forces Movement, anxious not to let either the CP or the SP build credibility for themselves in the working class by being in opposition, brought Soares and his followers into the provisional government. They resigned in July 1975 after the dispute over the paper Republica, demanding that the government use armed force against the workers occupying the printshop. By September they had rejoined the government under Azevedo, and lined up with the new government’s efforts to regain control over the press and broadcasting. In the elections of April 1976 the Socialists were easily the largest single party in Parliament; Soares then did a deal with Eanes, the general who had master-minded the right-wing crack-down of 25 November 1975; Eanes was elected President with Socialist as well as right-wing support and Soares became Prime Minister. Soares then introduced an austerity programme based on wage controls and ‘productivity’; he attempted to roll back the gains of the unfinished revolution by a policy of ‘ “pin-prick” attacks on the working class in the factories and on the land.’ [10]
The Soares government lasted sixteen months, till December 1977; Soares then cobbled together a coalition with the right-wing CDS, but this only staved off his own departure from power for a few months.
Soares’ achievement was modest but significant. Certainly there can be no suggestion that Portugal is in for forty years of ‘stability Swedish-style’. Neither the world crisis nor Portugal’s own underdeveloped economy can permit that. But a potentially revolutionary situation was defused; Portugal’s workers and peasants have lost many, though by no means all, of the gains of 1974-75; neither workers’ power nor fascism is on the short-term agenda; the Portuguese revolutionary left, which in 1975 was the strongest in Europe, is faced with the long task of slow patient reconstruction. The most likely prospect for Portugal, up to and probably after the, coming elections, is a prolonged period of political instability and coalition rule. But, as the post-war history of Italy shows, a ruling class can live with such instability for quite a long time.
An attempt to understand how the Socialist Party achieved as much as it did may be of some value in trying to evaluate the potential role of reformism in the present epoch of crisis. [11]
When Portuguese fascism collapsed in April 1974 the various classes of Portuguese society were united by at least one thing – a desire for the abstraction ‘change’. The bourgeoisie, sections of which had at least tacitly encouraged the coup, wanted to ditch the colonial wars, radically modernise the economy and prepare for Portuguese entry to the EEC. The working class sought rapid economic improvement and the right to take advantage of the newly established freedom to build its own independent organisations. Between them the petty-bourgeoisie had disparate projects corresponding to its disparate sectors, but all pointed roughly in the direction of ‘reform’. To the left there were two major reformist parties, the Communist Party and the Socialist Party. The Communist Party seemed to hold all the main advantages – it had both a well-developed political ideology (it was one of the most commitedly Brezhnevite parties in Western Europe) and a well-organised centralised apparatus with a real base in the working class. The Socialist Party had neither. Yet in the long term the disadvantages turned into positive assets.
In 1974-75 ‘socialism’ was very popular in Portugal. Parties of the left (SP, CP and various groupings to their left) got almost 60% of the votes in the 1975 elections for the Constituent Assembly, probably the highest such percentage in any West European election. Indeed the most right-wing of the major parties, with links with the British Tories, called itself the ‘Social Democratic Centre’ (CDS), and even the tiny Monarchist party professed to be socialist.
In such a climate the very name ‘Socialist Party’ offered a certain hegemony. The SP claimed to be ‘Marxist’ and took a class line on certain issues. Thus in September 1974 it attacked the government’s proposed labour legislation for making illegal ‘solidarity strikes and political strikes, the most important forms by which the working class demonstrates its unity and its strength.’ [12]
Yet at the same time the SP remained resolutely parliamentarist, with Soares claiming that ‘Elections, when they are free, are the direct expression of the will of the people, the only way of legitimizing political power.’ [13] And Soares could always find time to attack: ‘cafe revolutionaries, the word-mongerers, and adventurers whose irresponsible political practices could put obstacles in the path of the revolutionary process in our country.’ [14]
When logic proved inadequate to resolve the contradictions, Soares fell back on the last refuge of every pragmatist, the special; national conditions of Portugal:
‘We say that social democracy is not possible in Portugal. We said it before the proclamation of the land reform and before the nationalisations which affect 60% of our economy. The power of the big monopolies in Lisbon is broken. That’s a fact. We repeat the same thing: the methods used by our European social-democratic friends are not necessarily valid for us. What we want is to build a true democracy, respectful of the forms of political democracy but which would accept the very concrete forms of direct democracy, the experiences of self-management.’ [15]
This last reference to ‘self-management’ (autogestion) was a clever use of a concept which French Socialists have managed to deploy to the simultaneous pleasure of left and right (for after all it means nothing). Indeed, the Socialist Party was able to make calculated use of its ideological ‘flexibility’; during the 1975 election campaign Soares made right wing speeches in the conservative North, and left wing speeches in the industrial areas of Lisbon. (Perhaps the prize for two-facedness must go to Raul Rego, who as Minister of Information in 1974 fined the paper Republica, of which he himself was the publisher, for its reporting of a strike.)
Compared with the CP’s apparatus, steeled by clandestinity and rooted in the workplaces, the Socialist Party had little in the way of an organised base. In most situations this would not have worried the SP leaders. A social democratic party does not aim at mass mobilisation; if there are enough activists to collect subs and organise election propaganda, the rest of the class can be left in peace as voting fodder. But the peculiar circumstances of Portugal required the SP to mobilise on the streets, in particular in the period between the failed coup of 11 March 1975 and 25 November the same year. In this period the SP had to try to show that it was a ‘mass party’ able to rival the CP and the revolutionary left, though its leaders were always aware of the dangers of mass action.
During the summer and autumn of 1975 the SP mobilised several big rallies, first against the workers’ occupation of Republica, later in support of the Azevedo government. It is claimed that several of these attracted tens of thousands of participants, and some sources claim that the SP rally in Oporto of 25 October 1975 drew two hundred thousand. [16] But the numbers are not so important as the class composition of the demonstrations. It would appear that the SP demonstrations were not rallies of workers, but rather offered the opportunity for sections of the middle class to demonstrate for conservative policies without publicly aligning with the open right. An eye-witness report from Portugal in July 1975 puts it as follows:
‘We observed a demonstration called by the Socialist Party in Lisbon last week. It was overwhelmingly middle class. We looked closely and questioned many people. The only worker we came across was a Communist Party member who had come along, like us, to keep an eye on things. The mass of the demonstration was middle class to the backbone. It was made up of bank managers, senior servants, lawyers, doctors, with their expensive suits and carefully manicured hands.’ [17]
The SP attempt to win a trade union base likewise reflected its failure to win active working class involvement. In the summer of 1976 the Socialists launched an operation called the Open Letter designed to win away support from the CP leadership of the Intersindical. Initially this was quite successful, and at a conference held in August 1976 the Open Letter attracted unions representing about 350,000 workers, perhaps a quarter of the total forces of Intersindical. But workers fairly soon seem to have realised that a pro-governmental split in the unions could scarcely serve their interests. During the autumn many unions withdrew support for the Open Letter, and the movement collapsed by January 1977. Since the formation of the Soares government the previous summer, not a single union has elected an SP leadership.
On the electoral terrain things were very different. Here the SP were in their element. Their appeal, both to the middle class and to the non-militant sections of the working class, was considerable. In the April 1975 elections they took 37.87% of the vote, a clear 10% ahead of any other party; and in April the following year, despite the defeats and betrayals of the intervening twelve months, they held the vote at 34.97%. As committed supporters of parliamentarism the SP were streets ahead of their rivals as far as the politics of manipulation and demobilisation were concerned; in the 1975 elections:
‘The most sophisticated campaign was certainly that planned by the Socialist Party. Since 15 February the Portuguese Public Opinion Institute had carried out three polls, and the Socialists based their strategy on its findings. Three factors emerged as crucial. First, among those who would not admit their voting choice to the pollsters (most would not) the Socialist leader, Mario Soares, was by far the most popular figure in Portugal. Second, the Communist leader, Alvaro Cunhal, though far less popular than Soares, was more closely identified with his own party than Soares was with the Socialists. Third, the electorate’s main concern, after the cost of living, was not with the industrial aspect of the revolution – how well the workers were running industry, for example – but with the provision of a national health service and a proper pension scheme. Neither existed in Portugal before the coup. The Socialists therefore had to implant into people’s minds the fact that Soares was the party, which meant holding more rallies, including more outside Lisbon, than any other party.’ [18]
From the point of view of the ruling class, then, the CP and SP could be seen to be playing complementary roles. When the level of class struggle was high, in the factories or on the streets, then the CP was far more crucial as an instrument for disciplining and restraining workers. But when the focus shifted to the electoral arena, the Socialists were the more effective operators.
One important advantage which a social democratic party possesses over a Stalinist party is its ability to co-opt on its left. A Stalinist party can make left turns – as the Portuguese CP did to great effect at various points – but they must be bureaucratic and disciplined turns, which can be reversed the moment the tactical objective is achieved. What it cannot permit is individuals, let alone tendencies, acting freely to the left of the party line.
For a social democratic party, on the other hand, a left wing can be a positive asset. In a long-established party, such as the British Labour Party, the relationship between the leadership and the left is harmonious and functional. (When Callaghan attacks Benn he simultaneously (a) reassures the bourgeoisie that he will have no truck with leftist ideas and (b) reassures the constituency left that Benn is a threat and that it is worth their while staying in the party. When Benn attacks Callaghan he simultaneously (a) reassures the bourgeoisie that Callaghan is a ‘moderate’ and (b) reassures the constituency left that there is still a fight on).
In the hurly-burly of Portugal the relationship could not be so harmonious, but the ability to co-opt to the left was even more valuable in a situation where the workers’ upsurge was breeding leftism and ultra-leftism in growing quantities.
In the early months after the fall of fascism Soares made his left face by far the most prominent. The SP were noticeably more sympathetic to strikes than the CP, and it was the SP left who carried the main burden of building an SP base in the unions. The SP collaborated with the revolutionary left in some unions, and Soares spoke of a ‘multi-tendency party’ which might include the revolutionary left. Indeed, the SP maintained for quite a long time a sympathetic relationship with the Maoists of the MRPP (Movement to Reorganise the Proletarian Party) [19] whose hysterical Stalinism revived rhetoric of the Comintern’s Third Period and turned it against the CP, so that the SP seemed an acceptable ally against Cunhal’s ‘social fascists’. The SP youth was one of the few organisations to protest when hundreds of MRPP members were jailed in May 1975. [20] Undoubtedly this relationship with the MRPP formed a bridge over which the SP hoped to draw in sections of the radicalised left.
None the less, because of the volatility of the situation, Soares could not give his left too free a hand. At the December 1974 Congress of the SP the group around Manuel Serra accused Soares of rigging the leadership elections and left to form the FSP (Popular Socialist Front).
But when Soares formed his government in the summer of 1976, he again needed to show a left face. Two key ministries were given to figures identified with the left of the party; labour went to Marcelo Curto and agriculture to the party’s best-known left-winger, Lopes Cardoso. They would have to deal with the key struggles around wage control and the reversal of the land reform.
The tactic only half worked. By the beginning of November the SP left publicly denounced the austerity programme and Cardoso resigned from office. At the party congress, held at this time, the left were excluded from the SP leadership. The labour commissions of the party were suspended, and at one meeting the ‘leftist’ labour minister Curto was reported to have brought in security forces to break it up. [21] Cardoso subsequently left the SP and early in 1978 launched a new movement, the Socialist and Democratic Left.
Soares had one further asset, his close links with the major social democratic parties of Western Europe. He had these already during the years of exile (on 25 April 1974 Soares was in Bonn, dining with the West German Social Democratic Minister of Defence). [22] Soares undoubtedly benefited from these links; they provided him, not only with moral and political backing, but with practical and financial support. The image of being associated with the ruling parties of the prosperous Scandinavian countries may well have helped Soares with the poor voters of Portugal.
But it would be wrong to lay too much emphasis on outside influences. Such influences undoubtedly existed, but they were able to operate only to the extent that Soares built an initial basis of support for himself inside Portugal.
Likewise the EEC did not begin to offer the aid to Portugal that could reinforce Soares’ position until the internal conflicts were well on the way to resolution. The Economist commented on both the tardiness and the stinginess of the EEC’s offer:
‘After months of hesitation, and on the same evening as the agreement not to reopen trade talks with Spain for the moment, the Nine on Monday decided to grant emergency aid to Portugal at last. The arrival of a sixth provisional government under Admiral Pinheiro de Azevedo in Lisbon last month, pruned of radical officers and including the two main democratic parties, satisfied the Nine that Portugal was again on the democratic road, and so deserved the aid which had been dangled before it since the summer. The return as foreign minister of the pragmatic Major Melo Antunes, who was in Lisbon to meet the Nine, no doubt helped to push the EEC into coming up with an offer.
‘The amount of money involved – 180m units of account – is small, almost indecently so. [23] “So this is the price the EEC puts on pluralist democracy,” remarked one senior EEC aide who had closely followed the preparation of the commission’s own proposal for 700m units of account over three years.’ [24]
Likewise Philip Agee claimed at the end of 1975 that the CIA was ‘directly or indirectly, financing the two Christian Democrat parties, as well as the PPD and the Socialist party.’ In other words, it was hedging its bets. As Agee pointed out, ‘in any given country, the CIA cannot itself determine a chain of events, but only facilitate it.’ [25]
To sum up, then, Soares had a fairly mediocre hand of cards. A flexible ideology, enabling him to tack to left or right, a skilful election technique but no real working-class base, a limited success in co-opting to the left and a little – but only a little – help from his friends overseas – all this adds up to something very much less than a political triumph. The only plausible conclusion seems to be that Soares brought it off, not so much by his own merits as by the default of his rivals.
In underestimating Soares we tended to overestimate both the threat from the extreme right and the potential of the CP. It is certainly true that in the summer of 1975 various extreme rightists were regrouping, and the wave of attacks on the CP and other left-wing organisations was undoubtedly orchestrated by openly fascist elements. But the role of the extreme right was to harass the left and push it back onto the defensive rather than to pose itself as a direct contender for power. After all, the Portuguese ruling class had suffered the inconveniences of a right-wing authoritarian regime for decades before 1974, and had found them so intolerable that they had backed the military action that was to get rid of them; a reversion to fascism so soon was hardly an appealing prospect. For one thing it would have ditched Portugal’s chances of entry to the EEC for a very long time.
Nor was the Chilean example as inspiring to the right as many on the left tended to imagine. The coup of September 1973 had been a catastrophic defeat for the Chilean working class; but it had hardly been an unqualified success for the Chilean bourgeoisie and its American backers. The Chilean economy faced continuing chaos, and even conservative politicians found close association with Chile an embarrassment. Portugal clearly called for an alternative strategy if one could be found. As the New York Times put after the fall of Spinola in September 1974:
‘For the United States the only course is to respond with sympathy and generosity to the real needs for Portugal’s economic development and participation in the world trading economy. In the era of cold war there might have been a temptation to intervene, overtly or covertly, to counter “leftist” trends. Surely this country has learned enough from the recent and more distant past to understand that any such interventions would be foolhardy and futile.’ [26]
The Chilean model was real in the minds of many of the protagonists of the left. Thus for the PRP:
‘We have studied the Chilean situation. We detected crucial moments in the situation. The revolutionary process did not develop at these points and the working class was defeated. We think that we are in one of those crucial moments in Portugal now.’ [27]
And for Otelo de Carvalho:
‘But what worries me is the possible Chileanisation of Portugal building machines to kill. Machines for repression. With them they can set off a new Chile. I am haunted by that fear.’ [28]
Unfortunately the main effect of this preoccupation with the lessons of Chile was to distract attention from the source of the real threat.
Anti-communist sources inside and outside of Portugal suggested in 1975 that there was a real threat of a seizure of power by the CP. In fact such a possibility was never on the cards. It is true that the CP played a crucial role in 1974 by holding back workers’ struggles in a way that no other party could have done. But to convert their very real strength in the factories and on the streets into a potential for power would have meant a total transformation of their politics.
In fact the CP needed the SP far more than the SP needed the CP. At the time of the overthrow of fascism the CP was immeasurably stronger and better organised than the SP. On 25 April 1974 it had already five thousand members; it was the only party to have consistently organised throughout the period of fascism, and it had wide respect in the working class. It grew rapidly to a membership of 100,000; it had firm control of the central trade union body, the Intersindical, and soon took over the reins of local government in some two hundred municipalities. Thus its strength on the ground was immeasurably greater than was indicated by its rather meagre electoral performances. (In 1975 12.53% of the vote, plus 4.12% for its close ally the MDP.)
But to realise the political scenario to which it was irrevocably committed, that of the Popular Front, it needed a Socialist Party to act as a bridge between itself and the openly bourgeois parties. In the months after April 1974 the CP actively campaigned to build the Socialist Party, to give its leaders credibility, precisely in order to construct an ally for itself. Cunhal himself admitted this a year later:
‘I do not think that for the moment any governmental coalition linking the MFA and other parties could leave out the SP. Likewise the CP could not be left out. A coalition between the CP and what is called the left of the MFA is very unlikely.’ [29]
A similar piece of tailing was evident in 1976, when the CP stated they would have backed the right-wing General Eanes for the presidency along with the SP, if the right-wing parties had not been supporting Eanes.
In this situation, Soares could attempt to co-opt the CP, knowing that he was in the politically advantageous position. When asked by Marcel Niedergang of le Monde whether the CP was the main enemy, Soares replied:
‘Not at all. We have never considered the PCP as an enemy. The main enemy, the only one, is the right, which is plotting and waiting. The Communist Party must be associated with the government but it must be forced to play the democratic game. That is possible elsewhere in Europe. Why not in Portugal? I am personally very close to Santiago Carrillo, the general secretary of the Spanish Communist Party.’ [30]
The CP could not install state capitalism in Portugal. The establishment of state capitalism, as in post-1945 Eastern Europe, required not only the virtual absence of a native bourgeoisie but also the passivity of the working class. Nor was a Peruvian solution (a ‘left’ military regime without formal participation of the parties, but backed by the CP) possible. That too would have required a passive working class. So only the Popular Front strategy remained. But the result was the same as in France and Italy in 1944–47, (or for that matter as in the experience of the Union of the Left in the 70s in France); the social democrats use the CP as a means of building their own support in the class, then, when the time is ripe, they discard it.
There was, of course, one other alternative for Portugal in 1975 – proletarian revolution. Here it was the subjective factor that was missing; none of the revolutionary organisations in Portugal had been willing and able to build the mass party rooted in the class that was needed for a bid far power.
If this account of the Portuguese experience is correct (and if it is not I hope comrades with a closer experience of it than I will point out the errors) then some very tentative general conclusions may be drawn:

Social democracy provided a more effective and economical way of defusing a potentially revolutionary situation than a Chilean-style coup. In future crises we may expect social democracy to be the preferred weapon of the ruling class.
 
For the benefit of any malicious readers this does not mean that I am reviving the ‘social fascism’ theory. Social democracy is not the ‘main enemy’. What it does mean is that the revolutionary left has to be very careful to preserve its political and organisational independence from social democracy so as to offer a political alternative.
 
In Portugal, social democracy succeeded by default rather than through the intrinsic merits of its programme, ideology or organisation. Workers accepted the SP pragmatically, for want of an alternative, rather than having any positive commitment to its politics. Therefore political strategies based on exposure of, or making demands on, the social democrats, are likely to be of little value. [31]
 
This is not to rule out the united front strategy towards workers in or around social democratic parties. But it does mean such united fronts must begin with concrete day-to-day struggles, not with grandiose programmatic formulations or governmental slogans.
 
The phenomenally high level of struggle in Portugal in 1974-75 came from a working class which, because of the long years of fascism, had been scarcely touched by reformism. (In Spain, where there had been a much more extensive development of working-class organisation under Franco, the transition from fascism to bourgeois democracy was less explosive). But the achievement of such levels of struggle did not mean that Portuguese workers had by-passed reformism or were permanently immune from it. Reformism’s power to co-opt should never be underestimated.
 
There may be parallels with other aspects of the class struggle. For instance, in Britain over the last few years the highest level of struggle has come from sections of the class – women, blacks, youth – which have been relatively little touched by the reformism which is so deeply rooted in the British working class. Such struggles have been of immense importance. But we should beware of believing that any section of the class is permanently immunised against reformism. A revolutionary movement that underestimates the power of reformism will pay a heavy price for it.


Notes
1. C. Harman, Portugal: the latest phase, International Socialism 1:83, p. 9.
2. C. Harman, The crisis of the European revolutionary left, IS 2:4, p. 54.
3. I have phrased the point thus to avoid what seem to be me largely semantic arguments about what constitutes a ‘revolutionary’ or ‘pre-revolutionary’ situation. (Trotsky dealt scathingly with those who ‘have a thermometer which they place under the tongue of old lady History, and by this means ... infallibly determine the revolutionary temperature.’ – Whither France?, Colombo, 1961, p. 44.
4. Expressed in innumerable articles in Socialist Worker and International Socialism and various pamphlets. The most comprehensive single statement is T. Cliff, Portugal at the Crossroads, IS Special, 1:81–82.
5. Press statement issued after IS delegates withdrew from an international conference organised in early November 1975 by Lutte Ouvriere. Reproduced inter alia in Intercontinental Press (hereafter ICP), 2 February 1976, p,143.
6. Socialist Worker, 26 July 1975, p. 7 and 20 September 1975, p. 1.
7. T. Cliff, Portugal at the Crossroads, p. 17.
8. Revoluçao, 17 November 1975 and Isobel de Carmo at press conference on 10 November 1975; both cited ICP, 22 December 1975, p. 1804.
9. I. Birchall, April Dream in Portugal, IS 1:69, p. 17 (this piece, which appeared under my name, was in fact almost exclusively based on an interview with a Portuguese militant in exile).
10. Notes of the Month, IS 1:101, p. 7.
11. For some general thoughts on the problem, see I. Birchall, Social Democracy in Europe, SWP International Discussion Bulletin, 7/8, p. 21.
12. Diario de Lisboa, 3 September 1974, cited ICP, 14 October 1974, p. 1320.
13. Cited ICP, 3 February 1975, p. 132.
14. Cited ICP, 31 March 1975, p. 424.
15. Interview in Le Monde 4, 23 October 1975.
16. ICP, 17 November 1975, p. 1576.
17. Colin Sparks, Socialist Worker, 26 July 1975. Some readers may feel this report is not objective, being tainted by the ‘workerism’ commonly said to characterise the IS tendency. But compare the following account of the SP demonstration of 2 May 1975, by Gerry Foley, a supporter of the Hansenite wing of the Fourth International, which has been generally soft on the Socialist Party (see note 31 below):
’The class composition of the march seemed quite mixed. There were many youth, some workers, but the crowd seemed largely middle-class. Some of the men in the cordon ringing the crowd were carrying briefcases. The CP crowds I have seen have also been largely middle-class but seemed to have more worker activists.’ (ICP, 19 May 1975, p. 651)
18. Insight team of the Sunday Times, Insight on Portugal, Deutsch, London, 1975, p. 234.
19. Jean Pierre Faye, in his Portugal: The Revolution in the Labyrinth (Spokesman Books, Nottingham 1976), based on the work of the Russell Committee for Portugal, suggests obliquely that the MRPP was part of a conscious manoeuvre against the left (pp. 87–90). It is not necessary to accept this to agree that the objective role of the MRPP was certainly to weaken the revolutionary left and strengthen the SP.
20. ICP, 30 June 1975, p. 899.
21. ICP, 29 November 1976, p. 1717.
22. Faye, op. cit., p. 51.
23. Something of the order of £75 million.
24. The Economist, 11 October 1975, p. 50.
25. Faye, op. cit., pp. 190, 195.
26. Editorial, 2 October 1974, cited ICP, 14 October 1974, p. 1319.
27. Portugal: the views of a PRP leader, IS 1:80, p. 20.
28. Faye, op. cit., pp. 49–50.
29. Interview in Le Monde. 27 May 1975, cited ICP, 16 June 1975, p. 812.
30. Le Monde, 3 October 1975, p. 3.
31. A typical case is the response to the Portuguese events of the United Secretariat of the Fourth International. The USFI is divided into two major tendencies which may be described as ‘Hansenite’ (based on the American SWP) and ‘Mandelite’ (based on the West European sections of the USFI). The division between these two was sharpened by the dispute over the newspaper Republica. In Spring 1975 print-workers on the paper occupied the presses because the paper’s pro-SP line (though it was not the SP’s official paper) was leading to declining sales. While the MFA agreed that the paper should be handed back to its owner, SP member Raul Rego, they were unwilling – or unable – to accede to Soares’ demand for military force to be used to break the occupation. Soares then left the government and began to mobilise demonstrations against the government line. From this time on the Hansenite wing began to develop a position of almost uncritical tailing of the SP. A typical utterance was the following from one Gerry Foley:
‘What is certain is that the real vanguard of the Portuguese working class at the present time participated in the SP demonstrations. The proletarian vanguard is not to be found among the ultra-leftists who followed a shadow of “people’s power” into isolation and even allowed themselves to be used by military demagogues as pawns in a campaign to rob the masses of their democratic rights. Nor were the most intelligent, class-conscious, and courageous sections of the proletariat with the Stalinist myrmidons who were mobilised to sing the praises of military rulers and help deny the majority of the working class the right to demonstrate.
‘The most courageous and independent-minded sections of the Portuguese proletariat braved furious demagogy from the Stalinist-controlled media, physical threats from the military, and the demented anathemas of the ultra-leftists, to demonstrate their determination not to be intimidated or deluded into giving up their right to political freedom, their right to decide for themselves who will run the country and the workers organizations.
‘Since the Communist party is the main supporter of the military’s attack on the democratic rights of the masses, it was inevitable that such mass mobilizations. would express anti-Communist feelings. Objectively, this was certainly no more reactionary than the denunciations levelled by the Stalinists and the ultra-leftists against the SP supporters as “reactionaries”, “pro-imperialists”, “enemies of the people”, and so on.
‘In fact, the anti-Communist feeling in the SP demonstrations was less backward, since it was a reaction to real efforts at repression suffered at the hands of the Communist party and its allies. The dogmatic denunciation by the Stalinists and ultra-leftists amounted to a demagogic campaign in defence of military rule.’ (ICP, 4 August 1975, p. 1114)
Such sub-McCarthyism was too much for Mandelite stomachs. A veritable ‘battle of the giants’ erupted in the public press. The three major texts are: Pierre Frank, Livio Maitan and Ernest Mandel: In Defence of the Portuguese Revolution, ICP, 8 September 1975, pp. 1167ff.; Gerry Foley, Joseph Hansen and George Novack: For a Correct Political Course in Portugal, ICP, 13 October 1975, pp. 1355ff.; Frank, Maitan and Mandel: Revolution and Counterrevolution in Portugal, ICP, 15 and 22 December. 1975, pp. 1768ff.
Mandel and friends commented, with some justice, that the Hansenite line, ‘if persisted in, ... could seriously discredit Trotskyism in the eyes of advanced workers not only in Portugal itself; but throughout capitalist Europe.’ (ICP, 8 September 1975, p. 1167)
Hansen and friends replied, equally correctly, that in the current situation in Portugal, the two wings of the supposedly ‘democratic centralist’ party of world revolution might find themselves on opposite sides of the barricades:
‘... Inherent in such situations ... is the application of force. Skulls can get cracked.’ (ICP, 13 October 1975, p. 1392)
However, after the rhetoric was over it seemed that not so much separated the two tendencies after all. Both were prepared to go quite a long way in tailing the reformists. In Portugal there were two sympathising sections of the USFI, the Mandelite LCI (International Communist League) and the Hansenite PRT (Revolutionary Workers Party). In the elections of April 1976 the two organisations issued separate statements to the voters. The LCI declared:
‘We demand that the CP and the SP assume their responsibilities by forming a government without representatives of the bourgeoisie.’ (ICP, 26 April 1976, p. 713)
What those responsibilities were they did not specify. Were they the ‘responsibilities’ defined by the leaderships of the reformist parties, or rather the responsibilities incumbent on the ‘ideal type’ of a ‘workers party’?
The PRT had a slightly different slogan:
‘If you want a government that represents the will of the SP and CP comrades, if you want an SP government without capitalists or generals, vote for the PRT.’ (ICP, 26 April 1976, p. 714)
There was no advice for the simple-minded elector who might respond: ‘Wouldn’t it be simpler just to vote for the PS?’
Behind the different formulations lay the same preoccupation, namely, that the task of revolutionaries was to put the reformists in power precisely at a moment when the reformists were about to remove the vestiges of power that workers had won in their struggles over the two preceding years.
The grotesque conclusion came with the presidential elections. The LCI and the PRT united to present a candidate (who withdrew before polling for non-political reasons). In her programme ‘she promises that if she is elected she will call on the general secretary of the SP, Mario Soares, or an SP leader chosen by the party to form a government representing the will of a majority of the workers.’ (ICP, 24 May 1976, p. 847)
In short, in the unlikely event of a Trotskyist being elected president, she would have – give or take a little rhetoric – appointed the same Prime Minister as was in fact appointed by General Eanes. Further comments seems superfluous.
 



Émile Zola died on 29 September 1902. In the 100 years since then his novels have been published in many languages; several are available to English readers in paperback. [1] His books have been adapted for radio, television and the cinema. Of the classic novelists Zola is one of the most popular with working class readers, and is frequently cited – like The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists – as offering an introduction to socialist ideas.
Of Zola’s achievements two stand out. Firstly he wrote Germinal, the only major 19th century novel to deal, not just with working class life, but with a long and bitter strike. [2] Secondly, he defended Alfred Dreyfus, a wrongfully convicted Jewish officer, confronting both the army and a wave of anti-Semitism.
In this article I shall try to locate Zola in the social and ideological conflicts of his own century. By so doing I hope to show that he is still relevant to the struggles of today, and, hopefully, to encourage comrades to read him more widely.
 
Childhood and empire
Émile Zola was born in Paris in 1840, the son of an Italian immigrant, a fact his xenophobic opponents often recalled during the Dreyfus case. He spent much of his childhood in Aix-en-Provence (the Plassans of his novels). When in Paris he was mocked by his school-fellows as a marseillais; in Aix he was derided as a Parisian. Perhaps this experience made him more hostile to racism when he encountered it.
Zola could not read till the age of seven or eight, and would have been judged a failure by New Labour’s school tests. His father died just before Émile’s seventh birthday, leaving the family in relative poverty. The following year France was shaken by revolution. In February 1848 workers, shopkeepers and the urban population united with the bourgeoisie to overthrow the king and the ‘finance aristocracy’. Two socialists joined the Provisional Governing Council. Four months later, to appease taxpayers, the workshops for the unemployed were closed down; the slums of eastern Paris exploded in revolt, and the guns of the Republic turned on its former supporters. The Republic lost support to left and right; three years later Louis Bonaparte, nephew of Napoleon, staged a coup, and had himself crowned emperor; his ‘Second Empire’ lasted 18 years.
Zola later realised that 1848 was the last point at which the bourgeoisie had been a revolutionary class. He wrote:
The bourgeoisie betrays its revolutionary past to try to safeguard its capitalist privilege and remain the ruling class. Having taken power it does not want to pass it on to the people. It ceases to move. It allies with reaction, with clericalism, with militarism. I must bring out the vital, decisive idea that the bourgeoisie has ended its role, that it has gone over to reaction to preserve its wealth and power, and that all hope for the energy of tomorrow is in the people. [3]
On leaving school Zola was unemployed. He never forgot those years of hunger, later recalling the time when he ate only one meal a day, and that often merely bread and cheese, or a few fried potatoes. In 1862 he finally got a steady job with the publisher Hachette. By now he knew that his aim in life was to be a writer. After one or two false starts, he discovered that his gift was for the novel.
 
Republicanism, positivism, realism
Zola was a young man seeking success – but also seeking ideas on which that success could be built. Napoleon III’s coup led to a huge ideological offensive. The traditions of the Enlightenment were too hot to handle; the works of Voltaire were repeatedly banned from libraries. There were purges in the schools and universities, and philosophy was removed from the school syllabus. Two outstanding writers, Flaubert and Baudelaire, were prosecuted for offences against public morals. Under such pressure most leading writers openly supported the Empire. Zola, pursuing an alternative, was drawn to three intellectual currents which, in the Second Empire, offered a basis for radicalism.
(i) Republicanism: The term republican covered a variety of political currents. Essentially it referred to those who identified themselves with 1789, with Liberty, Equality and Fraternity. It implied anti-clericalism, especially the removal of education from the clutches of the church.
Zola combined commitment to republican principles with a sharp awareness of the contradictions internal to republican politics. In his novels he showed respect for the courage of the republicans, the only people to stand up against the crimes of the empire. And it was the left of the movement, the so called ‘red republicans’ who aroused his admiration most. He was contemptuous of those who adopted or abandoned republican principles to suit their own interest. Zola’s republicanism pointed him in the direction of the socialism he was later to embrace.
(ii) Positivism: The basic tenet of positivist philosophy was a belief in scientific method, in particular the claim that the methods of the natural sciences should be applied to the study of human behaviour. It maintained the Enlightenment belief that human society could be subjected to rational understanding and control, but whereas the Enlightenment embodied the ideas of a pre-revolutionary bourgeoisie, positivism fitted the needs of a post-revolutionary class.
The philosopher and historian Hippolyte Taine, an important influence on Zola, was a conservative. But in the climate of Empire some of his formulations seemed profoundly shocking to orthodox thought, notably his claim that ‘vice and virtue are merely products like vitriol and sugar’, which Zola used as an epigraph for Thérèse Raquin.
For Zola the radical implications of positivism were the most important, and he tried to marry his optimism about science to his republican politics. The positivist who most influenced him was Claude Bernard, a medical researcher who wrote an essay on scientific method. Medical science does not profess neutrality, but is committed to preserving health and curing the sick; for Zola, the scientific method was inextricably linked to social reform.
The position Zola derived from Taine and Bernard was determinist, but his notion of causality was not a fatalistic one. For Zola determinism means that if we know a particular cause has a particular effect, then by taking a given action, we can produce a desired consequence. Determinism is not the negation of freedom but the precondition for human beings to control their environment. [4]
This is still a positivist and not a dialectical position – for Zola knowledge precedes action, rather than being indissolubly united with it as in Marx’s Theses on Feuerbach. [5] Nonetheless, republicanism and positivism gave Zola a radical basis for developing the novel in new directions.
(iii) Realism: The realist novel in France begins with Balzac’s Human Comedy, a series of interconnected novels aiming to give a picture of the different classes, professions and regions of post-revolutionary France. In the new bourgeois order, money replaced all other institutions that had held human society together. Hence Balzac presented his characters in painstaking material detail; to understand people we must know where they lived, what they wore, and above all what they earned.
The young Zola greatly admired Balzac because of the devastating way he portrayed the bourgeoisie:
He showed a hundred times over the narrow, limited spirit of this class ... All the bourgeois of Balzac, with a very few exceptions, are selfish, ambitious beasts who patiently watch and eagerly hunt their quarry.
Yet Balzac was a monarchist and devout Catholic. As Zola pointed out, if there was a radical message in Balzac’s novels, it was there despite Balzac:
Here is a man who ... bowed down every day before royalty and Catholicism ... And today all we perceive in his work is a powerful revolutionary inspiration ... On his flag, where he wrote: Royalty, Catholicism, our children will read the word: Republic.
Zola aimed to be the new Balzac, but one whose conscious intentions coincided with the content of his writings.
In 1856 Flaubert’s novel Madame Bovary – about the disastrous adulteries of a provincial doctor’s wife – was unsuccessfully prosecuted for being morally offensive. The state prosecutor proclaimed that Christian morality:
... brands with infamy realist literature, not because it paints the passions: hatred, vengeance, love; it is by these alone that the world lives, and art must paint them; but we condemn it when it paints them without restraint or measure. Art without rules is no longer art; it’s like a woman who takes all her clothes off.
Against this, Zola saw it as a republican duty to defend realism. It was an essential part of his struggle for intellectual truthfulness and social justice.
 
Heredity
Zola’s first successful novel was Thérèse Raquin (1867). [6] The plot is pure melodrama. Thérèse and her lover, Laurent, murder her husband, Camille, but are pursued by guilt in the form of vivid hallucinations. One particularly intense passage describes Laurent’s visits to the morgue in search of Camille’s corpse.
Madeleine Férat (1868) introduced what was to become one of Zola’s central preoccupations, the question of heredity. The topic continues to have considerable relevance in our own age, when the science of genetics combines great achievements with some dubious claims.
During Zola’s lifetime the study of heredity was going through a transitional phase. The work of Darwin had drawn attention to the importance of inherited characteristics and a number of scientists had pursued the subject, notably Prosper Lucas, whose two-volume treatise on heredity Zola studied. However, he knew nothing of the work being done by the Austrian monk Mendel, who was laying the foundations of modern genetics.
His ideas on heredity combined scientific observation with rather dubious myths. The plot of Madeleine Férat centred around the belief that a woman’s children would bear a physical resemblance to her first lover, regardless of who the actual father was. This theory owed more to the cult of female fidelity than to any ‘scientific’ knowledge. Yet Zola’s ideas were not absurd in terms of current scientific thinking; in 1869 he received a letter from the future professor of zoology at the University of Marseilles, congratulating him on the novel.
Zola’s stress on heredity formed part of his attack on the doctrine, deriving from Rousseau, and widely current on the French left, of ‘natural goodness’. Flawed heredity showed that human beings were not born good; goodness could flow only from scientific understanding and beneficial environment. [7]
Zola had now brought together the elements that comprised his distinctive approach to the novel. Like Balzac, he aimed at a vast panorama grasping the totality of contemporary society. Unlike Flaubert, his primary aim was not beauty but truth. Inspired by the scientific method, he embarked on each novel with a programme of systematic reading and research. Though some of his formulations may seem naive to later readers, it was the belief that the novel could give an objective account of the real world that led Zola to his best creations. On this basis he began a cycle of novels which took up the major part of his adult life. He had barely started when he was interrupted by an unprecedented event – the world’s first proletarian revolution.
 
The Commune
In 1870 Napoleon III declared war on Prussia. The Prussian army rapidly crushed the French forces and besieged Paris. The emperor abdicated; the working people of Paris collected money to buy cannon to defend their city. The French bourgeoisie could not tolerate an armed Paris and on 18 March 1871 troops tried to seize the cannon at Montmartre.
After fraternising with the local people, the soldiers refused to fire into the crowd. Paris declared itself an independent state. Eight days later the government of the Commune was elected. As with the soviets of 1917, members of the Commune got the pay of a skilled worker and could be recalled at any time. But workers’ power could not survive more than a few weeks in a single city. In May troops massacred thousands of workers and thousands more were imprisoned or deported.
In 1870–1871 Zola was a republican, but not a socialist, certainly not a revolutionary. His political naivety was compounded by the fact that he still had to supplement his income by working as a journalist. During the early weeks of the Commune he commuted between Paris and Versailles, then stayed in Paris, finally leaving less than a fortnight before the massacre. He reported for two different newspapers – the republican La Cloche based in Paris, and the right wing Le Sémaphore of Marseilles. As now, editors bought opinions, and Zola tempered his views in quite striking fashion to suit their tastes. [8]
Yet even for a right wing readership Zola’s honesty was sufficient to ensure that he gave a balanced account of events:
Individual freedom and the respect due to property have been violated, the clergy is disgracefully persecuted, searches and requisitions are used as a means of government; that is the truth in all its shame and wretchedness. But it is not true that blood is running in the streets, as I read in some newspapers.
[Le Sémaphore]
Zola had little sympathy for the bourgeois politicians who had fled to Versailles to plan the destruction of the Commune:
… between Versailles, discussing wretchedly, and Paris which is reconciled at the ballot-box, I confess that instinctively I am for that great and noble city.
[La Cloche]
 
The Rougon-Macquart cycle
After prolonged wrangling the Third Republic was established. However, the conservative onslaught continued. The backlash against the Commune produced a religious revival, with the establishment of the cult of the Sacred Heart and the pilgrimages to Lourdes. [9] The embryonic working class movement was decimated by repression, and the militants who survived were mostly exiled. French socialism revived only after the amnesty of 1880.
In 1870 Zola had completed the first volume of the Rougon-Macquart cycle which occupied him for the next 23 years, and included his masterpieces. There were 20 novels, each self contained. But, in accordance with his preoccupation with heredity and environment, there were two basic unifying themes.
The main characters of the cycle all belonged to the same family, descendants, over three generations, of one woman, Adélaode Fouque. She bore one child to her husband, Rougon, and two to her lover, the smuggler Macquart. (The legitimate branch rose into the upper layers of society, while the bastard line sank into the proletariat and peasantry.) All had what Zola described as ‘excess of appetites’; the direction of those appetites – power, money, sex, art, religion, social justice, murder – depended on the environment in which they operated.
The whole cycle was set under the Second Empire, an age of meteoric political careers, financial speculation, labour migration, the growth and development of modern Paris, the emergence of new industries. After 1848 there were to be two decades of unbridled bourgeois power. What gives Zola’s novels their strength is the undisguised hatred for the bourgeoisie that radiates from almost every page. Bourgeois greed, brutality and ignorance are constant themes.
The first six novels of the cycle dealt with the coup of 1851 and its aftermath. Zola showed the role of politicians, speculators and the church in consolidating the emperor’s power. His hatred of the bourgeoisie came out most strongly in Le Ventre de Paris (1873, Savage Paris). Set in the Paris food markets, this portrayed the petty bourgeois shopkeeper class. In earlier revolutions this class had played a militant role; by the Second Empire it had become complacent and mean-minded. Lisa Quenu was the forerunner of millions of Tory voters when she declared, ‘I support the government which is good for trade. If it’s doing wicked deeds, I don’t want to know.’ In his notes for the novel Zola promised to show ‘what an amazing underside of cowardice and cruelty there is beneath the calm flesh of a bourgeois woman’.
The novel was filled with descriptions of foodstuffs. Food was a major theme throughout Zola’s work. For Balzac, the economic base of human society had still largely appeared in abstract form; he demonstrated the importance of money in human affairs. Zola, who probed lower depths of society than Balzac, gave equal importance to food. The fact that human beings must eat was grasped by Zola in its sensuous and painful wholeness.
The political dimension was supplied by Florent, Lisa’s brother in law. A deported revolutionary in 1848, he returned to his brother’s home. Eventually Lisa betrayed him to the police. Claude Lantier – a painter who stood back somewhat from the bourgeois world – pronounced Zola’s damning conclusion: ‘What scum respectable people are.’
As early as 1872 the conservative paper Le Pays noted that ‘every day people are sentenced for offences against decency who are less guilty than citizen Zola’. In 1873 the police established a file on Zola – according to one informer he was a member of the First International. This was implausible, but perhaps an acute perception of how his politics were developing.
 
L’Assommoir
In L’Assommoir (1876) [10] Zola produced a remarkable portrait of working class life. It was not, however, a novel of struggle. Written in the aftermath of the Commune, the story itself belonged to an earlier period of defeat. After June 1848 Paris workers lost faith in the Republic; in December 1851 they refused to defend it. Zola dramatised this in a scene in L’Assommoir where Goujet and Coupeau refused to risk their skins for the ‘bleeding idlers in the Chamber’.
L’Assommoir was set in the quarter around the rue de la Goutte-d’Or, in northern Paris behind the gare du Nord. In the mid-20th century this was one of the main areas where North African immigrants settled. A century before it had received immigrants from provincial France; here the laundress Gervaise Macquart came from Plassans and met her husband, the building worker Coupeau.
This had been one of the strongest areas of working class militancy in 1848. Zola took up the story at the point of defeat, after which the working class became fragmented and private relationships (the family) and private pleasures (drink) dominated their lives. Zola depicted the slow degradation of the couple. After Coupeau suffered an accident they slid into alcoholism and the story – the bleakest of all Zola’s novels – ends with delirium tremens and death.
But its strength lay in Zola’s sensitivity to various aspects of working class culture. The most important of these was language. Zola called it ‘a purely philological study’ in his attempt to reproduce working class language, not just as an ‘incorrect’ version of standard French, but with all the vigour and concreteness it derived from the realities of working class life.
Zola examined the relation between class and culture most acutely in the scene where Gervaise’s wedding party visited the Louvre. The working class celebration confronted the works of art cherished by the bourgeoisie. The effect was comic, for the workers did not respond in the authorised manner, remembering the appropriate distance between ‘art’ and ‘life’. On the contrary, when they saw Rubens’ Kermesse (a reflection of their own popular festivity), the women blushed while the men sniggered and looked for ‘dirty details’.
Zola’s political conceptions were still undeveloped. He claimed to have produced an apolitical work: ‘My book is not a work of ... propaganda, it is a work of truth.’ Yet in the selfsame letter he went on to set out the ‘lesson’ of L’Assommoir by advocating a programme of education, slum clearance and struggle against alcoholism – a reformist programme, but one that put him to the left of most of his contemporaries.
L’Assommoir gave Zola instant notoriety. Serialised in Le Bien public in 1876, its publication was suspended by the editors, fearful of losing respectable readers – and replaced by a novel by arch-reactionary Léopold Stapleaux. The right accused Zola of wallowing in filth, but much more significant was the hostility provoked in left wing circles.
The republican Arthur Ranc wrote a pamphlet accusing Zola of ‘bourgeois contempt’ for the people. Charles Floquet gave a lecture calling Zola a ‘public slanderer’. Victor Hugo, author of Les Misérables, accused Zola of turning ‘naked poverty’ into a ‘spectacle’.
However, the condemnation was not unanimous. Jules Vallès, a leading figure in the Commune, now exiled in London, praised L’Assommoir: ‘M Zola is a red in literature, a Communard of the pen.’ Jules Guesde, later leader of the Socialist Party left before 1914, commended Zola’s portrayal of workers under the Empire, ‘crushed by the heavy burden of the past, brutalised by excessive toil, dragged into alcoholism by overwork’.
Zola responded vigorously to his critics, asking:
Are Gervaise and Coupeau idlers and drunkards? By no means. They become idlers and drunkards, which is quite a different thing.
Zola was concerned, not with moralising about social phenomena, but with understanding their causes. The criticism of Zola was similar to that later directed at Orwell’s The Road to Wigan Pier, when he challenged left wing stereotypes of working class virtue.
Zola did not see the working class as the subject of history. But any theory that takes the working class as the agent of socialist transformation must begin with the working class as it is, brutalised by capitalism and trapped by ideology. One does not need to be a moralistic teetotaller to recognise that drunkenness is not only a social problem, but a serious impediment to many working class militants. The aim of socialism is not to flatter the working class, but to abolish it.
 
Sex and class
The next novels returned to the bourgeois milieu. Encouraged by the success of L’Assommoir, Zola’s attack acquired a sharper edge. Nana (1879) [11] traced the fortunes of Gervaise’s daughter, who had a brief but dazzling career as a high class prostitute before dying of smallpox; her physical decomposition mirrored that of the Empire.
There was much lurid sexual activity, but also a serious attempt to explore the social nature of sex as commodity. The ‘oldest profession’ long predated capitalism, but the prostitution depicted here reached a new level. The Second Empire was the period in which Paris gained its international reputation as a capital of entertainment and dubious pleasures, the age of the Folies-Bergère. In the opening scene a theatre manager was congratulated on his establishment; he responded dryly: ‘You mean my brothel.’
The theme of class ran right through the novel. Nana was a child of the slums, seen by Zola as the revenge of the workers on the parasitic classes whose beds she now frequented. Her role was summed up by the image of the fly:
... a fly the colour of sunshine which had flown up out of the dung, a fly which had sucked death from the carrion left by the roadside and now, buzzing, dancing and glittering like a precious stone, was entering palaces through the windows and poisoning the men inside, simply by settling on them.
In his preparatory notes for Pot-Bouille (1882, Restless House), Zola made his intentions quite explicit:
To speak of the bourgeoisie is to make the most violent indictment that one can cast against French society ... To show the bourgeoisie naked, after having portrayed the people, and to show it as more abominable, this class which sees itself as representing order and respectability ... the bourgeoisie taking its pleasure and opposing all change. They vote out of self-interest to preserve their position. Hatred of new ideas, fear of the people, determination to stop the revolution at the point where they come to power. When they feel under threat, they all band together.
A modern reader may well feel not much has changed.
The novel traced the fortunes of individuals living in one apartment house. Zola confronted the private life of the bourgeoisie, the futility and violence that marked interpersonal and especially sexual relations. Of the many scenes showing total absence of common humanity, perhaps the most striking was when Duveyrier, rejected by his mistress, came home and, trying to kill himself, shot off part of his jaw. His wife, finding him dripping with blood, afraid to shoot again, howled in horror, ‘Go and kill yourself outside!’
Zola showed how the bourgeois family crushed women’s freedom and humanity. Madame Josserand was determined to find a husband for her not very marriageable daughter, Berthe. The daughter recounted how, when dancing with a well placed prospect, he had grabbed her and she had pushed him against the furniture. The mother screamed at her that she had ruined her chances of marriage, saying she should have let him do what he wanted, trapping him into marriage. The other side of the coin was the story of the servant Adèle, forced to give birth in complete solitude, in fear and terrible suffering. Zola saw this as a clear indictment of the society that drove women to this situation.
 
Success
Zola was always ambitious, and knew that whatever antagonisms his writings provoked, they could only boost sales. His earnings rose rapidly; by the late 1870s he was getting at least 15,000 francs a year, well over £30,000 in today’s money. He missed no opportunity to exploit the market. In 1880 he developed a new form of hype, launching the term ‘naturalism’. Zola claimed that as a naturalist he was developing a new kind of writing that went beyond the mere ‘realism’ of his predecessors. [12] The difference, he argued in his essay The Experimental Novel (1880), was that his work was more systematically scientific; the placing of a character with certain hereditary features in a range of environments was akin to a scientific experiment – say the testing of the effect of a variety of acids on a given type of metal. The work contained some interesting passages but the overall thesis lacked plausibility. The main point was to promote the brand name ‘naturalism’. [13]
At 40 Zola was at the stage in his career when many rebels have turned right and made their peace with an existing order which gives them a comfortable living. Zola moved in quite the opposite direction.
 
Germinal
Germinal was Zola’s masterpiece. [14] Whereas L’Assommoir had shown a working class just emerging from an older world of small workshops, Germinal shifted to the coal mining industry, a central source of energy for France’s developing capitalism. Mining, with a large, disciplined labour force herded into pit villages and facing the dangers of underground work, produced a class for which solidarity was the key value.
The novel took its title from a month in the revolutionary calendar introduced in 1792. Germinal fell in springtime (March–April), the month of germination and hope; but on 12 Germinal Year III (1 April 1795) hungry crowds had rioted, demanding ‘bread and the 1793 constitution’. The events of Germinal inspired Babeuf, the first revolutionary socialist, to establish his secret organisation of Equals. In the novel Zola argued that the bourgeoisie, having made its own revolution, now wished to suppress any further revolution from below.
The first part of Germinal gave lengthy descriptions of work underground, one of the few novels to deal with the experience of work. The second part focused on the dynamics of the strike. No novel before – and very few since – had given such a detailed and authentic account of an industrial struggle.
The central figure was Etienne Lantier, son of Gervaise Macquart and half-brother of Nana. He was an outsider to the pit village, a worker intellectual, who read socialist papers and pamphlets, and talked to the Russian asylum seeker Souvarine while his workmates were preoccupied with beer and sex. But when the management cut pay rates, a strike began, and Etienne emerged as leader. At a mass meeting of workers Etienne captured the mood of the crowd, and made the speech of his life. He was ‘tasting the heady wine of popularity’ and dreamed of being the first working man to enter parliament. Yet when the action started, the crowd, not restrained by ideas or traditions of organisation, rapidly outflanked Etienne. He found himself holding his fellow workers back, preventing gratuitous violence to scabs or damage to equipment. As the strike dragged on the miners rejected Etienne, threw bricks at him, and turned back to the more moderate Rasseneur whom Etienne had earlier supplanted.
Finally the defeated miners returned to work. Etienne saw:



... one of his stalwarts of the strike, a good fellow who had sworn to die before surrendering.
‘You too!’ he said, deeply shocked.
The man looked confused and mumbled vaguely, then said apologetically:
‘What else can I do? I’m a married man’. [15]



Many readers of International Socialism will have experienced at least some of these stages of struggle. Zola showed that working class leadership is not a question of a fixed hierarchical relationship, but an ever-shifting interrelation.
Zola also drew out the importance of spontaneity, showing the slow, painful dawning of consciousness in struggle. He went into detail on matters of tactics, for example the possible use of sabotage, or flying pickets. The latter played an important role in the strike; they were a well-established tradition in French mining, having been used in the Loire strike of 1869.
He also showed how ideas developed in the minds of the less articulate characters, bringing out the effect of a strike on those who for year after year had taken their situation for granted; now, faced with the fact of struggle, they had to painfully think through the questions raised. Maheu confronted old Quandieu, who tried to prevent the strikers forcing out working miners:
It’s our right, old chap. How can we make the strike general if we don’t force all the blokes to come out with us?
Zola stressed the role of women in the strike – miners’ wives, but also miners, since female labour in the mines had not yet been banned. Zola rejected the conventional nonsense about the ‘weaker sex’ – the women were extraordinarily tough, notably the indomitable Maheude. They were capable of great savagery, as in the scene where they took vengeance on the shopkeeper Maigrat, who had long exploited women by demanding sexual favours in return for unpaid debts. When he was killed in a fall, they tore off his genitals and paraded through the streets with them on the end of a stick.
Zola showed a microcosm of the late 19th-century labour movement. One small village contained articulate representatives of three political currents: Rasseneur, the reformist, believing in negotiation rather than confrontation; Souvarine, the anarchist; and Etienne, somewhere between the two, groping towards militant class struggle and a version of Marxism. The currents Zola presented were the main political trends in the First International prior to the Commune.
Souvarine was one of the most interesting figures in the book. He was a refugee from Tsarist Russia, where he had tried unsuccessfully to blow up the Tsar’s train. His lover was captured and he saw her hanged. As Zola observed, he had the ‘crushing scorn of the man prepared to sacrifice his own life in obscurity without even the glory of a martyr’s crown’ – in modern terms, the suicide bomber. In Souvarine’s view all trade union activity was futile. The only hope was ‘anarchy, the end of everything, the whole world bathed in blood and purified by fire ... Then we shall see.’ His rejection of class struggle revealed the elitism inherent in terrorism.
Only after the strike was defeated did he look for an alternative form of action, and sabotaged the mine. Zola showed terrorism as a sign of weakness, of lack of confidence in collective action, of desperation in the face of a declining movement – as Trotsky put it, ‘it belittles the role of the masses in their own consciousness’. [16] But Zola’s concern was to understand rather than to condemn.
Germinal was not just an extended strike report. It had many other literary qualities. The powerful imagery conveyed Zola’s sense of the dehumanising force of capitalist society. Men and women were denied freedom and human wholeness, subordinated to an alien logic in which the production of commodities was more important than human beings.
Thus the mine – named Le Voreux (with echoes of devouring) – was depicted as a living monster:
And so the shaft went on with its meal for half an hour, gulping men down more or less greedily according to the depth of the level they were bound for; but it never stopped, for the hunger of this gigantic maw could swallow up a whole people.
The mine was a human product, made to satisfy human needs, yet it took on the life of a beast, satisfying its own desires, not those of the people who made it; human beings became the inert fodder that the beast devoured.
Those who would like to drain the book of its socialist content often quote from a letter by Zola: ‘Germinal is a work of pity and not of revolution.’ But this sentence should be put in context. In the same letter he went on to say:
What I wanted to do was to cry out to the fortunate of this world, to those who are the masters: ‘Beware, look below ground, see those wretches who are working and suffering. Perhaps there is still time to avoid the final catastrophes. But hasten to be just, for otherwise here is the danger: the earth will open up and the nations will be swallowed in one of the most terrible upheavals of history.’
These were the words of a middle class reformer, not of a revolutionary; but this reformer had at least integrated the possibility of revolution into his historical perspective.
This was confirmed by the novel’s conclusion, all too often misunderstood. Etienne left the village, not because he had abandoned hope in the working class, but because he had been offered a job in Paris by Pluchart, an organiser for the First International. Since the novel was set around 1867, it was clear he was heading for the Paris Commune.
How did a prosperous middle class novelist who had never been involved in any industrial struggle give such a perceptive account of a strike? By 1884 the French working class movement was recovering from the defeat of the Commune. The miners of Anzin went on strike, and Zola himself visited the scene of the strike to gather material. Posing as the secretary of the left wing deputy Giard, he observed the action at close quarters. By courtesy of the management he visited the pit and crawled 675 metres on all fours below ground. He also met Emile Basly, an ex-miner who was the model for the figure of the reformist Rasseneur. As an honest and perceptive observer who detested all the bourgeoisie stood for, Zola undoubtedly learned a great deal from this experience.
Moreover, he was influenced by one of the great, though much neglected, socialist writers of his time, Jules Vallès, a leading activist in the Commune, exiled till 1880 in London. Zola helped him get journalistic work and encouraged him to write his powerful autobiographical novel trilogy. [17]
Vallès had written articles about the miners’ strikes of 1869 and 1870 when the army was used against workers. On 12 March 1884 he participated in a public meeting in support of the Anzin miners. Later that year, when Germinal was being written, Zola spent long hours discussing with Vallès during his summer holiday at Mont-Dore.
While academics often miss the point about Germinal, it has been properly appreciated in the working class movement. During the 1984–1985 British miners’ strike a militant miner saw direct parallels between the novel and the current struggle:
There are many similarities between the events in the book and what is happening in the current miners’ strike. In both cases management provoked the strike deliberately, confident that the miners would lose, in order that they could reinforce their power. Both sets of miners put too much faith in one man, Etienne and Scargill. The French miners paid the price, defeat. Although the miners were beaten by lack of organisation, hunger and bullets, they were changed by the struggle. No longer content to accept their lot in life, the seeds of revolt were sown. [18]
 
Towards socialism
Writing Germinal had a permanent effect on Zola’s own political development. A year later he noted, ‘Every time I write a study now I come up against socialism.’ But what kind of socialism? Marxism was only beginning to get a foothold in France. In preparing his novel The Earth, Zola conducted an interview with Jules Guesde, one of the leading advocates of Marxism in France. According to Zola’s notes, Guesde argued for socialism in the countryside on the basis of technical advance. The large farms of North America, equipped with machinery, could export corn to Europe. Competition would compel French peasants to accept nationalisation of the land so that their production could be competitive. Guesde believed in ‘scientific evolution’; according to Zola he hoped to win over the peasantry merely by displaying posters proclaiming the abolition of taxes and military service. This was ‘Marxism’ without class struggle, class consciousness or workers’ democracy; if this was the only Marxism on offer, small wonder Zola rejected it.
La Terre (1887, The Earth) [19] was one of Zola’s most successful novels. During the 19th century there was continuing division of land into ever smaller units. Zola followed Guesde’s argument that socialism was the answer to rural decline. The plot of the book – loosely based on King Lear – dramatised the problem. There was lots of sex, human and animal. The book opened with the coupling of a bull and cow, assisted by the helping hand of a young girl. There were vivid descriptions of child-birth, calf-birth and coitus interruptus. There was also a lot of shit. Characters included an old woman who manured her cabbages with human excrement and a peasant who farted extremely loudly and was known to everyone as ‘Jesus Christ’. Zola understood long before Malcolm McLaren that scandal sells; it was one of his bestselling books. [20]
But socialism was one thing, socialists were another. The socialist in The Earth, Canon, was shown in a negative light. His socialism was deterministic and authoritarian:
For Christ’s sake, stop nattering about your liberty, equality and fraternity ... Who needs liberty? What a joke! So you want us to end up in the pockets of the bourgeois again? Oh, no, the people are going to be forced to be happy, in spite of themselves! ... all the pleasure you want, every one of our needs fostered and satisfied, meat, wine, women and three times as much of them as we have today, because we’ll be stronger and healthier.
The Debacle (1892) [21] depicted the final collapse of the Second Empire. The first part, dealing with the disastrous Franco-Prussian War, showed Zola evoking the horror of modern warfare, anticipating some of the best novels of the First World War. But the second part, on the Commune, revealed all his contradictions. Zola was a socialist sympathetic to the working class, but had never been convinced of the need for revolution or working class violence. The Commune was represented by two characters, Maurice, sincere but naive, caught up in enthusiasm, and Chouteau, corrupt and violent, the most malicious of all Zola’s portrayals of leftist agitators. It was a complete travesty of the Commune and the ideas that animated it. Happily Vallès did not live to see this appalling betrayal.
Vision and terror
The Rougon-Macquart cycle was completed in 1893 and Zola needed a new project. As he progressed beyond negative hatred of the bourgeoisie but without embracing revolution, he often lapsed into moralism. Yet old passions did not die completely, and the two late cycles contained some interesting works.
The Three Cities cycle told the story of a priest, Pierre Froment. Appalled by the superstition at Lourdes, he went to Rome, where he found careerism and corruption. He abandoned the church and returned to Paris, a city marked by the vast gulf between rich and poor, parliamentary corruption and ineffective charity. There was repeated reference to the much vaunted ‘bankruptcy of science’. In this context Zola turned to a theme relevant to our own times, terrorism.
At the beginning of Paris (1897) Zola introduced Salvat, whose unsuccessful search for work had driven him into brutalised silence and ‘incendiary dreaming’. He planted a bomb outside the home of a wealthy baron; eventually he was tracked down in the Bois de Boulogne, tried and executed; unbroken, he shouted, ‘Long live anarchy!’ when dragged to the guillotine.
Zola showed terrorist violence as a direct product of poverty, and of the impotence of both politics and charity. There was savage satire of the way the press exploited the whole episode, presenting Salvat as a monster. As Zola showed, capital punishment merely prolonged the cycle: ‘It was blood paying for blood, and it was like the eternal debt redeemed by human misery, without mankind ever being able to free itself from suffering.’
Meanwhile Pierre’s brother Guillaume, a scientist, had discovered a new form of high explosive. Guillaume had stored a quantity of this beneath the Sacré-Coeur, planning to ignite it on a day when ten thousand pilgrims were visiting the church. Guillaume himself was not a victim, but had been inspired by Salvat’s execution. He believed his new explosive would make war impossible and intended to demonstrate its power by a vast explosion. Luckily Pierre averted the atrocity, took up cycling and got married. (Happy endings were never Zola’s strongest point.)
Zola now moved on to his final cycle of novels. The overall title – The Four Gospels – showed he did not suffer from undue modesty. The four heroes (Matthew, Mark, Luke and John) exemplified the virtues of fertility, work, truth and justice.
Travail (1900, Work) was Zola’s attempt at a socialist utopia. Luc Froment took over a steel mill in a small town, and under the influence of Fourier’s ideas turned it into a workers’ co-operative. There followed the irresistible ascent of the co-operative way of life, as people were drawn in by the sheer power of example. But Luc’s paternalism was the very antithesis of the self emancipation of the working class. The question of the state was simply evaded; ‘socialism in one town’ developed while the rest of France made no effort to obstruct it. Strangely, Lenin is reputed to have liked the novel. [22]
 
The Dreyfus Affair
By now Zola had become involved in the defence of Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish army officer, wrongly accused of spying for Germany and deported to Devil’s Island. This revealed profound corruption at the heart of French political and military life, compounded by pervasive anti-Semitism. The affair created divisions in French society that lasted over 50 years; the right wing current that crystallised around the affirmation of Dreyfus’s guilt provided support for the Vichy regime in 1940.
Most of the French left failed the test. On 18 January 1898 a statement signed by all socialist deputies (including Jaurès and Guesde) [23] urged workers not to take sides in a ‘bourgeois civil war’. In July the Parti ouvrier français (led by Guesde and Lafargue) argued that ‘workers … have no place in this battle which is not theirs’. The same year the syndicalist CGT issued a pamphlet declaring, ‘We workers, eternally exploited, should not take sides in this conflict between Jews and Christians!’ [24] (All these came after Zola’s intervention.)
It is hard to express just how stupid this position was. It is as though people on the British left had argued that, since Stephen Lawrence was a middle class youth aiming to become an architect, the circumstances of his death were no concern of socialists. The price of stupidity was a heavy one. Among those observing the development of the affair was Theodor Herzl, who claimed the Dreyfus case convinced him that Zionism was the only solution to the oppression of Jews. [25] If the French working class movement had intervened wholeheartedly on Dreyfus’s side, the case for Zionism would undoubtedly have seemed much less plausible. The world – especially the Palestinian people – is still suffering the effects of the French left’s failure.
Zola’s intervention in the affair, with his famous article I Accuse – in which he named those he claimed had perverted justice – was a matter of considerable significance. The article appeared in the national newspaper l’Aurore on 13 January 1898 – 300,000 copies were printed. Zola concluded with an appeal to the power of truth that was rooted in his whole career as a realist writer:
If you hide truth underground, it accumulates, it acquires such an explosive force that when it does go off, it blows up everything with it ... The action I am taking here is merely a revolutionary means to hasten the explosion of truth and justice.
He was tried for defamation, enabling him to give the issues public exposure, and found guilty in a courtroom which broke into chants of ‘Down with Zola! Death to the Jews!’ He took refuge in England in order to avoid imprisonment.
Zola’s defence of Dreyfus was based on a complex, evolving critique of racism, nationalism, militarism and the state machine, and cannot be reduced to platitudes of liberalism and tolerance.
Among French intellectuals of the 1890s anti-Semitism was widespread. The writer Maurice Barrès declared quite simply, ‘I deduce from his race that Dreyfus is capable of treachery.’ Zola stood outside this. In 1896, before being at all involved in the Dreyfus Affair, he had published an article entitled In Defence of the Jews. Here he described anti-Semitism as:
... a monstrosity, I mean something outside all common sense, all truth and all justice, a blind, stupid thing which would take us back to centuries gone by ... The Jews, as they exist today, are our work, the product of our 1,800 years of imbecile persecution.
It was because of this article that Zola was first approached to intervene on Dreyfus’ behalf.
Zola’s intervention can be linked to his belief that the writer’s job was to observe and truthfully describe an objective reality. What better basis for pursuing the proposition that there is a difference between guilt and innocence? It is interesting to contrast the naturalist Zola with one of the key figures of modernist literature. As Michael Löwy has shown, [26] Kafka’s novel The Trial was inspired by the experience of the Dreyfus Affair and other anti-Semitic trials. Kafka gave us a powerful but bewildering nightmare in which it was quite impossible to discern what was the law. Zola’s aesthetic, cruder and simpler, helped him to keep faith that truth was attainable.
 
The end of the road
The Dreyfus Affair led Zola to reconsider the whole question of the state, so that he took up other cases of injustice and in particular became more sympathetic towards anarchism, for instance supporting a campaign for the release of imprisoned anarchists.
His developing political stance was also apparent in his fiction. The third novel of the Four Gospels cycle, Vérité (1902, Truth), was a fictional version of the Dreyfus case. [27] Here Zola regained all his old polemical vigour; he showed a savagery comparable to the best of his earlier works. Zola had not made his peace with religion: ‘Dirt and vermin are established in all the countries where Catholicism has triumphed ...’
There was a special mention for the Sacré-Coeur: ‘On the highest peak of the great, revolutionary Paris, [the Church] had erected this Sacred Heart, red and quivering, like the hearts you see hung on butchers’ hooks.’
In September 1902 Zola died of carbon monoxide poisoning due to a blocked chimney. The circumstances of his death may never be wholly clear, but newspaper revelations half a century later suggested he might well have been murdered by a deliberate blocking of the chimney. There were enough vicious-minded rightists, enraged by Zola’s defence of Dreyfus, to make this plausible.
When the news broke, shopkeepers in Montmartre shut up shop, householders pulled down the shutters, and crowds took to the streets. When he was buried, six days later, delegations of miners attended the funeral, chanting, ‘Germinal! Germinal!’
 
Marxists and Zola
One might imagine Zola would be the darling of the left. In fact the left has always been uneasy about him. From L’Assommoir on, Zola had opponents on the left as well as the right.
Most leftists are wary of imposing political criteria on literature. So they feel that if they commend one novel that deals with a strike, it will seem as though they are saying that all art should deal with picket lines and barricades. We reject this. Oedipus Rex and Wordsworth’s Daffodils are part of a human heritage that belongs to us all, and which the working class will inherit. But from Robert Tressell to Jim Allen there is a tradition of writing dealing specifically with working class experience, from Gorky to Victor Serge a tradition focused on working class organisation and struggle. These deserve a place in literature just as much as Milton’s Satan or Proust’s madeleine.
Moreover, while in the latter part of his life Zola was a socialist, he rejected Marx, was ambivalent about the Paris Commune, and was influenced by the ideas of the Utopian Socialist Fourier. Unfortunately there is a longstanding sectarian habit on the left of directing the greatest hostility at those whose ideas are closest to our own. Socialists often seem happier with overt reactionaries like Balzac and Dostoevsky than with ‘unsound’ socialists like Zola. Even great Marxists like Engels and Lukács have had problems with Zola.
Shortly before the translation of The Earth, Vizetelly published A City Girl, by John Law, pseudonym of Margaret Harkness. Vizetelly forwarded a copy to Engels, who, in April 1888, wrote a letter to Miss Harkness, thanking her for her novel and making a number of observations on it. [28] Among these was a reference to ‘Balzac, whom I consider a far greater master of realism than all the Zolas passés, présents et á venir [past, present and future]’. This letter has hung fatefully over subsequent Marxist discussion of Zola. [29]
Most who cite this letter have clearly never read A City Girl. It was a very poor novel. The plot – working class girl seduced by middle class radical – was neither original nor striking, while the descriptions of working class life were largely conventional and certainly not comparable to those of Zola. The tone was highly sentimental. Engels’ praise, going well beyond what politeness required, does not enhance one’s respect for his literary judgement.
The essence of Engels’ criticism of Harkness was that an account of the working class could not be ‘realistic’ if it saw workers simply as a ‘passive mass’ and ignored their ‘rebellious reaction’ against oppression. The point fitted very badly with the condemnation of Zola in the next paragraph. For if asked in 1888 to name a novel which did show ‘the rebellious reaction of the working class against the oppressive medium which surrounds them, their attempts – convulsive, half conscious or conscious – at recovering their status as human beings’, surely many readers would immediately have seen Engels’ words as an accurate description of Germinal.
Had Engels ever read Zola? Those who quote Engels’ dismissive reference to ‘all the Zolas’ assume that it was based on a knowledge of Zola equivalent to his undoubted familiarity with Balzac. But a study of Engels’ voluminous writings reveals no such acquaintance with Zola. In his published correspondence there are, apart from the celebrated letter to Harkness, just two references to Zola. [30] In neither case is there any reference to a specific book or any indication of textual knowledge.
Engels probably derived such knowledge of Zola as he had from Paul Lafargue, Marx’s son in law, with whom he was in regular contact and with whom he might well have discussed Zola. Lafargue had been highly critical of L’Assommoir:
Zola, straight after the terrible massacres of the week of blood [the suppression of the Commune], in order to spare the bourgeois conscience the slightest remorse, depicted in L’Assommoir the working class with the most repugnant features.
One of the best-known Marxist critics, Georg Lukács, followed Engels in his low view of Zola. [31] Like Engels, he had only a very thin knowledge of Zola’s work. Lukács was mainly concerned with the concept of ‘totality’. He argued that in comparison to true realists, Zola merely engaged in accumulation of detail. Zola, he conceded, was successful in depicting ‘the outer trappings of modern life’:
But only the outer trappings. They form a gigantic backdrop in front of which tiny, haphazard people move to and fro and live their haphazard lives. Zola could never achieve what the truly great realists Balzac, Tolstoy or Dickens accomplished: to present social institutions as human relationships and social objects as the vehicles of such relationships. [32]
This is a travesty of Zola’s best work. If he does not present such memorable ‘characters’ as Balzac or Dickens, it is because he does not believe that great people make history. But the striking miners of Germinal are scarcely tiny, haphazard people. If objects – like the mine in Germinal – sometimes take on a life of their own independent of human control, than that is the fault of capitalism and not of Zola’s narrative technique. But Zola’s faith in science and truth, and his contemptuous hatred for bourgeois greed and ignorance gave his novels a unifying force that Lukács failed to grasp. [33]
A hundred years on, it is surely not necessary for Marxists to share the literary tastes of the founding fathers. The failure of Marxists to make a positive appropriation of Zola has left the field wide open for the Freudians (for whom Zola’s work means something different from what he intended) and the postmodernists (for whom it can mean just about anything).
 
Zola and the future
Zola was not a Marxist. He was, however, an anti-capitalist – almost every page he wrote was a denunciation of the greed, brutality, corruption and hypocrisy that characterised French capitalism in his day. Since then the system has had to make some concessions to working people, but it claws them back whenever possible. Now that the long detour of Stalinism is over, capitalism is reverting to the pre-1914 model of the unbridled pursuit of power and profit, sinking into congenital corruption; increasingly Zola’s descriptions have a ring of familiarity. Ultimately capitalism keeps going by devouring human flesh, just like the pit in Germinal. Zola never made his peace with the bourgeoisie, and those who read him will be encouraged not to make theirs.

Note on reading
Thérèse Raquin, L’Assommoir, Nana, The Ladies’ Delight, Germinal, The Earth, and The Debacle have been published as Penguin Classics. All the Rougon-Macquart cycle have been translated into English. Sixteen of the Rougon-Macquart novels were published by Elek Books between 1950 and 1960. Since 1975 there have been English editions of The Fortune of the Rougons (Sutton), The Kill (Panther), The Conquest of Plassans (Sutton), Abbé Mouret’s Transgression (Sutton), Pot Luck (OUP, Grafton), The Masterpiece (Sutton, OUP), The Beast in Man (Panther, OUP), Money (Sutton), Doctor Pascal (Sutton), Truth (Sutton). The Émile Zola Society holds regular meetings in London, and publishes a twice yearly Bulletin of material by and about Zola. Details from Chantal Morel, Institut Français, 17 Queensberry Place, London SW7 2DT.

Notes
Thanks to Dave Harker, George Paizis and Jim Wolfreys for comments.
1. References to novels published as Penguin Classics are to the English translation. In other cases translations are my own.
2. There are strikes in Gaskell’s Mary Barton and North and South, but in neither are they the centrepiece. Generally, in English novels of the Chartist period, it is riots and violence that predominate.
3. Zola uses the word ‘people’ (peuple) to refer to all the oppressed layers of society, ie the working class plus artisans, peasants etc.
4. Thus Engels wrote in Dialectics of Nature, ‘The activity of human beings forms the test of causality.’ K. Marx and F. Engels, Collected Works (London and Moscow 1975 onwards), vol. 25, p. 510.
5. The notion that knowledge precedes action belongs to the ideology of a minority class, such as the pre-1789 bourgeoisie. The working class, because of its position in production, cannot first acquire enlightenment and then make the revolution; it can only acquire enlightenment in the process of making the revolution.
6. Penguin Classic (Harmondsworth 1962).
7. Stress on the improving powers of environment was more progressive than a belief in the blind force of heredity; yet, as Marx pointed out in the Theses on Feuerbach, ‘The materialist doctrine that men are products of circumstances and upbringing, and that, therefore, changed men are products of other circumstances and changed upbringing, forgets that it is men that change circumstances and that the educator himself needs educating.’ Zola was never a revolutionary, and never made the dialectical leap embodied in this proposition.
8. The articles are compared in a fascinating study by D.S. Gross, Émile Zola as Political Reporter in 1871: What He Said and What He Had to Say, Literature and History, no. 7 (1978).
9. The Sacré-Coeur (sacred heart) church in Montmartre was built in the 1870s to expiate the ‘sins’ of the people of Paris.
10. Penguin Classic (Harmondsworth 1970).
11. Penguin Classic (Harmondsworth 1972).
12. It should be noted that Zola’s distinction of ‘realism’ and ‘naturalism’ is not the same as that used by Lukács, for whom ‘naturalism’ lacks the totality achieved by ‘realism’ (see below).
13. English translators entered into the spirit of things by giving Zola’s novels titles more lurid than the originals. Thus Le Ventre de Paris was published as La Belle Lisa, or the Paris Market Girls; Zola’s study of the painter Claude Lantier, which in French had the austere title L’Oeuvre (The Work), became Christine the Model, or Studies of Love.
14. Penguin Classic (Harmondsworth 1954).
15. As well as powerfully evoking the end of the miners’ strike in 1985, this scene is reminiscent of the end of Orwell’s 1984, where Winston and Julia, having betrayed each other, are reunited. The lesson is the same: individual heroism is not enough – victory requires effective collective organisation.
16. See L. Trotsky, Marxism and Terrorism (New York 1995), p. 10.
17. As far as I know no English translation exists.
18. Norman Strike (Westoe NUM) in Socialist Worker, 21 July 1984.
19. Penguin Classic (Harmondsworth 1980).
20. In 1888 Henry Vizetelly published an English translation of The Earth. Following a prosecution instigated by a Liberal MP, who claimed Zola’s novels ‘are only fit for swine, and those who read them must turn their minds into cesspools’, Vizetelly, aged 69, was sentenced to three months jail for publishing novels by Zola.
21. Penguin Classic (Harmondsworth 1972).
22. A. Wurmser in the collective work Zola (Génies et Réalités) (Paris 1969), p. 230.
23. Jaurès and Guesde opposed the position within the parliamentary group, but accepted the majority position. Guesde abandoned support for Dreyfus after poor election results in May 1898.
24. E. Cahm, L’Affaire Dreyfus (Paris 1994), pp. 129–130, 145.
25. See S. Beller, Herzl (London 1991), pp. 31–32.
26. M. Löwy, Redemption and Utopia (London 1992), p. 89.
27. Zola died before writing the fourth volume.
28. MECW, op. cit., vol. 48, pp. 166–168.
29. It is quoted approvingly by Chris Harman in the January 2002 Socialist Review 259, p. 31. For a fuller discussion, see I. Birchall, Another Vizetelly Connection: Engels, Harkness and Zola, Bulletin of the Émile Zola Society, no. 6 (1993), pp. 1–11.
30. A letter of 15 July 1887 to Laura Lafargue appears in MECW, op cit, vol. 48, p. 85; a letter of 30 April 1891 to Karl Kautsky, ibid., vol. 49, p. 174.
31. For a full discussion of Lukács’s views of Zola, see I. Birchall, Georg Lukács and the Novels of Émile Zola, in D. Laurenson (ed.), The Sociology of Literature: Applied Studies (Keele 1978), pp. 92–108.
32. Studies in European Realism (London 1972), p. 92. In this essay, The Zola Centenary, Lukács performs the tour de force of never naming a single novel by Zola.
33. As a leading literary representative of the Popular Front strategy, which sought alliance with the ‘progressive’ bourgeoisie, Lukács could scarcely emphasise Zola’s hatred of the bourgeoisie.
 



William Doyle
The Ancien Regime
Palgrave, Basingstoke 2001, pp. 66
Moira Donald and Tim Rees (eds.)
Reinterpreting Revolution in Twentieth-Century Europe
Macmillan, Basingstoke 2001, pp. 242
IN one sense, the reform or revolution debate has moved on. Today nobody, except for a handful of deep entrists in the Labour Party, even pretends to believe that socialism could come through parliament. Yet, as October 1917 recedes into the past, the notion of what a revolution would actually look like becomes more obscure. But the old mole is not dead, and these two volumes reveal that even the academic world has to face the problem.
Doyle is a well-known revisionist on the question of the French Revolution; and in this guide for students he tries to belittle the importance of the Revolution by stressing the continuities between the old regime and post-Revolutionary society. In this, he is indebted to Tocqueville, one of the few genuinely intelligent conservative thinkers, to whom the present crop of anti-revolutionaries return again and again.
Thus he argues that ‘trade and industry commanded as little social prestige in the early nineteenth century as they had since the remotest times’, and that the real change came with the advent of the railways after 1840. He should follow Engels’ advice and study the novels of Balzac, where he will see just what an impact the Revolution had on the values of society, religion and the family.
He argues that there was no significance to Le Chapelier’s law to ban trade unions, because pre-Revolutionary governments had ‘never countenanced any form of workers’ organisations’. Why then was Le Chapelier, who had been President of the National Assembly in 1789, so anxious to insist that the Revolution was ‘finished’. Precisely because social relations were changing far more rapidly than he had envisaged; as Marge Piercy puts it in her brilliant novel City of Darkness, City of Light: ‘Enlightened gentlemen imagined a Revolution that would be vigorous but polite … They had never imagined that people who waited on them in stores and made boots for them, who carted off their waste and brought them water, would come to rule.’
He also claims that the Enlightenment was not hostile to the old regime, but was essentially reformist. This is to forget that the philosophic movement of the eighteenth century contained many different currents — rather like the pre-Blair Labour Party — from moderate reformers to militant atheists and utopian communists.
However, Doyle makes one telling point. He argues that ‘the overthrow of the Ancien Regime began in France because there centralised government had excluded everybody from all say in or experience of public affairs, and thereby deprived men of all sense of public duty’. Two centuries later, that analysis has a real resonance.
The Donald and Rees volume is a collection of essays by academics, based on a series of seminars; like many such collections, it enables contributors to fulfil the norms of a system increasingly based on piecework. But since each writer is concerned with his or her personal research, there is no unifying focus. Certainly, the book contains many interesting observations, and much useful empirical material. But there is no engagement of debate, and no confrontation of theory with practice, such as would be necessary to truly develop a scientific approach. It confirms the present reviewer’s view that the bourgeois universities will play an ever-decreasing rôle in the development of knowledge.
Several contributors are concerned to define exactly what constitutes a revolution. Thus there are chapters entitled Stalin’s Great Turn and The Nazi Revolution. The problem here is of not seeing the wood for the trees. In Marxist terms, a revolution is the self-emancipation of an oppressed class; the means must be revolutionary, since the institutions of society are in the hands of the oppressors, and cannot serve their victims. Once this basic insight is abandoned, and merely secondary features are considered, then it is indeed difficult to tell a revolution from a counter-revolution.
Several contributors are concerned by the ‘revolutions’ of 1989 in the Stalinist bloc, since these present an apparently new historical phenomenon. Yet again the danger is of looking too closely at their subject. The question as to how extensive and how significant popular uprisings were is certainly of great interest, but it is secondary. It is first necessary to establish the nature and causes of the events.
It is all too easy to be confused by the regimes’ self-description. But anyone who considers that the collapse of Stalinism constituted a defeat for the working class has entered a world of formalism and abstraction, in which the term ‘working class’ has nothing whatsoever to do with the women and men who actually work in factories, mines and offices. It is rather like announcing that the French Revolution was against the Will of God, since Louis XVI claimed to rule in God’s name.
Moreover, the detailed focus on national specifics by academic specialists leads them to miss the ultimate cause of the collapse of Stalinism, namely the fact that centralised state economies, which had achieved a certain brutal efficiency in rapid industrialisation, had become obsolete as world capitalism entered a more highly globalised form in which the Stalinist regimes were incapable of competing.
Yet the ghost of revolution still walks through the corridors of our universities. Many readers will doubtless agree with the concluding sentences of the book, by Krishan Kumar: ‘The end of revolution has been proclaimed on numerous occasions in the twentieth century, in the 1930s as well as the 1950s and the 1980s. In each case a surprise was in store. We will be surprised again; of that we can be sure.’
 



What is called a lost revolution – and the expression is purely relative, for a revolution is never lost; it has been, it has served – this revolution, we say, becomes the best guarantee of the future revolution. [2]
THE job of a socialist historian is to try to restore the truth, as against the lies imposed by the representatives of the existing order. While in Paris recently, I saw a notice-board, officially erected by the Paris mairie, which informed passers-by that work on the restoration of the Pont-Neuf had been begun in 1848, on the orders of Napoleon III! Fortunately a passing socialist historian with a thick black felt pen had written across it: ‘It was the Second Republic!’ This paper is conceived in the same spirit of setting the record straight.
The June rising of Paris workers in 1848 was a crucial turning point in the history of the French, and indeed of the European, working class. In the February of that year, an alliance of several classes had come together to overthrow the monarchy of Louis-Philippe and establish the Second Republic. But by June the conflicts between the different classes had come to the surface; when the government decided to close down the ateliers nationaux, set up to provide some minimal support for the Paris unemployed, the working-class quarters of Paris erupted in a rising which was suppressed by the government with the utmost brutality. The working people [3] of Paris were forced to fight on their own for their own demands against an alliance of all the other classes.
Marx juxtaposed the two revolutions in a memorable paragraph; in the translation which many of us grew up with, the February Revolution was the ‘beautiful’ revolution, but in the more recent translation it has become – perhaps more accurately – the ‘nice’ revolution:
The February revolution was the nice revolution, the revolution of universal sympathies, because the contradictions which erupted in it against the monarchy were still undeveloped and peacefully dormant, because the social struggle which formed their background had only achieved a nebulous existence, an existence in phrases, in words. The June revolution is the ugly revolution, the nasty revolution, because the phrases have given place to the real thing, because the republic has bared the head of the monster by knocking off the crown which shielded and concealed it. [4]
The June rising was also a crucial turning point for Marx and Engels themselves, and a vital event in the process whereby they formulated their mature doctrine. At the time of the June Days, Marx and Engels were in Cologne, where they had begun to publish the Neue Rheinische Zeitung at the beginning of June. Their strategy, given the small size of the German proletariat and the virtual absence of any independent working-class organisation, was to establish themselves as the extreme left of the bourgeois democratic movement in Germany. The aim was to win mass circulation for the paper; publicity placards were displayed on walls throughout Cologne, and subscription lists were posted up in wine and beer dispensaries. [5]
The June Days were therefore not particularly convenient for them, since they obliged them to ‘come out’ as Communists rather than as radical democrats. However, there was no hesitation on their part; from the very first reports of the Paris rising, they expressed total and enthusiastic support for the French workers. Indeed, the NRZ, along with the British Northern Star [6], were just about the only papers in Europe to give full support to the rising. This did not, of course, endear Marx and Engels to their bourgeois allies, and it led to a considerable loss of support for the paper. Most of the paper’s shareholders disappeared; in order to survive the editorial staff agreed not to claim their wages, and Marx used what remained of his small personal assets to pay off the paper’s debts. [7] Nonetheless, the issue at stake was quite clear to them; for the first time the proletariat had been forced to fight on its own, for its own class interests, and the principled defence of the Paris workers overrode any other possible tactical consideration.
Marx, and in particular Engels, wrote several articles following the course of events in Paris as closely as their sources of information permitted. Issues 31 and 32 of the NRZ, published on 1 and 2 July 1848, carried an analysis of the military aspects of the insurrection written by Engels. [8] Apart from many other details, this makes several references to the organising rôle of a certain Kersausie:
The workers’ plan of action, which Kersausie, a friend of Raspail and a former officer, is said to have drawn up, was as follows … The success of the uprising depended on the insurgents reaching the centre of Paris as quickly as possible and seizing the Hôtel de Ville. We cannot know what prevented Kersausie from organising insurgent action in this district.
The article concludes with this stirring tribute:
Kersausie was captured and by now has probably been shot. The bourgeois can kill him, but cannot take from him the fame of having been the first to organise street-fighting. They can kill him, but no power on earth can prevent his techniques from being used in all future street-fighting. They can kill him, but they cannot prevent his name from going down in history as the first commander-in-chief of barricade fighting. [9]
Unfortunately, these texts leave us with a problem. Perhaps the best introduction is to explain the route which led me to research and write this article. When I first read Engels’ article some 20 years ago, my immediate reaction was that pleasurable excitement which any socialist historian will feel at discovering a figure who has been ‘hidden from history’. I had implicit faith in the accuracy of Engels’ account, and assumed that the fact that I had not encountered Kersausie in any other context could be explained by a conspiracy of bourgeois historians who had written this revolutionary hero out of the historical record. I vaguely resolved to look into the matter further, and gave it little more thought.
Then, two or three years ago, when working on my book on Babeuf, I was looking at the circles influenced by Buonarroti in the 1830s, and again encountered the name of Kersausie. Once more this provoked initial excitement, for it seemed that I had fallen upon an example of apostolic succession. The Buonarroti–Kersausie connection seemed to provide the ‘missing link’ between Babeuf’s conspiracy of 1796 and the June Days, a red thread of proletarian revolution. When I began to investigate, however, things turned out to be considerably more complex than I had imagined.
Firstly, it became clear that there was no confirmation of Engels’ account. Neither contemporary participants, nor subsequent historians, from whatever point on the political spectrum, mentioned Kersausie. [10] As I consulted volume after volume, simply noting ‘nothing on Kersausie’, I began to feel that if this was a ‘conspiracy of silence’, then it was a very effective one. Moreover, Marx and Engels themselves were clearly complicit in it. For the index to the Collected Works reveals that apart from the article cited above, neither Marx nor Engels ever again mentioned Kersausie in the extensive writings they devoted to the events of 1848 or in any other connection. If the bourgeoisie could not prevent Kersausie’s name going down in history, Engels was apparently doing nothing to ensure that it did so.
Engels’ article has been reprinted several times in various languages. The first English translation appeared in the collection Marx and Engels, Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 1848–49. [11] Neither the introduction nor the notes make any comment on Engels’ references to Kersausie. To the best of my knowledge, the first publication of the article in French came in a journal called Le Militant Rouge, obviously produced by people in or close to the French Communist Party, which aimed to use historical studies to assist workers with their coming struggles. [12] (I strongly suspect that the historian Maurice Dommanget may have played a rôle in the journal, which later published texts by Blanqui on the June Days.) There was no introduction or notes, nor even indication of source, and Kersausie’s name appeared as ‘Kerkausie’ throughout. Two compilations issued by the French Communist Party’s publishing house, Les Éditions sociales, also published the text in the 1960s, but apart from a brief entry in the biographical index to one volume, which merely states that Kersausie ‘participated … in the June 1848 insurrection’, neither volume offered any critical comment on Engels’ account of Kersausie’s role. [13]
If we hoped for better treatment from the Collected Works of Marx and Engels, edited under the guidance of commissions of British, American and Russian scholars, including our own Eric Hobsbawm, then we were fated to be disappointed. The Introduction to Volume 7 tells us that the whole set of articles about the June Days are ‘imbued with fighting spirit and at the same time they contain a profound analysis of the causes of the uprising and of its historical significance’. Indeed, but are they telling the truth? Engels’ references are not annotated, while the ‘Name Index’ piously tells us that Kersausie was ‘author of a military plan implemented by the participants in the June uprising in Paris’. [14] Obviously, Professor Hobsbawm and his learned fellow-commissioners are not prepared to allow the suggestion that Engels might have been wrong, even if what he states here is in blatant contradiction to what we read elsewhere in the Collected Works. Perhaps this abject deference should not surprise us; the same editorial team cheerfully reprints Engels’ obituary of Helene Demuth without informing the world that she was the mother of Karl Marx’s bastard son. [15] Maybe this is how the lives of the saints are written, but it is not the way to present the works of revolutionaries. I was tempted to describe the approach of Professor Hobsbawm’s commissioners as ‘scriptural’. However, I then recalled that I am in possession of an edition of the Bible printed with a central column which scrupulously cross-references every contradiction and inconsistency within the Holy Book. An edition of Marx and Engels constructed on the same principles would be a distinct step forward.
Not surprisingly, a similar approach is followed by the editors of the Great Soviet Encyclopaedia, which serenely informs us that Kersausie ‘worked out a plan for the June days of 1848 that was highly thought of by F. Engels’, and repeats Engels’ promise that Kersausie’s name would ‘go down in history’. [16] At least Engels cannot be blamed for ignoring the advantage of hindsight. Through the brevity of their entry, the editors of the Great Soviet Encyclopaedia clearly admitted that Kersausie, unlike Rudolf the Red-Nosed Reindeer, did not ‘go down in history’.
Only a handful of historians working outside the tradition of Stalinist hagiography have approached Engels’ article in the critical spirit that a great revolutionary deserves. Maurice Dommanget contrasted Engels’ account, based on ‘unknown reports’ with Blanqui’s assessment that the necessary leadership was missing, and concludes that Blanqui was nearer the truth, for ‘if the insurgents had combined their numerical strength and their fighting spirit with the technical factors Engels speaks of, then they would have won’. [17] Bernard Moss, in a robustly unscriptural account of Engels’ ideas in 1848, states quite bluntly that ‘based on false hopes and misinformation, Engels reported a degree of planning and offensive strategy among the insurgents that suggested political direction and emerging class consciousness.’ [18] But such willingness to criticise Engels belongs very much to a minority on the left. As for right-wing critics, who might have been happy to catch Engels out in error, they seem to have been too stupid or ignorant to pick up on the point.
So who was Kersausie? What rôle did he play, if any, in 1848, and why did Engels imagine that he might have played an important part? There are, to the best of my knowledge, no biographies of Kersausie or substantial studies of his life. He crops up fairly frequently, if often rather marginally, in accounts of the revolutionary current in French politics in the 1830s and 1840s. As much of his life was spent in activity of a conspiratorial nature, he did not leave too many clues as to his activities. Yet at the same time, he acquired something of a legendary status in the 1830s, with the result that a number of anecdotes of doubtful reliability have become attached to his name.
There are two valuable biographical sketches which provide at least an outline of Kersausie’s activities. One is the entry in Jean Maitron’s invaluable biographical dictionary of the French labour movement. [19] The other, which complements it neatly, was published in 1906 by J. Trévédy, a local historian based in Kersausie’s native Finistère. [20] Trévédy clearly had no sympathy whatever with the republican left, and he based himself on family documents. Hence, inasmuch as his account confirms Maitron’s, we can consider it as providing some sort of independent corroboration.
Théophile Joachim René Guillard de Kersausie was born at Guingamp in the Côtes-du-Nord in 1798. His mother was the niece of the famous aristocratic solider who had fought in the American War of Independence, La Tour d’Auvergne. The name Kersausie came from a piece of land owned by the family, originally called Kersauzic.
Coming from a military family, it is not surprising that Kersausie decided on a military career, and in 1815 he became a hussar. He served with distinction in Spain, and rose to the rank of captain. However, his political sympathies were already with the republican left, and in the 1820s he became a member of the carbonari, a radical secret society active in Italy and France.
In 1830, when the Bourbons were overthrown, he supported the revolution, but was rapidly disillusioned when the Republic was not proclaimed and Louis-Philippe acceded to the throne. He resigned from the army in protest, and devoted himself henceforward entirely to revolutionary activity in France and abroad. There is a picture of him painted by Larpenteur in 1832, showing him with Raspail in prison at Versailles. [21] He had ample sideburns, but no beard. According to police reports, he had brown hair and was 1.65 metres high (5 feet 5 inches).
In particular, Kersausie was rapidly involved in one of the new organisations that sprang up in opposition to Louis-Philippe, the Société des droits de l’homme (SDH). The name of this organisation clearly echoed Robespierre’s Déclaration des droits de l’homme et du citoyen of March 1793. It stood very much in the Jacobin tradition, and local sections bore such names as Robespierre, Saint-Just and Montagne. [22]
But if the SDH looked back to the golden days of Jacobinism, it also pointed forward to the emergent French working-class movement. Of its 765 members in 1832, some three-quarters were wage-earning manual workers, concentrated especially in metal-working, building, leather and clothing. [23] The SDH thus represents a vital link between the republicanism of 1793 and the socialism of 1848. The aristocratic Kersausie had sufficiently broken the links with his own class to put himself at the service of the Parisian workers.
But just because the SDH belonged to a social movement in process of evolution, political differentiations began to emerge among its members, and in the autumn of 1832 a major split was apparent. On the moderate side stood Raspail and Trélat; on the radical side there were a number of names, some of which would reappear in 1848 – Lebon, Vignerte, Caussidière, Lagrange – and Kersausie. On one level, the two factions seemed to be re-enacting the disputes of the 1790s – Raspail’s faction were known as ‘girondins’, and Lebon’s as ‘montagnards’. The key issue seems to have been the construction of political alliances. Raspail was willing to ally the SDH with sections of the bourgeoisie, in what Alain Faure has with some legitimacy called a ‘Popular Front strategy’. The Lebon grouping insisted on hard-line republicanism and refused any links with Bonapartists or Legitimists. In the course of this dispute, Kersausie seems to have formed his own military organisation, the Société d’action, consisting of some 400 armed workers, within the SDH. Obviously this led to a conflict of authority between Kersausie and the Central Committee of the SDH. The situation led to Kersausie’s resignation, and fairly rapidly to the disintegration of the SDH in the course of 1834. [24]
Yet the political divisions in this period seem to have been fairly fluid; individuals did not remain stuck in clearly defined factional positions. In the dispute in the SDH, Kersausie had been opposed to Raspail, but from now on their destinies were to be closely linked.
François-Vincent Raspail (1794–1878), scientist, medical populariser and revolutionary journalist, was a key figure of the French left in the 1830s and 1840s. He had been active with the carbonari in the 1820s, and went to prison on more than one occasion. He was also a friend of Kersausie’s sister, Madame de Pontavice, to whom (without naming her) he dedicated his book on prison reform of 1839, based on letters he had sent her while in jail. [25]
Raspail had known Kersausie since before 1830; in a dedication dated September 1839, he referred to him as ‘Your fellow accused in 1833, your collaborator in 1834, your comrade in arms since 1829’. [26] Obviously the faction fight in the SDH had not left any very deep wounds.
After the disintegration of the SDH, Raspail seems to have decided to abandon the conspiratorial politics of the secret societies in favour of legal propaganda activity. This took the form of a daily newspaper, Le Réformateur. While much of the political and journalistic input seems to have come from Raspail, Kersausie played a crucial rôle in providing the necessary funds. Obviously drawing on his family wealth, he made available to Raspail the sum of 100,000 francs. (In the 1830s the average worker’s wage was 1.5 francs per day, though building workers might earn double that. So Kersausie’s contribution was a huge sum, at a rough estimate something in excess of £2.5 million pounds at today’s values.)
The first issue of Le Réformateur appeared on 9 October 1834, and between then and its final appearance on 27 October 1835, some 383 issues were published. On the first issue, the paper described itself as a ‘daily paper of the new material and moral, industrial and political, literary and scientific interests. Published by MM. Raspail and Kersausie.’ The subscription was 18 francs for three months and 70 francs for a year, which would put it beyond the pocket of most workers, though it may well have been read collectively in workers’ cafés, etc. The paper carried a broad range of articles, of a cultural and educational nature as well as political – for example, popularising articles on geography, physiology, etc., which probably reflected Raspail’s scientific interests.
But the radical intentions of the paper were not concealed; the Prospectus announcing the appearance of the new paper launched a diatribe against the privileged classes. Proclaiming the editors’ commitment to the ‘happiness of all’, the statement continued:
Happiness for you, rich people, who accept the century’s favours with smug indifference; and happiness for the poor man, who hitherto has had to put up with all its rigours! For we shall not weary of reminding you of these truths, which always leave you indifferent, but which for us still have the capacity to break our hearts as they did the first time, and to make us tremble for the fate of France. While you lie stretched out on your expensive divans, you bless a state of affairs which lavishes on you gold without requiring talent, decorations without danger, and titles without merit; meanwhile the mass of humanity is afflicted with burning pains; there are still today people who are hungry close by your tables; there are still those who are freezing in the attics above your well-heated panelling; there are still children who fall at birth onto the public highway, because their father’s whim bore his name elsewhere; there are still young women paying the price of the degradation you imposed on them; there are talents stifled at birth by intrigue; there are others which are worn out by constant movement; there is work which requires overwhelming effort, and is scarcely able to provide nourishment; there are agreements made in a moment which become the scourge of a whole life; there is a whole people of 20 million persons languishing in ignorance and unemployment; and the happiness of which we are told in fine verse and beautiful prose on the day of your birth, and even of your death, this happiness exists nowhere, neither for you nor for us, thanks to these ancient institutions which you clutch onto with both hands as though they were your finest inheritance.
After this magnificent tirade against the rich, it comes as something of a surprise to find that Le Réformateur carried regular reports from the Stock Exchange! But it also campaigned regularly for a series of issues that came to constitute key themes for the republican left in the course of the nineteenth century – universal suffrage, free education for all, penal reform, progressive income tax, and the abolition of slavery. Certainly it was all too much for Louis-Philippe’s regime. The paper was prosecuted and fined repeatedly; within a year it had suffered fines amounting to 115,000 francs, so that Kersausie’s initial contribution was more than consumed. The paper disappeared. [27]
Kersausie was put on trial on more than one occasion for his revolutionary activities. In May 1835, he was among the 164 accused at a major trial in Paris, where the defendants included those involved in the rising in Lyons in 1834. Kersausie was sentenced to jail in January 1836, but was the beneficiary of an amnesty in May 1837.
At this point he seems to have decided to leave France, aware that the police would make it impossible for him to operate effectively. It is difficult to track down his movements in the decade up until 1848; but he seems to have involved himself in various national struggles. The year of 1848 was to be the first truly international revolutionary wave, and Kersausie saw no frontiers to the cause of human emancipation. In 1839, Raspail dedicated a book to ‘Kersausie, Polish volunteer’, and described him as a ‘Polish citizen, by your enrolment under the flags of the Polish insurrection’. [28] Other reports put him in London, Switzerland, Naples and Messina. [29] Yet he kept contact with his old comrade Raspail. When Raspail went through the distressing experience of having to amputate his own son’s leg, Kersausie returned to France unknown to the police and stayed for a week, comforting his old comrade. [30] Yet he was still regarded as a threat; when he visited Finistère in 1842, the Le Havre police put him under secret surveillance. [31]
From the above biographical sketch and from the various references in contemporary accounts, it is possible to get a sense of Kersausie’s character; courage, honesty, dedication, self-sacrifice are terms that immediately come to mind. But what were his politics? Was he in any sense a socialist, or was he simply a republican in the Jacobin tradition? This is a much more difficult question to answer, not just because of the relatively slender evidence, but because of the fluid nature of the French left in this period. Contrary to the Althusserians, modern socialism did not emerge from an ‘epistemological break’ inside Karl Marx’s skull. Contrary to Jean Jaurès, it is not true that ‘the French Revolution contains the whole of socialism … socialism was contained from the outset within the republican idea’. [32] Socialism emerged within the republican milieu in a slow, messy and contradictory fashion. The contradictions had not been resolved by February 1848, which is precisely why the ‘nice revolution’ was possible; it was the ‘ugly revolution’ which drew the line between republicanism and socialism – and drew it in blood.
As Maurice Agulhon has pointed out, for a rank-and-file militant around 1840, ‘a question like “are you a republican or a communist?” would have been completely absurd or incongruous’. [33] Kersausie would probably have found the question equally absurd. Thus it has been suggested that the subtitle of Le Réformateur (see above) may have been inspired by ‘Saint-Simonianism understood in a very broad sense’. [34] Doubtless Kersausie was aware of such ideas, though Georges Duveau has argued that ‘great systems like those of Saint-Simon and Fourier … had little penetration in the republican societies’. The SDH did not have an homogeneous political orientation; as Alain Faure has pointed out, in the early 1830s republicanism and Bonapartism often overlapped, with demonstrations where the same people would chant ‘Long live Napoleon II!’ and ‘Long live the Republic!’ Where general political demands were popular among workers, it was often for economic reasons. Military intervention in Poland was popular among workers, not so much for reasons of abstract internationalism, as because war would provide a remedy to unemployment, by creating jobs in the army and war supplies. [35] Where political differentiations emerged, they were often over tactics rather than political philosophy. Thus after the collapse of the SDH, Raspail (and apparently Kersausie) drew the conclusion that open propaganda was what was required, while Blanqui saw the lesson as being the necessity for more effective military organisation. [36] There is no indication that they differed significantly on the type of social change at which they aimed.
One important political influence on Kersausie must, however, be mentioned, namely Filippo Buonarroti. Buonarroti had been one of the main leaders of Babeuf’s Conspiracy of Equals in 1796, and had stood trial alongside Babeuf at Vendôme in 1797. Babeuf’s place in the history of socialism is crucial, for he was the first to go beyond mere Utopian speculation about the possibility or desirability of a Communist society, and recognise the necessity for revolutionary organisation to achieve that end. [37] Alone of Babeuf’s associates, Buonarroti never forgot that principle, and until his death in 1837 he continued to try to build clandestine organisations. He spent many years in Geneva, seeking to coordinate such activity and working closely with the carbonari. In 1828, he published his history of Babeuf’s Conspiracy, a work which was widely studied in republican circles in the following years, and was to have a major influence on such diverse figures as Cabet, Bronterre O’Brien, Moses Hess, Marx and Engels. Though Buonarroti himself was more sympathetic to Robespierre than Babeuf had been, his history scrupulously reproduced the documentation that revealed the socialist nature of Babeuf’s intentions.
Buonarroti returned to France after the 1830 revolution. As Arthur Lehning records, he ‘participated actively in political propaganda and in the elaboration of the policies of the revolutionary wing of the republican opposition to the Orleanist monarchy, while preserving his secret international organisation and creating new ones, with constant attention to the possibilities of a European revolution’. [38]
His reputation was enormous. As one of the historians of babouvisme has put it, ‘he was regarded as the heir of the ideas of the great revolutionary age, as the apostle who possessed the true democratic tradition; as the high priest of a proscribed religion who was maintaining almost single-handed and in a mysterious refuge the sacred flame of Equality’. [39]
Buonarroti took a particular interest in the SDH, although Robiquet tells us he distrusted it because it was imprudent enough to recruit openly, rather than respecting the requirements of clandestine organisation. [40] But as Elizabeth Eisenstein has shown, basing herself on the researches of Armando Saitta, Buonarroti played a considerable rôle in the internal disputes of the SDH. His prestige was considerable – two of the 163 Parisian sectors of the SDH bore the name ‘Buonarroti’. She claims that the dispute between the Raspail and Lebon factions ‘was probably precipitated by Buonarroti’s attempt to exploit this key organisation for his own ends and that, after a temporary setback, he was eventually successful’.
In particular, Buonarroti seems to have been aligned with the faction in which Kersausie played a leading rôle. ‘By the end of 1833, Buonarroti obtained effective control through new elections which placed d’Argenson, Lebon, Kersausie and Vignerte on the renovated central committee of the original society.’ However, there does not seem to have been complete factional polarisation, since she assures us that Raspail was ‘a friend and admirer of Buonarroti’. [41] There is perhaps an echo of babouvisme in the Prospectus for Le Réformateur, where Raspail and Kersausie declare that their aim is ‘the happiness of all’ (le bonheur de tous), a phrase strikingly resembling the term which Babeuf coined to describe his socialist vision, ‘common happiness’ (le bonheur commun).
There is also a possible continuity with Babeuf to be observed in the various political trials of the 1830s. Buonarroti had stood trial alongside Babeuf at Vendôme for 14 weeks in 1797, when the defence had managed to turn the courtroom into a platform for their ideas, and succeeded in reducing the number of death sentences to two, and an acquittal for the majority of the defendants. [42]
In December 1833, Raspail, Kersausie and others stood trial in Paris – the so-called Trial of the Twenty-Seven. They used the trial as a platform for republican ideas, insulted the prosecution, and succeeded in getting the accused acquitted. [43] There was obviously an echo here of the Vendôme tactics, and the defendants probably received advice from Buonarroti. In May 1835, Kersausie was on trial again, together with others accused of participation in the insurrections of 1834 in Paris and Lyons. Some of the defendants succeeded in escaping from jail, but Kersausie refused to do so, regarding it as a duty to use the trial as a political platform. [44] There is a striking account of the opening day of the trial by Frances Trollope (mother of the novelist) who was in Paris at the time:
This interchange of hostilities commenced by some of the accused refusing to answer when their names were called – then followed a demand for free admission to the chamber, during the trials, for the mothers, wives and all other females belonging to the respective families of the prisoners – and next, a somewhat blustering demand for counsel of their own choosing; the body of legal advocates, who, by general rule and common usage, are always charged with the defence of prisoners, not containing, as it should seem, orators sufficiently of their own clique to content them.
This was of course stoutly refused by the court, after retiring, however, for a couple of hours to deliberate upon it – a ceremony I should hardly have supposed necessary. The company of the ladies, too, was declined; and as, upon a moderate computation, their numerical force could not have amounted to less than five hundred, this want of gallantry in the Peers of France must be forgiven in favour of their discretion.
The gentleman, however, who was appointed, as he said, by the rest, to request the pleasure of their society, declared loudly that the demand for it should be daily renewed …
Next came a demand from one of the accused, in the name of all the rest, that permission for free and unrestrained intercourse between the prisoners of Lyons, Paris, and Marseilles should be allowed. This was answered only by the announcement that ‘the court was adjourned;’ an intimation which produced an awful clamour; and as the peers quitted the court, they were assailed with vehement cries of ‘We protest! … We protest! … We will make no defence! … We protest! … We protest!’ [45]
The tactics here – refusal to give names, use of technicalities to delay proceedings, uproar in the dock, are highly reminiscent of the Vendôme trial, and it is easy to suppose that Buonarroti was providing tactical advice.
Thus we can be fairly certain that Kersausie knew Buonarroti, and that through him he was familiar with at least some of the basics of babouvisme. Kersausie thus provides a living link between the socialist conspiracy of 1796 and the workers’ insurrection of 1848.
So what was Kersausie’s actual rôle in 1848? The evidence is often rather thin, but certain points are fairly clear. Not surprisingly, Kersausie returned to Paris for the year of revolution. One account claims that at the time of the February Revolution, he was in prison in Naples, and that Raspail had to persuade the Provisional Government to send three ships to Naples to secure his release. [46] This may well be apocryphal. But certainly he retained his links with Raspail, and was soon active in the frenetic political debate between February and June.
This period saw the creation of large numbers of political clubs, and the Société des droits de l’homme was revived. A number of veterans from the republican left of the 1830s were still active, and Kersausie seems to have rapidly fitted into the political scene. In April, he was adopted as an election candidate by the Société républicaine centrale on a list that also included Albert, Louis Blanc, Flocon, Cabet, Raspail and Blanqui, although he was not elected. [47] At the end of May, he was placed on the Central Commission for Democratic Elections, a body dominated by the SDH. [48]
On 15 May, a massive popular demonstration invaded the National Assembly, an event which led to the arrest of a number of the best-known left-wing leaders. Raspail was present and was one of those arrested, although he seems to have been very unenthusiastic about the event and to have tried to urge the demonstrators to leave the building. [49] Raspail then went to the home of his son, but finding him out, went to visit Kersausie, who lived in the same building. It was at Kersausie’s home that he was arrested. [50] This tells us that Kersausie and Raspail were still closely connected; it also suggests that Kersausie did not participate in the demonstration. Whether this was because he recognised that the events were liable to give the government the ideal excuse to deprive the left of its leadership, we cannot know. [51]
At the beginning of June, by-elections were held for the National Assembly. The left, now rather better organised, presented a list of 11 candidates. This included Proudhon, Raspail, Cabet and Kersausie. These were described as ‘candidates of the people, adopted by the workers’ Corporations, the National Workshops, the Republican and Mobile Guard [52] and the united democratic clubs’. [53] The results were reasonably satisfactory for the left; the same newspaper described the votes for Proudhon, Thoré, Raspail and Kersausie as ‘the social republic at the doors of the assembly; it is knocking there, so to speak, and makes reaction go pale on the benches …’ [54] In fact four of the list were elected – Caussidière, Leroux, Lagrange and Proudhon. Kersausie, with 71,852 votes, came in third place behind Proudhon, the successful candidate with the lowest number of votes. [55] It is clear from this that Kersausie was a well-known and popular figure of the republican left, and that he stood on the same list as socialists such as Proudhon and Cabet.
As far as the June Days themselves are concerned, there is disappointingly little trace of Kersausie. His name does not appear in the great majority of eye-witness accounts that I have consulted. Of course, there are obvious reasons for this. Given the decentralised and often chaotic nature of the rising, participants can generally have had little idea of what was happening in sectors other than their own. In view of the repression, contemporary writers would be unwilling to name those who took a leading rôle. The one eye-witness account, written by a Christian liberal, which mentions Kersausie’s name, suggests he was absent from the fighting: ‘An insurgent asked an agitator why Lagrange and Kersausie were not in their ranks. This man replied that they loved the people too much too allow them to expose their life and liberty in an insurrection.’ [56]
But Trévédy, who used family sources, and is extremely unlikely to have read Engels, insists that Kersausie did fight in the June insurrection, a claim that is more convincing in that he doubtless regarded this as a blot on his hero’s record. [57]
After the June rising had been suppressed, the government immediately launched a major enquiry into the causes of the insurrection. Obviously the aim was to find the ‘agitators’ who had been behind it, and to provide grounds for prosecuting the government’s enemies. The full report ran to three volumes, a total of 967 pages. The pièces justificatives included many interviews, formal minutes and reports from informers on what had been said in limonadiers’ shops, etc. Louis Blanc and Caussidière were given extensive treatment, in an attempt to establish their guilt.
Kersausie’s name occurs a handful of times in the report, and it is obvious that although the authors would have liked to find evidence against him, it was not sufficient to arrest him. (Of course, many workers were arrested and even put to death on the flimsiest of charges, but the authorities were obviously aware that it was necessary to get it right with a man like Kersausie, given his reputation, his family connections and his previous record of using trials as a platform.)
So it is reported that as early as April lists of names for a new government of public safety were being drawn up, including Kersausie. M. Carteret, of the Ministry of the Interior, reported that the Société des droits de l’homme had played a rôle in the events of 15 May. It was rumoured to have 20,000 armed members, but this was said to be an exaggeration. Later, M. Panisse of the police was questioned as to whether Kersausie had become president of the SDH, but he professed ignorance. M. Rocher from Brittany was questioned as to his financial dealings with Kersausie. M. Trouve-Chauvel, also of the police, was questioned on 3 and 4 July as to whether Kersausie – said to have had less brains than Esquiros – had been arrested, but it transpired that he had not.
A document from the préfet de police claimed that the SDH had played a major rôle in the insurrection, and that a large number of its members had been killed or arrested. Documents from the SDH were reproduced, including membership conditions which imposed strict military discipline, and a report of a meeting on 30 April in which a speaker was applauded when he put forward the ideas of Louis Blanc and advocated the equality of wages. Two documents signed by Kersausie were also reproduced: an address to Barbès from members of the bureau of the Club de la révolution, and the text of the règlement of the Société des représentants républicains. [58]
In short, it appears clear that the Commission d’enquête would have quite liked to show that Kersausie was guilty of something, but was unable to pin anything on him, although the likelihood is that, through the SDH, he did give active support to the insurrection.
Engels was also clearly wrong in his claim that Kersausie had been arrested and probably executed. Kersausie remained in Paris, at liberty, until the following year. He was probably involved in the demonstration of 13 June 1849 [59], and his name appeared on a note allegedly written by Charles Delescluze in June 1849. [60] At this point, he seems to have decided that the game was up, and he left the country; he was tried and sentenced in absentia for his rôle in June 1849. [61] We have only the most vague indications of the rest of his life. He is said to have fled to London with Delescluze, the future communard, and others, and later to have lived in Switzerland under the pseudonym of Quercy. [62] He appears to have kept contact with the international revolutionary movement; Trévédy expresses deep shock at the fact that he apparently presented Garibaldi with the sword of honour belonging to his great uncle La Tour d’Auvergne. Garibaldi accepted it ‘as a sign of the sympathy of humanitarian France for the oppressed nationalities’. Trévédy was clearly outraged that a family heirloom should have been treated in this way. [63]
The last description we have of the veteran revolutionary is in a letter by Proudhon, writing from Brussels on 4 February 1860. He recounts having seen Kersausie for the first time in 12 years. He describes him as ‘a thin, bent little old man, already rambling; the poor fellow is over 60’, and notes that Kersausie urged him not to attack Napoleon III at the present time. Proudhon describes him as ‘another ruin’, but concludes that ‘at least we have the satisfaction of telling ourselves that this one is quite full of hope and not depressed’. [64] He died, still in exile, on 24 August 1874. [65]
Thus there is no doubt that Kersausie was actively involved in the events of 1848. Whether his politics were more clearly defined than they had been in the 1830s is much harder to establish. Some sources refer to him as a socialist, but it is hard to define exactly what sense the word had. As we have seen, the ideas of Louis Blanc were current in the SDH, but it would be difficult to describe it as a socialist organisation.
Perhaps some indications of Kersausie’s political milieu can be obtained from examining one of the short-lived radical newspapers which supported his election campaign in 1848. L’Aimable faubourien (The Likeable Suburb-Dweller) [66] took its name from an ironic reference to a phrase of Louis-Philippe’s about the Paris suburbs, that is, the main working-class districts (notably those to the east of the city which were the main theatre of the June rising). It was subtitled ‘Journal de la canaille’ (Paper of the Rabble), and cost five centimes (a sou) per issue (workers in the ateliers nationaux got 23 sous per day).
An editorial in the first issue states: ‘We are socialist republicans, and that is why we shall vote for socialist republicans.’ [67] A later issue declared that ‘we fully approve of the plan for an Exchange Bank proposed and developed by citizen Proudhon’. [68] It followed closely the situation in the ateliers nationaux, carrying a letter from an unemployed cabinet maker complaining of poor management in the ateliers and warning of the danger of closure. [69] Interestingly, it published a report on the little-discussed subject of the women’s ateliers, showing that it was not afflicted by the misogyny that characterised so much of the French republican left in the nineteenth (and twentieth) centuries. It should be recalled that the men’s ateliers did elect low-level officers:
The following fact has been reported to us: A large number of women workers, when putting their names down at the mairie of the tenth arrondissement, had demanded the right to choose and elect their leaders, arguing that in other ateliers, leaders brought in from convents had stirred up disorder by their unfraternal conduct. The right was granted. As a result, last Monday, these women went to the premises where they were to work, in order to immediately get down to the choice of leaders. The election was just about concluded, when MR …, sent by citizen Pagnerre, burst into the room and had the women occupying it driven out in order to replace them with nuns. [70]
But the most striking feature of L’Aimable faubourien was the editorial which appeared on the front page of the first issue under the heading To the People, and clearly prepared the ground for the rising three weeks later. This immediately preceded the item on elections cited above:
O people of the likeable suburbs! You who know how many generous hearts beat in the sturdy breasts of your children, how many noble minds shine out from behind the burnished foreheads of your sons – O people, do you know where you are being led, do you know? Do you know what trap they want to make you fall into? Do you know what plots are being hatched in the shadows against your liberties, heroic people of the barricades? No, you don’t know! You who suffer, to live in hope, like all those who suffer! You are counting on better days, and calm as strength, steady as righteousness, you await the future which will put right so many evil days, the future dreamt of by your poets and proclaimed by your prophets!
You are waiting! And you have deserted your gun in favour of your work tools! Your gun! O! Hide it, for today, when the law against suspects has been decreed, you might be taken for a conspirator! Hide it, but all the same don’t let it out of your sight, so that at the first signal it will be held in your virile hands!
For your nine hundred representatives, O people, are preparing for you a surprise which you don’t expect! The assembly is pregnant with plans for reform, and it will give birth to a hoax! Yes, the word is written, and I shall not cross it out. The February Revolution, like her sister the July Revolution, is a revolution which has been STOLEN! [71]
These sentiments may not have precisely echoed Kersausie’s own, but they reflected those of the people campaigning for his electoral success.
As far as the leadership of the actual insurrection is concerned, we have already seen that Engels’ claims are unsupported, and that there is no evidence of any leading rôle played by Kersausie. Most contemporary accounts and subsequent historical analyses agree with Albert Soboul that ‘Whatever may have been the rôle played by the secret societies, especially that called “The Rights of Man”, the insurrection had no overall leadership.’ [72] But this does not mean that there was no leadership on a political or military level. One late twentieth-century historian, surveying the evidence, concludes in agnostic terms:
Whether the June days were preceded by a systematic consideration of military and political strategy by which the revolutionaries hoped to seize power is a question as obscure today as it was in 1848. It is difficult to believe that no one talked about the prospects of a revolution that everyone felt to be coming. The Union of Brigadiers of the National Workshops, who emerged as genuine spokesmen for the workers on relief, or the paramilitary Society of the Rights of Man must at least have weighed alternatives … There is no solid evidence pointing to overall planning or to its prerequisite, the existence of a disciplined, hierarchical revolutionary organisation with a devoted mass following. In 1848 we know of no Bolshevik party plotting an October Revolution …
The apparent absence of any master plan did not preclude tactical preparation for the expected showdown. When, where and how the insurrection would break out might remain unpredictable, but anyone could foresee some down-to-earth, practical problems. The democratised Paris National Guard had handed a rifle to every able-bodied man, but the rifle was unloaded. Bullets and cartridges were stored in district municipal armouries. On this level, preparations did take place, though we know less about them than we would like. [73]
Certainly the main radical leaders had been arrested after 15 May, but many second-rank figures – including Kersausie – remained at liberty. As François Pardigon, a participant in the insurrection, put it:
The June insurrection was carried out, it is true, without overall plan, without conspiracy in the full sense of the term, without general staff, but it was not carried out without the people working on by itself, without prior agreement. [74]
Obviously some reference should be made to Louis Ferdinand Pujol, the worker from the ateliers nationaux who first urged and inspired his fellow-workers to resist, and who is said to have called for the building of the first barricade, near the porte Saint-Denis. [75] Pujol is a strange figure; having been a seminarist, he listed his profession as ‘merchant’ (négociant). [76]
But Pujol seems to have played little part in organising the actual fighting, and individuals are difficult to identify; for obvious reasons, those who knew the names of those who had played a leading rôle were not going to make such information public. Victor Marouck, a former communard, gives the fullest list of names in his history of the June Days published in 1880, when the danger of repression was well past. He gives around a dozen names, and assigns each to the particular street in which he was responsible for the barricades. The names are of largely unknown figures, and there is no independent corroboration of his account. [77] Dommanget has identified a certain number of blanquistes who played a leading rôle in the insurrection, notably the former naval officer Paul de Flotte. [78]
Certainly there was no lack of military leadership among the insurgent workers. As Charles Schmidt has pointed out, there was experience enough of barricade building among the Paris workers. Most would have been involved with the barricades that went up only four months earlier, in the February Revolution; quite a few would have memories of 1830, only 18 years earlier. [79] And as de Tocqueville pointed out, half the workers of Paris had done military service, and would be able to put their training at the service of the insurrection. [80]
But if it is true that a military leadership emerged in the course of struggle, it is also the case that the insurrection revealed genuine mass involvement. Thousands of workers and their families contributed their skills and ingenuity to the cause of their class. Lead characters from printworks were melted down to make bullets; pharmacists were recruited to manufacture gunpowder. In one factory in the faubourg du Temple, a cannon was manufactured in the course of the insurrection; local women and children threw damp sand over it to cool the metal more quickly. [81] Women smuggled munitions from one area to another concealed under their clothes, passing themselves off as pregnant. [82] Such initiative could not have been the product of a single master-plan; it was evidence of the creativity manifested by working people when they sense the possibility of their liberation.
As for Engels’ criticism that the insurrection should have aimed to capture the Hôtel de Ville, it seems clear that there was no central coordination that could have set itself such a goal. However, the marquis of Normanby, the British Ambassador to Paris, reported that such a capture was seriously feared by the government; at 8.30am on 24 June, the Assemblée Nationale was warned that the Hôtel de Ville could fall within an hour, and that this outcome was narrowly averted later that morning. [83]
It is clear, then, that the June insurrection was not the product of a centralised individual leadership; but nor was it simply the fruit of spontaneity. There was a complex pattern of local leadership of which we still know relatively little. The question remains: why did Engels attribute such importance to the figure of Kersausie?
First of all, it is clear that Engels had reservations about the information. This is clear from two sentences in the original German of the article: ‘Der Schlachtplan der Arbeiter, der von Kersausie, einem Freund Raspails und ehemaligem Offizier, gemacht sein soll, war folgender.’ Here the verb sollen has the sense of ‘is said to’ or ‘is reported to’ (equivalent to the French use of the conditional); Engels is conveying reports he has heard, rather than guaranteeing their truthfulness. The second reads: ‘Kersausie ist gefangen und in diesem Augenblick wohl schon erschossen.’ Again the use of wohl – probably – indicates that Engels does not guarantee the accuracy of the reports he is quoting. [84]
But what were Engels’ sources? Although the fighting in Paris had initially delayed the arrival of French newspapers (which normally arrived in Cologne on the evening of the day following publication), by the time the article on Kersausie was written, Engels had studied reports of the insurrection in the French, German, Belgian and English press. On the same day that he began the article on Kersausie, Engels published a devastating attack on the Kölnische Zeitung’s account of the insurrection, comparing it to reports published in the French press. [85] But it is unlikely that Engels gleaned any information about Kersausie’s rôle from the public press. A more likely source is private correspondence. Again, we know that Engels expected to receive correspondence from Paris on a daily basis, and that this correspondence was disrupted at the outbreak of the insurrection. [86] Engels had spent much time in Paris in the 1840s, most recently in the autumn of 1847 and the early months of 1848. He had been in contact with a number of well-known figures on the French left – Blanc, Flocon, Cabet, Imbert – as well, doubtless, as with many lesser-known individuals, both from the French left and in the German community. [87] Correspondence from Paris doubtless reflected the various rumours that were rife during and immediately after the insurrection. [88]
It is also important to remember that when Engels wrote his article, he believed that Kersausie was probably dead, and therefore judged that it could do no harm to name him as the leader of the insurrection. We may presume that if he learnt subsequently that Kersausie was not only alive but not yet arrested, he would have decided that fraternal prudence dictated that he should omit further reference to his name.
More interesting, however, than Engels’ possible sources is the question of the political reasons that led him to write the article. Whatever reports he may have received, it is significant that Engels seized upon the alleged leading rôle of Kersausie because he was grappling with certain problems about the nature of revolutionary leadership. These may be illuminated by comparing Engels’ account of the June days with those of Blanqui and Karl Marx.
In 1849, Blanqui wrote a short article entitled Military Lessons of the Street Warfare in 1848. [89] This is in many ways a remarkable document. Blanqui was, of course, in jail during the insurrection, but he had clearly received detailed reports from members of his organisation, and he set out to examine the causes of the defeat.
He began by arguing that in 1830 it had been possible for spontaneous ‘élan populaire’, without organisation, to overthrow the Bourbons. Since then, however, the ruling class had learnt from experience much more than the popular forces. Indeed, he claimed, the February Revolution had been a lucky ‘fluke’; if Louis-Philippe had seriously tried to defend himself, he could have stayed in power.
In June, the government had been in disarray, and the workers ‘almost certain of victory’. Why had they lost? Blanqui’s answer was simple – ‘for lack of organisation’. Thus barricades had been put up at random, often in the wrong places, and with no overall plan. Of the 600 barricades built in June, only 30 had been serious obstacles to the enemy; most of the rest had been taken without a shot being fired.
The overall weakness was summed up for Blanqui in the phrase: ‘No general command, hence no leadership.’ There was little communication between one barricade and the next, and poor discipline. Those defending the barricades came and went as they felt like it, and at night went home to bed, leaving inadequate forces to resist any attack.
Blanqui saw it as a weakness that insurgents fought in their own quarters, and hence were much more liable to denunciation after defeat. He thus gave little or no importance to the fact that the insurrection was deeply rooted in the local communities. He regarded grenades as inferior weapons which wasted gunpowder and did little more damage than cobble-stones.
In civil conflicts, Blanqui argued, the people had an enormous advantage over the army. The professional soldiers fought reluctantly, only kept going ‘by constraint and brandy’. The popular forces were superior morally, intellectually and even physically. But for victory ‘they need organisation. Without it they have no chance. Organisation is victory, dispersion is death.’
Blanqui’s analysis stressed military factors, as opposed to social and political ones, but it represented a serious attempt to analyse the causes of defeat. Interestingly, Blanqui’s position began from assumptions quite opposite to those of Engels, and yet in a sense they converged. For Blanqui there was no overall plan, hence the workers lost. Engels too saw the overall plan as crucial, but he asserted that it had existed, and the workers had lost despite its presence, not because of its absence.
Marx’s writings at the time of the insurrection are less detailed than Engels’, and at times descend into a strange triumphalism. On 26 June, he wrote:
Paris bathed in blood; the insurrection growing into the greatest revolution that has ever taken place, into a revolution of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie. Three days which sufficed for the July revolution and the February revolution are insufficient for the colossal contours of this June revolution, but the victory of the people is more certain then ever. [90]
Marx’s strength is, of course, the recognition of the significance of the June days as the first independent rising of the proletariat, but in terms of the concrete circumstances of the rising it is less than adequate. His longer analysis, The June Revolution, written on 28 June, is in some ways even worse:
The workers of Paris were overwhelmed by superior strength, but they were not subdued. They have been defeated but their enemies are vanquished. The momentary triumph of brute force has been purchased with the destruction of all the delusions and illusions of the February revolution, the dissolution of the entire moderate republican party and the division of the French nation into two nations, the nation of owners and the nation of workers. [91]
It would obviously be too harsh to compare this to the way that the German Communist Party saw Hitler’s victory as a step forward for the working class; but there is certainly a dangerous triumphalism which fails to recognise that the French working class had suffered a defeat from which it would not recover for 20 years.
When Marx returned to the subject in 1850 in one of his finest historical writings, The Class Struggles in France, he took a rather detached view. The question of proletarian organisation was left aside, for now Marx simply assumed that it had been non-existent:
It is well known how the workers, with unexampled bravery and ingenuity, without leaders, without a common plan, without means and, for the most part, lacking weapons, held in check for five days the army, the Mobile Guard, the Paris National Guard, and the National Guard that streamed in from the provinces.
But in Marx’s revised analysis, the question of organisation is in any case of little relevance, since the defeat of the workers is now seen as inevitable:
The Paris proletariat was forced into the June insurrection by the bourgeoisie. This sufficed to mark its doom. Its immediate, avowed needs did not drive it to engage in a fight for the forcible overthrow of the bourgeoisie, nor was it equal to the task. [92]
In 1895, the year of his death, Engels returned once again to the experience of 1848 in writing a new introduction to Marx’s Class Struggles in France. As an honest revolutionary, Engels made no attempt to claim consistency with his earlier writings. In 1848, he and Marx had been too absorbed in the day-to-day course of political events to analyse the more long-term economic context. As a result: ‘History has proved us wrong, and all who thought like us. It had made it clear that the state of economic development on the Continent at that time was not, by a long way, ripe for the elimination of capitalist production …’ [93]
Engels reassessed the military aspects of 1848, arguing that developments in the subsequent period meant that the specific tactics of 1848 were of declining relevance. Already in 1849 ‘the barricade had lost its magic’. [94] In the context of such a major re-evaluation, the detailed contribution of Kersausie must have seemed of little or no importance.
But in the summer of 1848, Engels’ priorities were very different. Bernard Moss has argued that between 1848 and 1850 Marx and Engels turned to a more ‘sectarian and ultra-revolutionary position’. [95] There is an element of truth in this, but the turn must be seen in the context of the changing situation. In June 1848, the revolutionary process in Europe was still advancing, and it was the duty of all revolutionaries to encourage that advance; only when the movement was defeated would it be time to analyse the causes for failure.
During and immediately after the June insurrection, there was a flood of slanders from the right, and from sections of the left, accusing the workers of Paris of having been misled by outside agitators and bribed by foreign money. The Leipzig paper Der Leuchtturm, more than 50 years before the Bolshevik Revolution, blamed the rising on ‘Russian gold’. [96] In Cologne itself, the Kölnische Zeitung spread and exaggerated French reports of sums of money found on the insurgents. [97] In France, even more bizarre reports circulated. Marouck tells us that a journal called Le Lampion claimed that on the corpse of one insurgent had been found a ticket bearing the words ‘This entitles the bearer to three ladies from the faubourg Saint-Germain.’ (Marouck, who was not free of the prejudices of the Republican milieu, retorted that socialist men were happy with their own womenfolk and did not want ‘noble ladies … gangrenous with the practices of Lesbos’.) [98]
The Marquis of Normanby reported a speech in the National Assembly, where Ferdinand Flocon, now Minister of Agriculture (who had discussed cordially with Engels the previous October) [99], blamed the uprising on money from neighbouring countries (a charge that Normanby, as British Ambassador, was anxious to deny). [100] The same theme, of conspiratorial agitation against the government, ran through the report of the official enquiry into the rising.
Obviously it was the duty of revolutionaries to refute such charges, and to show that the rising had its causes in the social oppression of working people. In the same issue of Neue Rheinische Zeitung as the first part of the Kersausie article, Engels published a reply to the accusations of the Kölnische Zeitung. Here he quoted in support M. Payer, a conservative member of the National Assembly who had spent 12 hours as a prisoner among the insurgents: ‘Most of them were workers who had been driven to desperation by four months of misery. They said: Better to die of a bullet than of starvation!’ [101]
But though this was an important argument for the left to carry, it was not sufficient. Indeed, some of the intelligent representatives of the right – those concerned to understand, rather than to make a political point – recognised that the rising had its roots in social conditions and not in foreign agitators. Alexis de Tocqueville wrote: ‘… this formidable insurrection was not the undertaking of a small number of conspirators, but the uprising of one whole population against another. The women took part just as much as the men.’ [102]
Engels was well aware that the invocation of ‘spontaneity’ did not resolve the very real problems of revolutionary leadership. Indeed, earlier that year in Cologne he had observed the sad results of excessive reliance on spontaneity. On 3 March, a demonstration called by the Communist League at the Cologne Town Hall had been dispersed by troops and its leaders arrested; as Engels lamented in a letter to Marx:
It’s a bad business in Cologne. Our three best men are in jug. I have been speaking to someone who took an active part in the business. They wanted to go into the attack, but instead of supplying themselves with weapons, which were easily obtainable, they went to the town hall unarmed and let themselves be surrounded. It is said that most of the troops were on their side. The thing was initiated without rhyme or reason; if the chap’s reports are to be believed, they could very well have gone into the attack and in two hours all would have been over. But everything was organised with appalling stupidity. [103]
For Engels, the question of revolutionary leadership went beyond the abstract dichotomy of ‘outside agitators’ or ‘spontaneity’. So, on the basis of some tenuous report from Paris – and it must have pretty tenuous, for it did not surface anywhere else – Engels seems to have made Kersausie into the centralising leadership which he recognised the insurrection needed. Kersausie thus became a composite symbolic representation of missing revolutionary leadership. Indeed, had Kersausie not existed, Engels might have found it necessary to invent him. The Kersausie article is bad history, but good politics.
Kersausie fitted the bill in two respects. Firstly, he was a veteran of the opposition to the July monarchy. He was a republican, an internationalist, and in some sense a socialist. He had supported the 1830 revolution, had participated in both the secret societies and the radical press of the 1830s, and had associated with the most left-wing currents in the Second Republic. Through his connection with Buonarroti he was linked to a revolutionary line that stretched back to Jacobinism and to Babeuf. Hence he came to symbolise the necessity for revolutionary organisation to be implanted well in advance of the revolutionary upsurge.
Secondly, Kersausie was a military man. He had served, with conspicuous success, under the Bourbons before 1830. Engels had a lifelong interest in military questions [104], and he recognised the need for the insurgent working class to take military questions seriously. Whatever the relations of class forces, workers needed to have guns at the right time, and guns with bullets in them. If they were to challenge the power of the ruling class, workers needed to draw on the best and most advanced military knowledge. In this sense, Kersausie became a symbolic forerunner of the Tsarist officers whom Trotsky drew into the Red Army with the justification: ‘As industry needs engineers, as farming needs qualified agronomists, so military specialists are indispensable to defence.’ [105]
Engels gave importance to the rôle of an individual in the June Days because he saw it as a situation when history was on a knife edge. His formulations from this period are both optimistic and voluntaristic: ‘The insurgents … would have triumphed had they used the same violent means as were employed by the bourgeoisie … The Paris workers … were within a hairbreadth of victory … The mobile guard … needed but a slight impetus to make them go over to their side.’ (Later historians have been particularly critical of this belief that the mobile guard might have changed sides.) [106]
Bernard Moss claims that ‘Engels’ work is marked by a dichotomy between an overarching historical determinism and instances of political voluntarism’. [107] This is a much better way of putting it than the common but implausible attempt to juxtapose Engels’ alleged determinism to Marx’s ‘humanism’. [108] But in fact Engels did not see determinism and voluntarism as a dichotomy. Rather, he recognised that history was made by social forces that transcended individuals; unlike Blanqui, he did not believe that a small group could impose its will on history. But at certain historical turning points, Engels realised that individual intervention could tip the balance and decide between two possible futures. Hence the importance attributed to the symbolic figure of Kersausie.
As Lenin wrote in December 1906, when the revolutionary wave of 1905 was ebbing: ‘The Marxist is the last to leave the path of directly revolutionary struggle, he leaves it only when all possibilities have been exhausted, when there is not a shadow of hope for a shorter way …’ [109]
In the same spirit, Engels clung to the hope of victory in 1848 until all possibility of success had passed. It is easy to criticise his voluntarism in retrospect, but the problem of when to give priority to activism and when to analysis has always been a difficult one. [110]
We do Engels no service by failing to criticise his mistakes. His article on Kersausie was historically false, and it should be recognised as such. Only by such criticism can we begin to appreciate Engels’ real insights, his recognition of the necessity for effective political and military organisation. Engels had many differences with Blanqui, but when the latter wrote ‘Organisation is victory’, Engels would not have disputed its applicability to the June Days. It remains true today.

Notes
1. This paper was originally presented to a conference organised in Manchester in September 1998 by the Northern Marxist Historians’ Group to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the 1848 revolutions.
2. F. Pardigon, Episodes des journées de juin 1848, London and Brussels 1852, p. 64.
3. I use this phrase to include both artisans and proletarians in the strict sense. Both groups were involved in the rising; the proportions remain a matter of historical debate.
4. K. Marx and F. Engels, Collected Works, London and Moscow 1975ff., Volume 7, p. 147.
5. T. Carver, Friedrich Engels, Basingstoke and London 1991, p. 223.
6. A. Cornu, Karl Marx et la révolution de 1848, Paris 1948, p. 27.
7. G. Mayer, Friedrich Engels in seiner Frühzeit, Berlin 1920, p. 323.
8. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 7, pp. 157–164.
9. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 7, pp. 157, 158, 164.
10. I make no claim, obviously, to have consulted more than a tiny fraction of the vast literature on 1848. But I have tried to look at the main eye-witness accounts and the most recent historical syntheses in English and French.
11. K. Marx and F. Engels, Articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 1848–49, London, 1972.
12. Le Militant Rouge, no. 1, November 1925, pp. 14–20.
13. K. Marx, Les Luttes de classes en France (1848–1850) suivi de Les Journées de juin 1848 par Friedrich Engels, Paris, 1967; K. Marx and F. Engels, La Nouvelle Gazette rhénane, tome 1 (ed. Lucienne Netter, Paris 1963), p. 481. It can also been found in various other anthologies, such as Antimilitarisme et révolution (ed. A. Brossat and J.-Y. Potel, Paris 1975), Volume 1, and F. Engels, Théorie de la violence (ed. G Mury, Paris 1972). Neither the former, of Trotskyist inspiration, nor the latter, edited on Maoist principles, offers any attempt to explain Kersausie’s rôle.
14. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 7, pp xx-xxi, 620, 666.
15. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 27, pp. 529, 634, 642.
16. Great Soviet Encyclopaedia, English version, New York and London 1976, third edition, Volume 12, p. 424.
17. M. Dommanget, Auguste Blanqui et la révolution de 1848, Paris and The Hague 1972, p. 199.
18. B.H. Moss, Marx and Engels on French Social Democracy: Historians or Revolutionaries?, Journal of the History of Ideas, Volume 46, no. 4, October–December 1985, pp. 539–57.
19. J. Maitron (ed.), Dictionnaire biographique du mouvement ouvrier français, Paris 1964ff., tome 2, p. 319. Note that the entry is given for the name Guillard de Kersausie and appears under the letter G.
20. J. Trévédy, La Famille Limon du Timeur, Bulletin de la société archéologique du Finistère, tome 33, 1906, pp. 222–46.
21. X. Raspail, La Vie et l’oeuvre scientifique de F.-V. Raspail, Paris 1926, p. 43.
22. See B.H. Moss, Parisian Workers and the Origins of Republican Socialism, 1830–1833, in J.M. Merriman (ed.), 1830 in France, New York and London 1975, pp. 203–21.
23. Alain Faure, Mouvements populaires et mouvement ouvrier à Paris (1830–1834), Le Mouvement social, no. 88, July–September 1974, pp. 51–92.
24. On the dispute in the SDH, see Faure, op. cit.; Moss, Parisian Workers …, op. cit.; G. Sencier, Le Babouvisme après Babeuf, Paris 1912, pp. 52–61.
25. F.-V. Raspail, Lettres sur les prisons de Paris, two volumes, Paris 1839.
26. F.-V. Raspail, De la Pologne sur les bords de la Vistule et dans l’émigration, Paris 1839, p. 7.
27. J. Wogue, Raspail, Paris 1939, p. 50.
28. F.-V. Raspail, De la Pologne …, op. cit., pp. 1–2.
29. E. de Mirecourt, Raspail, Paris 1869, p. 27.
30. De Mirecourt, op. cit., p. 52.
31. Maitron, op. cit., p. 319.
32. Cited J. Godechot, Un jury pour la révolution, Paris 1974, p. 245.
33. M. Agulhon, editor’s introduction to Martin Nadaud, Mémoires de Léonard, Paris 1976, p. 28.
34. Maitron, op. cit., p. 319.
35. Faure, op. cit., pp. 74–6.
36. See L.-A. Blanqui, Oeuvres, ed. D. Le Nuz, Nancy 1993, Volume 1, p. 246.
37. See I.H. Birchall, The Spectre of Babeuf, Basingstoke and London 1997.
38. A. Lehning, De Buonarroti à Bakounine, Paris 1977, p. 76.
39. P. Robiquet, Buonarroti et la secte des égaux, Paris 1910, p. 87.
40. Robiquet, op. cit., pp. 220–1; Buonarroti doubtless remembered that Babeuf’s conspiracy had been betrayed by the traitor Grisel, who was allowed easy access to the secret directory.
41. E.L. Eisenstein, The First Professional Revolutionist, Cambridge 1959, pp. 101, 122–4.
42. See the complete stenographic record in Débats du procès instruit par la Haute-Cour de Justice contre Drouet, Baboeuf et autres, Paris 1797, four volumes, or for a brief account, I.H. Birchall, The Vendôme Defence Strategy, British Journal for Eighteenth-Century Studies, Volume 20, no. 2, Autumn 1997, pp. 141–53.
43. G. Perreux, Au Temps des sociétés secrètes, Paris 1931, p. 320.
44. J. Lucas-Dubreton, Louis-Philippe et la machine infernale, Paris 1951, p. 223.
45. F. Trollope, Paris and the Parisians in 1835, London 1836, Volume 1, pp. 141–3.
46. De Mirecourt, op. cit., p. 27.
47. Dommanget, op. cit., p. 144.
48. P.H. Amann, Revolution and Mass Democracy, Princeton NJ 1975, p. 256.
49. L. Ménard, Prologue d’une révolution, Paris 1849, p. 157.
50. Assemblée Nationale, Rapport de la Commission d’enquête sur l’insurrection qui a éclaté dans la journée du 23 juin …, Paris 1848, Volume 1, p. 67.
51. For the not at all implausible argument that 15 May saw the success of a plan designed to facilitate the arrest of the main leaders of the left, see H. Guillemin, La première résurrection de la république, Paris 1967, pp. 327–52.
52. Before the June Days, many observers thought the garde mobile would take the side of the workers; in fact they helped to suppress the rising, which makes this list rather contradictory. See P. Caspard, Aspects de la lutte des classes en 1848; le recrutement de la garde nationale mobile, Revue historique, no. 511, July–September 1974, pp. 81–106.
53. L’Aimable faubourien, no. 2, 4–8 June 1848, p. 1.
54. L’Aimable faubourien, no. 4, 11–15 June 1848, p. 1.
55. S. Wassermann, Les Clubs de Barbès et de Blanqui en 1848, Paris 1913, p. 205; Maitron, op. cit., p. 319.
56. Journées de juin – 1848 écrites devant et derrière les barricades par des témoins oculaires, Paris n.d., pp. 56–7.
57. Trévédy, op. cit., p. 243.
58. Rapport de la Commission d’enquête sur l’insurrection …, Volume 1, pp. 16, 253, 332, 343, 359–61, Volume 2, pp. 84, 105, 94–5, 255–7.
59. Trévédy, op. cit., p. 243.
60. Marcel Dessal, Charles Delescluze (1809–1871), Paris 1952, p. 139.
61. Trévédy, op. cit., p. 243; Maitron, op. cit., p. 319.
62. A. Saint-Ferréol, Les Proscrits français en Belgique, Brussels 1870, Volume 1, p. 47, Volume 2, p. 19.
63. Trévédy, op. cit., pp. 243–4.
64. P.-J. Proudhon, Lettres au citoyen Rolland, Paris 1946, pp. 44–5.
65. Trévédy, op. cit., p. 243.
66. This appeared twice a week, from 1 June 1848 onwards; each issue consisted of a single two-sided sheet. E. Hatin, Bibliographie historique et critique de la presse périodique française, Paris 1866, p. 462, says seven issues appeared, but the British Library at Colindale has only numbers 1–5, covering the period of 1–18 June.
67. L’Aimable faubourien, no. 1, 1–4 June 1848, p. 1.
68. L’Aimable faubourien, no. 4, 11–15 June 1848, p. 2.
69. L’Aimable faubourien, no. 2, 4–8 June 1848, p. 1.
70. L’Aimable faubourien, no. 4, 11–15 June 1848, p. 1.
71. L’Aimable faubourien, no. 1, 1–4 June, 1848, p. 1
72. A. Soboul, The French Revolution of 1848, London 1948, p. 32.
73. Amann, op. cit., pp. 298-9.
74. Pardigon, op. cit., p. 69.
75. D. Stern, Les Journées de juin 1848, Oxford 1907, p. 125.
76. M. Traugott, Armies of the Poor, Princeton NJ 1985, p. 249. According to Dommanget (op. cit., pp. 194-5), his conduct after his arrest was highly questionable. He later served as a colonel on the Northern side in the US Civil War (Maitron, op. cit., Volume 3, 1966, pp. 263–4).
77. V. Marouck, Juin 1848, Paris 1880, pp. 36–7.
78. Dommanget, op. cit., p. 195.
79. C. Schmidt, Des Ateliers nationaux aux barricades de juin, Paris 1948, pp. 44–5.
80. A. de Tocqueville, Souvenirs, Paris 1893, p. 209.
81. C. Schmidt, Les Journées de juin 1848, Paris 1926, p. 70.
82. Marquis de Normanby, Une Année de révolution, Volume 2, Paris 1858, pp. 110–11.
83. Normanby, op. cit., pp. 103, 108.
84. H. Neef, Vier Tage rote Fahnen in den Strassen von Paris, Berlin 1983, pp. 91, 100 (my emphasis – IHB).
85. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 7, pp. 121, 123, 135, 150–6, etc.
86. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 38, pp. 121, 123.
87. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 7, pp. 8; Volume 38, pp. 152, 156, 169, etc.
88. Schmidt, Les Journées de juin 1848, op. cit., p. 113.
89. L.A. Blanqui, Les enseignements militaires de la guerre de rues en 1848, Le Militant rouge, no. 11, November 1926, pp. 242–5. This text should be used with some care. As pointed out by Dommanget (op. cit., p. 197), it was subjected to later revisions. The text as published contains a reference to the chassepot rifle, introduced to the French army only in 1866 (I am grateful to Edward Crawford for pointing this out). But the general line of argument represents Blanqui’s considered response to the experience of June 1848.
90. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 7, p. 128.
91. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 7, p. 144.
92. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 10, pp. 67–9.
93. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 27, p. 512.
94. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 27, p. 518.
95. Moss, Marx and Engels …, op. cit., p. 555.
96. Neef, op. cit., p. 117.
97. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 7, p. 155.
98. Marouck, op. cit., p. 70.
99. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 38, p. 136.
100. Normanby, op. cit., pp. 103–4.
101. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 7, p. 155.
102. Tocqueville, op. cit., p. 209.
103. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 38, p. 159.
104. In 1862, in the course of correspondence about the American Civil War, Marx mildly reprimanded Engels, writing: ‘It strikes me that you allow yourself to be influenced by the military aspect of things a little too much.’ Engels had predicted the likelihood of the North getting ‘the terrible thrashing it deserves’. (Marx to Engels, 10 September 1862; Engels to Marx, 30 July 1862, Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 41, pp. 416, 388)
105. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, Oxford 1970, pp. 407–8.
106. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, Volume 7, pp. 139, 164; Traugott, op. cit., pp. 51–2 (see also note 51 above).
107. Moss, ‘Marx and Engels …’, op. cit., p. 552.
108. For a critique of this position see J. Rees, Engels’ Marxism, International Socialism, no. 64, 1994, pp. 47–82.
109. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Volume 11, Moscow 1960, p. 351.
110. I personally recall being accused of crowing ‘exultantly and … ignorantly’ for trying to analyse the causes of Allende’s overthrow rather than celebrating those who had resisted Pinochet’s coup. See Jane Scott Paul, letter in Socialist Worker, 6 October 1973, p. 13.
 



French Communism in the Making 1914-1924
Robert Wohl
Oxford, £5.
Wohl sees his book not as ‘a reflection of the Cold War’ but as ‘a sign that the Cold War is coming to an end.’ If by this he intends a rehabilitation of Communism within the political consensus, his aim coincides with that of latter-day Stalinism. At all events he has contributed a serious and scholarly account of the making of the French Communist Party.
The real opportunity for revolution in France was between 1917 and 1918. Army mutineers set up Soviets; in the Loire basin workers seized factories and whole municipalities. The French socialist movement, bemused by pre-war theoretical debates, failed to offer leadership. In 1922 Trotsky was still berating French communists for failing to work in the unions; L’Humanité failed to so much as publish the CGT’s call for a general strike after three strikers had been shot at Le Havre. Only in 1924 was the Party reconstructed on a base of factory cells rather than area sections. The Bolshevik strategy of splitting the Socialist Parties and uniting the unions was never clearly understood in France. All this exposes quite clearly the danger of postponing the building of the revolutionary party until a revolutionary situation arises.
Wohl’s interpretation stresses the continuity between the early years of the party and its later weaknesses. Of course the debates on reform and revolution have relevance to later problems. And it would be naive to suggest that in Lenin’s lifetime there could not already be conflicts of interest between the Russian State and the French working class. But to a great extent the weaknesses of the early years were the weaknesses of a living movement faced with almost insuperable problems. The class-collaboration of 1936, the strangling of revolution in 1945, the failure to halt de Gaulle in 1958, the loving-up to right-wing social-democrats in 1967, have roots elsewhere, which only a class analysis of Russia itself can elucidate.



Modern Tragedy
Raymond Williams
Chatto & Windus, 30s
Raymond Williams is, unfortunately, one of the best literary critics we’ve got. Amid a general collapse of bourgeois criticism into formalism, sensationalist biography, and other evasions of the critical function, he has always insisted on the role of literature as communication, and on the fact that culture is an organic part of the society it belongs to. If, as is to be hoped, the coming years see a growth of Marxist criticism in England comparable to that already being produced in France, the positive critique of Williams’ work will be one of its crucial starting points.
Williams’ latest work, Modern Tragedy, represents both a narrowing and a broadening compared with Culture and Society and The Long Revolution. It is narrower in that it is more purely concerned with ‘literature’ in the strict sense; broader in that it deals with the European tradition rather than the parochial concern with the English alone which marked his earlier works.
The book falls into three sections. The first outlines a general history of the idea of tragedy since the eighteenth century. The starting-point is the apparent gulf between literary tragedy, and tragedy in everyday language; between the ‘tragedy’ of falling under a bus and the ‘tragedy’ of Oedipus or Hamlet. Williams goes on to state the need for a tragic vision which is compatible with the idea of revolution; which rejects the facile mechanistic rationalism that holds that tragedy is irrelevant since all human problems can be solved; but which also rejects romantic subjectivism, and the idea of transcendental evil which cannot be overcome by human effort.
The second part takes some examples from modern tragic literature – Ibsen, Tolstoy, Lawrence, Eliot, Sartre, Brecht and others. The third is a play, Koba, based on the life of Stalin, which seeks to concretise the issues of the earlier parts.
The work contains many acute perceptions; the constant oscillation between literary criticism and contemporary political issues is refreshing. But the idealism of Williams’ earlier work remains. Culture and Society was not about culture and society, but about ideas of culture and society. Tragedy, in this work, is not a narrowly defined literary genre (as it often seems to be in Steiner’s Death of Tragedy), but it is still an idea. The movement is always from ideas to the social situation. Socialism is for Williams a warmly-felt aspiration, but an ill-defined concept. If he invokes Marx, it is the early humanism in isolation from the later totalisation – and he can quote Carlyle alongside him. However real and vivid Williams’ experience of the working-class may be, he does not conceive it in the perspective of working-class power.
In Koba, the use of one of Stalin’s own pseudonyms makes clear the. author’s intention. But the background, other than the fact that a ‘revolution’ of some kind takes place, is deliberately left blank. The main characters, Joseph (Stalin) and Jordan (Lenin) act out a dialectic of revolutionary idealism and practical necessity – but in a vacuum. The real history of Stalinist betrayal and the anguish of genuine Bolsheviks from 1924 onwards is incomparably more tragic than Williams’ shadow-show.
In making a legitimate plea for a sensitive and complex tragic vision – but without a clear revolutionary structure – Williams runs great dangers. Koba could be taken as a demand for a sympathetic understanding of Stalin. Anouilh (an author Williams dealt with in Drama from Ibsen to Eliot but does not mention here) shows in his Antigone the reactionary potential of a tragic vision. Beside the pure, impossible idealism of Antigone is the pathos of Creon – of practicality, of compromise, of collaboration with fascism.
The scholastic dispute on the future or non-future of ‘tragedy’ can be safely forgotten; but the real problem of a revolutionary, social literature will be increasingly with us. This book makes an ambiguous contribution.



Le Socialisme Français et le Pouvoir
Michelle Perrot & Annie Kriegel
Pologne-Hongrie 1956
Ed. Jean-Jacques Marie & Balázs Nagy
Études et Documentation Internationales
These two volumes, available to subscribers to Études et Documentation Internationales, are further valuable contributions from this source to working-class history. All IS readers able to read French should write for further details to 29 rue Descartes, Paris 5. Those unable to read French should think about the possibilities of establishing a similar socialist publishing-house in Britain.
Le Socialisme Français et le Pouvoir consists of two essays on French labour history and attitudes to political power. Michelle Perrot traces the struggle against reformism in the French socialist party up to 1914. Among features bolstering reformism were participation in.local government – a Guesdist paper saw control of the Lille municipality as a more successful repetition of the Paris Commune – and the tradition of eighteenth century static materialism and the Revolution of 1789, which hung like an albatross around the neck of French socialism, while reformists proclaimed the French people were living in a post-revolutionary society.
Annie Kriegel’s study of the French Communist Party from the 1920s, through the Popular Front and the de Gaulle Government of 1945 to the present day, contains a wealth of facts and documents about PCF attitudes to power. Controversies such as poly-centrism, and especially about the class support of the Party at. various times, bringing out clearly the marked decline in active working-class participation, if not in electoral support. In 1924, of 38 PCF candidates in the Paris region, all but five were manual workers. In 1966 in the same area only 10 out of 65 candidates were manual workers.
Pologne-Hongrie 1956, edited by Jean-Jacques Marie and Balazs Nagy, is a collection of texts and documents on the events of 1956 in Poland and Hungary. To anyone still dubious that the events of 1956 were working-class self-activity, these documents provide the proof. In particular the growth of workers’ councils in Poland is shown in true perspective and not overshadowed by .the more dramatic events in Budapest. The Ninth Plenum of the Polish trade unions in November 1956 was invaded by a thousand delegates elected directly from the factories.
But the collection goes much further than this, and scotches a popular myth among the ‘libertarian’ left – that the Hungarian Revolution was a product of pure spontaneity. In fact these documents bear witness to the deep theoretical consciousness which underlay the revolution, and the way in which the events of the Revolution went hand in hand with the redevelopment of the Marxist critical method. A long testimony by F. Töke, a factory-worker and vice-president of the Budapest Central Workers’ Council stresses the quick transmission of the ideas of the Petöfi Circle into the factories. In the fighting in Budapest, students and workers came together to concretise the unity of theory and practice.
The theories which fomented the revolution were far from uniform – Pierre Broué in his introduction is perhaps a little too eager to see a confirmation of The Revolution Betrayed. The question of ‘socialist property forms’ caused deep pondering and some confusion. The legend of Yugoslav workers’ control played a considerable role in inspiring belief in the possibility of workers’ power.
The penultimate document of the book is a noble but tragic statement of the Csepel metal-workers’ council of January 1957, saying that, rather than cause confusion by continuing to exist without power ‘we return our mandate to the hands of our workers.’ But the last document of all, an extract from Kuron and Modzelewski’s Open Letter to the Polish Workers’ Party shows that the theoretical and revolutionary heritage of October 1956 lives on.



Vietnam: Between Two Truces
Jean Lacouture
Secker & Warburg, 35s
M. Lacouture believes it is possible to find a solution to the Vietnamese question – with Vietnam, in Cabot Lodge’s words, ‘an Asian Yugoslavia’ – which is in the real interests of both sides. This makes his book useless politically, but does mean that it is not hysterically propagandist, and tries to appreciate sympathetically and factually the position of both sides.
This work, translated (badly) from the French, outlines the history of Vietnam from the Geneva agreements to the beginning of the bombing of North Vietnam in 1965. It is thus already seriously out of date, but provides quite a lot of useful material. The religious question, crucial for Vietnam, is dealt with; in some detail, though not related to the whole historical and economic complex; there is material (though not as much as one would like) on the South Vietnamese trade unions, and their politically ambiguous leadership. An interview with an NLF leader shows that the Vietnamese revolutionaries have no illusions about assistance from either Russia or China. Most interesting of all are extracts from the notebook of a captured NLF soldier, showing the democratic spirit that prevails in the NLF, and the fact that political education is carried on regularly, even daily, in the most dangerous zones.
Here, however, the book’s utility ends. Like the British Council for Peace in Vietnam and the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign, who confine themselves to moralising and atrocity-chasing, it does not attempt to offer a global political analysis of the Vietnam struggle.



Marx, Engels and the Poets
Peter Demetz
Chicago UP, 59s 6d.
This book is a serious attempt by a non-Marxist to evaluate the contribution of Marxism to literary criticism. As such it is to be welcomed – above all if it sends more readers back to the sources, and inspires a translation into English of the whole compendium from Marx and Engels’ writings On Art and Literature.
The most valuable part of the work is the account of how Marxism developed out of the intellectual context of the early nineteenth century – dealing especially with the close interrelation of politics and literature in early nineteenth-century Germany. Marxism was not the creation of individuals; Marx’s debt to Heine and Engels’ to Carlyle are worthy of study. Interesting morsels include Marx’s early verse epigrams on Hegel.
Demetz’s critique of Marxist literary theory is less satisfactory. He identifies Marxism with economic determinism; sees close parallels between Marx and the positivist determinism of Taine; and claims to discover a contradiction between Marx’s overall theory and his literary judgments. Two points must be made in reply.
First, Marxism is a method, not a system. We are concerned with the validity of this method, not with the particular inconsistencies and invalid judgments that occur in the writings of Marx and Engels.
Secondly, while Marxism is of course sociological, it is also dialectical. The great writer does not reflect an age; he embodies its contradictions. This is in fact implicit in Demetz’s account of Marx’s views on Shakespeare, Goethe and Balzac.
The final section, on twentieth century Marxism, should have been expanded or omitted. To deal with the work of Lucien Goldmann in one page can produce only parody. The chapter on Lukacs is interesting, but incomplete without a consideration of the nationalism and class collaboration of the Stalin period; and this in turn would have meant more than the two sentences allocated to Trotsky – much more.



La Guerre et la Révolution – 1: Guerres d’Asie: Vietnam et Corée
Pierre Naville
Études et Documentation Internationales, F18.50.
This volume contains, in unaltered form, the journalistic articles written by Pierre Naville on the questions of Vietnam and Korea between 1949 and 1956.
One admires M. Naville’s courage in submitting such transient writings to his readers’ knowing hindsight; but it is hard to see the value of presenting the work in this form, especially when it contains such misguided judgments as the assertion that the Geneva Agreements were a victory for Ho Chi Minh. Would even Ho claim this now?
Certainly the work contains useful facts and insights. M. Naville stresses the importance of demoralisation among US troops in Korea; and shows how the US were weakened by the fact that soldiers served no more than one year – very relevant to Vietnam today. Equally interesting is the fact that, within a month of the outbreak of the Korean War, the Indian CP replaced an anti-Mao leadership by a pro-Mao one.
Moreover, M. Naville shows a knowledge of military strategy which could be equalled by few Marxists – perhaps to the extent of overestimating purely military factors. This is at the cost of social analysis; M. Naville’s clear partisanship for North Korea and the Vietnamese Revolution does not make up for the absence of this.
In both Korea and Vietnam there was a genuine national liberation movement based on guerillas; in both cases an underdeveloped country was cynically manipulated by two opposing world power blocs. The independent revolutionary movement was a bigger factor in Vietnam than in Korea; but was the quantitative difference great enough to become a qualitative one? Of this problem we still await an adequate Marxist analysis.



On Literature and Art
A. Lunacharsky
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 12s 6d
Marxists, concerned with the understanding of ideology, have always, justly, given great importance to literature. For every work of literature is simultaneously ideological and anti-ideological; on the one hand it crystallises the ideas of a particular social group; on the other hand, explicitly or implicitly (by its nature as an art-form) it criticises these ideas. Hence an advance in Marxist theory will be organically linked to a development of Marxist criticism.
This advance is in no way assisted by the publication of this rag-bag of essays by Lunacharsky, Stalin’s Commissar for Education. A critique of Mayakovsky lapses into hysterical abuse of Trotsky. At one point he says ‘this is the cue for the appearance, not of Marxist criticism but of Marxist censorship.’ (As Literature and Revolution shows, any justifiable Marxist censorship must be firmly based on Marxist criticism.)
But beyond the political distortions lies a complete absence of method. Failing to transcend the facile dichotomy of subjective and objective, Lunacharsky flutters pathetically between mechanical determinism and idealist formalism.. (A similar phenomenon can still be observed; in the pages of Marxism Today).
On the one hand art is often seen as passive reflection – ‘Every writer speaks for one class or another.’ Bernard Shaw is praised as a friend of the Soviet Union; his Fabianism and his dramatic brilliance are neglected. Crude judgments are interspersed with banalities that are not criticism, let alone Marxist criticism: ‘First, of all, there is the sound of Wagner’s music, the intensity, the depth, courage, variety, passion, psychological and acoustical charm of his musical texture.’ Lunacharsky’s favourite word seems to be ‘profound’ – used to add weight to singularly unprofound sentences.
For Lunacharsky, Marxism is no more than static rationalism. Surrealism’s attack on ‘bourgeois rationalism’ is dismissed in a few lines. The longest piece in the book is devoted to the defence of the ‘enlightener’ Chernyshevsky.
That this hack material (subsidised from the surplus value of Soviet workers) is available, while the works of critics like Lucien Goldmann and Henri Lefebvre await expensive translation from bourgeois publishers is symptomatic of the contempt for theory that permeates even the best sections or British Marxism.
 



Démocratie et Conseils Ouvriers
Max Adler
Maspero, 9.90 Fr
This pamphlet on Democracy and Workers’ Councils was written in 1919 by the Austrian Marxist Max Adler (not to be confused with his contemporaries Victor Adler and his son the political assassin Friedrich Adler).
Trotsky called Adler ‘a lyrical philosopher of passivity.’ This seems an undue compliment to his style. Adler was essentially an idealist who saw his role as an educator of the working class, but who saw education as abstracted from struggle.
The first part of the book is a critique of bourgeois democracy, notable for its tendency to invoke Rousseau, and its complete absence of concrete historical examples.
Adler was obviously somewhat alarmed by the revolutionary wave he lived through. While making a patronising allusion to the ‘courage’ of Lenin and Trotsky, he rejects the Bolshevik model. He states that ‘one cannot replace the lack of economic and political maturity by dictatorship.’ The workers’ councils are to be ‘schools of socialism,’ and a National Assembly will coexist with the councils to represent die interests of non-socialist sections of the community. What a pity revolutions are not such orderly, leisurely and well-timed events! The workers would probably have enjoyed Adler’s lectures.
English readers may sometimes feel envious at the number of classic texts being reprinted in French. This one, however, could have been safely left in the archives.
 



Régis Debray
Praised Be Our Lords
Verso, 2007, £9.99
Régis Debray first came to prominence in the 1960s when he
published various articles and a short book, Revolution in the
Revolution?, about guerrilla struggles in Latin America. This
aroused considerable interest because a new generation of the left
was eager to discover revolutionary movements independent of both
Washington and Moscow.
The Latin American guerrilla struggles, beginning with the Cuban
Revolution, had rejected the orthodoxies of Stalinism. But as Debray
showed, they had also rejected the basics of Marxism. Debray stressed
the importance of small revolutionary groups acting in isolation,
remote from any proletarian or peasant base. As he put it, “The
mountain proletarianises the bourgeois and peasant elements, and the
city can bourgeoisify the proletarians.”
Debray was adopted by the Cuban leadership, and went to Bolivia to
join Che Guevara’s guerrilla group shortly before Che’s murder.
Debray spent nearly four years in a Bolivian jail and then went to
Chile, where he wrote a book based on conversations with the
president, Salvador Allende, defending Chile’s parliamentary road
to socialism. He claims that “it never occurred to me for a single
moment” that Allende’s rule would end with bloody overthrow.
Debray’s analyses were soon overtaken by events. The Cuban
Revolution had succeeded in a unique historical conjuncture which was
not to be repeated; when Castro tried to declare independence from
Washington, he soon found himself trapped as sugar supplier to the
rival empire in Moscow. Guevara died a heroic but futile death, and
by the early 1970s the wave of guerrilla struggle was largely
exhausted. Allende was overthrown by a vicious right wing coup.
For Debray it looked like the end of a promising career. But when
François Mitterrand was elected president of France in 1981 he
appointed Debray as a “special adviser” on foreign affairs. At
first sight it was an odd choice. After what had happened to Guevara
and Allende, Debray could hardly be seen as a lucky mascot. And given
the quality of his previous predictions, the standard of advice he
could offer was scarcely guaranteed. But then, as Debray wryly notes,
Mitterrand never listened to his advice anyway.
It seems more likely that Mitterrand imagined that Debray’s
reputation would enhance the president’s left image while he
pursued ever more right wing policies. The United States, for whom
such Gallic subtlety was a bit much, tried to get Debray’s
diplomatic passport withdrawn. Debray did, however, do a number of
odd jobs for Mitterrand, and acted as ghost writer: “I could churn
out kilometres of pure Mitterrand non-stop.” He finally resigned in
1988, noting that there was nothing socialist or even republican
about Mitterrand’s policies. True enough, but he took his time
noticing it.
This book consists of Debray’s memories of his experiences with
Castro, Guevara, Allende and Mitterrand. Contrary to the front cover,
it is not an “autobiography” (the French original makes no such
claim, but merely subtitles the work “a political education”). It
contains only a few mentions of Debray’s student days – he
studied under the Stalinist anti-humanist philosopher Louis
Althusser, which may explain a lot. And, since the French original
was published in 1996, it says nothing of the past decade, in which
Debray took part in a commission set up by President Chirac that
advocated the ban on the hijab in schools. (From Guerrilla Fighter
to Veil-Snatcher would make a nice title for an autobiography, if
he ever does write one.)
This is not an easy book to read. Grappling with Debray’s style
is rather like swimming in marmalade. He has obviously got through a
very large number of books. (Or am I being naive? Perhaps he just
read a library catalogue and a dictionary of quotations.) His
continual use of literary allusions constructs a protective barrier
against the reader: “If you don’t understand that, you aren’t
clever enough to be reading me.”
Yet it would be surprising if there were nothing of interest in
the memoirs of one who has associated with some of the key figures of
the left over the past 40 years. The anecdotes and observations are
often drowned amid Debray’s own rather tedious reflections on the
universe and everything, but they are there.
On Castro, he is quite severe. He notes that on returning to Cuba
in 1971 he found that all attempts to pursue an independent
revolutionary course had been abandoned: “What had been restless or
anxious about the man seemed to have congealed or stiffened ...
Seized by totemic solemnity, my companion was well on the way to
being certain of everything, and deaf to everyone.” The man who had
once described Russia as “a giant country run by midgets” now
praised Moscow’s representatives.
Debray attempts no explanation of why Cuba’s bid for
independence failed, but he shows how bureaucracy became established.
He adds that Castro is a man “for whom theory has never been a
problem, has no interest in debating ideas and never listens to an
adversary’s argument”.
Guevara gets equally harsh treatment. What had seemed virtues in
the 1960s are now viewed more critically. His leadership style is
summed up as “not giving a damn really whether anyone understood
him or not; not bothering to acquire the means to win the ‘masses’
over to his point of view, as politicians do. Not even his own
lieutenants: he never explained orders, briefed the men, asked them
any questions or invited them to speak.”
Guevara went to Bolivia “without any political, geographical or
social survey of the terrain, without trying to set up any sort of
support network in the region or to recruit a single Bolivian from
the region”. Debray eventually concludes that “Che Guevara went
to Bolivia not to win, but to lose”. This can only be psychological
speculation, but Debray is sufficiently well informed to make us
think twice about drawing tactical, as distinct from moral, lessons
from Guevara.
Mitterrand, by contrast, gets a much easier ride. Debray tells us
nothing of the failure of his initial reflationary economic policies
and his consequent swing to the right, nor of how his electoral
manoeuvring gave an initial boost to the Front National (Le Pen’s
name never appears in the book).
Debray is well aware of the shifts and turns in Mitterrand’s
career, how he started out as a right wing anti-Gaullist and then
“recycled the credo of his youth into a left anti-Gaullism”.
Mitterrand was “a socialist advancing the cause of advanced
liberalism”, a secularist encouraging church education, “the
signatory of a party congress motion calling for a break with
capitalism adopting the country’s most right wing finance policy
since the liberation”. He could “talk revolution in public and
police surveillance in private”. Indeed, he had “an allergy ...
to the very idea of truth”.
And yet Debray calls the old crook “a decent man” (the
original French pudique is stronger than “decent”,
implying reserve and discretion). Clearly truth, let alone socialist
principle, is not a value of any great importance to Debray. He
protects himself from criticism by adopting an ironic,
self-deprecating stance. The Mitterrand years were “no big deal”,
leaving a “sense of artificiality and emptiness”. He justifies
his jesting tone by noting that “at court, more than elsewhere,
truth comes from the mouths of buffoons”.
In any case, none of it matters. Debray concludes that, although
progress is possible in technology, it is meaningless in politics.
This, of course, is the delusion of an intellectual, comparing
himself to Victor Hugo or whoever. Life is no paradise for French
workers today, but it is a sight better than it was a century ago,
thanks to the great struggles of 1936 and 1968, and a thousand
smaller battles.
Debray protests vigorously that he is no renegade from leftism,
that he was never a leftist. He was “repelled” by the “anarchist
psychodrama” of 1968. He even makes the preposterous claim that
there was a 20 percent suicide rate among the extreme left. Here we
can admit that Debray’s claim of consistency is valid. From the
rigorous Guevarist to Mitterrand’s errand boy, and from there to
the conservative cynicism of his memoirs, there is one constant theme
in Debray’s work – a total rejection of the idea that collective
human action could change the world for the better.
As I write, the press is full of furore about Alastair Campbell’s
diaries. (By the time this is published, people will be asking
“Who?”) Debray is immeasurably more cultured than Campbell, whose
literary ambitions never extended beyond his youthful efforts at
pornography. But in the end both books are testimony to the
degradation of politics in declining capitalism.
 



Duncan Thompson
Pessimism of the Intellect? A History of New Left Review
Merlin, £16.95
To produce uninterruptedly, every two to three months, a socialist
theoretical journal with a consistently high standard of analysis and
commentary from 1960 to the present is no small achievement. Only two
journals in Britain fit the description: International
Socialism and New
Left Review (NLR).
Though in some sense rivals, the two journals have been
complementary, and on occasion – the Revolutionary Socialist
Students’ Federation and the Balkans war – have cooperated.
Anyone who (like myself) has a complete set of NLR since 1960
possesses a rich collection of contributions to socialist thought.
The left as a whole would have been poorer without NLR; any
negative comments in this review should not be seen as detracting
from that.
So those interested in the history of the British left should
welcome Duncan Thompson’s history of NLR. Written from a
point of view of general support for the left, it makes some sharp
and fundamental criticisms of NLR, but never in a hostile or
sectarian manner.
NLR emerged from the aftermath of the events of 1956. In
1962 the original editorial team around the historian Edward Thompson
was replaced by a group headed by Perry Anderson. Anderson proposed
to make NLR the British equivalent of Les Temps Modernes,
the French journal founded by Jean-Paul Sartre in 1945. He never came
remotely close. In its heroic years during the Algerian War Les
Temps Modernes formed a focus for the opponents of the war; it
published denunciations of torture and testimonies by French soldiers
about the brutalities of the war. It was seized four times by the
authorities in Algeria in 1957. It is hard to imagine the police
bothering to -confiscate NLR.
Duncan Thompson gives a careful account of NLR’s political
evolution, aptly described as “skittish” – a series of sharp
political turns made without justification or self-criticism. In its
first few years NLR had more than its share of illusions in
the modernising potential of Harold Wilson’s Labour government. But
the emergence of the student movement in 1968 produced a sharp swing
to the ultra‑left. NLR argued (rightly) that ideology
was of great importance and (wrongly) that ideology was primarily the
product of intellectuals. Hence the working class could not be
approached directly; instead the student movement would produce a
Marxist intelligentsia who would bring “theory” to the working
class which was so sadly deprived of it.
The NLR of these years was a peculiar mixture of student
ultra-leftism (one article urged students to “behave as
provocatively as necessary and to effectively sanction the university
to the extent that they need to use force, probably the police” –
the author was “Baron” Triesman, now foreign office minister) and
esoteric theory, notably discussion of the work of Louis Althusser
who attempted a pathetic rearguard defence of Stalinism by dressing
it up in pretentious academic jargon.
After a brief flirtation with Maoism, NLR turned to
“Trotskyism”, though it was a Trotskyism filtered through the
work of Isaac Deutscher and Ernest Mandel. But the journal became
ever more remote from the actual course of political events –
neither the massive industrial struggles of the 1970s nor the rise of
racism made any impression on it. (I suspect Trotsky himself would
have judged NLR in the same way as he did Partisan Review:
a “small cultural monastery, guarding itself from the outside world
by scepticism, agnosticism and respectability”.)
Although NLR defended dissident currents in the Eastern
bloc, it continued to regard Russia and its satellites as
representing a higher form of society. So the “collapse of
Communism” in 1989 induced a considerable pessimism, and a shift
towards a far more defensive position with the advocacy of
constitutional reform, tactical voting and on occasion “market
socialism”. When NLR was relaunched in 2000 Anderson
announced that “for the first time since the Reformation, there are
no longer any significant oppositions ... within the thought-world of
the West”.
The root of NLR’s failure lay in a progressive distancing from
the working class movement. In its first years NLR made at
least two positive contributions. One was the production of a very
useful Penguin compilation, edited by Robin Blackburn and Alexander
Cockburn, called The Incompatibles (1967) – a set of essays
on British trade unionism (the pick of the bunch was Paul Foot on the
1966 seafarers’ strike). The other was a series in NLR
entitled Work, overseen by Ronald Fraser. This gave
first-person accounts of the alienation experienced in everyday
employment by those in a wide variety of jobs. It pioneered later
work in the field of “oral history”.
But with the euphoria of 1968 this attempt at concrete engagement
with the working class disappeared, never to be seen again. From now
on if the working class appeared in the pages of NLR it was as
a concept in Marxist theory, never as the women and men in the
factory down the road whom you might join on a picket line – except
in the important case of an interview it ran with Arthur Scargill on
the mass pickets of the 1972 miners’ strike.
NLR was never the journal of an organisation. That was its
strength – as Blackburn put it, NLR was not “a journal for
recycling an already established truth” – but also its weakness.
NLR frequently wrote about “strategy”, but it was never
clear who would implement that strategy. Hence it was never tested
against reality. Lessons can be learned from a failed strategy, but
an untested hypothesis can only be eternally debated.
“Left clubs” founded by the first editorial team in the early
1960s soon evaporated. Although some members of the later editorial
committee were for a time members of the International Marxist Group
(IMG), there was never any close connection between NLR and
IMG activity. In the 1980s there was an attempt to expand the
editorial committee by adding a group of leading feminist writers.
One of the conditions they proposed was the establishment of
“readers’ groups”. This was promptly vetoed by the existing committee.
Duncan Thompson has no startling revelations about the somewhat
secretive internal workings of NLR. He has worked on the basis
of printed material, without interviewing the main protagonists. He
has, however, had access to some illuminating “internal documents”.
“Democratic centralism” is much maligned. Yet it has some
merits compared to what was described as the “common-law variety of
democratic centralism” as practised by NLR. NLR was
produced by a small team – for years numbering no more than seven
or eight – accountable to nobody. The dominating figure was
undoubtedly Anderson, described here as “overbearing”. He is
without question a man of enormous erudition, but one who often uses
his knowledge to intimidate his readers rather than enlighten them.
The situation was further complicated by the fact that Anderson was
also the paymaster – his private income bailed out NLR in
its financial crisis in 1962. There is no indication that Anderson
actually threatened to take his bat home if his editorial will was
denied, but it must have been a factor in the minds of those concerned.
Anderson is a somewhat reclusive individual (as one who has been
active on the left for over 45 years, I have seen Anderson in the
flesh just once). In this he contrasts sharply with his closest ally,
Blackburn. Whatever criticisms one might make of Blackburn, he has
been an activist. At the height of the student movement of the late
1960s, he put his head on the line and lost his job at the London
School of Economics. In the early 1980s, when NLR helped to
launch a “Socialist Society”, it was Blackburn who was the
entrepreneurial driving force. Anderson made only a token appearance
at the founding conference.
Though small, the NLR team was never homogeneous: there
were major differences within it. But apart from periodic
resignations, these were never made clear. Preserving the cohesion of
the team was regarded as more important than political clarity.
The striking example is the question of Ireland. There were deep
disagreements within the committee. Some favoured the slogan “Victory
to the IRA”, while others, to put it mildly, were less
enthusiastic. This might have been a matter for debate and, at worst,
for a split. Instead, from 1970 to 1994, there was “by common
consent” silence about Ireland: this throughout a time when bombs
were exploding in the streets of Britain, and theoretical clarity –
on terrorism, on the violence of the oppressed, on national
liberation – was urgently needed.
In 1964 another of Anderson’s collaborators, Tom Nairn, declared
that the English working class “needed theory”. He was right.
Sadly NLR, despite its real achievements, has rarely
delivered.
 



Jean-Jacques Marie
Staline
Fayard, Paris, 2001, pp. 870, Є30
JEAN-JACQUES Marie has devoted a lifetime to the study of Stalin. His first book on the subject (Staline, Editions du Seuil), published in 1967, ran to 297 pages. The present work, the culmination of 40 years of research, has 870. Not all the archives are yet open, and there may be new discoveries, but they are unlikely to change the overall picture much. This book should last for some considerable time as containing all anyone could reasonably want to know about ‘the father of the peoples’.
Biographers are supposed to have sympathy with their subjects. Marie, with a long history on the anti-Stalinist left, has nothing but contempt and loathing for his. Yet he retains a scientific objectivity. Myths and legends accrete around a figure as notorious as Stalin; Marie carefully dismisses those for which he cannot find documentary evidence, on the sound principle that what Stalin did was quite bad enough, without accusing him of things that he didn’t in fact do. Thus it seems unlikely that Stalin had Zhdanov murdered – not because of any tender-heartedness, but because Zhdanov had a bad heart and he didn’t need to (pp. 784–5). Marie gives no credence to the notion that Stalin may have been a police agent in the pre-revolutionary period (pp. 60–1). This has been a comforting myth for many – ‘Stalin was never a proper revolutionary’. The reality – that revolutionaries can go terribly wrong – is rather more unsettling. And it even appears dubious whether he ever enquired ‘How many divisions has the Pope?’ (pp. 703, 947).
Victor Hugo once wrote a poem in which an evil Eastern ruler is brought to the Last Judgement and is saved despite his manifold crimes because he once showed pity and brushed the flies off a dying pig. There are no pigs in Marie’s narrative, not one good deed in an unremitting narrative of cruelty and degradation.
Marie has unearthed as much as it is possible to know about Stalin’s youth, a period obscured by Stalin’s own activities in rewriting his life-story. His family background was one of savage brutality, and the youth was undoubtedly brutalised for life by the violence he received from his parents and the harsh life at the seminary. His contempt for others was soon visible in his personal life; he fathered illegitimate children, but seems to have shown no concern for their mothers. Politically, he had a contemptuous attitude towards ordinary workers, and regarded the creation of soviets in 1905 with extreme distrust (p. 89). Intellectually, he was mediocre. During the First World War, he was deported. While Lenin was studying Hegel and planning a new orientation for the labour movement, Stalin slumped into passivity; his Works contain just five letters for a period of four years (p. 130).
Stalin was out of his element in 1917, a year of mass action. From March to October 1917, he spoke in public only three times. He had little liking for the unpredictability of mass meetings, preferring to bury himself in the party apparatus (p. 145). As Marie notes, his talent was an ability to wait; not much use in an insurrection, but much more valuable in period of downturn (p. 157).
The early years of the Revolution were a harsh time, and severe measures were needed. In a situation in which experienced cadres were hard to come by, Lenin recognised Stalin’s talents and gave him jobs where the brutal enforcement of authority and efficiency were necessary. However, he played no rôle in the International, where a degree of tact was required in dealing with revolutionaries from a variety of different traditions. Stalin always despised the Comintern, and did not even attend the Seventh Congress in 1935, when the Popular Front line was put through (p. 457).
In 1921, when his second wife gave birth to her first son, she was expelled from the party for ‘lack of interest’ in party affairs during her pregnancy. Lenin asked for her readmission; Stalin did nothing in her defence (p. 221).
After Lenin’s death, Stalin seized his opportunity. His skills at bullying and manoeuvring enabled him to overcome his opponents, not only the principled Trotsky, but men like Zinoviev who were more or less on the same moral level as Stalin, but not quite as good at it. Zinoviev did oppose ‘socialism in one country’, but from a perspective of bureaucratic voluntarism and putschism, rather than a commitment to building a world revolutionary movement. And as President of the Comintern, Zinoviev had a vested interest in defending ‘internationalism’ (p. 300). Stalin was quite happy for Zinoviev’s Leningrad party to claim unanimous support, as it opened the way for Stalin to make similar claims (p. 304).
From now on, it was downhill all the way. The absurd logic of the purges took over, with the precious human resources of the state being wasted. The harm done to Russia’s own interests was immense. It is ironic that Stalin’s latter-day fan club are often christened ‘tankies’, when it was Stalin who put to death Tukhachevsky, the one general in the Red Army who realised that the car, and its cousin the tank, had made the horse and hence cavalry obsolete (p. 493).
By 1938, Stalin saw the need to call a halt to the excesses of the purge. But he had his supporters – the bright young men, generally careerists with no political baggage from the revolutionary period, who took over the jobs of those purged; as Marie points out, this new generation ‘owed him everything, while he owed them nothing’ (p. 534). There was also an element of pure sadism in Stalin’s methods, for example in the way that in his last years his closest and most loyal collaborators, Andreev and Molotov, were forced to support the purging of their own (Jewish) wives (pp. 787–8, 817).
The Second World War is often seen as Stalin’s finest hour. Marie shows what a shambles it in fact was. He clung frantically onto hopes of maintaining his alliance with the Nazis, even when it was clear that German invasion threatened. He was quite happy to pay any political price – in April 1941 he was planning to dissolve the Comintern as a gesture to Hitler (pp. 605–6). He was even willing to sign the pact of the Axis powers, Germany, Italy and Japan (p. 597).
When forced to fight Hitler, Stalin reacted with the only means he knew – terror. Russian losses in the war reached horrific proportions, but it should not be forgotten that a substantial number were victims of their own side. This was not ‘friendly fire’, in the American euphemism, but special NKVD forces situated behind the line to kill those retreating or deserting (p. 666). Giving a bizarre twist to the words of the Internationale which promise that ‘our bullets are for our own generals’, Stalin continued to execute his own senior officers; in 1942 no less than 30 generals were executed (p. 659). Doubtless, in Voltaire’s words, he wanted to ‘encourage the others’.
Certainly there was great heroism on the Russian side, but ultimately the war was not so much won by Russia as lost by Germany. Stalin’s regime was scarcely popular, but Nazi racial theories prevented the pursuit of a policy of encouraging collaboration, which had considerable success in such Western states as France. In the Ukraine the local peasants, sick of Stalin’s rule, welcomed German troops with flowers – and received vicious treatment in response (p. 634). Anticipating George Bush, the Wehrmacht declared that ‘Bolshevik soldiers’ had lost the right to be treated according to the Geneva Convention.
Stalin’s final years were squalid. Drink and lack of sleep had wrecked his body and mind. Estranged from his children, surrounded by piles of unopened correspondence (p. 852), he feared plots against him and became increasingly crude in his anti-Semitism (pp. 847–55). Most embarrassingly of all, his memory was in decline, and he could no longer remember who had been purged and who had not; on one occasion he proposed someone for a drama prize who was already in jail (p. 766).
The last glimpses we have of him show him slumped in his own urine, his eyelids too dry to close, with the Politbureau already preparing to fight for the succession. Yet there is no sense of tragedy; this was not a great talent gone astray, but a bullying mediocrity chosen by history to carry through a counter-revolution. There is one passage in Victor Serge’s magnificent Case of Comrade Tulayev where the author succeeds in making us feel sorry for Stalin, but Marie, for all his research, never achieves that feat.
At the end of all the loathsome detail, we are led to ask what purpose such a biography serves. When Marie published his first book on Stalin, it was still a work of some courage: the French Communist Party still revered Stalin and denied the validity of Khrushchev’s secret speech. Today those who still worship Stalin are so few in number that they will fit on Harpal Brar’s ‘Friends & Family’ application form.
It is true that many of the last century’s leading Marxists – Trotsky, Serge, Deutscher, Cliff, Broué – have used the biographical form to understand the Russian Revolution, precisely because the rôle of individuals was so crucial. But biography cannot answer all the key questions. Stalin’s brutalised childhood may explain his later brutality, but cannot explain how such a brute assumed total power in a so-called ‘workers’ state’. Today, the crucial problem is whether Leninism, or indeed the very fact of revolution, necessarily leads to dictatorship of the Stalinist type. And an account focusing on the individual personality of Stalin cannot provide an adequate response.
Stalin alone did not make Stalinism. Yet many of the other figures involved in the process remain relatively unknown. Marie writes of the rise of the ‘nomenklatura’, but most of them remain names behind which there is very little substance. To the best of my knowledge, there is no serious biography of Zinoviev. How much is known of Andrei Andreev, an old Bolshevik – described by Stalin as ‘an active Trotskyist in 1921’! (p. 511) – who became one of the chief agents of the purges of the 1930s? Why did Krupskaya, who initially stood up to Stalin, instead of gracefully retiring into obscurity, remain on the Central Committee until her death, voting for the expulsions which technically had to precede the arrest and execution of Central Committee members (see Getty and Naumov, The Road to Terror, Yale, 1999)?
Marie only touches on the social and economic context of Stalinism, and here his testimony is ambiguous. He insists that ‘planning’ coexisted with Stalin’s arbitrary rule, even claiming that it was the planned economy that ensured the defeat of Hitler (pp. 711–2) (rather than recognising that Germany was unlikely to triumph over the combined might of the USA, the USSR and the British Empire).
In fact, Marie shows us a blend of corruption, incompetence and terror which is a mockery of the very word ‘planning’. Even the purges were carried out according to the free market principle of competition between sections of the state apparatus for the most victims (p. 546). Terror undoubtedly increased the productivity of labour when sheer brute force was the main thing required; but it could not provide the innovation necessary for a more sophisticated industrial society. One does not invent the computer at gun point.
As Marie shows, far from being a higher stage of economic development, the Russian economy was dependent on its international competitors. Its scientists were required to imitate developments already made in the West, rather than pursue new ideas. Original scientific research was positively discouraged, while a massive and highly expensive espionage network was built up so that Western inventions could be copied (p. 725).
Stalinist ideology was a positive obstacle to progress. Stalin encouraged the absurd, unscientific theories of the charlatan Lysenko, even at the cost of many lives through famine (pp. 780–3). But at one point he pulled back. He originally wanted to denounce relativity and quantum physics as ‘bourgeois science’, but was firmly told that they were the basis of nuclear weapons (pp. 796–7). Even the old butcher himself could not resist the pressure of capitalist competition, mediated through the arms race.
 



William M. Reddy
The Navigation of Feeling
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001, pp. 380
WHEN I was young, I was firmly instructed: ‘Only little girls cry.’ Nowadays thuggish boy footballers are constantly in floods of tears because they have lost a bonus. It is the recognition that human emotions are not a timeless given, but change with the historical process, that is the starting-point for William Reddy’s book, subtitled A Framework for the History of Emotions.
Pursuing a vigorously interdisciplinary approach, Reddy draws on contemporary work in psychology and anthropology, as well as the post-structuralist philosophy of Foucault and Derrida, to aid an understanding of how emotions work in history. The psychological work is the least convincing; it is far from clear how pushing buttons in a laboratory experiment when emotionally charged words are flashed on a screen can contribute to an understanding of how emotions function in human history.
From his sometimes frenzied tour of relevant academic studies, Reddy comes to the conclusion that emotions are not biologically based but learned (thus undermining the widespread assumption that women are by nature emotionally different to men). At the same time, he rejects the thoroughgoing relativism which would claim that there is no way of preferring the emotional values of one civilisation to those of another. The cultural manifestations of emotion are highly complex – as Reddy notes, people watch horror movies because in some sense they ‘enjoy’ being frightened.
Reddy thus makes out a serious case for the need to study emotions in an historical framework. It is when he tries to apply his method to a concrete historical period, France between 1700 and 1850, that he falls flat on his face in the most ungainly manner.
Reddy begins by asserting that ‘from 1794 to the present, the history of the Enlightenment has been presented largely as a matter of science, rationality, social contract, and natural right’ (p. 142). He argues that the eighteenth century also saw a powerful current of what he calls ‘sentimentalism’, but that this ‘was erased from the history books, until recent research … began to rediscover it’ (p. 147).
Reddy is very hot on ‘recent research’ – so hot that he has apparently had little time to study primary sources, and seems blissfully unaware that much of what passes for ‘new’ research is simply warmed-over commonplaces from the past. When I did a very conservative undergraduate course in eighteenth-century French literature some 40 years back, I would have faced certain failure if I had not grasped the importance of sentimentalism – or sensibilité as we called it – in this period. Back in the 1870s, the conservative historian Taine was linking sensibilité to the crimes of the French Revolution, and Trahard’s four-volume Les Maîtres de la sensibilité française au XVIIIe siècle of 1932 constituted a major historical assessment of the phenomenon (this book, like so much else, is absent from Reddy’s bibliography).
In his haste to be comprehensive, Reddy cheerfully grasps at second-hand judgements. Thus he tells us ‘Robert Darnton, in 1985, proclaimed Rousseau’s La Nouvelle Héloïse to be “unreadable”’ (p. 161). Reddy, apparently, has been quite happy to accept this judgement; there is no evidence of any first-hand investigation of one of the texts most relevant to his thesis. (I have some sympathy here; Rousseau’s novel is very long and tedious, and I only got halfway myself.) In fact, there is nothing unusual about this phenomenon of a best-seller becoming unreadable. Historians of the twenty-first century doubtless find it hard to understand the impact of Look Back in Anger or Catcher in the Rye; you had to be there just at the right moment to see the point.
Things go from bad to worse as he moves on to the French Revolution. His central claim is that ‘sentimentalist’ ideas offer an explanation of the Terror, and he tries to graft this onto the work of Furet and other revisionist historians. Now it is undoubtedly true that emotion played a major rôle in the revolutionary process; to put it crudely, there’s no point running a ‘terror’ if nobody’s scared. And this rôle has been recognised by all the classic historians of the Revolution from Michelet onwards, as Reddy would find out if he troubled to read them.
But the point is to show how emotions related to the social conflicts of the period, rather than offer them as an alternative explanation. For Reddy emotions, culture and ideology become determining factors. Thus he writes: ‘increasing intolerance … had a sentimentalist basis insofar as it rested on a Manichean fear of the immorality of plotters’ (p. 186). He should recall the old joke: ‘Just because you’re paranoid, it doesn’t mean they aren’t out to get you.’ After 1789, a long-established ruling group had been ousted from power which they believed, quite literally, to be their God-given right. They were prepared to use any means necessary to regain it. It is not necessary to follow the Popular Front historians in their veneration of the Terror; there are valid criticisms to be made of its methods, its targets and its rhetoric. But it was a response to very real conspiracies by the defenders of the old order; to forget that is to abandon any hope of making sense of the period.
But Reddy has little time for any attempt to articulate emotion with class. Ever happy to grasp at a second-hand judgement, he notes that ‘Richard Cobb long ago, and eloquently, complained of the lack of purchase of class concepts on the experience of the Terror’ (p. 198). Cobb, a former Stalinist fellow-traveller who jumped ship, produced important studies of the revolutionary armies, and was unlikely to have been as cavalier as Reddy in abandoning any use of the concept of class.
In fact, Reddy seems very ill at ease with the discussion of class. He believes that domestic servants were part of the ‘labouring poor’, when their whole social situation (and consequent rôle in the revolution) was worlds apart from, say, the dockers and market-porters among whom Babeuf won his support. He tells us that in the literary salons ‘differences of rank were set aside on entry’ (p. 150). While it may be true that lower aristocrats rubbed shoulders with debt-burdened writers, it is most unlikely that any poor peasants or water-carriers turned up to read out their sonnets. The ‘amoral aristocratic evildoer’, as depicted in Beaumarchais’ Marriage of Figaro, is dismissed as a ‘sentimentalist cliché … hardly consonant with the social reality of the time’ (p. 185). The popularity of Beaumarchais’ play, and the state ban on it, suggest that the figure was all too rooted in reality.
The treatment of the post-Revolutionary period is even thinner. Reddy retails some half-truths about Romanticism, obscuring rather than illuminating the question of its similarities to and differences from the sentimentalism of the previous century. He seems to assume that all Romantics believed in the concept of ‘art for art’s sake’, when many of its leading protagonists, notably Victor Hugo, vigorously repudiated it. There are in fact two important novels which trace the complex and subtle interplay between individual emotion and social change in the first half of the nineteenth century – Stendhal’s Scarlet and Black and Flaubert’s Sentimental Education. Neither rates a mention from Reddy.
Finally, Reddy – now obviously up against a deadline – gives a cursory analysis of some legal disputes from the 1820s, to show that his history is not merely literary. Here he shows that cases where individual motivation was at stake were conducted in more emotional terms than those which turned on technical points of law. Surprise, surprise!
In conclusion, Reddy argues that a society based on the profit motive allows greater freedom than one based on the ‘emotional discipline’ of the revolutionary period. Joining up with a long-established criticism of the Enlightenment, he argues that ‘belief in the natural origin of good feeling resulted in oversimplified and overoptimistic hopes for political reform’ (p. 326). On the other hand, ‘the advantage of the pessimistic outlook was that it lowered expectations’ (p. 328). In other words, you can’t change human nature, and if people have a low view of their own worth they won’t make large wage demands. This isn’t very striking for a book which makes such claims to originality.
Perhaps this is unfair. There is the germ of an important idea in this book. In the old days, an academic would have gone away, pored over the source material for years, and eventually come up with a sober and well-considered assessment. In the modern university with its factory-like drive to productivity, this is unimaginable. Professors are paid to write, not to read, and certainly not to think. Reddy is not a charlatan, merely a victim.
 



To many readers of International Socialism Michael Kidron is known only as a name that crops up in discussions of changes in capitalism after 1945. But without Kidron, who died in March, this journal would not have developed as it did over the last 43 years. [1] He was its founding editor and steered it through its first 20 issues from 1960 to 1965.
Kidron made many contributions to the left. Some will remember him for helping to build Pluto Press as an independent left publisher, others for the political atlases he produced with Ronald Segal. [2] As a theoretician he is known for his work on the ‘permanent arms economy’, notably his two books Western Capitalism Since the War [3] and Capitalism and Theory [4] (containing key articles Imperialism: Highest Stage but One and International Capitalism). [5]
But Kidron was also a remarkable editor and a prolific author of analyses and polemics. I had the enormous privilege of working with him on the editorial board of International Socialism between 1963 and 1965. [6] Kidron was warm, hospitable and humorous [7]; he wrote incisively [8], had the capacity to draw a talented team around him, and gave encouragement and criticism to new writers. Such qualities were vital to an editor, but they were not the essence. Kidron’s supreme ability was to use the journal as a means of developing the embryo of what was to become the Socialist Workers Party (SWP). [9] The best tribute this journal can pay is to recall his achievements as editor, letting him speak in his own words.
The middle of the long post-war boom was not a quiet time for socialists. If the economic base was – temporarily – stabilised, there was a lot going on up in the superstructure. In 1956–1957 destalinisation and the crushing of the Hungarian Revolution had driven several thousand workers and intellectuals out of the Communist Party; this created a milieu in which Marxist ideas could be discussed free from Stalinist dogmatism, [10] and led to the creation, in 1960, of New Left Review – not just a magazine but briefly a federation of clubs at which lively and open discussion took place. [11]
Meanwhile growing opposition to the nuclear arms race led to the rise of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. [12] At Easter 1960 some 100,000 people joined the march from Aldermaston. That autumn Labour Party Conference carried a resolution supporting unilateral nuclear disarmament, provoking a severe crisis when the party leader, Hugh Gaitskell, [13] refused to accept the decision.
Also in 1960 the Labour Party, seeking to cash in on the youth radicalisation produced by CND, launched the Young Socialists, which promptly became a battleground for the competing grouplets of British Trotskyism. Because most of the groups were operating with a theory 20 years out of date and sectarian habits bred of years of isolation [14], a broad youth movement soon became a factional jungle. [15]
These times offered great opportunities to revolutionaries. International Socialism was conceived as a journal of analysis and debate, where rational argument might rise above sectarianism. Originally its editorial board was not limited to the Socialist Review Group, but drew from almost all the Trotskyist-derived currents except the Socialist Labour League (forerunner of the Workers Revolutionary Party). This experiment failed; by 1963 it became simply the theoretical journal of the International Socialists group. It was serious but not solemn, had glorious covers designed by Reuben Fior, and contained such delights as poems by the 28 year old Adrian Mitchell. Theoretical articles by Alasdair MacIntyre, Peter Sedgwick, Nigel Harris and above all Tony Cliff and Kidron himself provided vital support for the heated debates in the Young Socialists.
The journal also had to act as a tactical guide. When the left won at Labour Party conference, it was, paradoxically, somewhat disoriented. It fell back on legalistic reliance on the party constitution, while the right turned to the grassroots and successfully overthrew the resolution in 1961. The editorial in International Socialism was a model of lucidity and showed the importance of the permanent arms economy theory in establishing that the bomb was a class question; it guided IS supporters beyond possible demoralisation to a concrete strategy:
It is on defence that the left has scored its only significant victory these last years; it is on defence that the Gaitskellite Right has decided to ‘fight, fight, and fight again’ …
But it is ... easy to exaggerate the extent of victory. However powerful the revulsion from the inhumanities of nuclear logic, it is a revulsion from one isolated component of a policy which has as yet remained unquestioned by the left at large, as by the bulk of workers. The bomb is the monster issue of a world divided into nation states, organised by power politics, a world divided – ultimately – into conflicting classes. To fight the bomb alone, as a separate issue, it might be enough to advance the ‘little England’ arguments given by Cousins. But to fight the complex of which the bomb is part, it is not. Gaitskell’s policy has strength because it appeals to a fabric of traditions; it is ‘realistic’ because recognisable. The left has still to find a way to fight Gaitskell’s ‘internationalism’ of states, with an internationalism of its own – of workers.
This is not a matter of merely finding arguments to match Gaitskell’s. The right’s most powerful weapon is their control of the party and trade union machine and the unscrupulous use they make of it ...
The left is in no position to face Gaitskell’s machine with one of its own. Our organisational resources reflect our weakness in policy magnified by the greater stress we place on convictions and on the spontaneous recruitment of people to implement them. Our strongest weapon would be to link the issue of defence with the stuff of ordinary life on which workers have shown unshakeable convictions to the point of heroism.
From this angle, it is significant that those sectors of workers that have been engaged in industrial struggle latterly – railwaymen, engineers, transport workers – are in general the most outspokenly unilateralist. It is even more significant that the central London busmen, highly critical as they are of Cousins’ leadership on industrial matters, are solidly behind him on the bomb issue. It is obvious that progress for the left lies in breaking down the high stakes of nuclear diplomacy into the small chips of class struggle.
It is here that the left might show its greatest weakness. There is nothing in the record of its accepted leadership to suggest that it will organise around a programme of argument by action rather than by word, or indeed, that it sees any connection between boss and bomb. On the contrary, to date it has remained a prisoner to the basic Gaitskellite assumption: that defence is a national issue, not a class one, and has been able to find none better than the anti-unilateralist Wilson as alternative leader ...
The issue of defence is too fateful for reconciliation. The left might be muddled and disorganised, but it represents a real protest at the suicidal implications of Gaitskell’s policy. It represents the possibility, at least, of embedding anti-NATO politics in the soil of class struggle. It represents the unity and working class bias of the Labour Party. In order to win, the left will have to recognise at some point that the fight needs be generalised and carried beyond the arid corridors of party headquarters. Likewise, it will have to conclude that the defence problem cannot be solved in a purely British context, and that the time has come to promote – actively – internationalism as an alternative to Gaitskell’s ‘collective security’. [16]
A little later, when the racist right ventured onto the streets, Kidron responded in vigorous fashion:
What should the labour movement do about the fascists? Stop them physically and directly, or rely on Acts ‘outlawing the dissemination of racial doctrines and practices’? One would have thought the lesson had been learnt 30 years ago and needed no repetition.
But no, Michael Foot writing in Tribune’s leader column (10 August) advises against taking matters into our own hands. Forgetting the massive opposition shown the fascists recently in London, Manchester and even village Gloucestershire, ignoring the readiness of CND and Young Socialist youth for do-it-yourself politics, he writes: ‘if it were accepted that the right of people to speak and demonstrate in this country should be settled by street fights and physical violence of one kind or another, the eventual casualty would be the right of free speech for many others besides the neo-Nazis. They would retaliate against left wing meetings.’
Let them dare!
Tribune needs to be reminded of two basic truths. The law is their law, not ours – capital’s not labour’s ... We might use the law sometimes, but never can we rely on it.
The second truth Tribune needs to ponder is that socialists are in this society but not of it. However small the socialist movement and however clogged its communications with the wider labour movement, it represents the possibility of an alternative form of society, an alternative social power. We are duty bound to assert that power where we are able.
If we do not, the dangers of partial fascist victories and of the roughneck politics Tribune fears will grow ... We can’t expect the constituency machine-men and parish pump tinkers to take to the streets, but Tribune should certainly get out of the way of ready anti-fascist fists. [17]
In the pacifist-influenced climate of the CND milieu, this provoked protests even from within the editorial board. Subsequent history has given the verdict to Kidron.
Debate with the thinkers of the New Left was also crucial. When the New Left Review team produced in 1960 a collection of essays entitled Out of Apathy, Kidron’s review was fraternal in tone, but sharp in analysis:
It would be difficult to find a better description of apathy than E.P. Thompson’s, in his introductory essay, namely that it is the state in which people look for private solutions to public evils. The essayists proceed to enlarge and refine the description ... Altogether – a string of sensitive, fresh probes into the shape of apathy, but very little to do with its roots.
We must presume that if people look for private solutions to public evils they have sensed that such solutions offer some semblance of an answer to the problems they meet or are likely to meet. Surely collective action has always resulted from the demonstration of individual inadequacy when faced with certain problems? Put in this way, a discussion of apathy seems valueless without a consideration of the conditions which permit private and real solutions to be congruent to some degree, in other words the conditions which relax the imperative for collective action and allow its replacement by an aggregate of individual acts.
What are these conditions? Collective action by whom? How do conditions and collective action react on each other? It is a weakness of the book that nowhere does it give a systematic exposition geared to these questions ... If the war economy and the other factors mentioned by Thompson have anything to do with apathy, as I believe they have, it is not some wondrous alchemy that transforms them into personal withdrawal. The chaotic boom has affected different regions and different industries differently; war-sustained technical innovation has accentuated the disparity of conditions in different places of work; the anomalies of union structure and complexities of industrial structure have added their tangles, to the end that the common fate of being exploited and employed tends to be lost in the detail of being exploited in this particular manner and employed by this particular firm ... It is this decline of class consciousness, this tendency towards fragmentation of the class struggle into its local constituents, which has corroded not only revolutionary socialism in this country, but also reformism and Stalinism which, in their twisted way, also owe their existence to some degree of class consciousness in the ranks of the workers. It is the filter through which capitalist prosperity must percolate to become apathy. Unfortunately, it is something whose existence does not seem to have been noticed by the authors of this volume, or if noticed, not considered sufficiently important to warrant full-length treatment.
I say ‘unfortunately’ in no patronising tone. The New Left has brought two very real treasures to the socialist movement: a sensitivity to the falsities and contradictions which go to make contemporary society east and west of the Iron Curtain, and a tireless assertion of human agency and human (as distinct from class) consciousness as the creators of history. These two characteristics are alone, eloquent protest at the indignities heaped on socialist thought by the orthodoxies of Stalinism and Social Democracy; for this alone, given the miserable scale by which we measure such things today, the New Left is a potent force for good in British socialism. But these are not enough in themselves. What is needed is an analysis of contemporary capitalism in terms of its impact on working class consciousness, prescriptions tailored to the weakness and strength of class consciousness today; in fact the recognition that class consciousness is the material with which we deal as socialists with a view to transforming it into a material force in its own right. Without this at its centre, socialist analysis loses its coherence and socialist programmes their reality. Both afflictions can be seen in this volume of essays ... The crucial weakness of the essays is the absence of a programme. I don’t mean that the essays are devoid of concrete proposals and demands ... What I do mean is that each demand is put forward as a good idea in itself unrelated to material considerations of class power and consciousness, lacking in the coherence that derives from class activity and therefore unable to link up and sustain the fragments of class struggle which are always with us into a broad, integrated and thus socialist, movement. I shall take E.P. Thompson’s concluding essay, Revolution, to substantiate this thesis. There is no quarrel with his rejection of the schematic, toy-soldier approach to revolution and social change held by the sectarian Left; I agree that ‘it is necessary to find out the breaking point (in capitalism) ... in practice by unrelenting reforming pressures in many fields, which are designed to reach a revolutionary culmination’. It is true that ‘this will entail a confrontation, throughout society, between two systems, two ways of life’ and that ‘in this confrontation, political consciousness will become heightened’. All this is well stated, but something is missing. Confrontation between whom? One presumes, one hopes, that Thompson means labour and capital, the working class and the capitalist class (not the idea of progress and the idea of stasis), but it is nowhere clearly stated. And the tiny fuzz that surrounds this question spreads rapidly: the moment Thompson directs the working class off-stage in his social confrontation, the state of that class’s political and social consciousness becomes of no immediate concern to him. It then becomes easy for Thompson to fix that consciousness: to give it its goals, to – and this is the crux – ignore the material factors in its development (just like the ‘vanguardists’ and ‘voluntarists’ which he inveighs against with such vigour). And so he blithely writes off ‘disaster as the prelude to advance’ forgetting that by disaster socialists have always understood those crises of capitalism – economic or political – which have fused individual and sectional struggles into classwide struggles, which have heightened consciousness of class and of the power of collective action; in other words, by disaster socialists have always understood precisely those conditions which bring together those ‘unrelenting reforming pressures in many fields’ at a time when they can be satisfied only through a ‘revolutionary culmination’.
But Thompson will have none of this talk of ‘conditions’ and suchlike in his sweeping revolt against determinism and ends up by more or less equating the struggle for socialism with the struggle for a change of attitudes within the socialist movement: ‘What is required is a new sense of immediacy’; ‘a break with parliamentary fetishism’; ‘research and discussion’. Yes; but how? It is time to sum up. Out of Apathy contains a lot of the good and a lot of the bad in the New Left. It is fresh and keenly sensitive to the more subtle brutalities of capitalism; it is passionate in asserting man’s responsibility for history, man’s creativity. But it shies away from a class analysis; it is blind to the material power of working class consciousness; it belittles the factors which impinge upon that consciousness. It has ideas, but unless these ideas become working class ideas aimed at working class power they will remain irrelevant to the socialist movement and powerless to advance it. [18]
In the pages of New Left Review, Edward Thompson described International Socialism as ‘the most constructive journal with a Trotskyist tendency in this country, most of the editorial board of which are active (and very welcome) members of the Left Club movement’, but revealed some of his own confusions in responding to Kidron:
The word ‘working class’ is about the most dangerous word in the rhetoric of the labour movement ... the sectaries employ it platonically to indicate ideas not actually held by significant numbers of working people but ideas which they ought to hold, or which it would be in their interests to hold, if they conformed to an approved doctrinal system. In this case, a ‘working class idea’ is an idea of which Michael Kidron approves. [19]
Kidron clarified the points at issue in a letter to New Left Review:
I see IS in the tradition of political action, a paper designed to serve the agent of social change – the working class – and therefore necessarily devoted to problems of class and class consciousness. We are not intellectual democrats – class struggle is our overriding theme. We try to study its working, to enhance it in the form of workers’ independent activity. We try to link its phenomena through time and between countries. We don’t think this is a narrow field. On the contrary, class relations and activity (or the absence of it) are the key to most of today’s major problems; what cannot be related to them, we often find irrelevant to our aim – revolutionary social change.
Not so the New Left. Here is an intellectual liberalism that makes equals of all problems. True, class and class consciousness are recognised as fields of enquiry, but so is so much else, and all so well segregated. Little is done to bridge them. I defy anyone to see in the spate of words on cinema and sentiment, painting and politics the primacy of a single galvanising element, to see in fact anything but the dislocation between the Statesman’s back and front written large. It is not that I disagree with Thompson on class, but with its weighting in what he writes; I might agree with what the New Left as a whole thinks of the matter, but I suspect that it hardly gives it a thought.
In a word, to my mind IS is geared to action; NLR is not. Action demands priorities of preoccupation; inaction can do without. [20]
But the most important debate was between reform and revolution. To be a revolutionary at all in the early 1960s was far from easy; to argue the case for revolution without relying on outdated language and outdated analyses required real intellectual clarity. International Socialism carried a major debate on left reformism, initiated by the labour historian Henry Collins. Kidron’s contribution extended far beyond the technicalities of the permanent arms economy to lay the basis for a political strategy. He began by showing the fundamental instability of modern capitalism:
For reformists capitalist instability is subject to cure within the system; for revolutionary socialists it is not. The reformist will point to the absence of major slumps since before the war; the revolutionary – apart from a lunatic fringe who see in every visit to the labour exchange a prelude to hunger marches – will accept the fact but question its relevance. Slumps have never defined the system; they merely indicated, viciously and publicly, its contradictory nature. Ultimately they derive from factors which are as inherent in capitalism today as they ever were, and which remain as powerful a source of instability.
Were it not that the productive forces of society are controlled by an infinitesimal minority of its members, the capitalists, the disposition of its resources over and above what is required for renewal would present no problem. It would conform to a pattern formulated by all in terms of present and projected needs and wishes. Were it not for competition amongst capitalists, whether organised in monopolies or not, there would be no compulsion for them to accumulate these surpluses and reinvest them in a constant, unplanned expansion of the productive structure. These statements are axiomatic in my argument. Without both these factors there would be no reason for the blind accumulations of capital – blind in the sense that it bears no immediate relation to the consumer needs of society – that has always defined the capitalist system. And it is this compulsive accumulation, the expansion of capacity in response to the exigencies of competition rather than to the needs of society, that has been the final cause of the periodic crises of overproduction that punctuated the development of capitalism until quite recently. It is also for Marx the underlying factor in the long-term decline in the rate of profit which, by lowering the ceiling of booms and shortening their duration, presaged for him a future of increasingly catastrophic slumps. [21]
He went on to show the implications for class consciousness and political intervention:
An obvious outcome is the decline of reformism as a political movement. Whether it is measured in the shrinking individual membership of the Labour Party, or in the changing nature of the party as Gaitskell drags it towards Brandt’s SDP, or in the utter confusion of the honest reformist left around Tribune, the symptoms of decline are all too apparent. On balance workers still vote Labour – although the balance among young workers is slowly tilting away – but the expectation of improvement from changes at Westminster is dying, and with it the degree of political involvement on the part of the working class.
This is not to say that workers are any less interested in reforms than they have ever been. The permanent arms economy has provided full employment; it has created the expectation of continued full employment and to that extent a degree of self confidence and indifference to authority little known in working class history. It is hardly to be expected that this confidence and bargaining power will be wasted. On the contrary, far from there being less interest in reforms and less involvement in gaining them, there are more; what has happened is a change in the forms and arena of struggle and, to an even more marked extent, a change in the troops.
In a word, workers have become their own reformists. Where before they pursued their reformist aims – minimum wages, maximum hours, health and other welfare services – by sending representatives to parliament, now, with the decanting of power out of parliament into the huge private complexes that control the economy, they take steps to achieve the same end directly, without intermediaries other than shop stewards’ or similar local organisations.
It is no part of this argument to idolise this development after the manner of the syndicalists. It has unpleasant aspects. However militant a body of workers, or successful in improving their own conditions, unless their militancy is generalised into political action, it can only result in deepening the gulf between themselves and less fortunate sections, those that are either too old or not lucky enough to work in the concentrated and growing industries. The pattern of capitalist success merely assumes a cloth cap. Their activity is sectional, it multiplies the fragmentation of their class, substitutes a local, ad hoc consciousness for class consciousness, leads to a distrust of political ideas and political organisations. The indictment is long and could be extended. Nevertheless, these things are happening. To deny it, or the relevance of sectional militancy or do it yourself reformism to modern conditions is to ignore contemporary capitalism’s most characteristic features and the realism of the working class response to them.
But if there is no case for idolatry, there is equally no cause for despair. By becoming his own reformist the worker rejects the inhibiting influence of the organised reformist party. It is he, directly involved in his local primary organisation, who bears the brunt of the conflict with capital; it is he who takes the decision, with scant reference to authority, to act; and it is his appreciation of the relation of forces between those fragments of capital and labour with which he has direct experience that informs his activity. For him reform and revolution are not separate activities, enshrined in distinct and separate organisational loyalties; his transition from reform to revolution is natural, immediate and unhampered by the vested interests of a reformist organisation and one eminently responsive to changing circumstances.
It is here that the discussion of capitalist stability ties in with the argument. Were the system as stable as Collins suggests, there would be no question of transition. It is only because of its fundamentally crisis-ridden nature that we can posit the transformation of sectional consciousness and loyalties into their class equivalents, and therewith a change of society, sharp and cataclysmic, as a realistic alternative to the deadly status quo.
To say this is not to underestimate the difficulties of transition. Reality is infinitely more complex and contradictory than appears here. And working class history is a confusion of revolutionary opportunities lost, of revolutionary consciousness castrated by the very fragmentation that has enabled sections of the class to attain a high order of self mobilisation. But this is where we must stop. To continue would entail a detailed discussion of the role of a revolutionary party, the problems of its formation and the forms it could take.
After 1968, for reasons that were probably partly personal and partly political, Kidron’s role in the organisation became much less central. But if it was Tony Cliff’s relentless determination that enabled the SWP to become what it is today, Mike Kidron’s part in educating the generation that seized the opportunities of 1968 and after should never be forgotten.

Notes
1. The first International Socialism (containing an article by Kidron on recent strikes) appeared in 1958. This was a one-off and a new series (quarterly, and from 1973 monthly) was launched at Easter 1960. This lasted till issue 104 in 1978. The new series, now approaching its 100th number, began in 1978.
2. For an overview of Kidron’s life see Richard Kuper’s obituary in The Guardian, 27 March 2003, Chris Harman, Permanent Legacy, Socialist Review 273, April 2003, or my own piece in Revolutionary History, vol. 8, no. 3 (2003).
3. M. Kidron, Western Capitalism Since the War (London 1968); revised Penguin edition (Harmondsworth 1970).
4. M. Kidron, Capitalism and Theory (London 1974).
5. For a critique of Kidron’s economic work see C. Harman, Better a Valid Insight than a Wrong Theory, International Socialism 1:100 (July 1977); C. Harman, Explaining the Crisis (London 1984); and Harman’s article Analysing Imperialism in this issue of the journal.
6. I owed my position to my knowledge of foreign languages, and not to my (negligible) political experience.
7. One of the joys of joining the International Socialists was to discover that one was allowed to have a sense of humour. For much of the Trotskyist left jokes were frowned on, unless they were recycled bits of abuse from Trotsky’s less well judged polemics. But while Tony Cliff never told a joke that did not have a direct political message, Kidron’s humour was more playful and self ironic, a recognition that however good the analysis there was always something left over.
8. He characteristically used a condensed and abbreviated style that often suggested he was submitting his copy by telegram at a pound a word. His work often had to be reread carefully to get the full wealth of meaning.
9. In 1960 the Socialist Review Group had less than 50 members; it changed its name to the International Socialists in 1962 and by 1965 had grown to over 200.
10. For a sense of the period read the earlier sections of D. Widgery, The Left in Britain (Harmondsworth 1976).
11. See I. Birchall, The Autonomy of Theory: A Short History of New Left Review, International Socialism 2:10 (Autumn 1980).
12. For a history of CND see R. Bulkeley et al., “If at first you don’t succeed”: fighting against the bomb in the 1950s and 1960s, International Socialism 2:11 (Winter 1980).
13. At this time Labour leaders were elected by the parliamentary party alone.
14. For the crisis of post-1945 Trotskyism see T. Cliff, A World to Win (London 2000), and S. Bornstein and A. Richardson, War and the International (London 1986).
15. To get a sense of the atmosphere in the Young Socialists read A Weekend with the Lumpentrots, Young Guard (June 1964), describing the factional degeneration of a YS weekend school. This appeared under the name Mike Caffoor but was written by Jim Higgins. Jim died last year and a collection of his political writings is currently in preparation.
16. Labour and the Bomb, International Socialism 1:3 (Winter 1960). This was before I joined the editorial board, and I cannot be sure it came from Kidron’s pen. Style and intellectual rigour suggest it did; if someone else drafted it, they were heavily influenced by Kidron.
17. Fists Against Fascists, International Socialism 1:10 (Autumn 1962).
18. Two Left Feet, International Socialism 1:2 (Autumn 1960).
19. Revolution Again!, New Left Review 1:6 (November/December 1961).
20. Intellectual Liberalism?, New Left Review 1:7 (January/February 1961).
21. Rejoinder to Left Reformism, International Socialism 1:7 (Winter 1961).
 



Dear Editor
In his review of Susan Weissman’s Victor Serge: The Course is Set on Hope (Revolutionary History, Volume 8, no. 2), Paul Flewers speculates on how Serge’s political thought might have developed had he survived into the Cold War period. It is always difficult to judge what figures from the past might have thought of events after their death, and it is doubly difficult with Serge, a complex and original thinker. As Richard Greeman points out in his review of Weissman (International Socialism, no. 94), Serge left a large number of unpublished manuscripts, many of them not considered by Weissman.
Flewers cites Alan Wald’s article Victor Serge and the New York Anti-Stalinist Left (The Ideas of Victor Serge, Critique, 1997) as suggesting that Serge might have been moving towards the view that Stalinism was the ‘main enemy’. Wald’s article is well-documented and balanced, and must be taken seriously. There is, however, an important text (not to my knowledge ever translated into English) which suggests a rather different direction of development.
It is one of a series of letters sent by Serge to the French socialist René Lefeuvre. Lefeuvre (1902–1988) is best known as the publisher of the Cahiers Spartacus, a series of books by a wide range of authors from the anti-Stalinist left (from Serge to Denis Healey). He also published the magazine Masses intermittently from 1933 onwards; a new series of 14 issues appeared between 1946 and 1948.
Serge’s letter is undated. The first part seems to have been sent for publication in Masses in the summer of 1946, but not to have reached Lefeuvre. Another copy with a postscript was sent, probably in October 1946. The Yugoslav incident mentioned may be a reference to the Trieste dispute. The letter was published in the 1984 reprint by the Cahiers Spartacus of Serge’s Seize Fusillés à Moscou (1936) (pp. 123–5). The letter makes three important points:


Serge is highly critical of reportage on Russia which is not adequately documented. His reason lies, not in some abstract notion of ‘honesty’, but in a recognition that only a properly supported argument will have any chance of making an impact on those sympathetic to Stalinism. Serge is not interested in mere denunciation; he believes it is desirable and possible to win over Stalinist workers.
 
Serge sees the dangers of war as lying rather more on the American side than on the Russian, since Russia is still exhausted from the Second World War. This is in the period before the Truman Doctrine of March 1947 opened the Cold War proper.
 
Most crucially, Serge recognises the double nature of the Stalinist parties in countries outside the Russian bloc. Despite their Stalinist politics, they are working-class parties and part of the working-class movement. And while he wisely refrains from recommending detailed tactics to his French comrades, he clearly believes that some sort of united front activity should be proposed to Communist workers.


The 1950s were a testing period for revolutionary socialists, and there were few who wholly escaped making concessions to either Stalinism or Western imperialism. But given the orientation spelt out in this letter, I find it hard to imagine Serge succumbing to Stalinophobia.
Ian Birchall

Victor Serge: Letter to Lefeuvre (undated)
 



THE death of Michael Kidron, so soon after the loss of Tony Cliff, Duncan Hallas and Jim Higgins, robs us of yet another of the older generation who built and educated the International Socialists (subsequently the Socialist Workers Party) in the 1960s.
I first heard Kidron speak at a student meeting in Oxford in the autumn of 1962. I was a CND supporter sympathising with the Labour left, but unimpressed by the theoretical standards of the Tribunites. As I listened to Kidron analyse the current state of capitalism, I was dazzled. This man really understood how the world worked, and I grasped that it was possible to be a revolutionary and intellectually rigorous at the same time. His concluding challenge has remained lodged in my skull for over 40 years — historically revolutions have followed wars; in the nuclear age we must reverse the order.
Kidron was above all associated with the theory of the ‘permanent arms economy’, which claimed that arms production was waste or luxury production and therefore, for a time, retarded the fall in the rate of profit, and made possible the long postwar boom. (For the genesis of the theory and the respective contributions of Vance/Oakes, Cliff and Kidron, see C. Harman, Explaining the Crisis, London 1984, pp. 77–8, 165–6). The theory has been much criticised, but on the essentials Kidron was proved right. In the early 1960s, the overwhelming majority of the left believed capitalism had overcome its contradictions, and that mass unemployment was gone for ever. Meanwhile, some benighted elements still talked of ‘absolute pauperisation’ and ‘impending slumps’. Against both, Kidron insisted that the boom was indeed real, but would not last forever. His prediction from 1961 has been amply justified by subsequent history: ‘Whatever the future holds, it is one of irreparable instability, of crises whose violence is such as to question the continued existence of capitalism as a world system at best, or at worst of civilisation itself.’ (International Socialism, no. 7)
For Young Socialists and students radicalised by CND, the theory linked the struggle against nuclear weapons to the fight against capitalism — a link summed up in the IS slogan ‘The fight against the Bomb is a fight against the Boss’. In its most extended version (Western Capitalism Since the War, London 1968; revised Penguin edition, 1970) Kidron’s theory encompassed planning, inflation, the decline of reformism and changing patterns of working-class struggle.
Almost equally important was his critique of Lenin’s theory of imperialism Imperialism. Highest Stage but One (International Socialism, no. 9). He characterised Lenin’s pamphlet as ‘supremely good theory’ for its own time, but showed that it no longer fitted the facts of the world four decades later. The follow-up, International Capitalism (International Socialism, no. 20), used the analysis to attack the Third Worldism so widespread on the 1960s left. He concluded:
To believe nowadays that the short route to revolution in London, New York or Paris lies through Calcutta, Havana, or Algiers, is to pass the buck to where it has no currency … The greatest service we can render international socialism is to help stoke up the fires at home.
(Interestingly, he noted that Portugal was still ‘old-model imperialist’; 10 years later colonial revolt was to bring this imperialist country to the edge of revolution.)
Kidron’s work as theoretician was paralleled by his activity as editor. In the late 1950s, he editedSocialist Review, the organ of the tiny group of the same name. Though the paper had only a few dozen members behind it, Kidron used it to debate with the mainstream left, for example in a vigorous discussion on the subject of wages policy — which he had already spotted would become a key issue in the 1960s — involving himself, Eric Heffer, John Hughes and Ken Alexander (Socialist Review, April 1959 to February 1960).
But his great editorial achievement was the first 20 issues of International Socialism (1960–65). The journal was founded as an explicitly Marxist rival toNew Left Review, also launched in 1960. In 1961, in his article Revolution Again! (NLR 6), Edward Thompson took Kidron to task for excessive invocation of the working class. Kidron responded with a letter in which he argued: ‘to my mindIS is geared to action;NLR is not’ (NLR 7).
The journal initially attempted to regroup the non-Healyite currents of the Trotskyist-derived left. The Editorial Board included at various times Ken Coates of the Fourth International, ‘Martin Grainger’ ofSolidarity, the Dunayevskayaite Harry McShane, and even a proto-Posadist (Theo Melville). The alliance could not hold together in the factionalised atmosphere of the period, and from 1963International Socialism became simply the theoretical journal of the IS group. (The group changed its name from Socialist Review to International Socialism in December 1962, apparently recognising that the journal, rather than agitational publications, was the most attractive public face of the organisation.)
The wealth of material in the first 20 issues ofInternational Socialism provided a splendid education for anyone new to Marxism. There were core articles designed to arm comrades for the arguments in the Young Socialists — an extended debate on Revolution and Left Reformism (involving Kidron, Alasdair MacIntyre and the historian Henry Collins), Cliff on ‘substitutionism’, permanent revolution, the Sino-Soviet split and Deutscher, and Kidron himself on Imperialism and International Capitalism, while Ken Coates and Sergio Junco (Sam Farber) presented alternative views of the Cuban Revolution. There were articles introducing us to hitherto unknown territory — Peter Sedgwick on Victor Serge, Erich Gerlach on Korsch, Jim Higgins on British Trotskyism, and Hal Draper’s magnificent Two Souls of Socialism. Although — indeed because —International Socialism had no truck with ‘international secretariats’ of any provenance, there were many international contributors: Jean-Jacques Marie on Gaullism, Paul Cardan (Castoriadis) on Socialism and Capitalism, Jean -François Lyotard on Algeria, Kan-ichi Kuroda on the Japanese revolutionary left, George Rawick on the American Negro Movement, and documents from the Socialist League of Africa written by Baruch Hirson.
The book reviews helped to develop a new generation of IS writers, among them Chris Harman and Nigel Harris. Kidron contributed frequently, often under the name David Breen. But there were also names which subsequently cropped up in a variety of places on the political and intellectual spectrum — Barry Hindess, Hilary Rose, Ian Taylor, John Corina, Mary-Kay Wilmers, J.P. Nettl and Richard Hyman. There were drawings by Abu, a collection of Songs with Teeth edited by Bobby Campbell (including Eric Morse’s immortal Workers’ Bomb), a short story by H. Orlando Patterson, and magnificent covers by Reuben Fior (two of which were included in an exhibition of Design and Art Direction at the Hilton Hotel). It was a team effort, but without Kidron the team would not have existed. And the editor’s whimsical sense of humour was always present — who but Kidron could have written a piece on drug company profits and the arms economy, and called it Arms Drugs and Booms-a-Daisy?
The editorials helped to steer comrades through a difficult period. The Labour Party Conference voted in 1960 against Hugh Gaitskell for unilateral nuclear disarmament. Amid the general euphoria of the Left, Kidron’s editorial struck a sour note, warning that it was ‘easy to exaggerate the extent of victory’, and arguing that if the victory were not to be reversed, the Left must learn to break down ‘the high stakes of nuclear diplomacy into the small chips of class struggle’. (Labour and the Bomb, International Socialism, no. 3) This may have seemed pessimistic, but after the Right’s success in 1961 it offered the best logic for continuing the struggle.
Kidron was not infallible. Sometimes his desire to grasp the wood as a totality led him to regard mere trees as an unnecessary distraction. In 1963 or 1964, as a very junior member of the Editorial Board, I suggested an editorial on Vietnam. Kidron looked at me with withering scorn and said: ‘You mean that little war! That silly … little … war!’ Vietnam always perplexed him; his own intelligence was so powerful that he found it hard to understand why ruling classes should act so stupidly.
In 1965, Kidron contributed a column to the fortnightlyLabour Worker under the name Frat Cain, in which he attempted to orient a new generation recruited through the Young Socialists to the novel experience of a Labour government. In his first piece, he argued thatTribune might be renamedThe Weekly Whisper, and concluded: ‘I would hate to see the Government topple meaninglessly or because business becomes restive. But if it falls because workers organize against wage-freeze and refuse the business-backed policies Labour is handing out, I should welcome it.’
He produced a document opposing Cliff’s organisational proposals during the debate on democratic centralism in 1968, entitled We Are Not Peasants (reproduced in Jim Higgins,More Years for the Locust, London 1997, pp. 145–6). He did not oppose democratic centralism in principle, but rather suggested an intermediate organisational form to fit the changing needs of IS.
He continued to provoke controversy. In 1968, Kidron reviewed Mandel’sMarxist Economic Theory under the title Maginot Marxism (International Socialism, no. 36), arguing that Mandel was ‘more concerned with defending Marx’s categories of analysis than with applying them’. Mandel responded with a pamphlet entitledThe Inconsistencies of State Capitalism (IMG, 1969). Inside IS, the undeclared faction around David Yaffe (later the Revolutionary Communist Group) made Kidron’s economics a particular target of their polemics. Kidron replied acidly: ‘As every Torah has its Talmud, so every Program has its Yaffe.’ (IS Bulletin, March 1973)
There was always a degree of tension between Kidron and his brother-in-law Tony Cliff. By the side of Cliff’s relentless focus on the unity of theory and practice, Kidron’s more relaxed style and broader culture could seem somewhat dilettante. Yet between 1955 and 1968, they worked closely together on the basis of mutual respect. As Cliff told me: ‘I have had many rows with Mike, because he is worth it.’ Kidron became somewhat less central to the organisation after 1968, though he continued to speak and write for it. Early in 1973, Cliff and Jim Higgins proposed to bring him back as editor ofInternational Socialism, now a monthly. (I was summoned to Cliff’s home and harangued for an hour about why I must vote for Mike. I didn’t.) He was appointed, but a deep split in the leadership now emerged, and he was replaced before taking office.
Though he did some speaking for a year or two more, this was really the end of the road. It is unclear exactly when Kidron left IS. Nothing was more alien to his nature than the classic Trotskyist procedure of the noisy split followed by denunciation of former comrades. By now he was increasingly involved, alongside Richard Kuper, in Pluto Press. Pluto had originally been established as a semi-autonomous publishing house for IS. But as the 1970s unfolded, the political priorities of a small revolutionary organisation seeking influence in the working class increasingly diverged from those of a left-wing publishing house trying to ensure commercial survival. There were failures to liaise and faults on both sides; by the end of the 1970s there was complete divorce between Pluto and the SWP.
In 1977, Kidron contributed a critique of some of his earlier positions to the hundredth issue of the journal he had founded, entitled Two Insights Don’t Make A Theory (International Socialism, no. 100). He now argued that the postwar boom had happened ‘despite the arms economy, not because of it’. More seriously, he claimed the rôle of trade unions had changed so much that ‘a political strategy structured around them is bound to fail’. This implied rejection of the rank-and-file strategy pursued by the SWP.
Thus ended Kidron’s 20 years in the organised revolutionary movement. (For an overview of his whole life, see Richard Kuper’s excellent obituary in theGuardian, 27 March 2003.) But in his published writings and his unpublished work (he left behind a 750,000-word manuscript) he continued to pursue the understanding of capitalism as a total system.
Last year, he contributed a final article to the SWP journal (Falling Growth and Rampant Costs: Two Ghosts in the Machine of Modern Capitalism, International Socialism, 2/96). He examined the rôle of waste in modern capitalism; here were still the same penetrating intelligence, the same playful humour and the same indignation at the irrational system we live in. He ended with the delightful — and utterly Kidronesque — image of a married couple, he a tax inspector, she a tax avoidance accountant, whose endless labours are ‘mutually cancelling’; their son, neglected by his hard-working parents, becomes a vandal. Death prevented further collaboration, but all of us who learned some of our Marxism from Mike Kidron will continue to be indebted to him.
 



Theodor Bergmann and Mario Kessler (eds.)
Ketzer im Kommunismus: Alternativen zum Stalinismus
Decaton Verlag, Mainz 1993, pp. 383, DM 48
AFTER the collapse of Stalinism, the task of rebuilding a healthy Socialist tradition requires a critical assessment of the history of the movement, in particular of the various thinkers and currents that opposed Stalinism during its long period of dominance. As a contribution to this task, Bergmann and Kessler have edited a collection of 20 essays dealing with what they call ‘heretics in Communism’.
The editors have cast their net wide. Beginning with Luxemburg and Trotsky, they include not only oppositional figures such as Nin and Trotsky, but also ‘alternative’ currents within the bureaucracy itself, such as Khrushchev and Liu Shao-chi. The story ends with the Czech Communist Party and Gorbachev.
The book contains much valuable documentation. Whilst in general, the various authors are sympathetic to their chosen subjects, there is little hero-worship, and always a balanced attempt to assess weaknesses as well as qualities. But since the contributors subscribe to no common analysis, the whole question of ‘alternatives to Stalinism’ broached in the book’s title is left somewhat in the air. For some contributors, it is simply a question of alternative policies that might have been adopted by Stalin – or Mao or Dubcek – had they been a little wiser, or a little more humane. For others, Stalinism seems to be implied in the whole Bolshevik enterprise, and hence we have to start again, although no one seems quite sure from where (the final essay on Gorbachev ends with the words ‘On the road again’, but Canned Heat lyrics are scarcely likely to be the source of Marxist renewal). As a result, the book can be seen as no more than a collection of useful but unprocessed raw material.
Part of the problem is the varied nature of the figures dealt with. The opening chapters, on Luxemburg and Trotsky, add little new, but they do make it clear that for these Marxists, Socialism was to be defined by the self-emancipation of the working class, and that this was the criterion by which any alleged ‘workers’ state’ was to be judged. Tito’s revolt against the Kremlin and Khrushchev’s Secret Speech are significant historical events deserving of critical appraisal, but their protagonists had scant interest in workers’ self-emancipation, as the murdered Belgrade Trotskyists and the workers of Budapest could have testified.
It is also striking that in the broad range of ‘heretics’ treated, there is not one who developed any serious analysis of Stalinist society in terms of a form of class rule. There is no Serge, no Shachtman, no James, no Djilas, no Cliff, no Kuron and Modzelewski. Apparently, some heretics are too heretical.
But if the book as a whole fails to deliver its promise, many of its parts are of considerable value. All but the most erudite will have something to learn from the essays on Thalheimer, Arthur Rosenberg, M.N. Riutin (whose anti-Stalinist document of 1932 is reproduced), M.N. Roy and Robert Havemann. Whilst at first sight Frantz Fanon might seem out of place in such a collection, Hansen and Schulz make a good case for his work as an important contribution to Socialist thinking, fashioned in opposition to the betrayals of the French Communist Party. Fanon was not a black nationalist, and he stressed the role of European allies in the Algerian liberation struggle; he rejected Russian ‘state capitalism’ as a model for Third World development, and he had interesting views on the relationship of party and class. Now that the post-cooption of Fanon as a ‘Third Worldist’ is more or less dead, it may be time to look again at this important thinker.
Jones and Mitchell attempt to make out a case for Isaac Deutscher as the most important Marxist thinker of the postwar period. Deutscher’s historical skill and his great influence on those of us who came to Trotskyism in the 1950s and 1960s are unquestionable. But although the authors are scrupulous in recognising that Deutscher grossly overestimated the progressive nature of the Soviet economy (a four-hour working day by 1984), they still fail to make their case because of certain problems shared by most of the contributors to this volume. Firstly, they claim that had Deutscher lived to see the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, he might have revised his optimistic hopes in the Eastern regimes’ capacity for self-reform. But on their own evidence, he could not have done so without abandoning his entire theoretical structure. Secondly, they commend Deutscher for his opposition to Trotsky’s founding of the Fourth International. Now Deutscher may well have been right that it was the wrong time to found a democratic centralist International. But the more profound difference was between Trotsky’s persistent determination to preserve an organisation, and Deutscher’s retreat into the ‘watchtower’. In a sense, Deutscher sums up the problem with this volume – most of its subjects either tried to reform the bureaucracy from within, or criticised from without from a position of isolation. Neither offers a way forward for Socialists today.
 



David Cotterill (ed.)
The Serge-Trotsky Papers
Pluto Press, London 1994, pp. 275, £14.95
IN the 1930s Leon Trotsky fought unceasingly to found a new International clearly based on firm revolutionary principles. The Fourth International when founded excluded Victor Serge, Alfred and Marguerite Rosmer – but included James Burnham.
The publication of The Serge-Trotsky Papers provides some new insights into the tangled and paradoxical politics of those years. The book was originally conceived by the late Peter Sedgwick, who did so much to promote the knowledge of Serge’s work in Britain. With commentaries by David Cotterill, Philip Spencer and Susan Weissman, the book contains the correspondence between Trotsky and Serge as well as related documents on Kronstadt, Spain and the Fourth International. Whilst Trotsky’s criticisms – sometimes stinging – of Serge were already known in the movement, this is the first time that Serge has been able to defend himself in his own words to an English audience.
The strength of all Serge’s writing is its grasp of the concrete, and his letters are a grim testimony to an age of defeat. Just escaped from Russia, Serge is haunted by the privations of those he has left behind in the so-called ‘workers’ state’. He writes to Trotsky of the fate of Lado Dumbadze, paralysed in both arms and unable to dress himself, but transferred from one place of deportation to another without medical care. He recalls how a copy of Trotsky’s My Life found its way to Moscow, and was passed from hand to hand; Serge had a single night in which to read it.
But the bleakness of the context did not blunt the polemic between Serge and Trotsky; on the contrary it made them both more determined to fight for the ideas they believed could offer a way out. David Cotterill tries to identify the roots of the differences between the two men as lying in their political origins, arguing that whilst Trotsky’s views were formed ‘within the Russian movement’, Serge’s were ‘imbued with the experience of Western movements’ (pp. 36–7).
But the evidence of the text is otherwise. Certainly Serge is correct in many of his detailed criticisms of the Trotskyist movement. Trotsky and his closest associates were not free from sectarianism, and many of his best writings are marred by a tone that is decidedly unhelpful. (The history of the movement since his death is littered with examples of those who had the tone but not the analysis.) And it is very arguable that it was a mistake to proclaim the Fourth International in 1938.
But the subsidiary errors must be seen in the context of Trotsky’s overriding concern with organisation. And despite the bankruptcy of his Fourth International as such, history has given the verdict to Trotsky. In those countries (France, Britain) where Trotskyism established a toehold in the 1930s, the post-1968 left has survived, battered but not destroyed; in those where Trotskyism was unable to implant itself (Germany, Italy), the post-1968 left evolved through Maoism to self-destruction, leaving the field open to the far right.
Against this, Serge’s organisational recipes are far from convincing; in 1939 he wrote to Trotsky:
The solution, I believe, lies in an alliance with all the left-wing currents of the workers’ movement … in free, comradely discussion of every issue, without abuse and mutual recriminations; in the creation of an International Bureau of committees and similar bodies … one must abandon the idea of Bolshevist-Leninist hegemony in the left-wing workers’ movement, and create an international alliance … (p. 109)
The sentiments are pleasingly libertarian, but the historical record of such ‘alliances’ is not good. (By coincidence, as I write this, a copy of Red Pepper has fluttered through my front door.)
In practice, Serge confined himself to recommending Trotsky to work with some of the revolutionary Syndicalists of the older generation. Serge, of course, remembered that in the founding of the French Communist Party the revolutionary Syndicalists had been the best elements – better by far than most of those coming from the alleged mass workers’ party of the SFIO. But whilst many of those mentioned were fine militants, it was clear that, in the absence of a new upsurge, they had little to offer.
The other key area of difference was the question of the Popular Front, and in particular, the Spanish Revolution. Serge aligned himself closely with the POUM, whilst Trotsky continued to see it as the ‘chief obstacle’ (p. 148) to the building of a revolutionary party. Behind this lay Serge’s lack of clarity on the question of Popular Frontism. He argued that if the working class ‘exerts enough pressure on the Popular Front, the latter can be a useful transitional form which will allow the workers to enter the later phases of the struggle with greater possibilities’ (p. 84). Serge’s instinct is clearly to ensure that Trotskyists do not stand aside when the class is in action, but the political logic is very dubious (rather like that of those who argue that the only way to relate to the Labour Party is to enter it). As for Serge’s slogan ‘transform the Popular Front from an instrument of class collaboration into an instrument of class struggle’, it is like demanding the transformation of a rat into a horse: the Popular Front is class collaboration.
The Serge-Trotsky Papers is a profoundly sad book. In reading the correspondence, from its initial warmth to its final acrimony, it is impossible not to wish for a Hollywood-style conclusion where Leon and Victor embrace and walk together into the sunset. In a more favourable conjuncture two such acute and dedicated revolutionaries could have complemented each other in the ranks of a mass movement. They are both part of our tradition.
 



THE FRENCH CRISIS is beginning, not ending, but it is now possible to attempt a preliminary estimate of the first phase of the struggle.
It is clear that although the particular form and timing of the French events took the revolutionary left by surprise as much as anyone else, in its essential features the general strike has confirmed the perspective that this paper has put forward over recent years.
Firstly, France has shown, more clearly even than Hungary or the Belgian general strike, that the working class of the advanced countries has not been bribed or integrated into complacency, but retains enormous revolutionary potential – even though France has the most sophisticated form of planned Western capitalism. The exceptional militancy of workers in the most modern sectors of industry, including motors and electronics, has shown that such militancy is in no way a hangover from the past, but a crucial portent for the future.
Secondly, the crisis has clearly indicated the role of such social groups as students. The French students played a central part, acting, as it were, as “detonator” for the social explosion – but they themselves were not able to act as the agents of social change, but merely to set the stage for the working class. Nor were the students able to hold out on their own after the workers returned to their jobs.
Thirdly, the position of the Communist Party in a direct confrontation with the bosses and their state machine has been shown to be, not merely insufficiently radical and militant, but completely counter-revolutionary.
But when all this has been said, the real problem remains. Why was the French working class unable to carry its initial victory through to the establishment of workers’ councils and a workers’ government?
 
Setback
The acceptance of elections is quite clearly a setback. In many situations the possession of democratic liberties and a representative assembly are positive assets for the working class, worth struggling for and defending.







But when real power, the means of the production of wealth, is in the hands of the workers, it is nothing short of a defeat to trade this for the right of “misrepresentation” in an elected body within the capitalist framework.
As a result, the victory of the Gaullist forces in the election comes as no surprise. If the left has shown itself incapable in struggle of establishing a regime based on workers’ power, there seems little point in inviting it to manage a capitalist economy.
It is not possible to present the results of the French struggle in terms of a simple profit and loss account. One cannot measure concrete economic gains against experience and demoralisation. The dynamic of a social movement is such that, if it does not go forward, it will start to go back.
At the end of May, the French workers had made unprecedented economic gains and the only thing that remained for them to go forward to was a revolutionary seizure of state power. For various reasons, they did not do this and from this point on it was possible for the bourgeoisie to regroup.
de Gaulle, whom even his most fervent supporters were ready to desert, was able to win them back to a massive demonstration; the army and police, whose loyalty was in severe doubt, enthusiastically rallied to the “ restoration of order.” Many of the most vicious acts of repressive brutality occurred, not when the workers and students were on the offensive, but when the return to work had already started.
Those leaders and advisers of the working class who counselled that further militancy would be a provocation and led the way to an illusory reconciliation have the blood of their comrades on their hands.
The danger is that this turn of the tide may continue, and allow a regroupment of extreme right wing forces. The return of Georges Bidault and the release of General Salan have indicated such a danger. We should not be hysterical about this prospect: the men, who brought de Gaulle to power in 1958 were betrayed by him over the Algerian issue and have spent the last seven years trying to kill him, will not easily be reunited with him.
Nor is there any mass base for fascism at the moment. The pro-Gaullist demonstrators, while they might well be sympathetic to some brand of fascism, had few members in the right age-bracket for street-fighting. Bidault showed a keen sense of political realism by refusing to expose himself to defeat and isolation by standing for election at this stage.
But in the long term – and not so long as all that – there is a huge political vacuum, and if the socialist forces do not fill it, the fascists will. Those who dream of a return to the status quo, however well-intentioned they may be, will only help to prepare the way for fascism.
In order to evaluate the nature of the general strike it is necessary to recognise the very complex interweaving of economic and political demands. It is an oversimplification of the situation either to reduce it entirely to a movement for higher wages and improved conditions, or to condemn as betrayal any raising of political or economic demands as opposed to “ pure ” revolutionary demands.
In different sectors, different industries, different regions, there was a wide range of demands – some quite simply for higher wages and longer holidays, some for purely political changes like the sacking of Pompidou or de Gaulle, many, perhaps predominantly, for control or participation in some form.
To understand the nature of such demands for control it is necessary to remember that corporatist ideology, the identification of all classes’ interests with that of the ruling class, has made much greater headway in France than in Britain. France has a highly developed system of economic planning with representation for employers and trade unionists.
The problems of “participation” and “democratic planning” are constantly on the lips of economists and bureaucrats. When de Gaulle spoke of the need for greater participation in the national economy and the partnership of capital and labour, he was not making any dramatic new adaptation to the events, but repeating the kind of speech he has been making since the Liberation.
Of course de Gaulle’s corporatism – scarcely distinguishable from that hawked by Mendès-France and the former Catholic CFDT trade union – is fraudulent. But it has a dual effect. On the one hand, when workers constantly hear talk of participation instantly hear talk of participation in control, they begin to ask for it in real earnest. On the other hand, it may lead to serious confusion and deception in a period of crisis and concession.
 
Control
In countless cases over the last few weeks workers have been faced with the real issues of control of economic life. In some places workers committees have established links with the discontented peasantry to continue food supplies. Print workers and radio personnel have been faced with important decisions in controlling the crucial dissemination of information.
Reports from the CSF electronics factory at Brest tell of workers establishing a committee to completely reform the management structure of the factory. Doubtless many more similar examples will be uncovered when the full history of the strike is written.
The strike has involved a “cultural revolution” in the best sense of the term. This has centred on the students of the Sorbonne, but has been manifested by the spread of the strike even to groups like footballers and Folies Bergères dancers. The vast creative potential of non-alienated man has again, as at other crisis points of history, been glimpsed.
The French crisis was beyond a shadow of a doubt spontaneous – even a paranoid could hardly read it as a “communist plot,” and none of the revolutionary groupings had the resources to initiate it. But spontaneity is inevitably irregular and uneven. And if all revolutions of history have begun spontaneously, none has ever ended so.
If France, May 1968 has much in common with Russia, February 1917, there are two crucial differences – this time there are very few real soviets (as distinct from strike committees) and no party able to take on the mantle of the Bolsheviks.
As a result, it has been possible for the counter-revolutionary forces to exploit the contradictions and unevenness of the movement. This must be seen in terms of two specific aspects of the French situation – the political orientation of the trade unions and the role of the Communist Party.
The French trade-union movement, growing up at a time when parliamentary democracy was blatantly corrupt and ineffective, never shared the parliamentary illusions of its British counterpart. On the contrary, syndicalist ideas were very strong in it.
Occupation of the factories is not a new phenomenon in France – it was the most notable feature of the general strike of June 1936 at the time of the Popular Front government. Such occupations, of course, pose the question of control much more clearly than ordinary strikes, and are much more beneficial to the strikers’ morale.
Secondly, the French trade-union movement has been divided since 1948 into three political tendencies. As a result, the unions have been used to fight out the political disagreements between the major parties, rather than for straightforward defence of trade-union interests. This kind of “politicisation” of the unions did not, of course, benefit the workers, as can be seen by the sharp fall in union membership in France from seven million at the end of the war to just over two million today.
The political strike – of the one-day stoppage variety – has been widely used by the CGT, both during the Algerian war and against the Gaullist economic policy. It has served mainly as a safety valve to divert and weary the workers of conventional politics.
In this context the role of the CFDT is of particular interest. Originally a Catholic union, it broke its formal religious ties in 1964, and has developed its position as a “non-political” union ever since. Although its industrial base does not compare with that of the CGT, it has made significant inroads into the technological industries such as electronics.
In the present crisis it has at almost every point outflanked the CGT on the left, and in fact forced the CGT to support many actions to which it was originally opposed. In a recent statement, Seguy, secretary-general of the CGT, gave as one of his main reasons for not pursuing unity with the CFDT the latter’s excessive sympathy for the “ ultra-left ” groupings.
This is not to deny the essentially bureaucratic and reformist nature of the CFDT. It is rather to point out the extremely complex relation of political and economic demands; a situation in which concrete economic demands may be more revolutionary than an abstract political line imposed from outside. Even the enormous social explosion of the last months has only begun to fracture the deep-rooted structure of reformism.
This of course brings us to the most crucial factor in the whole situation – the role of the French Communist Party. For all too long the revolutionary left has thought that it was sufficient to expose Stalinism – to reveal its zig-zags, its opportunism and its betrayals.
What is required is a much more profound analysis of the sources of the enormous strength and resilience of the Communist Party. To do this requires a recognition that Stalinism has a coherent logic. Whatever may be the motives of the leadership, the rank and file militants who have beaten up leftists and turned students away from the factories do so out of the sincere acceptance of a political position.
 
Policy
In 1936 and 1945 the strategy of the Communist Party was largely directed from Moscow. Today, though Moscow still has a general interest in “stability,” nuclear weapons have replaced the international communist movement as its main instrument of foreign policy. The Communist Party must be understood more and more in terms of the traditional social democratic parties, with a growing gulf between leaders and rank and file.







In view of the fact that it has been universally recognised that the CP has not led the present struggle but acted as a brake on it, it may at first seem surprising to learn that the party has gained in strength and support during recent weeks. But this is in accordance with the party’s historical development.
Its two greatest periods of growth have been in the Popular Front of 1936 and the Liberation of 1945; both were occasions when it held back a working-class thrust towards taking power and diverted it into safe parliamentary channels.
The great resilience of the French CP was shown at the time of the Hungarian Revolution. Certainly the rank and file did not support the Russian action – the leaders of the CGT were unable to get their members to endorse the Russian action, and had to leave it as an open question. But the party lost few members or votes over the question, because there was no plausible, alternative working-class party in view.
Despite a long-term tendency for its working-class base to decline, the CP has built itself deep roots in the factory organisations. French factories do not have the same system of shop stewards as in Britain; delegates are elected to factory committees to negotiate with the management, but nomination to these elections is confined to the official union bodies, and not on the basis of personal knowledge of and contact with the representative, as in the British shop stewards’ movement. As the strongest trade union body, the CGT has kept a firm grip on shop-floor organisation, a grip which continued through the recent strike.
In more general terms, the CP has all the plausibility of the accomplished fact. In the minds of most workers it is identified with the left and is the only left they know. In these circumstances a general movement to the left will benefit the CP. The Party may now be finished among the students, but its disintegration among the workers has hardly begun.
It is not through exposure that the CP will be defeated among the workers, but through the breakdown of reformism through the experience of revolutionary activity. Therefore the exposure of the Communist line must always be accompanied with the united front with rank and file CP member in all concrete struggles. [1]
 
Experience
The French struggle will not be resolved quickly. What happens will depend on the emergence of alternative forces to the left. The call for a “new leadership” is not an elitist demand; it is a simple recognition of the need for a body to communicate and develop experience in struggle, and prepare for the transference of the state to the hands of the working class.
Doubtless there will be a number of contenders for this role, for it is no longer difficult to stand to the left of the CP. Among others, Mendès-France (who resigned from de Gaulle’s government in 1945 because of its refusal to impose a total wage freeze) is grooming himself for the role. But the only organisations worthy and able to fulfil the role are the “grouplets” so despised by the Communist Party.
No one section of the revolutionary left need be singled out. The roll of honour has been drawn up by de Gaulle himself in dissolving these organisations. (They were, incidentally, dissolved under a law drawn up to liquidate fascist groups. Advocates of legal action against fascists please note).
Meanwhile the CP enjoyed full radio and TV facilities in the election campaign. The Trotskyist groupings Voix Ouvrière and the Jeunesses Communistes Révolutionnaires played a valuable role, and the permanent liaison committee established between them is an important step forward to regrouping on the left. But, inasmuch as they abandoned sectarian attitudes and adapted to the real conditions, maoist and anarchist groups played a useful part, too.
 
Penetrate
It is not for us to suggest to the French comrades how to respond to the legal dissolution. But revolutionary ideas are like nails – the harder you knock them, the deeper they penetrate. The long haul ahead will depend on profiting, by patient propaganda and discussion, from the disillusion with the CP, especially among the most militant sectors and those slowest to return to work. This will be the work of years rather than months.
French workers are returning to work with substantial gains, not only on economic terms, but in experience. At the same time there is inevitably a feeling of retreat from the total victory that seemed promised in May. What happens next will be a crucial test of tactics and militancy. Many, though not all, of the gains of the Popular Front of 1936 were rapidly lost through devaluation and rising prices. The consequent demoralisation made possible the capitulation to fascism in 1940.
In the short term the French ruling class is willing to make concessions, rather than lose everything. Cuts will be made in other sectors – already there has been talk of cutting back on the independent nuclear striking force (a vindication of the old slogan “A blow against the boss is a blow against the bomb”).
But in the long term severe attacks will be made on the French workers’ gains. This is especially true in the context of international competition, and in a situation where much employment depends on the siting of US subsidiaries in Europe.
If French wages are higher and management rights limited, US firms will shift production elsewhere. So now a European strategy for the working class becomes a reality as never before. Other Western European workers must decide whether to cut French workers’ throats, or seek to extend the French gains throughout Europe. The basis of a European-wide movement has already been laid among the students; perhaps more significant was the refusal of Belgian print-workers to print ballot papers for de Gaulle’s phoney referendum when he could not get them printed in France.
 
Prepare
The lesson for Britain is therefore not merely to substitute Knightsbridge for Grosvenor Square in the demonstrators’ weekend round, but to prepare a revolutionary movement in Britain.
The initial success of the French uprising was of enormous value in inspiring British militants to develop their struggle; but the evidence of the continuing stranglehold of Stalinist reformism must caution against undue optimism and telescoping of the perspective.
On the one hand, France has shown the falseness of the purely economistic – bread-and-butter – trade union perspective. A revolutionary movement does not grow naturally out of a mere accumulation of partial economic struggles. In France it was only after a direct political confrontation that we saw the unleashing of a vast movement of economic demands.
But on the other hand, France should not give the cue for a voluntaristic strategy. Turning over a few cars in Grosvenor Square will no more automatically lead to a general strike than a Guevara going into the hills will automatically lead to a new Vietnam.
 
Crucial
The dramatic events of the Paris barricades had to be paralleled by a long patient campaign of contacting workers and political education. In this students have a crucial role to play, providing they recognise that they have no interests and no independent role outside of the general strategy of the working class.
The only middle term between economism and voluntarism is the creation of a revolutionary organisation. This can bring together students and workers; it can combine an overall political perspective with deep roots in the actual fragmentary struggles of the workers.
In France the creation of such an organisation is now on the order of the day; in Britain it is not so far removed.
*
Footnote
1. This is of course doubly true in the British situation, where a small Communist Party in opposition to a ruling Labour Party does not have the same pressures towards the right that are felt by a mass party like the French. The line that makes the British CP turn its back on the VSC and rent strikes is the same logic that counsels a return to work in France, but while there are many lessons to be drawn for British party members in the French events, this should not disrupt the united front at grassroots level.
 



CHARLES DE GAULLE’S decision not to devalue the franc has been compared to a brilliant poker bid.
But while gambling man Charles plays the international financial game, the French working class are like the wife and kids sitting at home wondering if there’ll be enough left to pay the gas bill.
To understand the logic of de Gaulle’s strategy we must go back to last spring’s general strike.
 
Keep the workers split
Faced by the united action of 10 million workers occupying the factories, de Gaulle, like any other ruler, was powerless.
It was only by playing on the divisions in the working class that he was able to survive the crisis.
Since then, de Gaulle’s strategy has always been to keep the workers split. Above all, he had to avoid any head-on collision with the entire working-class movement.
If he had devalued the franc last summer, or attempted to impose a total wage freeze, he would probably have had a second general strike on his hands.
Instead he gambled on expansion, setting a very high target for industrial growth. It half came off.
The much heralded ‘Red October’ fizzled out into nothing more than a few student demonstrations. But the international financial crisis, plus the speculators in France, brought fresh trouble. (Contrary to what is often implied, most speculators are Gaullists, not communist wreckers.)
The new measures do represent a vicious attack on working-class living standards The cut-back in subsidies to the nationalised industries is going to mean higher prices for gas and electricity and higher railway fares. Every worker’s pocket will be hit.
The general effect of the measures will be an increase in unemployment, but not a big one. Estimates are about 200,000 more out of work.
But this comes at a time when unemployment is growing and when many bosses are trying to weed out the militants and ‘troublemakers’ who took a lead in the strike last spring.
All over France struggles are going on in different factories against victimisation. Where immigrant workers are involved, militants are often not just sacked but deported – sometimes to the welcoming arms of the Spanish or Portuguese police.
 
Total wage freeze out
Growing unemployment will make this struggle all the tougher.
And remember that French workers are already badly off compared, say, to the Germans. Despite their four weeks holiday a year, French workers work 12 per cent more hours – about five hours a week – a year more than workers in other Common Market countries.
All the same, de Gaulle’s government has not dared impose a total wage freeze. That would have meant taking on all the workers together.
The process of attacking wages and conditions will continue in the form of local skirmishes. Already, the French Employers’ Federation has demanded limitations to trade-union rights and a preservation of ‘authority’ in the factories.
But the present crisis is going to mean a lot of trouble for the Gaullists. Most explanations of Gaullism fail to recognise its peculiar quality.
Essentially, Gaullism represents an attempt to create a corporate state – that is, capitalism with state planning and the trade unions sucked into the planning machine. As such, it is a more advanced form of the kind of society the British Labour government aims at.
Around the hard core of corporatism, however, there are a lot of frills. In particular, de Gaulle’s peculiar patriotism – his eccentric foreign policy with regard so America, the Common Market, etc.
Now that America has helped to bail out de Gaulle, some of these frills may have to go and de Gaulle will have to be more friendly to the US and US policies.
This could lead to a complete regrouping of political forces in France. The Gaullists are already split, between the hard-core right wingers and the reformers who genuinely believe in the myth of ‘participation’ for workers in industry that was widely discussed last spring as a sop to the strikers.
So the government lurches between two extremes. De Gaulle, who last June released the fascist General Dalan, now bans the fascist terror group Occident (though whether his police will enforce the ban is another matter).
 
Collapse of Federation
Already some of the ‘Left Gaullists’ have criticised de Gaulle’s failure to be tough enough with the currency speculators.
Meanwhile the non-communist Federation of the Left has collapsed. A whole bunch of politicians are discussing forming a new opposition party.
But their only real opposition is to the frills of de Gaulle’s policy – like keeping Britain out of the Common Market, a tactic which he may now have to drop. On fundamentals, they agree.
This leaves the Communist Party out in the cold. Well-informed rumours suggest that there is a pro-Russian group who would like to split the party. And although the party still has at least the passive support of many workers, it is quite unable to lead a fight against the new measures.
Before May, the main tactic of the CP and its trade union, the CGT, was the ritual procedure of one-day general strikes. This looked very militant, but was in fact just another public holiday.
Since May the one-day strike has been shown up as useless, and the CP has no way of putting up a fight.
So the CP opposition will be largely verbal. Georges Seguy, the CGT leader, has said that ‘The CGT recommends all militants to claim a wage increase in proportion to the rise in the cost of living since June.
Such advice amounts to telling the workers to look after themselves. The unions can do nothing for then.
The other main union body, the CFDT, which has a reputation of being more progressive, has asked for a commission of inquiry to unmask speculators. In other words, verbal demands, but no lead in struggle.
 
Nothing to replace CP
The French Communist Party was built by the blood and sweat of French workers during the Resistance and in violent struggles after the war. Now it is crumbling, but there is nothing to replace it as a national organisation.
Slowly a fight will develop. The fervour of the student movement has now gripped Paris secondary schools. Many student militants are now getting roots in industry.
In the factories, action committees and shop stewards independent of the union machine, are merging. The new cuts will heighten the struggle that will continue for a long time to come.
 



THE FRENCH COMMUNIST Party, battered by last summer’s general strike and the Czech crisis, ran into new trouble when its Central Committee met on October 20 and 21.
Perhaps the biggest shock was the resignation from the Central Committee of Jeannette Thorez-Vermeersch. She is the widow of Maurice Thorez, leader of the party from its early years up to his death in 1964.
Mme. Thorez-Vermeersch has been angered by the party’s disapproval of Russian intervention in Czechoslovakia, and has accused the leadership of helping ‘anti-Soviet’ forces.
The party leaders also criticised one of France’s leading communist intellectuals, Roger Garaudy, for having been too outspoken in his criticism of the Russians. Garaudy publicly accepted the criticisms.
This could be the first sign of a serious split in the party. There is a strong pro-Moscow group which has been distributing material published in Russia defending the Russian intervention. Some reports even suggest that this group may try to form a separate party.
But most of the leaders realise that to show public support for the Russians would ruin the party’s parliamentary ambitions for years to come, especially since they can only win parliamentary seats in alliance with the social-democrats, who are strongly anti-Russian.
 



FOR MOST PEOPLE Mexico means the Olympic Games which start next month. The Mexican government, anxious to increase tourism, would like to keep it that way.
That is why they brought out tanks and paratroops to put down this week’s student demonstrations.
 
Government to blame
The students, accused of wanting to wreck the Olympic Games, replied: “If our movement is an obstacle to the Games, the blame lies with the government, who bear the responsibility of solving the social problems affecting our country."
For the Mexican people, the charm of the revolution of 1910–1917 has worn very thin. The government party—the Institutional Revolutionary Party claims to embody the traditions of that revolution.
But the PRI has been in power ever since 1929, and holds all but one of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies. The parliamentary opposition is negligible, and more radical critics of the regime have been imprisoned and tortured in recent years.
Although Mexico has seen rapid industrial expansion in the last 10 years, this has not benefited the population as a whole.
Last summer a Mexico daily paper carried a report of a baby being eaten alive by rats while its mother begged for food. The land reform programme is a half-hearted failure.
 
Spark off a struggle
The student movement, growing out of anti-Vietnam protests and encouraged by Paris, has developed rapidly. The students have their own problems, too. The Mexico State University, built for 27,000 students, has over 80,000.
They may well spark off a struggle, which will make the Olympic competitions pale into insignificance.
 



TO A TOURIST EYE, Paris in late July was back to normal. The Folies Bergères – where the strike was one of the longest – is open again and the cobblestones of the Latin Quarter are being covered over with asphalt.
There is no obvious repression. Every bookstall is covered with books on the May events- The only shop we found that did not have a single book about May in its windows was the official Communist Party bookshop, which was concentrating on holidays in Rumania.
The satirical paper Canard Enchaine continued its anti-Gaullist [line of text missing] Action and Lutte Ouvrière are sold on the streets of the Latin Quarter, despite the occasional seizure and arrest of sellers.
But behind this is a more sombre aspect. The banned groups proclaim their continued existence in slogans on the walls of the Underground. Plain-clothes policemen, carrying guns, follow suspicious elements.
The attitude of the Gaullist regime is quite clearly to act, not against freedom of ideas – which, with the word “Revolution” painted on every [line of text missing] tionary party a little sooner than some members of the libertarian left.
The general opinion of French comrades is that there is a long struggle ahead. There will not be a repetition of the May events in October, although it is possible that the universities will not be reopened as it will be impossible to prevent them being occupied by students.
In the factories a long struggle is developing. At the moment the crucial issue is overtime working to make up for the time during the strike.
[line of text missing] strike, hitherto almost unknown in France, is becoming more widespread, and there may be a wave of them in the autumn.
 



The Algerian Insurrection 1954–1962
Edgar O’Ballance
Faber, 36s
Major O’Ballance, an expert on revolutionary war whose sympathies lie firmly with the forces of ‘order,’ has written a military history of the Algerian war of national liberation. As such, it may serve to illuminate the complex relationship of political and military factors.
O’Ballance’s main point is that at no stage of the war did the French come anywhere near military defeat. The National Liberation Army lost ten times as many killed as the French forces during the war, and at many times were forced back on to small areas of territory.
Nonetheless, the Algerian Revolution was able to topple the Fourth Republic and force de Gaulle to break with the ultras who originally brought him to power. The reasons were of a political nature.
Firstly, in Algeria itself, the FLN was able to gain support of the mass of the Muslim population. O’Ballance attributes this largely to terror. Certainly torture and indiscriminate terrorism were used (and may be criticised by those who wholeheartedly align themselves with the Revolution). But he seriously underestimates the work of propaganda and the new social institutions created in the liberated areas.
Secondly, the war heightened the contradictions of French society. The war was deeply unpopular; unlike Vietnam, it demanded conscript forces. While citing some of the antics of the French Communist Party, O’Ballance overestimates their influence (the Party actually expelled members for sending arms to the FLN). But he ignores the fact that by 1958, the big bourgeoisie (aware of the changing place of under-developed countries in the world economy, and of the possibility of separating political oppression from economic exploitation) were quite willing to give Algeria political independence. The first years of the Fifth Republic in fact saw a struggle between large and small capital, with both sides trying to win workinp-class support.
In a sense, writers like O’Ballance present the obverse face of the Regis Debray school, for both attempt to define the confrontation of social forces in exclusively military terms. There is no magic about ‘guerilla warfare,’ independent of the historical conjuncture. The difference between Guevara’s failure in Bolivia and Giap’s success in Vietnam is not one of military strategy, but of the whole political complex.



In Paul Foot’s otherwise excellent article on Harold Wilson and the Labour Left (IS 33), there is one questionable passage. Among Tribune’s sins is listed the fact that it ‘severely rebuked’ Richard Gott for his independent ‘anti-Vietnam’ candidature in 1966. In fact, Labour Worker, the then fortnightly organ of International Socialism, criticised Gott in rather more unkind terms than Tribune.
I raise this point, not out of historical pedantry, but because I think it is important to understand that we were right to take such a stand at that time. Gott’s action did not provide the basis for a real campaign against the Vietnam war, which has developed in a much more healthy non-Parliamentary fashion since, and it did isolate the anti-imperialist movement from the mass of the workers and trade unionists who might otherwise have been more sympathetic to it.
In more general terms, we have not sufficiently analysed the strategy of work in the Labour Party. There has been a tendency to forget about it as a wasted period; of course, social-democracy did not split, in classic 1920 style; the Labour fakers were not exposed to the masses in a blinding flash of light. But it is true that many militants, particularly youth, were attracted to the Labour Party in the 1962–1966 period. Their militancy has not been destroyed; some have joined revolutionary organisations; many more have turned to direct action on wages, rents or Vietnam; the rest still provide a reserve on which a new revolutionary party can draw. It is precisely this point that is missed by such undialectical analyses as Alasdair MacIntyre’s Labour Policy and Capitalist Planning (IS 15), quoted approvingly by Foot. The installation of the Labour Government was not purely and simply a rationalisation of neo-capitalist planning; it was that, but it also had effects on consciousness that had a revolutionary potential.
A change of strategy is not necessarily opportunism. There is no need to rewrite our history; on the contrary, an honest writing of our own history is an essential part of the growth of our own self-consciousness.

 H. Birchall: From Revolution to Reform (Autumn 1968)



Ian Birchall   |   ETOL Main Page

Ian H. Birchall
From Revolution to Reform
(Autumn 1968)
Paris: May 1968
Solidarity Pamphlet No. 30
(H. Russell, 53A Westmoreland Road, Bromley, Kent), 1s
Over the last few years, the Solidarity group have produced a series of descriptive pamphlets, on both local and international topics, which have reached the highest standard of reportage. Their most recent, on the French events of May 1968, is one of their best.
The pamphlet is described as ‘an eye-witness account of two weeks spent in Paris during May 1968. It is what one person saw, heard or discovered during that short period.’ Taken on these terms, the pamphlet succeeds admirably in capturing the atmosphere of a revolutionary situation; on a much smaller scale, it has something of the flavour of Ten Days that Shook the World or Homage to Catalonia.
The author has a keen eye for concrete detail. He notes one of the very first instances of student-worker link-up – when a passing building-worker showed the students how to operate a pneumatic drill to break the road into cobblestones. He cites the efflorescence of slogans and posters: ‘One doesn’t compose with a society in decomposition,’ ‘The only outrage to the tomb of the unknown soldier was the outrage that put him there,’ ‘Art is dead, do not consume its body,’ ‘Debout les damnes de Nanterre’ (allusion to the first line of the Internationale), ‘Please leave the PC as clean on leaving as you would like to find it on entering.’ He tells how those Maoist students who took a portrait of Stalin to the Sorbonne were quickly persuaded to remove it. Everywhere was self-organisation – from canteens to children’s crèches.
The rôle of the Communist Party is made clear; the betrayals of Seguy and Waldeck-Rochet were backed up by countless tiny functionaries – some frightened to lose their comfortable place as ‘loyal opposition’ in factories and local government; others, sincere but so saturated in the myth of the ‘only party of the working class’ that they had forgotten what the working class looked like.
Having advised everyone to read the pamphlet, however, I must go on to make certain reservations. Firstly, there is a regrettable tone of sectarianism in the pamphlet. The introduction tells us that we must be prepared to ‘discard a mass of outdated ideas, slogans and myths and to reassess contemporary reality.’ After this, it is rather disappointing to be told on page 41 that events fully confirm the ideas of Solidarity and Paul Cardan. In particular, the pamphlet recognises the need for ‘a new kind of revolutionary movement ... strong enough to outwit the bureaucratic manoeuvres ... deeply enough implanted to explain to the workers the real meaning of the students’ struggle.’ However, anyone misguided enough to want such an organisation but to use the shorthand term ‘party’ for it is immediately damned as a ‘Trotskyist’ (Trotskyists are usually compared to Stalinists as though the two went together like love and marriage).
It is, of course, easy to criticise with the advantage of hindsight. Few of us could have prophesied the Gaullist election victory at the end of May. Nonetheless, we have the right to ask that the analysis should give us some basis for an explanation.
In the last resort, the analysis of this pamphlet (symptomatic of Solidarity which is so much better at description than perspective) has an over-facile view of consciousness. An involvement in revolutionary activity does not necessarily cure people of reformism for ever. Many people were fully aware of the political nature of the strike – but this did not make them indifferent to the economic issues. As a result, the Communist Party (whose resilience is due to the fact that it is a reformist party corresponding to reformist consciousness) was able to channel the revolutionary energy into reformist demands. The CP has not exposed itself for good and all (any more than it did in 1936 or 1945). Rather, there is a long struggle ahead, in which economic and political struggles will interact. In this protracted battle against reformism, revolutionary euphoria may be just another mystification.
 






Contrary to most predictions (including our own in Socialist Review two months ago) François Mitterrand has become President of the French Fifth Republic, the first clear-cut victory for the left in French politics since the onset of the Cold War in 1947. Street celebrations that have been in all seriousness compared to the events of 1968 leave no doubt as to the enthusiasm that has greeted Mitterrand’s victory.
But how real are the prospects for change? Tribune (15.5.81) looks to Mitterrand’s victory as being the ‘first salvo in the attack to drive back the madness of monetarism which has affected so much of the Western industrial world.’ But Mitterrand may find the road ahead much more arduous than his supporters expect. Ian Birchall explains.



* * *
Mitterrand’s victory was, of course, a narrow one. He took 51.75% of the vote is against Giscard’s 48.24%. In 1974 Giscard won by 50.81% to 49.19%. This represents a total swing of only just over 2.5% – i.e. only one voter in forty has shifted sides since 1974.
Indeed, since Mitterrand did particularly well among young voters voting for the first time, the result could have been achieved simply by Giscard’s supporters dying off while Mitterrand’s came of age, without anyone changing their mind at all. Certainly not an indication of a massive shift in popular consciousness.


 


Secondly, Mitterrand was able to take advantage of the fact that the open representatives of the French bourgeoisie were in a state of disarray. In the face of growing economic crisis, the corrupt and authoritarian Giscard did not have the confidence of a significant section of the French ruling class. Hence the Chirac candidacy.
At the same time Mitterrand brought off the difficult tactical feat of getting substantial support from the Communist Party electorate without making any significant political concessions to it. Mitterrand was able to do this because of the deep crisis raging in the ranks of the Communist Party. The CP’s greatest growth in recent years came during the period between 1972 and 1977 when the CP was campaigning jointly with the Socialists for a Common Programme of government. The members recruited during that period have found it hard to follow the more recent swing to a line sharply critical of Mitterrand and the Socialists, and many more long-standing members have also drifted into opposition.
Many traditional CP voters seem to have switched their votes to Mitterrand on the first round. Hence the CP’s catastrophic performance, with some of their biggest losses coming in their traditional strongholds such as the Paris suburbs. CP voters seem to have believed that

they might as well vote from the start for the only candidate who had any chance of beating Giscard or
that it was better to vote for an openly reformist party than for a reformist party rather inconsistently pretending to be revolutionary.

While some observers may have been premature in writing the CP’s obituary, it is clear that the situation posed great difficulties for the Marchais leadership. If they had called for anything other than total support for Mitterrand on the second round, they would have faced a massive revolt from their own ranks and ended up looking very foolish. Yet this left them in the role of being mere voting fodder for Mitterrand without being able to impose their own demands on the situation. Despite Marchais’ bluster in calling for guarantees of CP ministers in Mitterrand’s government, they found no way out of this trap.
Mitterrand’s victory, then, was that of a clever political operator taking advantage of a favourable situation. This is indeed what one might expect of someone of his political background. Mitterrand was a minister on no less than eleven occasions under the Fourth Republic and showed himself to be a loyal agent of the French bourgeoisie and of French imperialism. When the Algerian national liberation struggle began on November 1st 1954, Mitterrand was the Minister of the Interior. It was his responsibility to organise the dispatch of CRS riot police to Algeria to try and suppress the rising. Mitterrand was one of those who insisted from the beginning that there could be no question of independence for Algeria.
‘The only negotiation is war’, he told the National Assembly on November 5th 1954, and on November 22nd he elaborated:
‘We want the Algerian people to be more and more integrated into the French nation, and it’s because we cannot allow it to be separated that we are having recourse to force, as the ultimate means of maintaining national unity.’
Likewise Mitterrand could be relied on to show the priorities of the Cold War period. Serving in the Mendes-France government, he declared: ‘We are not a government which confuses an anti-communist policy with constant victimisation.’ Clearly the former was quite acceptable, while the latter might be tactically undesirable. Mitterrand was responsible, as Minister of the Interior, for banning the traditional Communist Party demonstration on July 14th.
With this record Mitterrand proved which side he was on. His opposition to de Gaulle in 1958 was purely tactical. With so many politicians rushing into the Gaullist camp, it was necessary for someone to keep their hands clean and bide their time, just in case the Gaullist strategy didn’t work.
But Mitterrand’s main achievement over the last decade was the reconstruction of the Socialist Party. The old Socialist Party – the SFIO led by Guy Mollet, to which Mitterrand never belonged – became discredited through its support for the Algerian war and its capitulation to de Gaulle in 1958. By the sixties it had lost most of its members who made any claim to socialist politics – and many of those who didn’t. In the 1969 presidential elections its candidate Gaston Defferre got a derisory vote of around five percent.
The new Socialist Party was formed iri June 1971. It was based on a fusion of various social-democratic groupings, and chose as its leader Mitterrand. It made every effort to stress its discontinuity from the old rightist SFIO; it made great play of autogestion (workers’ participation), and openly sought an alliance with the CP, as well as coopting much of the PSU, a party formed in the early sixties by left dissidents from the SFIO. Some of its leaders, notably Michel Rocard, came from the PSU, with a suitable aura of leftism about them.
In June 1972 the SP signed a common programme of government with the Communist Party. Mitterrand’s strategy was already clear – to ally with the CP so as to equal it and then to dominate it, in order eventually to be able to go it alone. Mitterrand made no secret of his intentions. The day after the Common Programme was signed he told the Vienna Congress of the Socialist International:
‘Our fundamental objective role is to rebuild a great Socialist Party on the ground occupied by the CP, itself – to demonstrate that of the 5,000,000 Communist voters 3,000,000 can vote Socialist! That is the reason for this agreement ... The reconstruction of the historic bloc by escaping from Communist leadership.’
The CP accepted the union, despite Mitterrand’s open boasting, because they thought their superior industrial base made them invincible. But the SP remorselessly overtook them electorally. In the 1973 general election the SP was only 3% behind the CP, and by the municipal elections of 1977 it had caught up. Although considerably weaker in the workplaces, it began to catch up there too; in 1971 the SP had only 51 workplace branches, but five years later it had nearly a thousand. At the same time it developed its links with the bureaucracy of the CFDT, the second largest union federation in France.







If its members were predominantly white-collar and supervisory workers, and teaachers, it was beginning to break into the GP’s electorate. A 1976 opinion poll showed that 38% of industrial workers would vote Socialist and only 34% Communist. At the same time the SP was also able to get the support of some managers and employers – in 1976 some CFDT militants were disciplined for producing a poster showing a boss sitting on a worker’s shoulders, with the caption ‘Like your boss, join the SP’.
It was this irresistible ascent of the SP that forced the CP to break the Common Programme and make a ‘left’ turn in 1977. But it was all in vain. The SP’s electoral rise continued and culminated in Mitterrand’s victory.
It is not surprising, therefore, that Mitterrand’s victory was perceived by the French ruling class as something less than a total disaster.
True there was a sharp fall in prices on the Paris stock exchange in the week after the second round, but that was the result of speculation rather than a long-term collapse. The franc fell on international markets over the same period – but not catastrophically – the sharpest fall, from just before the election to just after, was from 11.28 francs to the pound to 11.55 francs to the pound. (For a British tourist that would make a 25-franc meal just five pence cheaper.)
A certain amount of financial nervousness will continue until the parliamentary elections in June – indeed it may be deliberately engineered to scare some voters back into the right-wing fold. But there is scarcely any indication of rampant panic among the ruling class. Indeed, many of them have taken the Socialist victory very philosophically indeed.
One French banker told the Economist that Mitterrand’s nationalisation plans would ‘change nothing in reality. Already no big business decision is taken by French industry without the implicit, or explicit, approval of the government.’
And Marcel Dassault, head of one of the big aircraft firms facing nationalisation has said:
‘If the majority of the French people decides that armaments manufacture should be nationalised, then I can only accept. There is not a shadow of a doubt about that.’
On the working-class side, there is no doubt that Mitterrand’s victory was felt as a great step forward. There are numerous reports of spontaneous demonstrations, and of workers taking bottles of champagne to work (Rouge tells of a workplace in Marseilles where a Trotskyist militant took champagne to work on the morning after the election – and where the CP members could not make up their minds throughout the day whether to drink any or not.)
In some places the result had a clear effect on the morale of workers – and of management. In a hospital near Rouen the management called a meeting to announce that all disciplinary penalties imposed since the beginning of the year had been cancelled.
It is certainly indisputable that Mitterrand’s victory has provoked considerable enthusiasm and goodwill. But this seems to arise from a general welcome for the prospect of change, rather than any very precise expectation of what that change will mean.
As a result some sections of the left seem to have developed exaggerated expectations of the implications of the result. Thus Rouge paper of the French section of the Fourth International:
‘An immense hope is born. The French workers have just won a substantial victory. It needed the general strike of 1968, then years of struggles and battles, often fought under difficult conditions, to lead to the defeat of the bourgeois parties and the opening of a new period. The victory of François Mitterrand is not only evidence of the rejection by a majority of the policies carried out for seven years by Giscard and the employers, it is also the expression of a victory of a will for radical change, a will to get rid of a society which exploits and oppresses the workers.’
The first hurdle that Mitterrand faces will be the parliamentary elections now set for June. Undoubtedly the presidential success will produce a certain band-wagon effect and produce a good result for the Socialist Party. Some polls show 38% of the vote going to the SP and their close allies, the Left Radicals. But even this will not be enough for the SP to govern alone, especially since the present electoral system, established by the Gaullists in 1958, is deliberately rigged against the left, with some constituencies (generally left-wing ones) having more than six times as many electors as others (generally right-wing ones).
Talks between the CP and the SP on an electoral agreement (for the first time since the 1978 elections) have been resumed. The CP need such an agreement, since without it they are likely to have their parliamentary representation catastrophically reduced. But Mitterrand will doubtless take good care not to get himself too closely tied to the Communists. Any decision about the vexed question of Communist ministers will be left until after the election results. Mitterrand would doubtless prefer an Italian-style solution, whereby the CP give support to the government but do not actually vote for it.
Mitterrand’s provisional government does not contain any Communists. It does contain Claude Cheysson, former member of the European Commission, Jacques Delors, who in 1971 was economic adviser to the Gaullist prime minister Chaban-Delmas before deciding to become a Socialist, and Michel Jobert, a former Gaullist minister.
Whether these will serve as a bridge to more formal links with the Gaullists as an alternative to an alliance with the CP only time – and the election results – will tell. Mitterrand may prefer a series of ad hoc alliances in order to get specific measures through.
Two things, however, are clear. Firstly, whatever the formal designation, Mitterrand’s will be a thoroughly bourgeois government. The fact that a man like Delors now sports the label ‘Socialist’ does not make the government he belongs to into a ‘workers’ government’. Whether or not Mitterrand openly governs with the Gaullists, his regime will be based on class collaboration. And secondly, whatever happens, Mitterrand will have some good excuses for not carrying out all of his programme – his allies or lack of them can always be blamed for that. Some observers have seen parallels between the present situation and that of 1936. In 1936 a Popular Front government – based on an electoral alliance of Communists, Socialists and Radicals – was elected on a programme of anti-fascism and social reform. The enthusiasm this electoral victory gave rise to sparked off a series of strikes with factory occupations, and before the Popular Front government even took office there were hundreds of thousands of workers occupying their factories. Despite being sold out by the Socialist and Communist bureaucrats, the mass strike achieved important economic concessions – notably two weeks’ annual holiday for all workers – and potentially could have set off the process that led to a revolutionary situation.
Doubtless the Mitterrand victory, like that of Blum in 1936, has produced great enthusiasm. But the French working class is a very different phenomenon from what it was then. In 1936 the French working class was still substantially unorganised. At the beginning of the year the membership of the CGT was only around one million – by the end of the year it had risen to five million. The strikes were largely spontaneous – in some cases workers occupied and then came to the union officers to ask what the demands ought to be. 1936 was the struggle of a working-class which had not yet been coopted by reformism – and which, in the absence of a revolutionary leadership, fell into the hands of the Socialists, Communists and CGT. The French working-class of 1981 has a long tradition of trade-union and political organisation behind it. Its response to a Mitterrand government will initially be one, not of revolutionary euphoria, but of goodwill and cooperation.
The real crunch will come when Mitterrand proves incapable, in a crisis-ridden world, of delivering his promises, and seeks the support of the workers’ organisations for a policy of austerity. That will be the point at which the right – probably led by Chirac – will be able to start making a comeback. Then it will be a question of whether there is any force in the working-class able to resist demoralisation and a drift to the right. Otherwise Mitterrand is all too likely to act out a Wilson-Callaghan scenario – social contract followed by return of the right.
In the short term the election has been a shot in the arm for the revolutionary left. So much had been invested in the electoral perspective that a win for Giscard would have certainly led to colossal demoralisation.
But all sections of the left will have to break with the political habits acquired in the pre-election period. Thus the LCR (Fourth International) have devoted so much attention to calling for left unity to defeat Giscard that they have run the risk of seeming to be cheer-leaders for Mitterrand. The danger is that they will now get caught up in metaphysical abstractions about whether Mitterrand has capitalist ministers or not, instead of preparing to lead a real fight. As for Lutte Ouvrière, they have devoted themselves almost exclusively to pure propaganda; ceaselessly proclaiming that the workers must rely on their own struggles, they never explain how such struggles can be organised.
The next period will be more testing for the revolutionary left than any in the last decade. If they do not rise to the challenge, then 1981 will go down with 1936, 1944 and 1968 in the catalogue of missed opportunities.
 



In the summer issue of Socialist Review (1981: 7) we reported on the initiative of a number of socialist intellectuals to set up a Socialist Society. At the time we commented that the enterprise was basically worthy of support, but that the project was somewhat woolly and that various contradictions had remained unresolved.
Since that time a Steering Committee has been regularly meeting to prepare for the launching of the Society. It has not resolved the contradictions, but has produced some concrete proposals for action.
The basic aims of the Society would be to provide a framework for theoretical and polemical discussion of socialist ideas. In practical terms various proposals have been floated.


Firstly, it is intended to produce a series of pamphlets on the key issues of the day. The first two, on the SDP and on NATO, are already being written.
 
Secondly, there have been negotiations with publishers with a view to producing a series of books on current problems, either by single authors or based on seminars at which a variety of viewpoints would be put forward. Suggested titles include the state, the economic crisis, Northern Ireland and the family.
 
Thirdly, it is proposed that the Society should have local organisations which would set up meetings, classes and conferences on current and theoretical topics.


The proposed political basis of the Society could not be explicitly Marxist, though it would call for support for public ownership and the radical transformation of the existing state. Clearly this leaves open the possibility of collapse into being a left cover for the Labour left (and not-so-left). There are no guarantees that the Society will not go down the same drain as the left clubs of 1959–60, the Centre for Socialist Education of 1965, the May Day Manifesto of 1967 and the National Convention of the Left of 1968. But if the Society does get off the ground, it will be a modest gain for the left, offering an arena in which it may be possible to have clear and sharp political debate without sectarian abuse.
The Society’s main audience will probably be among left intellectuals, and its chance of succeeding depend in part on the particular problems of the left intelligentsia in this period of industrial downturn and political upturn.
Since 1968 there has been a substantial enclave of self-proclaimed Marxism within the British academic system. Though this generated some interesting work it remained on the margins of struggle – indeed for many the Althusserian mystique offered a positive justification for the separation of theory and practice. But now the situation is changing.
The academic left is under attack, not only in the form of an ideological backlash, but more fundamentally in terms of the massive cuts that the government is implementing in higher education. On top of this there is the rise of Bennism and the collapse of Eurocommunism as a viable tendency. A further factor in the recent development of the academic left has been the proliferation of publishers and caucuses in specialised areas – radical philosophers, socialist economists etc. etc. There is a need for some sort of coordination between such bodies.
The Socialist Society may, then, respond to some of the needs of the present period. It make no pretence to be an alternative party; its present Steering Committee contains members of the Labour Party, CP, SWP, IMG, Big Flame and non-aligned individuals. Its existence will not change one iota our task of building a revolutionary party rooted in the working class. But the battle of ideas is one part of that task; and if the Socialist Society provides an arena for that battle, we should welcome it and help it to develop.
 
Charmed circle
If that is to happen two dangers must be avoided. Firstly, the debate must be open and wide-ranging. The books and seminars must be must not be confined to the charmed circle of established contributors to such journals as New Left Review. They must draw in those who have been involved in the real struggles of the last few years.
The trade union presence must not be limited to a few tame left bureaucrats. With the collapse of Eurocommunism, it is a fitting time to debate some of the basic issues of socialist theory – reform or revolution, the nature of the capitalist crisis and of the ‘socialist’ countries. The anti-Leninism currently fashionable on the academic left must not be allowed to ostracise any currents from the debate.
Secondly, the majority of those currently involved in preparing the Socialist Society belong to the Bennite current, or at least to those who give critical support to Benn. In itself that is no problem. If one of the aims is to provide a forum for debate between revolutionaries and the Labour left, then we can hardly ask for the Labourites to be excluded. But there is the constant danger that, in the cut and thrust of Labour Party factionalising, the Society will be diverted from its original purpose and turned into just one more in the array of Tony Benn fan clubs. If that happens, then the Socialist Society will be just one more footnote in the history of British centrism.
A conference has been called to launch the Society, to be held at the Institute of Education (Malet Street, London WC1) on the weekend of January 23-24. This will be open to all individuals sympathetic to the aims of the Society. It will consist mainly of workshops to discuss practical areas of work, with one main plenary session to adopt a constitution and membership charter, and to elect a Steering Committee. The Conference fee will be £5 (£2 for the unwaged) and there will be a creche. For further details and registration write to WGSS, c/o 7 Carlisle Street, London, W1V 6NL.



 


Ian Birchall
(Member of Provisional Steering Committee)



 






No serious sectarian slanging match is complete without the use of the word ‘centrist’. It is, for instance, one of those terms of abuse used by the smaller left sects in relation to the SWP and to each other. Not surprisingly, many people who are new to left politics regard it as an obscure bit of jargon they’d prefer to do without. Who cares whether one group of 200 people calls another of 300 ‘centrist’?
Yet, as Ian Birchall explains at certain points in history the term designates a very important phenomenon. When it was first used by revolutionaries at the end of World War One it applied to organisations with hundreds of thousands of activists. When it was used again, by Trotsky, at the beginning of the Spanish Civil War, it characterised a party (the POUM) bigger in Catalonia than the Communist or Socialist Parties (which merged), with five thousand armed militiamen.
So what is a centrist?





‘Centrism is the name applied to that policy which is opportunist in substance and which seeks to appear as revolutionary in form. Opportunism consists in a passive adaptation to the ruling class and its regime, to that which already exists, including, of course, the state boundaries, Centrism shares completely this fundamental trait of opportunism, but in adapting itself to the dissatisfied workers, centrism veils it by means of radical commentaries.’
That is Trotsky’s definition. Revolutionary in form, opportunist in substance.
So, for example, Tony Benn, who makes no claim to be a Marxist, is not a centrist. (He’s a middle-of-the-road reformist pretending to be a left reformist.) But many of Benn’s supporters are centrists – they use the rhetoric of class struggle, even to criticise Benn, yet in practice end up reinforcing Benn’s positions.
 
Marxist terminology
The substance of Marxism lies in three things: the historical role of the working class, the need to smash the state machine and the need for a vanguard party. And it is on these points that the centrist, despite a rhetorical and sometimes erudite commitment to Marxist terminology, will turn out to be ambiguous.
‘We need the working class, but there are other social forces to be reckoned with in modern society.’
‘The state has to be radically restructured but this needs parliamentary action backed up by mass struggle.’
‘We need a revolutionary organisation, but democratic centralism is hopelessly out of date.’
‘We need a revolutionary organisation, but trade union militants can’t be subjected to total party discipline.’
When you find yourself listening to language like this, it’s probably a centrist talking.


 


Centrism, as a serious political phenomenon, is not a question of naive or dishonest individuals. It is a product of a society in crisis.
People do not go to bed one night as reformists and wake up the next day as revolutionary socialists. As people move between two radically different views of the world, they often stop off at halfway positions, holding a variety of confused or inconsistent views. Of course, certain centrist leaders will seek to exploit such confusions and inconsistencies in their own political interests. But the vast bulk of those who make up centrist organisations or currents are a vital part of our audience – it is our job not so much to denounce their inconsistencies as to try to clarify them.
The problem of centrism in the socialist movement first became of vital importance in the First World War. The war drove a deep wedge between those who put loyalty to their own nation first, and those who continued to argue for proletarian internationalism.
But among the opponents of the war two camps soon emerged. On the one hand were those like Karl Kautsky, whose knowledge of the Marxist classics was so great that before the war he had been known as the ‘Pope of Marxism’. He now argued that what was needed was to end the war by negotiation, so that the old International, including pro-war and anti-war elements, could be cobbled together again.
The other camp, including Lenin, argued that there could be no turning back. The war had shown a fundamental divide between those who wanted to smash the bourgeois state and those who didn’t. So Lenin called, not for peace negotiations, but for turning the war into revolution. In this three-way line-up, Kautsky and friends came to be known as ‘the Centre’. In the period immediately after the war, when millions of workers were determined that a similar catastrophe should never occur again, the ranks of the centrist organisations grew rapidly. Towards the end of the war Kautsky and others were expelled from the German Social Democratic Party and formed the USPD (Independent Social Democratic Party). By 1920 the new party had 800,000 members, as against 50,000 in the German Communist Party.
This caused deep problems for the international revolutionary left, united in the newly founded Communist International.
The Russian Revolution was extremely popular with workers all through Europe, and many of the old-time politicians who had thoroughly disgraced themselves during the war were trying to climb back into favour by jumping on the pro-Russian bandwagon. The Communist International had to take a very tough line towards the centrists, especially the centrist leaders – otherwise the new revolutionary International would have been taken over by parasites and has-beens.
 
Revolutionary crises
The International drew up a set of twenty-one tough conditions designed to keep out centrists. As the president of the International, Zinoviev, put it:
‘Just as it is not easy for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, so, I hope, it will not be easy for the adherents of the centre to slip through the 21 conditions.’
Centrism grew very rapidly – only to fall apart just as rapidly. In October 1920 the USPD debated its attitude to the Communist International. After hearing a four-hour speech from Zinoviev delegates voted to join it; 300,000 members did so and merged with the revolutionary Communist Patty. Within three years the remaining rump of the ‘centre’ round Kautsky collapsed back into the Social Democratic Party.
In subsequent revolutionary crises the role of centrism has been similar.
At the beginning of the Spanish Civil War in 1936 the POUM was a serious contender for the leadership of the Spanish working class. It had significant working class support and a leadership with a creditable revolutionary anti-Stalinist past.
Yet the inconsistent politics of the POUM led to disaster. It failed to make a head-on challenge to the influence of reformists and anarchists in the trade unions and in the army. It stood for a government composed exclusively of representatives of working class organisations – but when the other left parties rejected this view it entered a coalition with bourgeois representatives. The POUM opposed reformism but failed to fight it. And as a result it cut its own throat – and left the Spanish workers to face a defeat that would last a generation.
In more recent times the experience has been pathetic rather than tragic.
In 1960 the French PSU (United Socialist Party) was founded by members of the Socialist Party disgusted with their leaders’ support for the Algerian war and capitulation to Gaullism. In its early years it took some principled and courageous initiatives in favour of Algerian independence. But the party consisted of a bunch of quite divergent political groupings and used the excuse of ‘internal democracy’ to avoid a clear decision between them.
Its relations with the leaders of the CFDT trade union meant that it never organised its trade union militants on a fractional basis. In the general strike of May 1968 many PSU militants played a key role; but the party as a whole had no impact because it could not make up its mind whether it was developing the embryos of workers’ power in the factories or organising a come-back for former prime minister Mendes-France.
In the early seventies, when the Socialist Party started to rebuild on a new basis, a large part of the PSU went over; a former PSU leader, Michel Rocard, now heads the most right-wing tendency in the French Socialist Party. The PSU lingers on, as a kind of ‘Beyond-The-Fragments’ rump, unable to make up its mind whether to campaign against the Mitterrand government’s sell-outs or to negotiate to join it.
Just because centrism is a half-way house, any centrist party or current will Contain a variety of groups moving in different ways; some moving from revolution to reformism, some from reformism to revolution – and some staying where they are because they prefer to fish in muddy waters.
So, relating to centrists requires a certain amount of subtlety. Blanket denunciations are easy, but winning those who are moving the right way, needs a bit more skill. We can’t all recruit three hundred thousand new members in four hours, like Zinoviev, but we can try.
Above all, the question of centrism varies according to the ups and downs of the class struggle. When masses of workers are moving to the left, then centrism presents enormous dangers. For if centrists take the lead of the movement, they will fudge the issues and deflect it front the path it should follow. But if the masses are moving to the right, then the task is to attract those few centrists willing to swim against the stream.
 
Leninist dogmatism
In 1920 the Communist International put up the barriers against centrists who found it fashionable. But by July 1921 Lenin was criticising ‘exaggeration’ in the fight against centrism.
In today’s situation there is little danger of the SWP being swamped by a flood of centrists seeking to join us. We have to meet, debate and work with centrists as part of the process of building an organisation. But at the same time’ total clarity about centrism is necessary.
A study of history, from Kautsky to Rocard, and an insistence on the basic principles of Marxism, are necessary to forestall the danger that when a revolutionary upsurge comes, the centrists will make the running. And for that we need a party with a clear programme and a trained cadre. Just the sort of Leninist dogmatism any self-respecting centrist would have nothing to do with.
 



Anti-gay prejudice is disgusting and reactionary, and any sign of it in a revolutionary organisation should be firmly stamped on. But before the Manchester SWP Gay Group (SR 1981:1) start keeping files on comrades’ alleged lapses, they should take the trouble to read what was actually written.

They claim that in Socialist Worker 711 I linked ‘sodomy (and therefore homosexuality) with French capitalism.’ I linked nothing. I quoted a remark by Coluche, a clown who is running for the French presidency. I don’t in fact believe Coluche’s remark was anti-gay (anal intercourse may be homosexual or heterosexual), but in any case I felt it was quite legitimate to give a quotation – clearly labelled as such – of a typical comment from Coluche. After all SW in the past has quoted Thatcher and Martin Webster.
 
It is claimed that in my article on Simon Raven (SR 1980 : 10) I ‘equated’ homosexuality with self-indulgence. I did nothing of the sort. I stated that Raven was gay and self-indulgent. (Anyone who reads The English Gentleman or the semi-autobiographical Fielding Gray can check the truth of this.) If I had said Idi Amin was a brutal black dictator would I be accused of generalising about all blacks? What I tried to argue in the article was that although Raven portrays his gay characters in a sympathetic light, their homosexuality is never allowed to challenge the structures of the existing order.
 
They have totally misinterpreted a passing – and perhaps too flippant – comment in my piece on Stalinism. (SR 1980 : 11) It was certainly never my intention to criticise masturbation as such. (If I had referred to people hanging pictures of Stalin on their walls, would Manchester SWP Art-Lovers Group have written to complain I was against painting?) Nor do I have any desire to censure anybody’s fantasies. But do the letter’s writers really believe that all fantasies are equally good? Surely we condemn fantasies about, say, the Yorkshire Ripper – and the porn merchants and millionaire publishers who get rich encouraging such fantasies. And Stalin killed far more people than the Ripper. All I was seeking to criticise was the distortion of sexuality that was one – small – component of the fascination of Stalin for a generation of the left. The comment was not anti-gay – Stalin had as many female fans as male. And it was not ageist: it’s simply a fact that the generation that loved Stalin are now getting on in years – they were worse when they were younger.

There are a lot of questions about sexual politics that the SWP still needs to work on. The current debate on paedophilia in Socialist Review, for example, has scarcely scratched the surface of the problem. But the kind of discussion we need will not be helped by misquotation and unfounded accusation.



 


Ian Birchall
North London



 

Birchall: Building "The Smallest Mass Party in the World" (3. Facing the crisis)



Ian Birchall Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Ian Birchall
Building “The Smallest Mass Party In The World”

Part 3: Facing the Crisis
THE ELECTION of a Labour Government in February 1974 was to mean, to a greater extent than anyone at the time realised, a sharp change in the rhythm of class struggle. Labour had been brought to power, not by the positive virtues of its programme or leaders, but by the success of the working-class opposition to the Heath Government. While Labour received a lower vote than at any election since 1945, an anti-Tory vote going to minor parties thrust Wilson into power. In this potentially unstable situation the Labour Government took on a left face, with Tony Benn and Michael Foot brought into the cabinet, and the former leaders of the left in the TUC, Jack Jones and Hugh Scanlon, brought into ever closer association with the government. After just over a year of a loosely-worded ‘social contract’, during which some quite substantial wage rises were won, the Labour Government attacked its supporters head-on by introducing a series of compulsory incomes policies.
The Labour Government produced a major change in the pattern of industrial struggle. Sharp struggles continued throughout the five years of Labour rule – the Scottish strikes of 1974–75, the wave of struggles in 1977 (including Grunwicks) culminating in the unsuccessful firemen’s strike, and the so-called ‘winter of discontent’ in the last months of the Callaghan government. But no section of workers was to emulate the miners in 1972 and 1974; increasingly struggles were fragmented and defensive, even though enormous reserves of fighting spirit were still evident. Rising unemployment helped to discipline workers.
In this situation a slow but steady movement to the right affected all levels of the labour movement. On the shop-floor, ideological and social factors combined to whittle away the periphery of the revolutionary left. The growing role of full-time convenors, and the revived attraction of reformism as being at least a lesser evil, reduced the number of militants who were open to revolutionary ideas. At the 1974 TUC, Ken Gill, the first Communist Party member on the General Council for over twenty years, withdrew his union’s resolution against the Social Contract ‘in the interests of the broadest unity’. Many people who in 1968 and after had been active revolutionaries began to drift back into the Labour Party.
1974 was also a year in which repression against the left began to be more noticeable. In the pre-election period there were many reports of police harassment of paper-sellers and flyposters. In June a Warwick student, Kevin Gately, was killed by police on an anti-National Front demonstration. The next week two thousand IS members marched through London with placards reading ‘Murdered by Police’. Socialist Worker was cautioned by the police with a threat of action for criminal libel. And in October Socialist Worker was fined £500 with £5,000 costs for naming wealthy witnesses in the Janie Jones blackmail case. Attacks, from both the state and the trade union bureaucracy, continued throughout the 1970s making it much more uncomfortable to be a revolutionary socialist.

THE period up to the February 1974 election had been one of rapid growth for IS. Membership was approaching 4,000, with a higher proportion of manual trade unionists than ever before. 56 factory branches had been formed, though about ten of these lasted only a few months. In election week the print order of Socialist Worker had risen to 52,000, with a paid sale of at least 35,000. There were obviously problems of changing gear from the mood of urgency and enthusiasm that had characterised the last months of the Heath Government.
Initially the perspective developed by IS was that the Labour Government would merely offer a ‘breathing space’, a brief ‘honeymoon’ period of a few months before massive struggles of the 1972–3 type would break out again. But by early 1975 it was becoming clear that such a perspective was telescoping the real course of events. A document prepared for the 1975 Annual Conference put it as follows:
We predicted, in our perspectives for last September’s IS conference, that the rising level of unemployment and the acceleration of prices would put the Social Contract under pressure from two opposed directions – from workers inspired by the success of the miners in breaking the Tories’ Phase Three, and from the ruling class intent on pushing down workers’ living standards.
Our economic perspective in general was correct. But it was mistaken in one important respect.
We overestimated the speed with which the economic crisis would drive workers to draw revolutionary political conclusions. [29]
One alternative open to IS in face of the general drift to the right was to follow the example of other revolutionary tendencies, and either enter, or orient more closely on the Labour Party. Instead IS chose to develop a position which came to be summed up by the slogan ‘Steer Left’. In effect this meant attempting to relate to those sections of the class that were prepared to fight, even if they were in a small minority.
The strategy earned IS (sometimes from within its own ranks as well as from outside) the label of ‘ultra-left’. This was misplaced. At no time was there any suggestion that the mass organisations of workers could be by-passed. But in a period when the level of struggle had fallen (there were thirteen million days strike in 1974, only three million in 1975), concentrating all the organisation’s efforts on routine trade union work would have inevitably meant getting caught up in the drift to the right. Moreover, it was necessary for IS to distinguish itself clearly from the various ‘broad left’ groupings in the unions which had no real strategy to offer.
The meaning of isolation and of ‘steering left’ was shown in March 1975, when the Labour government alleging a ‘health hazard’, sent troops to break a strike by dustcart drivers in Glasgow. Trade union bureaucrats and left MPs spoke scarcely a word of protest. When the Glasgow IS issued a leaflet to troops asking ‘Would you have to act like this if you had your own trade union?’, the Communist Party secretary of Glasgow Trades Council told the bourgeois press that IS were ‘fleas in a bed who turn up at other people’s picketing.’ [30]
The change of tempo did not take place smoothly. The 1973–75 period saw the biggest internal crisis in the organisation’s history, culminating in a serious split. [31]

THE dispute can be traced back to the summer of 1973, when the National Committee, believing the Executive to be out of touch with developments in the rapidly growing organisation, replaced it with a new Executive which included a number of provincial full-time organisers. The disagreements over this change led to the resignation of the national secretary, Jim Higgins.
The second phase of the dispute erupted in the aftermath of the February 1974 General Election, with a debate about the future role of Socialist Worker. The position presented by Tony Cliff, and eventually accepted by the national committee, was, firstly, that the paper was mainly aimed at a younger generation of militants without much experience of the reformist and trade union organisations, and therefore should present its arguments in a simpler fashion without taking so much for granted; and secondly that more of the paper should actually be written by workers. Roger Protz, the editor of the paper since 1968, disagreed sharply, arguing that the paper still had to relate to ‘advanced workers’.
When Protz’s position was defeated, Protz and Jim Higgins were removed from the Editorial Board of the paper, with Paul Foot taking over as editor. This led to an extremely stormy two-day meeting of the National Committee in May 1974, leading to the election of a new Executive seeking to reconcile the different currents in the organisation.
Unfortunately that was to be far from the end of the argument.
In the run-up to the conference in the autumn of 1974 a group of comrades produced a document called Our Traditions, in which they broadened the debate from Socialist Worker to the whole strategy for building the organisation. They argued that the current IS leadership had developed a ‘Youth Vanguard’ thesis and was turning its back on its traditional emphasis on shop stewards’ organisation.
(It is true that this argument reflected a reality of the organisation’s development. In any revolutionary organisation that has grown beyond the level of a monolithic sect, there will be a section of the membership which has acquired real roots in the established labour movement and is thereby strongly exposed to its pressures; and another section of the membership, often more youthful and newer to politics, that is impatient of the traditions and routines of the mass labour movement. A serious revolutionary organisation can be built only by reconciling these layers in creative tension. The debate in 1974–5 served on the contrary to force an unnecessary polarisation.)
The annual conference in 1975 made a number of major constitutional changes. Since 1968 the leading body of the organisation had been a National Committee of some forty members, elected by conference, and consisting of both full-timers and lay members. This in turn elected an Executive of full-timers which actually ran the organisation but which was not directly accountable to the organisation. The conference voted to end this separation of power and responsibility and establish a Central Committee of full-timers directly elected by conference, with a Party Council as an advisory body. The conference also voted to strengthen district organisation.
There was some opposition to the constitutional changes, alleging that they involved a reduction of internal democracy. But the long-standing internal dispute finally came to a head in the autumn of 1975 over the question of strategy towards the Broad Left in the AUEW. The majority of comrades in the AUEW fraction had decided that, in the light of the decline of the Broad Left, they should support a rank-and-file candidate for the post of AUEW national organiser. A number of IS members it the Birmingham area AUEW refused to accept this perspective, broke discipline and were expelled.
This led to a revival of opposition by a number of those who had been in disagreement with the majority since 1973, and a faction, calling itself the ‘IS Opposition’, was re-established. This refused a requirement froth the December 1975 Party Council that the faction be dissolved, arguing that ‘we are concerned that the present lurch to ultra-leftism will destroy any working-class base, while it may generate the sort of self-perpetuating irrelevant work that we associate with the WRP’. Faced with the choice of dissolving the faction or being excluded from IS, about 150 members left, including such former Executive members as Jim Higgins, John Palmer, Granville Williams and Roger Protz. [32]

DESPITE difficulties and disagreements, the central focus of IS’s political strategy continued to be the rank and file movement. The two large conferences in 1974 which established the National Rank and File Movement showed the potential for rank and file organisation. And objectively, the need for this became greater as the Labour Government’s term dragged on.
The decline of the traditional left in the unions was dramatically highlighted by Terry Duffy’s victory in the AUEW. The Liaison Committee for the Defence of Trade Unions came to life once a year to hold rather boring and stage-managed conferences, then vanished again. Above all, the growing co-operation of the TUC leaders with the government made independent rank and file organisation imperative. Yet the move to the right made it increasingly difficult to maintain effective rank and file organisation. The bureaucracy, moreover, took any opportunity to try to silence militants. In 1974 Ian Gibson was removed from the Executive of ASTMS for having written an article in Socialist Worker critical of the union leadership.
In the early period of the Labour Government it was possible for the Rank and File Movement to make a number of interventions in real struggles. When workers at the Strachans factory near Southampton occupied their factory in 1974 against the threat of closure, the AUEW refused to organise blacking on the grounds that this would be illegal under legislation remaining from the Tory Government. The Rank and File Organising Committee (set up by the first Rank and File Conference in March 1974) circulated an appeal for blacking and helped to organise the only effective action that was taken.
Again, in late 1974, when the Intex textile factory in Manchester embarked on an eight-week strike, the sole response of the union leadership (the National Union of Dyers and Bleachers) was to expel two of the strike leaders from the union. The Rank and File Organising Committee convened a meeting of over a hundred trade unionists from the Manchester area which agreed to organise blacking, raise money, and defend strike leaders from threats of violence received from fascists.
The Rank and File Organising Committee also took a number of initiatives in defence of the building workers’ pickets jailed at Shrewsbury in late 1973, and ran a campaign to get work permits for Chilean refugees. Various rank and file groups led struggles in their own industries: thus supporters of Rank and File Teacher led unofficial strikes in the campaign for the London Allowance in 1974. All these were in themselves limited and modest initiatives, but they showed the potential for a rank and file movement. The Communist Party showed its awareness of rank and file movements influenced by IS when its theoretical journal published a critique of IS’s rank and file strategy. [33]
Yet the maintenance of rank and file organisation became increasingly difficult. A further Rank and File Conference was not held until November 1977 – in size it was no larger than the two conferences held in 1974. Some impact was made by running rank and file candidates for trade union elections, not in the hope of winning positions, but in order to fight for alternative policies and provide a basis for organising within the union. When Willie Lee stood for National Organiser of the AUEW in 1974, he spoke to meetings up and down the country, national leaflets were issued, and the first number of Engineers Charter was published. He gained a respectable total of some ten thousand votes. Similar campaigns were run in a number of other unions, the most successful being that for Tommy Riley in the election for general secretary of the TGWU in 1977; Riley came fifth with over 27,000 votes.

NATURALLY many critics on the right (and left) tried to smear the National Rank and File Movement by alleging that it was simply an ‘IS front’. The charge worried many IS members, and there was some internal discussion as to the ‘independence’ of the Rank and File Movement. In many ways, however, it was a false debate. The real problem in the labour movement was, of course, not the excessive influence of IS, but the continuing dominance of reformism. To the extent that IS was largely isolated in the struggle against reformist ideas, most of the burden of taking initiatives and maintaining the apparatus of the Rank and File Movement fell on the shoulders of IS members. For them have refused to take the burden, abstain in the name of some mythical ‘spontaneity’ of the rank and file, would have been nothing but pure political abdication. [34]
Yet, in a period of industrial downturn, a rank-and-file strategy was not enough. Indeed, there were grave dangers that a correct emphasis on organisation in the workplace could lead comrades to bury themselves in the minutiae of routine trade-unionism. The IS tradition had always consisted two components – on the one hand strategic insistence on the centrality of the working class, and on the other a willingness to be involved wherever a significant number of people were engaged in militant action. In the 1960s that had meant participating in mass movements such as CND and VSC and fighting for a class line. In the 1970s, IS, while still being a tiny force on the stage of British politics, was able to take some significant initiatives in launching movements. The two most important were in the struggle against unemployment and against racism.
The need for an initiative on unemployment became apparent in the autumn of 1975. Unemployment had officially topped the million figure (in fact it was considerably higher), with women, blacks and young people especially badly affected. At the same time the acceptance of the Labour Government’s income policy by most trade union leaders meant a damping down of struggle on the wages front. The Right to Work Campaign was launched in October 1975, as an initiative from the Rank and File Organising Committees. In fact, for the next couple of years, the Right to Work Campaign came to overshadow the Rank and File Movement.
The Right to Work Campaign in practice depended very largely on the initiatives of IS members, and was, not surprisingly, smeared as an IS front, although a significant number of non-IS members were involved. Politically the Right to Work Campaign sought to put into practice three main principles:
One: That the unemployed had to have a voice for themselves in the struggle. The Broad Left approach, which stressed that everything must be done through the ‘official channels’, left the unemployed simply as the recipients of fine words and promises. For example, in the Spring of 1976 an Assembly on Unemployment (called as a Broad Left initiative by the London Co-op and the No. 8 London Confed District Committee) attracted three thousand trade union delegates. There were many speakers on the evils of unemployment, but the only unemployed worker who got to the microphone was John Deason of the Right to Work Campaign.
In particular unemployed school-leavers, a significant section of the jobless, could not fight through the unions because they had never been able to belong to one. Local Right to Work Committees and Right to Work Marches provided a possibility for self-activity by the unemployed.
Two: At the same time it had to be recognised that the unemployed alone could not fight unemployment. It was necessary to fight for the unity of employed and unemployed, to confront employed workers with their responsibility in the fight for jobs. This meant taking the struggle for sponsorship of the Right to Work Campaign into the workplaces and trade union branches. This also provided a means of countering the routinism and economism into which revolutionaries in trade unions could so easily lapse in a period of relative passivity.
The first Right to Work March, from Manchester to London in March 1976, was sponsored by over four hundred trade union bodies, including seventy shop stewards committees. This was possible despite the ambiguous attitude of the Communist Party. In some areas Communist Party members opposed the March in a grossly sectarian manner, but in other places they recognised that IS was now taking initiatives of the sort the Communist Party had made in the thirties, and gave full and constructive support.
Three: The Campaign had to be based on direct action as well as on propaganda. It had to show that initiatives, albeit on a small scale, were possible even in the immediate short term. The first Right to Work March was significant, not just for the support it obtained, but for the style it adopted. Throughout the course of the March marchers joined picket lines and even entered factories where sackings were being threatened in order to encourage workers to fight against unemployment. This marked a big step forward from the ‘hunger marches’ of the thirties, which had great difficulty in making contact with employed trade unionists, and scarcely ever succeeded in actually entering workplaces.
The success of the first March was shown, not only by the 5,500 people who turned out to greet it at the Albert Hall, but by the fact that the March had sufficiently irritated the upholders of ‘law and order’ for the police to attack it as it entered London. 44 arrests were made. A number of marchers were sentenced to imprisonment, but the campaign against the repression provided an important focus for the Right to Work in the coming months. The most serious charges, against Campaign Secretary John Deacon, were dropped on the second day of the trial because of inadequate police evidence.
(Incidentally, Right to Work supporters who had gathered to picket the Old Bailey in support of Deason celebrated the acquittal by travelling to the Grunwicks factory in North London and staging what was to be the first picket of that factory. One struggle thus fired another).
A further Right to Work March, from London to the Brighton TUC, took place in September 1976, and as unemployment continued to rise, the Right to Work Campaign remained a central area of activity for IS members.

UNEMPLOYMENT and the Labour Government’s betrayal of even the miserable reforms it had promised inevitably bred racism. From the time of the Red Lion Square demonstration in 1974, where Kevin Gately was killed, it became clear that the National Front was a threat that could not be ignored, and that the police could be relied on to side against the anti-fascists. In August and September 1974 the NF staged marches through Leicester and London. On both occasions IS took the initiative in organising counter-demonstrations: at Leicester in particular the IS mobilisation was successful, with the IS contingent forming half of the 5,000-strong anti-fascist demonstration.
The fight against racism and fascism continued to be a priority. The IS strategy was based on two parallel lines. On the one hand, it had to be clear that racism and fascism were a product of a system in crisis. People would look for black scapegoats if they could see no other solution to their problems. So systematic anti-racist propaganda in the workplaces and communities had to be combined with a critique of the system as a whole, and above all, with a lead in fighting what could be fought here and now. But at the same time, organised fascism had to be confronted physically. There could be no question of ‘free speech’ for an organisation that was building a machine that aimed to use violence against blacks and trade unionists. Above all, militaristic marches through the streets were an essential part of the fascists’ attempt to build a mass organisation; they had to be stopped from marching by any means necessary.
So for the next couple of years IS members took to the streets to confront the National Front whenever they tried to demonstrate. Often this had to be done in almost total isolation, as most of the rest of the left still tended towards the view that if the NF were simply ignored they would disappear.
But the level of the racist threat rose sharply in May 1976. A vicious press attack on Malawi Asians alleged to be receiving huge state benefits was followed by an outburst from Enoch Powell and an upsurge of NF activity, in the course of which three black youths were killed and scores of other blacks were subjected to physical assaults. Socialist Worker took on the whole question of immigration controls head-on, with a front-page headline ‘They’re Welcome Here’. [35] This was followed by a flood of propaganda. In one week in June 1976 the IS printshop turned out 1,200 placards, 30,000 posters and 80,000 stickers to carry the anti-racist message.
Everywhere the Nazis appeared they were confronted on the streets. In July 1976 a Nazi, Robert Relf, achieved press notoriety by displaying on his home the sign ‘For Sale to an English Family’. The National Front, National Party, British Movement and others planned to capitalise on the impotent liberal protests at this by using it as a focus for a major racist demonstration in London.
But members of the International Socialists took possession of the offending sign and publicly burnt it, thwarting the Nazi plans.

FOR another year the threat of racist violence persisted, coupled with growing electoral success by the NF, with more and more of the left becoming aware that the Nazi menace could not simply be ignored. The turning point came on 13 August 1977 at Lewisham. Here a massive counter-demonstration to an NF march succeeded in physically stopping the Nazis, although the success was followed by vicious attacks by the police on the anti-fascist demonstrators.
The success of Lewisham was made possible by a number of factors. Many of the people who had participated in the exhilarating mass pickets at Grunwicks earlier in the summer joined the anti-Nazi protest at Lewisham. But far more important was the fact that the anti-fascist forces were no longer confined to the organised extreme left. Large numbers of local inhabitants – both black and white – joined the struggle on the street.
For the press this was a signal for an all-out witch-hunt against the Socialist Workers Party. [36] SWP comrades were accused of inciting violence, and of using knives and ammonia against the fascists (no-one troubled to recall that a month earlier Nazis in Lewisham had attacked an anti-racist demonstration with the deadly poisonous weedkiller Paraquat). The Communist Party, which had issued a leaflet urging people not to take part in the ‘provocative march planned by the Socialist Workers Party’, also helped to suggest that the SWP was responsible for the violence. And the Nazis themselves were in no doubt as to who had been responsible for their setback. At the end of August the Cottons Gardens warehouse, which had been the IS/SWP headquarters since 1969, was petrol-bombed and partly destroyed.
Lewisham helped to establish the SWP’s credentials as an anti-racist force. But a major difficulty remained. While many white anti-racists were drawn to work with and even join the SWP, the Party made little impact in the black community. During the seventies Chingari, an Asian paper published in various Asian languages, and Flame, a paper aimed at West Indians, had been launched, but had failed to build any substantial base of support. There were to be no short-cuts or easy gains here. The deep distrust felt by most black militants towards the white left in Britain could only be broken down by a long period of patient and regular anti-racist work.
By late 1977 electoral support for the Nazis was already beginning to decline: a clear indication that the strategy of confrontation had been justified. But the success of Lewisham also created the conditions in which a much wider anti-fascist movement could be built. In November 1977 the Anti Nazi League was launched. The original initiative was taken by Paul Holborow of the SWP, who approached Ernie Roberts and Peter Hain; the three agreed to launch a movement. Within a month or two the ANL had acquired a wide range of sponsors; as well as many leading Labour Party MPs and trade union leaders, it was also backed by a wide range of well-known journalists, writers and entertainers – such diverse figures as Brian Clough, Arnold Wesker, Keith Waterhouse, Warren Mitchell and many more. After initial hesitation the Communist Party gave its support.
The ANL had thus succeeded in creating a far broader united front than had ever been possible for the Right to Work Campaign. But the success of the ANL was not to be measured simply by its ability to win support within the existing labour movement. It was also able to win a very wide measure of support among young people with hitherto no political affiliations. This was substantially due to the existence of Rock Against Racism. RAR had been launched some time before the ANL, in autumn 1976, by IS members and others in response to openly pro-racist statements by pop musician Eric Clapton and pro-fascist remarks by singer David Bowie. [37]
It was the coming together of these different strands that made it possible for the ANL to break out of the weary old demonstration routine. On 30 April 1978 the ANL held a Carnival in London, with a march to Victoria Park where the Tom Robinson Band, the Clash, Steel Pulse, X-Ray Spex and others entertained a crowd of some eighty thousand. It was a mobilisation comparable to the peaks of CND and VSC. A second Carnival was held in September 1978, and the involvement of youth led to the setting up of such organisations as SKAN (School Kids Against the Nazis).
Attempts were made to smear the ANL as an ‘SWP Front’. But although SWP activists often played a key role in building the ANL at local level, the breadth of support won by the ANL was so great that such smears never looked at all convincing. The problem for the SWP was rather to distinguish its own revolutionary politics within the broader movement. Thus, for example, the ANL did not have a position of opposition to immigration controls.
It is undoubtedly true that in the early stages of the building of the ANL, the SWP had such influence that it could have forced the adoption of such a position. Had it done so, however, it is unlikely that the ANL would have been able to grow so fast. SWP members, however, argued for their position to the broader audience offered by the ANL. Thus Socialist Worker vigorously criticised Sid Bidwell, a sponsor of the ANL, for his support for immigration controls on the Parliamentary Select Committee on race and immigration. [38]
Likewise the SWP continued to call for physical confrontation with the Nazis where necessary. Thus during the summer of 1978 SWP members fought to clear the Nazis out of Brick Lane, a Bengali area in East London.
In general the ANL was an important and valuable experience of how revolutionaries can work in a broader mass movement. But one serious mistake was made. At the time of the Second Carnival in South London in September 1978, the NF announced that on the same day they would march to Brick Lane. Obviously they hoped to wreck the Carnival by attracting a large section of the supporters to the defence of Brick Lane. The SWP took the position that the Carnival must go ahead, and that the SWP would not be split from other forces in the ANL; but that a sufficient force should be mobilised to defend Brick Lane. The line was right but the organisation arithmetic was wrong; too few comrades arrived at Brick Lane and too late. [39]
The ANL’s work continued up to the General Election in Spring 1979, and particularly the mobilisation in Southall on 23 April. Here, as at Lewisham, the demonstrators were joined by large numbers of local youth determined to drive the Nazis off their streets. Here, too, Blair Peach, an East London teacher and an SWP-member, was beaten to death by the police Special Patrol Group (SPG). He was the Party’s first martyr. At his funeral in June, attended by several thousand people, Ken Gill of the TUC General Council and Tony Cliff of the SWP spoke from the platform. Cliff concluded ‘It is no use building monuments of brass and stone ... let us mourn, but let us organise and mobilise.’ Despite continued agitation, it was not possible to expose the full truth of how Blair Peach was murdered.

THE mid-1970s was also a period in which IS extended and diversified its activity. In the early 1970s IS was often accused by others on the left of ‘workerism’, of an exclusive preoccupation with industrial workers at the expense of other struggles and other oppressed sectors of society. The criticism was easy to make; to suggest an alternative was somewhat harder. A small revolutionary group of necessity has to have priorities; if it seeks to be present everywhere, it is effective nowhere, and rapidly demoralises its membership. To transform IS from an overwhelmingly student organisation, as it had been in 1968, into what it was by 1973, an organisation with some real roots in the organised working class, could be achieved only by ‘stick-bending’, by a conscious neglect of other tasks.
But there was a price to be paid for such neglect. Important areas of struggle were missed, and the seeds of future difficulties were sown. In particular IS can be criticised for the fact that in the early 1970s the organisation as a whole failed to recognise the importance of the rise of the Womens Liberation Movement, and to make a serious enough intervention in it.
IS women were, of course, involved from the beginning. Some fifty IS women attended the Oxford Women’s Liberation Conference early in 1970, which can be seen as one of the starting-points of the movement in Britain. There was a major debate on Women’s Liberation at the Easter Conference of IS in 1970. In June 1971 IS women organised a ‘Conference on Women’ attended by some 300 people, although a report noted that ‘almost all of those who spoke were students, lecturers or teachers.’ And in the summer of 1972 the first issue of Women’s Voice appeared.
However, the work tended to be left to the small group of women who took the initiative, with little guidance or encouragement from the central leadership of the organisation. There was a tendency for many comrades to suggest that only women working in factories were of any real interest to the organisation; and that Women’s Voice was a diversion from getting adequate coverage of women’s struggles in Socialist Worker.
One of the main factors leading to a change of emphasis came in 1975, with the emergence of a mass movement against attempts to cut back on women’s right to abortion. In June 1975 a demonstration of forty thousand women and men in London demanded rejection of the Abortion (Amendment) Bill. IS comrades were active in the National Abortion Campaign, although this posed some problems, since NAC did not have an effective structure with an elected and responsible committee; its ‘open committee’ form meant that it was constantly liable to reverse its own decisions, and laid it wide open to packing by a variety of tendencies. This made NAC, after June 1975, often unable to take the necessary initiatives. At times in 1976–7 Women’s Voice supporters found that there was no way of getting a proposal for action considered by NAC except to take the initiative and announce that it was going to take place.
The growing importance of Women’s Voice was reflected by the 600-strong Women’s Voice Rally held in Manchester in November 1975. The rally closed with Sheila McGregor, the first full-time IS women’s organiser, declaring:
We’ve got to lead the struggle for socialist revolution. We don’t want just to be a voice in the movement. We want to be central to the movement so we can be central to the socialist revolution. [40]
And in June 1978 a Women’s Voice Rally in Sheffield attracted a thousand women.
A recognition of the need for self-criticism on IS’s line on women appeared in a Socialist Worker editorial in 1978:
Just like those male socialists 60 years ago, we on Socialist Worker have tended to turn our back on that movement: to denounce it as ‘middle class’, to protest that we were fighting for the rights of all workers and to ignore the discrimination against women. The women in the Socialist Workers Party refused to accept this bias. They acted, as part of the women’s movement, to change the party.
They organised themselves in Women’s Voice groups and changed the face and tone of their paper Women’s Voice. They tapped a great well of anger and enthusiasm which men-only socialism had never come near. [41]
The 1978 SWP Conference decided that Women’s Voice should not be simply a publication, but an organisation, and Women’s Voice groups were set up in many localities. [42] This was a recognition of the need for a campaigning organisation that could take up a variety of women’s issues, as well as of the fact that there was a small but significant periphery of women open to revolutionary politics, but who could not be won directly through Socialist Worker.
The success of Women’s Voice as an organisation in turn led to a sharp but constructive debate as to how far Women’s Voice should be independent of the SWP. The 1979 SWP Conference decided that, within the limits of the present level of struggle, Women’s Voice could not be ‘politically independent’ of the SWP. As the impact of the Thatcher government’s programme of cuts began to fall especially heavily on women, campaigning in defence of abortion rights, and on the questions of women’s health and women’s employment became established as an important part of the SWP’s work.
Similar problems affected the attempt to establish a gay group in IS. In 1973 the National Committee issued a document forbidding IS members to work politically in the Gay Liberation Front (the main gay organisation at the time) and dissolving the IS gay group, arguing that this work could not be a priority at the present time. However, after extensive discussion, the 1976 Conference reversed this position. Socialist Worker added to the ‘Where We Stand’ column ‘We are for an end to all forms of discrimination against homosexuals’, and a new IS Gay Group was established; since then the organisation has continued to campaign and make publicity around the gay question. [43]

Another important development of the mid-1970s was the recognition of the growing importance of the battle of ideas. The ruling-class offensive was not purely economic, but thrust a whole number of’ ideological and cultural factors into the centre of the arena.
Books have always been a crucial weapon in the struggle for socialist ideas. The IS Book Service began in 1967 in a suitcase. By 1973 a bookshop had been opened in Finsbury Park, followed by some nine or ten others in various parts of the country. In 1977 the Bookmarx bookclub was launched making socialist books available at low prices. The Socialist Bookbus provided a mobile bookshop which toured the country organising showings of left-wing films.
In 1978, faced with a new audience offered by the growing anti-Nazi movement, the SWP reorganised its own publications. For some time the monthly International Socialism had been a uneasy compromise between a magazine and a theoretical journal. In April 1978, Socialist Review was launched as a popular socialist magazine, combining news analysis with a wide cultural coverage and a forum for debate with other sections of the left. International Socialism began a new series as a quarterly theoretical journal.
A range of cultural and educational events were also launched. 1976 saw the first of the annual Easter Rallies held in the Derbyshire Miners Holiday Camp at Skegness, combining political meetings with films, football and children’s activities. And 1977 saw the holding of Marxism 77, a week-long series of lectures and discussions on a wide range of political, theoretical, historical and cultural topics.
In 1977 too the ‘Stuff the Jubilee’ campaign, with badges, stickers and a special Socialist Worker, proved highly popular among those sickened by royal hypocrisy and extravagance.
In the early 1970s IS, reacting against its roots in the 1968 upsurge, tended to downgrade work among students, but by 1974 this neglect began to be corrected. In 1974 NOISS (National Organisation of IS Societies) was founded (subsequently to become SWSO), as an organisation of students closely associated with IS and as a means of bringing students towards the organisation. NOISS/SWSO participated in many student struggles notably against closure of colleges of education and increased fees for overseas students. In 1977 a leading SWP student militant, Andy Strouthous, was jailed for refusing to carry out a court order which would have prevented him carrying out his job as Students Union president at North East London Polytechnic.
Another area of IS’s work which began to be more developed in this period was internationalism. If IS’s politics had always been internationalist, involvement in the international movement had been limited; it was always argued that it was pointless to build international structures until the organisation had a real base at home. Two international conferences (sponsored jointly with Lutte Ouvrière in France and the International Socialists in the USA) in 1970 and 1971 bore little fruit.
In the first few months after the Chilean coup of 1973 IS concentrated on drawing propaganda lessons about the failure of the ‘parliamentary road’. By the Spring of 1974 the emphasis shifted to a more active participation in the work of the Chile Solidarity Campaign, and IS comrades were involved in such issues as ‘adopting’ political prisoners through the trade union movement.
But it was the events in Portugal in 1975, when the whole question of state power seemed to be in the balance, that produced the biggest involvement in international activity. In August 1975 56 IS members went to Portugal on a delegation organised in conjunction with the Portuguese PRP (Revolutionary Party of the Proletariat); an SW Portuguese Solidarity Fund was established, and money sent to the PRP for the purchase of printing material.
At the same time an attempt was made to raise a political debate about the issues of the Portuguese Revolution Tony Cliff’s Portugal at the Crossroads [44] was published and distributed in Portuguese, Spanish, Italian, French, Greek and German.
Portugal led to a revision of IS’s international perspective. It was argued that the traditional labels (such as ‘Maoism’ and ‘Trotskyism’) which had divided the revolutionary movement were becoming obsolete, and that in developing international links, IS should give priority to groups which had a serious practical orientation to the working class rather than those with which it had the greatest degree of formal agreement about points of programme. For a while IS had close links with the Italian semi-Maoist organisation Avanguardia Operaia [45], but during the 1976 elections AO moved to the right, and shortly afterwards went into a sharp decline.
The fall in the level of struggle in Portugal and Italy after 1976 made it clear that the process of international regroupment that IS hoped for was now going to take longer than expected. As a means of developing international debate IS launched an International Discussion Bulletin in 1976, subsequently to be incorporated into the new series of International Socialism.

THROUGHOUT the 1970s the question of Ireland continued to confront the British left. While condemning such actions as the Birmingham pub bombings in November 1974, IS continually campaigned for the withdrawal of British troops as the only solution to the problem. IS also developed close links with the Socialist Workers Movement, an Irish organisation founded in 1971 which had a similar political analysis
In the latter half of 1976 IS saw a considerable growth. The Right to Work Campaign and anti-racist activity, plus growing disillusion with the Labour Government, were producing a steady stream of recruits. They came as follows: June 64 new members; July 77 new members; August 100; September 174; October 192; November 243; December 155; making a total of over a thousand new members. By mid-1977 the membership was around four thousand, compared to something not much over 2,500 a year earlier.
The advance was not simply numerical. IS’s ability to initiate activity, rather than simply join in movements launched by others, had never been greater. Industrially, there were more members than ever able to lead disputes in their own workplaces, while districts were better equipped to intervene in struggles from the outside.
But the improved nature of IS’s organisation in no way matched up to the objective needs of the situation, given the vacuum left by the rightward d drift of the Labour left, the Communist Party and the union bureaucracies. One leading comrade described IS as being ‘the smallest mass party in the world’, such was the disproportion between the still tiny organisation and the tasks facing it.

ANOTHER factor in the development of the organisation was the decision, in the autumn of 1976, that IS should begin to contest parliamentary by-elections. The first seat chosen was Walsall North, the constituency vacated by runaway Labour MP John Stonehouse. The objective was twofold: firstly, to offer a generalised political alternative to a small layer of people looking for something to the left of the increasingly discredited Labour Government: secondly, to use the opportunity for propaganda to build a local branch of the organisation. The results at Walsall, while not startlingly good, seemed to suggest some validity to this perspective: 1.6% of the poll (more than the Communist Party had got in that seat in October 1974), and some twenty five recruits to the party.
It was on the basis of these developments that the decision was taken that from January 1977 IS should be renamed the Socialist Workers Party.
The perspective was that the rising level of struggle (there was a sharp rise in the number of strikes up to the defeat of the firemen’s strike at the end of the year) would offer the possibility for continued recruitment. As Tony Cliff put it in an article explaining the need for the party:
It is possible, and vital, to build the organisation quickly. But it is also a fact that many of us suffer from conservatism in doing that.
As a result of two tough years, many of us are putting the sights far too low. We are afraid of being hurt and therefore look for safety. And, of course, if you try to recruit no-one, you are 100 per cent successful.
The present members of our party are not the salt of the earth, the select few. If any elitism exists in our organisation it is necessary to uproot it completely. [46]
As a propaganda tool for the launching of the Party, twenty thousand copies of a pamphlet by Paul Foot called Why You Should Be A Socialist were printed and distributed. The title was significant. It stressed that this was not the time for arguing points of detail with others already committed to socialism, the key task was to approach a whole range of people previously untouched by political ideas, but who were becoming open to revolutionary politics as a result of the crisis.
In fact things did not go so smoothly. The industrial downturn was not as dramatic as predicted, and recruitment slowed down. Moreover, by early 1978 it was clear that the electoral strategy had, on balance, been unsuccessful. A total of eight by-elections was contested. In all cases the vote was, as expected, small; but the intervention of the IMG (under the electoral guise of ‘Socialist Unity’) and other far left groups meant that the results were in some cases much worse than expected; moreover, experience showed that it was difficult to maintain those branches built around an election campaign.
The original intention of standing some sixty candidates in the General Election was dropped, and it was finally agreed not to stand any candidates at all. While some experience had been gained, and the possibility of fighting elections in the future remains, the experiment had in general proved negative.
In the summer of 1977 the SWP sent an open letter to the Communist Party, making a series of concrete suggestions for joint meetings between the two organisations to discuss co-operation around specific industrial and trade union questions. Bert Ramelson, the Communist Party’s Industrial Organiser, replied that the SWP’s ‘activity and propaganda is divisive and disruptive, making more difficult the development of united mass struggle.’ [47]
The SWP was also approached by the IMG for co-operation in an electoral alliance. The response to this was that at the present time electoral interventions could be only a matter of propaganda, and that united fronts can be fruitful if they are based on specific and concrete demands, not abstract propaganda.

IN early 1978, following the defeat of the firemen’s strike, and when the main positive area of activity was the rapidly growing ANL, a new debate emerged in the organisation. Once again the question at stake was Socialist Worker, its orientation and its use as a tool for party-building. The editor, Chris Harman (who had taken over from Paul Foot some three years before), retired from the post and in February it was announced that ‘Socialist Worker is to be relaunched as an improved, livelier paper’. The aim was to open the paper out to ‘reach and involve thousands more people who are not members of the Socialist Workers Party.’ [48] The new design for the paper included more cartoons, regular sports and television coverage, and a serial story The Faradays. The claim was that over the previous year or so the paper had become ‘boring’ and ‘predictable’, and that the paper should now be used to reach a new periphery.
Critics of the new paper alleged that the paper was giving insufficient attention to the industrial struggle; that important political questions were being oversimplified to such an extent that the political content of the paper was diluted; and that the paper was simply reflecting and enthusing about the ANL, rather than arguing for the SWP’s distinctive politics within that milieu.
The debate carried on for some time. At the end of July four journalists who had been especially associated with the new line on the paper (Paul Foot, Jim Nichol, Laurie Flynn and Peter Marsden) resigned from full-time work on Socialist Worker, and Tony Cliff was appointed as editor. Some features of the new paper (for example, the sports column) were retained, while others disappeared. The Ford strike and the resurgence of industrial struggle in the autumn of 1978 shifted the balance of the paper back to what it had been a year earlier.
Tory victory in May 1979 brought to an end five years of Labour rule. In purely numerical terms the SWP was not significantly larger than in 1974, with a membership in 1980 of 4,100 as against 3,900 in 1974. But the serious losses of 1975–6 had been made up for, and the social composition of the Party (36 per cent manual and 32 per cent white collar workers) showed that the Party was sinking roots into the class, as did the large number of comrades holding shop-floor and trade union positions. The Rank and File ‘Defend our Unions’ Conference in June 1979, attended by some thousand delegates, was an indication of the Party’s implantation and ability to mobilise.
In the terms of the overall class struggle, the situation was one of continued downturn, with most struggles fundamentally defensive. The Communist Party and its various ‘Broad Left’ fronts faced further decline, while much of the revolutionary and ex-revolutionary left was bemused by a swing to the left in the Labour Party which was in fact largely confined to the rhetorical and constitutional levels. Almost alone the SWP stood for the open building of a new revolutionary party with a clear programme and a base in the working class. The problems – cuts, unemployment, racism and the new Cold War – were daunting.
But while the road before us is undoubtedly long and hard, the possibilities are enormous. On the basis of a critical understanding of its own traditions, the SWP can look forward with confidence to the struggles ahead.

Notes
29. Socialist Worker, 15 March 1975
30. Socialist Worker, 29 March 1975
31. For the record, some smaller split-offs occurred in this period. In the summer of 1973, an undeclared faction was expelled on the grounds that it had developed a total opposition to IS politics (notably an orthodox Trotskyist attitude to programme, and a rather academic critique of the Permanent Arms Economy theory). Some members of this grouping formed the Revolutionary Communist Group, while others disappeared without trace into the Labour Party. A subsequent split in the RCG gave birth to the Revolutionary Communist Tendency. The Left Faction, whose platform stressed the importance of solidarity with the Irish struggle and a critique of IS’s ‘workerism’ and rank and file strategy, were expelled in 1975. They formed an organisation called Workers Power, which was to fuse with Workers Fight to found the International Communist League. Most of the Workers Power members subsequently left the ICL and continued their existence as Workers Power.
32. The excluded comrades established the Workers League, which for a while published a paper Workers News. In 1978 the Workers League, together with some other ex-IS members, formed the International Socialist Alliance. This body had as its sole activity various manoeuvres for ‘revolutionary unity’ between the SWP, IMG and others. It soon disintegrated, with some members joining the IMG.
33. Geoff Roberts, The Strategy of Rank and Filism, Marxism Today, December 1976.
34. The best statement of the IS position of the relation of the party to the rank and file movement is in Towards a Rank and File Movement, by Andreas Nagliati, International Socialism 66.
35. Socialist Worker, 29 May 1976.
36. IS had changed its name to the Socialist Workers Party in January 1977.
37. Socialist Worker, 2 October 1976.
38. Socialist Worker, 1 April 1978.
39. See Socialist Worker, 30 September 1978 for a self-criticism.
40. Socialist Worker, 6 December 1975.
41. Socialist Worker, 10 June 1978.
42. Socialist Worker, 1 July 1978.
43. Compare in particular Socialist Worker, 26 August 1978.
44. International Socialism Special, Nos. 81–82.
45. See International Socialism 84 for a record of a debate between AO and IS.
46. Socialist Worker, 8 January 1977.
47. Socialist Worker, 9 July 1977.
48. Socialist Worker, 11 February 1978.
 

Birchall: Building "The Smallest Mass Party in the World" (Introductions)



Ian Birchall Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Building “The Smallest Mass Party”

Ian Birchall
Building “The Smallest Mass Party In The World”


Presentation
The first two sections of this pamphlet were written in 1973, at the suggestion of Roger Rosewell (shortly before he began his long journey to the right). It was rejected for publication in International Socialism by Chris Harman, but accepted in 1975 when Duncan Hallas became editor. The final section was written in early 1981. It offers an outline history of the Socialist Review Group/International Socialists/Socialist Workers Party over a period of thirty years.
The section on the fifties is, admittedly, weak, as I was only able to consult a very small number of documents. Between 1963 and 1974 I was a member of various leading committees and editorial boards, and it is for this period that the pamphlet may be of most value as a personal testimony. However, the account is substantiated from documents wherever possible, and I tried not to rely on purely personal recollections. Thus in 1969 I was one of the minority in the debate on the troops in Ireland; but I endeavoured to present here the majority position as fairly as possible.
The pamphlet has been widely denounced. Much criticism has come from expelled or former members of the organisation, often on the grounds that the circumstances of their own departure were not given sufficient attention. But despite claims that it is a sycophantic ‘official’ history, the pamphlet has often been regarded with suspicion within the SWP and it has never been reissued. One reason for this is that it was written during the prolonged and heated internal debate on the rôle of the Women’s Voice organisation and magazine within the party. I tried to give a fair representation of the argument at the time of writing, but by the time the published pamphlet appeared the situation had developed rapidly, culminating in the closure of Women’s Voice in July 1982. However, none of the pamphlet’s critics has ever been able to point to any serious error of fact.
The pamphlet is referred to positively, though not uncritically, in Tony Cliff’s autobiography A World to Win (Bookmarks, London 2000) and for that reason it seemed to me useful to make it available again to anyone interested in reading it as a complement to Cliff’s account. [Other relevant works are Jim Higgins, More Years, for the Locust (London 1997), a critical account by a former National Secretary expelled in 1975, and David Widgery, Beating Time (London 1986), on the Anti-Nazi League.]
Whether a fuller history of the SWP and its predecessor organisations is ever written will depend on whether we deserve it by what we achieve in the real world of the class struggle. Until then this pamphlet may be of some interest to historians of the British far left.
If I were to rewrite the pamphlet today I should doubtless not do it in quite the same way. However, I conclude by saying that I stand by the political judgements made in the pamphlet, and that I remain proud to be a member of the SWP.



 


Ian Birchall
October 2000





Introduction (1981)
Over the past decade the Socialist Workers Party (formerly the International Socialists) has grown into an organisation capable of small but significant interventions in the class struggle, and with a real possibility of laying the foundations for a revolutionary party in Britain. Many comrades who have joined the SWP in this period, or who have worked alongside us, quite rightly want to know where we have sprung from.
The following article will sketch out the history of the SWP and its predecessor groups over the past thirty years. The aim is not to answer all the slanders thrown at us by rival groupings; nor is it to prove that we were always right – we certainly weren’t.
‘Without revolutionary theory there is no revolutionary practice’, said Lenin in a much-quoted phrase. But, as Lenin’s whole life shows, correct theory is necessary but not enough. If the theory is not adapted and fought for by workers, it is a worthless abstraction. The history of the SWP is the history of the continued attempt to turn theory into practice.
The following brief history consists of three articles. The first two were written in early 1975 and published in International Socialism 76 and 77 in that same year. The third, which takes the story up to the 1979 Tory election victory, has been written in 1981. Readers may therefore notice certain discrepancies of style and perspective between the first two articles and the third.
In particular the closing section of the second article was written at a time when it was still not clear to any of us how long and deep the downturn in struggle that followed the Labour election victory was going to be. I have therefore dealt with this period, and the internal debate that arose during it, again in greater detail in the third article, at the price of a certain overlap. The most glaring omission in the first two articles, however, is any treatment of the development of women’s organisation it the International Socialists. I have tried to make amends for this in the third article.
A sharp attack on the account presented in the first two articles has been made by Martin Shaw, a former IS member, in The Socialist Register 1978 (Merlin Press). This article, and my reply in The Socialist Register 1979, may be of interest to any readers who want to take the argument further than is possible in this short article. Likewise, David Widgery’s The Left in Britain 1956–1968 (Penguin 1976) contains much interesting material relevant to the earlier part of this history.
I should like to thank Norah Carlin and Duncan Hallas for advice and criticism during the writing of all three of these articles.



 


Ian Birchall



 



Ian Birchall looks at the contenders for the French presidential elections
The persons who framed the constitution of the French Fifth Republic were no fools. Presidential elections every seven years, parliamentary elections every five years, both by direct universal suffrage. As a result France finds itself in an almost permanent pre-electoral situation.
As a result the forthcoming presidential elections (scheduled for April 26 and May 10) radiate nothing so much as boredom. The leading contenders – retiring president Giscard, Gaullist Chirac, Socialist Mitterrand and Communist Marchais – are all familiar faces who seem to have been around for a long time. Giscard’s probable victory (though polls suggest it could be a close-run thing) will come more from lack of enthusiasm at the alternative than from any positive merits in Giscard’s record.
When he was elected in 1974 Giscard promised to restore the economic balance of the country within thirty months. In fact, despite the much-publicised scandals (notably the Bokassa diamonds) which have characterised his regime, the most striking fact about Giscard’s seven years in office has been the consistent deterioration of the economy.
Over the last five years unemployment has doubled, reaching a figure of 1,680,000 at the beginning of this year. Inflation has risen from 9% to 14% a year over the same period. Meanwhile various social security allowances have been cut.
Giscard’s years of office have been marked, not only by new laws strengthening police powers, but by an alarming rise in the degree of brutality and open racism on the part of the police. And new laws have been introduced aiming at 200,000 repatriations of immigrant workers per year.
On an international level Giscard has continued to defend French imperialist interests in Africa. While he has been in power French troops have made military interventions in Mauritania, Zaire and Central Africa. In France’s West Indian colonies of Guadeloupe and Martinique repression of nationalist movements continues.
Giscard’s failure to win the confidence of large sections of the French bourgeoisie is shown by the widespread support for Jacques Chirac, the candidate who claims the mantle of General de Gaulle (although, as always with dead prophets, there are rival claimants). He is promising to cut public spending by 30,000m francs (about £3,000m) in his first year in office.
Giscard’s greatest asset is the disarray of the reformist left. Never since the mid-sixties have relations between the Socialists and Communists been so bad, and rank-and-file trade union cooperation between militants of the two parties is often rendered almost impossible.
Mitterrand, who has just enough chance of winning to make him wary of promising much, is waging a largely negative campaign. He is concentrating on unemployment, the need for an alternative to Giscard, and France’s role in the world. While Mitterrand’s accusations that Giscard represents a privileged clique are undoubtedly true, there is nothing in Mitterrand’s policies that goes beyond the limits of a timorous nationalist reformism. Indeed, some of his sharpest criticisms of Giscard have centred on the fact that Giscard is not anti-Communist enough – that he was not quick enough in condemning the Russian invasion of Afghanistan.
 
A left alternative
Marchais’ campaign, unhampered by any danger of victory, is marked by a demagogic leftism, aimed more at Mitterrand than Giscard. (Though Marchais’ populist image was somewhat dented by his recent inability, on television, to answer a question about the price of a Paris underground ticket.) But above all the CPs policies are marked by deep nationalism; Marchais has called for the nationalisation of the Michelin company because it invests abroad. The CP’s recent campaigns against immigrants are, of course, notorious (the Moroccan CP has recently denounced the ‘racism’ of the French party). The other main plank of Marchais’ politics has been a slavish defence of Russian foreign policy – this too has taken a knock recently, as a result of an article in Pravda which spoke highly of Giscard’s record, especially in foreign policy.
The CP’s current sectarian line is causing problems in its own ranks. Scarcely a day goes by but Le Monde carries reports of CP members being’ expelled, resigning, or signing manifestos calling for radical changes in the party. While such activity is largely confined to the party’s intellectuals, there is evidence of deep discontent, which might erupt in more dramatic forms after a bad electoral result.
On the first round of the election, Mitterrand will probably get something over 20%, and Marchais between 15% and 20%. It is therefore obvious to anyone who can count that Mitterrand can only win on the second ballot if the CP vote switches behind him.
Both sides, however, are playing hard-to-get, and studiously refusing to enter into any negotiations. Marchais has refused to promise CP support on the second ballot while keeping his options open by saying that he may call for a vote for Mitterrand if the CP’s vote on the first round is high enough.
Marchais has been demanding that Mitterrand promise to include Communist ministers in his government. Mitterrand has, however, refused to have any truck with this, thereby usefully improving his appeal to the middle ground as a solid anti-Communist. Mitterrand simply hopes to get Communist’s votes without making any concessions. He will get some, but probably not enough.
 
The revolutionary left
Since the 1974 election the Giscard regime has introduced new electoral regulations. making it harder for candidates outside the political mainstream to run for the presidency. All candidates now need five hundred signatures from certain categories of elected officials – primarily mayors.
The only candidate of the revolutionary left who seems certain to run is Arlette Laguiller, of the Trotskyist organisation Lutte Ouvrière, who got over half a million votes in 1974. LO has a smoothly functioning apparatus, and is clearly more adept at chatting up mayors than anyone else on the left.
Unfortunately Laguiller’s campaign seems to be confined to the level of abstract propaganda. LO announces, quite correctly, that the workers should look to struggle, not the ballot-box – but fails to offer any advice as to how such struggle is to be developed. Moreover, the propaganda is not pitched at a very high political level. The main posters for the Laguiller campaign bear such slogans as: ‘To tell them some home truths, Arlette Laguiller’; ‘Arlette Laguiller, the plain-speaking of a woman of the people’ – and even ‘Arlette Laguiller, for all women.’
Alain Krivine, of the Ligue Communist Révolutionnaire (French section of the Fourth International), is also hoping to stand again, as he did in 1969 and 1974, although the LCR seems to have had trouble finding friendly mayors over the last two or three months.
At the opposite pole from LO, the LCR is putting all its emphasis on the reformist parties. The LCR holds that the defeat of Giscard is a necessary ‘precondition for any significant rise in the level of class struggle in France, and therefore is giving priority to the demand that the CP and Socialists shall agree to support the best-placed left candidate on the second round. This demand, while not incorrect in itself, seems to channel all the LCR’s propaganda into purely parliamentary forms. A typical LCR poster reads: ‘On the first round, Vote Against Giscard without voting for the splitters. Vote for Alain Krivine.’
In short, the French presidentials look like being a bitter harvest for all concerned – except Giscard d’Estaing.
 



The SDP is indeed fortunate in its ability to attract persons of vision and integrity. It now numbers in its ranks not only Michael O’Halloran but one Roger Rosewell.
Rosewell, who describes himself as an ‘industrial relations consultant’, was recently elected as an SDP district councillor for Aston, Bampton and Standlake in West Oxford. But his wisdom is not being confined to his rustic constituents. On September 25th he addressed a conference, organised by the right-wing Aims group, on Managers and Marxism, about the role of extremists in industry.
‘I have seen extremists at work from the inside and they are worse than anyone else’, he told the New Standard. (23.9.81)
Some of the older extremists who read Socialist Review may remember Rosewell, for he was at one time the industrial organiser of the International Socialists (the predecessor organisation of the SWP).
However, people should not worry too much that Rosewell will betray the innermost secrets of the party to the class enemy. For it is clear that Rosewell is suffering from a severe attack of amnesia.
When asked how long he had been an IS member, Rosewell told Labour Weekly (14.4.81):
‘I can’t really remember. It’s difficult to be sure because it only really started in 1968, so I would say about five years.’
In fact Rosewell was a member for eleven years, from 1963 to 1974. Throughout that period he wrote regularly for the publications of the organisation, and for a good part of it he served on various leading committees. As for the claim that IS began in 1968, Rosewell wrote, in 1973, a pamphlet called The Struggle for Workers Power, in which he gave a perfectly accurate account of the founding of the organisation in 1950. It is tragic that a decade of activity and writing can be so blotted out of a man’s mind.
If Rosewell intends to carry on with his career as a lecturer on the role of Marxists in the unions, he may find some of his own early writings useful. He might well benefit from a rereading of the pamphlet On Industrial Work which he wrote in 1969 under the bizarre pseudonym of R. Warszawski.
In this he discussed the necessity of building revolutionary fractions and rank and file groups in the trade unions. He also stressed (page 6) the necessity for IS members to be open and clear about their political ideas in dealing with any contacts they make.
He might follow this with a reading of his article The Seamen’s Struggle (International Socialism 54 & 55, 1973). Here he showed clearly that the right-wing grip in the NUS was based on the passivity and inactivity of the rank and file, and that the Broad Left in the union failed to win leadership because:
‘Instead of leading a fight against the policies of the right wing and attempting to mobilise the rank and file behind them, they remained silent, hardly ever producing any propaganda and accepting productivity deals. Instead of fighting for more union democracy and exposing the methods of the right wing they accepted full-time appointments.’
Rosewell would clearly be most helpful to his new friends if he told them the truth he once clearly understood, that revolutionary activity in the unions is about political honesty and mass involvement, rather than regaling them with stories of conspiracy.
Rosewell might also tell the assembled managers something of his first hand experience of ‘infiltrating’ the trade union movement. In 1974 Rosewell, still being paid as an IS full-timer, applied for a position as an appointed official of the National Union of Journalists, without consulting his comrades in IS, and told the interviewing panel he had left IS. Since IS policy had always been opposed to the appointment of union officials, the IS National Committee suspended him for two months. Shortly afterwards he slipped out of the organisation.
This account (which can be documented) is somewhat at variance with Rosewell’s statement to the New Standard (23.9.81) that:
‘I quit the SWP 10 years ago when I realised that, come the revolution it would not just be bloated plutocrats who were put up against the wall – there would be lots of other people as well.’
After leaving IS Rosewell retired to academic seclusion to write a history of the Electricians Union. Somewhere along the line he seems to have been struck by the fact that if so many ex-Stalinists could get to the top of the EETPU, then maybe there was a future for an ex-Trotskyist. In the SDP Rosewell has indeed found the colleagues he deserves.
 



The enormous but superficial enthusiasm which greeted Mitterrand’s victory is already beginning to fade; between the end of June and the end of August confidence in Mitterrand, according to one opinion poll, had fallen from 71% to 62% of the population. The ousted right is still in utter disarray, but will regroup quickly enough if the government loses momentum.
The new regime has begun with a number of gestures which, while of limited significance, cannot fail to be pleasing to the left. The Plogoff nuclear power station will not be built and the Larzac military camp will not be extended – both had been symbolic focuses for leftist activists in recent years. Gaston Defferre, the minister of the interior, has not only refused to extradite ETA militants to Spain, but invoked his own past as a Resistance fighter to justify his decision. The satirical paper Hara-Kiri, banned under Pompidou, has reappeared; the ban on roulette within a hundred kilometres of Paris has been lifted, and – to the indignation of the paper Le Figaro – first-class compartments on the Paris metro are to be abolished.


 


Likewise, socialists cannot fail to welcome the news that France – later than almost every other country in Europe – is to abolish the death penalty, and that the repressive Gaullist state security court is to be abolished. Welcome too is the amnesty for many categories of prisoners, a cheap way of alleviating the chronic overcrowding in French jails. There are, however, some strange gaps in the amnesty, such as conscientious objectors and doctors charged with abortion offences.
But there is to be no real change in the machinery of the French state. France’s corrupt racist police force will remain unpurged, even if it is momentarily subdued. Defferre has refused demands from the police unions for a purge of top police officials, saying there will be no ‘witchhunt’. The much-hated CRS riot police are no longer to be used to ‘maintain order’ – but a section of the army has been assigned to do the job.
The Mitterrand government has broken with some of the more openly racist aspects of the Giscard era. Illegal immigrants are to be given the opportunity to ‘regularise’ their situation; but in practice only those in full-time legal employment will get permission to stay. And controls to prevent further illegal immigration are being tightened up. The government is now rapidly reneging on a promise to give immigrants the vote; apparently this will not be practicable before the municipal elections in 1983. All these reforms are, however, in the last resort marginal to the real problem facing the Mitterrand regime – how to deal with the economic crisis. Like every other government in the world, the French administration faces the twin problems of unemployment and inflation. Mitterrand’s attempts at a solution may be more humane and even marginally more intelligent than Thatcher’s, but since he cannot opt out of the world system he will find it hard to discover a remedy to the one problem which does not aggravate the other.
 
Unemployment
Mitterrand’s accession has not halted inflation. On the contrary, his first months in power have seen rises in the costs of basic necessities – petrol, transport, gas, electricity – which will produce further increases throughout the whole economy. And unemployment too is still rising. The official figures – which as in Britain understate the true situation – reached 1,680,000 for July and are expected to reach two million by the end of the year. Prime minister Mauroy admits that at best it will be twelve or eighteen months before the rise can be halted.
The government has taken a number of well-publicised measures against unemployment. The creation of 55,000 new jobs in the public sector (post office, education, etc.) may be welcome, but it is only a drop in the ocean. Beyond this the government has increased bonuses, loans and subsidies to private employers in the – probably vain – hope that this will encourage the creation of new jobs. In many ways this is little more than a continuation of Giscard’s unsuccessful policy.
The minimum wage has been raised by ten per cent (twice as much as was legally required to keep up with inflation) but this has been accompanied by a measure which cuts employers’ social security contributions on wages which are less than twenty per cent above the legal minimum; in effect this is an incentive to employers to pay low wages. The government is postponing a full-scale plan to increase employment to the fateful year of 1984, by when it is hoped inflation will be under control.
Nor will the unemployment situation be helped much by the agreement, made with government encouragement, between employers and unions (except the CGT) for a 39-hour week and a fifth week of annual holiday. As the revolutionary paper Lutte Ouvrière pointed out, it is 45 years since the 40-hour week was agreed in 1936. At this rate it will take another 180 years to reach the 35-hour week. In fact the agreement also contains a relaxation of restrictions on overtime which in practice will probably cancel out the cut in the working week.
And taxation policy is unlikely to lead to any fundamental change in the distribution of wealth. The income tax increase needed to provide the funds to pay unemployment benefit to a greater number of jobless will hit workers as much as higher-paid people. And the proposed wealth tax will have a minimal impact, amounting to about one per cent on fortunes over £300,000.
 
Nationalisation
As for Mitterrand’s nationalisation proposals, they are singularly failing to alarm the French ruling class. Managers and shareholders alike seem reasonably confident that their positions will not be significantly worsened. Five large industrial groups are to be nationalised, but their subsidiaries will not be included in the measure, and only 36 of the three hundred private banks are to be taken over. Nationalisation will be on the Renault model with companies having managerial autonomy; Renault has been nationalised since 1945 and French capitalism has in no way suffered thereby.
The head of Thomson-Brandt, one of the groups due to be taken over, has said that nationalisation will be no problem ‘if we are left to work like a private enterprise’. As for the shareholders, they will receive generous compensation in the form of long-term bonds. The nationalisations may give the government slightly greater control over the economy, though even that is doubtful; they will certainly not shift the balance of power in French society.
In terms of foreign and military policy Mitterrand’s position is even more openly reactionary. There has been talk of possible friction between France and the USA because of Mitterrand’s support for leftist regimes in the Third World. In practice this may not be so much conflict as a division of labour. As The Economist has suggested: ‘pro-Western governments in Africa may conclude that they should turn to Mr Mitterrand when they want money and to Mr Reagan when they want arms or soldiers.’
And there seems little likelihood that Mitterrand’s radicalism towards the Third World will extend as far as France’s colonies in the West Indies, where the repressive racist regimes remain unchallenged. In the Middle East Mitterrand’s pro-Zionist line led the Israeli Labour Party to call a special meeting of ‘solidarity with socialist France’.
As far as East-West relations are concerned, Mitterrand lines up with the hawks. He has demanded that the Western powers should build up their nuclear strength before engaging in any disarmament talks.
France’s own military strength is being carefully husbanded. An old Socialist Party promise to cut military service from one year to six months has been shelved because of the level of unemployment. And a decision has been made to construct a seventh French nuclear submarine. This means France will be able to have three nuclear subs at sea at any given time (Britain has to make do with one).
Despite the Plogoff gesture, Mitterrand is being equally cavalier about earlier promises on the question of nuclear power. Work has been suspended on about half the nuclear power stations currently being built, but the other half are to go on. The factory at La Hague, near Cherbourg, which processes foreign nuclear waste, also continues to operate. It was demonstrators against this – including Socialist Party members and members of the pro-Socialist union CEDT – who were the victims of the first tear-gas grenades of the new regime at Cherbourg in August. The pro-Communist CGT, not to be outdone, has organised demonstrations in defence of nuclear power and the jobs it creates.
 
Prospects for the left
Mitterrand has still some time left before he faces any outright opposition from the left. The CP, electorally humiliated and then coopted into government, will not launch any significant militant action this winter. For the moment they will continue to give Mitterrand full support. For example, the CP transport minister, Fiterman, persuaded French air traffic controllers not to take action in support of their American comrades.
By next winter, if inflation and unemployment continue as predicted, the CP may have to take a left turn to preserve their base. The fact that the CGT is technically quite independent of the CP might enable them to do this and still remain in the government.
The cooption of the CP might seem to give the far left the opportunity to put itself at the head of any struggles. Unfortunately this will probably not happen. The OCI and the LCR (Fourth International) have spent so long calling for a Socialist-Communist government that they are a little stunned now they have got one. Lutte Ouvrière’s insistence that nothing at all has really changed enables it to make correct propaganda but little else. The fact that the first struggles are occurring around the issue of nuclear power might seem to give the initiative to the left socialist PSU, with its ecological-cum-beyond-the-fragments-type support; but the PSU has been too busy negotiating a cooperation agreement with the Socialist Party to take the lead. For the revolutionary left, just as for Mitterrand, time is running short.
 



Dear Comrade,
I have no complaint to make of the cuts made in my article The Autonomy of Theory (IS 2 : 10), since I invited such cuts by grossly failing to write to the required length. One cut, however, did weaken the argument I wished to present.
On page 71, after the discussion of NLR’s critique of Chinese foreign policy, there should have been a mention of the resignation from the Editorial Committee of Ben Brewster. In resigning Brewster commended Chinese policy and invoked with approval the theory of ‘socialism in one country’ (NLR 70/110). The significance of this is twofold. Firstly, an overt Stalinist like Brewster had coexisted with the rest of the NLR team for several years, and had been a leading spokesperson on philosophical and military matters. Secondly, fear of further resignations seems to have been a factor in discouraging NLR from pursuing political clarification in the years after 1971.



 


Yours fraternally,
Ian Birchall



 



Recent developments in the Labour Party seem to have strengthened the case of those who argue that the left can make real gains by working inside mass social-democratic [1] parties. Many Labour Party members believe it is actually possible for the left current in the Party to grow in strength and influence until it dominates the whole Party. Others, who claim to be Leninists, and who recognise the need for a revolutionary party at some indeterminate date in the future, nonetheless insist that at the present time revolutionaries should be inside the Labour Party working alongside those radicalised by the Party’s leftward move.
In assessing the viability of either of these perspectives, we can learn some interesting lessons from the experience of the left in the French Socialist Party during the nine teen-thirties. Here an organised left tendency in the Socialist Party, which proudly bore the name ‘Revolutionary Left’, faced the challenge of a potentially revolutionary situation. Here too the forces of French Trotskyism made their first experience of ‘entrism’ – the famous ‘French turn’, to which reference is still made by the advocates of entrism. The French crisis of the thirties had some familiar features – falling production, falling exports, rising unemployment and a growing racist right. But the story of the French Popular Front’s response to this is one of enormous possibilities, and eventual catastrophe.
In the period after Hitler’s accession to power the French right grew rapidly. The right-wing ex-servicemen’s organisation the ‘Croix de Feu’ rose to a membership of some three hundred thousand. Open incitement to the murder of the Jewish leader of the Socialist Party, Leon Blum, was a commonplace of the rightist press. The situation came to a head with the riots of 6 February 1934 which brought down the government. This stung the left into the recognition of a need for unity. There was growing cooperation between the Socialist Party and the CP, which under Comintern influence was dropping the disastrous ‘Third Period’ line in favour of Popular Frontism. These two parties in turn sought united action with the Radicals, which had been the dominant party in the government before the 1934 crisis. The Radicals were the party of the lower middle classes – lawyers, shopkeepers and civil servants. But the move to unity was not only from above. On 14 July 1934 half a million people demonstrated in Paris. In January 1936 the three parties, plus the main trade unions and a host of other organisations came together in the ‘Rassemblement Populaire’ (Popular Assembly), which put forward a programme. This was decidedly not a socialist programme, but centred on anti-fascism, civil liberties, peace through negotiation, measures to end the economic crisis and nationalisation of the Bank of France.
At the beginning of May 1936 the Popular Front alliance was victorious in the general election. It is important, however, to note that this victory did not spring from a massive swing in public opinion. Compared with the previous elections, in 1932, the Communists increased their vote by nearly 700,000. They did this mainly, however, at the expense of the rest of the left; the two other Popular Front parties actually lost votes. The total swing of votes from the right (non-Popular Front) to the left was only about 1.5%. But an electoral agreement for mutual withdrawal on the second ballot gave the Popular Front parties a large bonus of seats.
However, before Leon Blum had even formed his government, a massive wave of strikes, in most cases with factory occupations, spread across France. The Popular Front victory had unleashed the expectations of millions of workers, but the response of the Popular Front leaders was to settle for economic concessions and to get everyone back to work. In Blum’s own words, ‘great reforms became the only means of avoiding bloody revolution.’ [2] Big capital was able to pay the price; but the middle classes saw themselves as being called on to pay for the workers’ gains. The class alliance necessarily began to crumble. Once Blum had lost the momentum attacks increased. In November 1936 his Minister of the Interior, Salengro, was driven to suicide by a press campaign about his war record. In June 1937 Blum resigned, and the new Prime Minister was the Radical, Chautemps, who had already been a Prime Minister before the Popular Front. The old gang was back. A second Blum government, in the Spring of 1938, lasted less than a month.
By now matters were clarified for the French bourgeoisie. If home-grown fascism could not do the job, they would try a foreign import. From the moment the Second World War broke out, a large section of the French ruling class saw the main threat as being at home, and German invasion as the lesser evil. Daladier, who had served as Minister of Defence in the Popular Front government, imposed a ban on his erstwhile allies in the Communist Party. And in July 1940 the majority of the National Assembly elected in 1936 voted full powers to the collaborationist Marshal Petain. The Popular Front had not defeated fascism; it had simply postponed it for a few years.
Was there a political alternative to this sorry story? Most accounts in the revolutionary socialist tradition have centred on the role of the Communist Party in holding back the struggle. This was indeed scandalous, typified by Thorez’s famous speech of 11 June 1936, at the height of the mass strike, when he declared ‘it is necessary to know how to bring a strike to an end.’ But by 1934 the die was already cast in the Comintern. There was no possibility that the CP, monolithic and Stalinist, could have played any role other than the one it did. The Socialist Party (SFIO) was a horse of different colour. Its very weaknesses – pragmatism, lack of international framework, lack of proletarian base – made a wider range of possibilities available.
The SFIO sprang from the minority of the French Socialist Party which had refused affiliation to the Communist International in 1920. Leon Blum, a literary intellectual who was to become leader of the SFIO Parliamentary group in 1929, had served under Sembat, one of the Socialist Ministers in the pro-war government of 1914, and had been one of the main opponents of affiliation to the International. Yet while the SFIO was clearly to the right of the CP, it continued to claim to be a Marxist and a revolutionary party. [3] It stood for nationalisation, workers’ and peasants’ democracy and the destruction of the bourgeois state. But, like a classic pre-1914 social-democratic party, it believed in these things only eventually. In the shorter term, anything went. Blum even developed a complex theological distinction between taking power (in a hypothetical revolution), exercising power (in a reformist coalition) and occupying power (in defence against fascism). [4] In 1928 and 1932 the SFlO had kept its hands clean by refusing to enter a coalition with the Radicals, and when, in 1936, it campaigned for a Popular Front coalition, Blum made it clear that ‘the programme presented by the Socialist Party does not have the aim of establishing socialism, but, within the framework of the present social order, of relieving the suffering caused by the crisis.’ [5] It was doubtless such supple scrupulousness that enabled 85 SFIO deputies (out of 147 elected in 1936) to vote for Petain’s new constitution in 1940.
Although the SFIO had been the minority in 1920, by the early thirties it was considerably larger than the CP. Its membership grew rapidly in time with the rhythm of the social crisis. In 1934 it had 110,000 members; in 1935 120,000; in 1936 200,000; in 1937 280,000; and in 1938 260,000. It was however, overtaken by the CP, which leapt from 131,000 to 285,000 between May and December 1936. The SFIO Youth rose from 11,000 in 1934 to 40,000 in 1936 and 45,000 in 1937. [6]
But this base was not, for the most part, in the working class proper, but in various middle-class layers. Daniel Guerin, who in 1930 joined the SFIO in a working-class area of Eastern Paris, notes that the Young Socialists had ‘a certain dynamism’ and had read Marx, but that in the adult party there were ‘relatively few industrial workers. Small artisans and lower civil servants, their intellectual and spiritual horizons scarcely went beyond electoral dealings and the defence of their own professional interests.’ [7]
Even more fundamental than the social composition of its branches was the fact that, unlike the British Labour Party, the SFIO had no formal links with the trade union movement. The SFIO had always respected the principle of separation between political parties and trade unions, written into the ‘Charte d’Amiens’ adopted by the CGT in 1906. The refusal of the Communist Party to accept this mechanical separation of politics and trade unionism had been a subject of heated debate in the French labour movement in the early twenties, and was one of the factors leading to the split between the CGT and the Communist-influenced CGTU. [8] (The two were reunited in 1936.) So, while the CP systematically developed a fraction organisation within the unions, the SFIO confined itself to parliamentary politics.
The SFIO, then, had a programme that was working-class on the level of rhetoric alone, and a social base that largely non-proletarian. But, for a leftist militant in the thirties, it had one great advantage over the CP. For the current CP leadership had established its dominance by a series of purges and expulsions directed against the left – Trotskyists, syndicalists and others. However open it was at certain times to compromises on its right, it could not allow any opposition, or even dialogue, to its left. The SFIO had no such inhibitions. It was precisely the liberalism, the acceptance of parliamentary norms, that made its leadership quite willing to accept open debate within the party, and indeed, to permit the formation of permanent organised tendencies operating openly inside the party. Thus at the 1927 Congress there was an open debate between Blum and Jean Zyromski, who argued that class antagonisms were becoming more pronounced. This led to Zyromski founding a tendency called the ‘Bataille Socialiste’, which continued to operate throughout the thirties. Zyromski’s politics were, in fact, very close to those of the CP, a party which he was to join after the Second World War.
But the leading figure of the extreme left of the SFIO was Marceau Pivert. Pivert, born the son of a peasant in 1895, became a primary school teacher. He joined the SFIO in 1924. Initially his main interest was in educational questions. He first became prominent as a representative of the most anti-clerical tendency in the debate on education at the 1929 SFIO Congress. This is a fact of some significance. For anti-clericalism and support for lay education, however laudable they are in themselves, are issues which characterise the radicalised Voltairean petty-bourgeoisie of the nineteenth century, a tradition from which the Radical Party as well as the Socialist Party emerged, and a tradition against which French Marxism has at many times had to fight. Pivert was an orator rather than a theoretician. His book, L’Eglise et l’Ecole [9] (The Church and the School), claims to be Marxist, but is primarily an anticlerical polemic.
Initially Pivert had been a follower of the Zyromski tendency, but by the early thirties he was moving clearly to the left. In particular he took a much more unambiguously internationalist position. At the 1935 Mulhouse Conference he argued that the best way to oppose German fascism was to fight French imperialism and to encourage German workers to follow the same example; while the best way to defend Russia was not to support the French military alliance with Stalin, but to take power. [10] In the same year Pivert established his own tendency, the ‘Gauche Révolutionnaire’ (Revolutionary Left), within the SFIO. [11] He was never a member of Parliament.
Pivert’s tendency clearly stood well to the left of the Communist Party. The CP were in no doubt about this. In his report to the VIIIth PCF Congress in January 1936, Thorez spoke kindly of ‘comrade Zyromski’, while referring slightingly to the ‘phrase-mongers of the so-called revolutionary left’. [12] But in March 1935 Trotsky, while recognising that there was more than one possible evolution still open, declared that ‘it is nevertheless unquestionable that the revolutionary left wing of the SFIO little by little is becoming a laboratory in which the slogans and methods of proletarian struggle are forming.’ [13]
The credibility of Pivert’s tendency was built up in the years before 1936. Against the sectarianism of both the CP and the SFIO leaderships, Pivert argued for a united front of workers’ organisations. As early as 1930 Pivert and Zyromski bitterly attacked the SFIO leadership for refusing to stand down in the second ballot in favour of the CP in the Belleville by-election. At the 1935 Mulhouse Congress the motion from Pivert and Zyromski supporting unity with the CP obtained 777 votes out of 3219 (24%). [14]
Moreover, Pivert realised that unity was not simply a question of electoral alliances; it had to be taken on to the streets. In 1934, after the fascist riots of 6 February, it was, according to the testimony of Leon Blum [15], Pivert and Zyromski who persistently lobbied the Party leadership to persuade it to call a counter-demonstration, and succeeded despite the lack of enthusiasm of some of the leading bureaucrats. The resulting demonstration, on 12 February, brought together Socialists and Communists for the first time, and coincided with mass strike action by the CGT.
But while Zyromski focussed all his attention on the need for unity of action with the CP in general, Pivert and his followers recognised that the struggle against the fascists could not be a purely political one, and that effective unity would be achieved only as a result of militant physical opposition. They therefore advocated the establishment of self-defence groups.
Obviously this found little favour with the SFIO leadership. But in 1935, after fascists had attacked the headquarters of the Seine Federation, Pivert and his followers, together with the Bolshevik-Leninists (as the Trotskyists inside the SFIO called themselves), set up the TPPS (‘Toujours Prets Pour Servir’ – Always Ready to Serve). Yvan Craipeau, a Trotskyist militant at the time, describes what the TPPS were:
It was not simply a military organisation, but a grouping of activists, ready for any task at any time. Organised in tens, thirties and hundreds, with their leaders elected by the rank and file, the TPPS went out at night to fly-post, paint slogans in red lead, and throw leaflets into factories. The TPPS were likewise mobilised to steward meetings, and when necessary were sent as reinforcements when a fight was expected. They went to defend working-class paper-sellers, and sometimes stopped the fascists selling their papers. There’s no need to add that they were very badly armed (usually one revolver among six, the rest having truncheons or improvised weapons). Sometimes they were routed ... Usually the fascists were dealt with. Everywhere they were driven out of the working-class quarters. [16]
Nonetheless, the Pivertists remained external to working-class struggle. The mass strikes of 1936 did not fall out of the sky; throughout 1935 there was a gathering storm of strike action. Lille tram-drivers, Marseilles dockers, Michelin workers in Clermont-Ferrand, miners, weavers, engineers. There is no evidence of any systematic intervention in these disputes by the Socialist Left. The Chinese wall between economics and politics continued to hang like an albatross round the neck of the French labour movement.
Even more serious was the attitude of the ‘Gauche Révolutionnaire’ towards the establishment of the Popular Front. [17] According to Guerin’s account, they made a distinction, obviously valid, between Popular Front No. 1, and Popular Front No. 2. No. 1 was the ‘misalliance, on the parliamentary and electoralist level, of bourgeois radicalism and Stalinism, under the banner of national defence.’ But No. 2 was ‘the powerful popular movement, the anti-fascist "unity of action", for which the political and trade union organisations of the working-class, supported by the intellectuals, had taken the initiative – a genuinely popular movement in the sense that it drew behind the working class a not inconsiderable layer of petty bourgeois and poor peasants.’ ‘We were’, Guerin adds, ‘resolute opponents of Popular Front No. 1, and enthusiastic supporters of Popular Front No. 2.’
The problem, he admits, was how to draw the line between the two. ‘For the sake of Popular Front No. 2, we let ourselves be drawn into participating loyally – too loyally – in Popular Front No. 1. We found a seeming justification for this compromise. We had to be present in No. 1 in order to push it forwards an get it to merge with No. 2.’ [18] Guerin here identifies the fatal ambiguity in Pivertist politics, which led Trotsky to his apparently harsh judgement: ‘The reformists and the Stalinists fear above all to frighten the radicals, the apparatus of the United Front quite consciously plays the role of disorganiser in relation to sporadic movements of the masses. And the "Lefts" of the Marcel Pivert type serve to shield this apparatus from the indignation of the masses.’ [19]
The contradiction within the ‘Gauche Révolutionnaire’ were put sharply to the test by the Blum government of 1936. The role of the Blum government was necessarily ambiguous; it had to be sufficiently to the left to contain the mass movement, yet firm enough in its defence of the existing order to avoid a head-on confrontation with the ruling class. [20] Indeed, Blum lost momentum before he even took office. For constitutional reasons there was about a month’s gap between the declaration of the election result and the accession to office of the Blum government. Needless to say financial speculators took advantage of this period to sell francs for pounds and dollars, causing a drain of French gold reserves. But when Pivert asked for urgent measures to be taken in early May, saying ‘Do you think the fascists would have hesitated for a moment if they were in our place?’, Blum simply replied : ‘No! But we aren’t fascists!’ [21] And by the end of May the strike wave had erupted. Blum’s proposals for rapid decisive legislation [22] came to nothing.
When Blum addressed the Paris Congress of the SFIO on 31 May 1936, he spoke sympathetically of the occupations, pointing out that this was a legitimate working class tactic. Obviously he recognised the huge wave of support within his own party. But when he spoke to Parliament on 12 June 1936 the tone was different: he denounced the ‘intrusion of outside elements into the workers’ union organisations’, and promised that the government was ‘absolutely determined to ensure order in the streets.’ [23]
Yet the strike brought the French working class the only real gains they made in the period: two weeks’ annual paid holidays, legal provision for collective bargaining and the forty-hour week. The rest of the Popular Front period brought few advances – some half-hearted nationalisations, some administrative reforms, virtually nothing as far as colonial policy was concerned. Inflation largely destroyed the economic gains; the purchasing power of the working class was lower in 1939 than in June 1936.
Pivert’s response to the situation was far more positive. As we have seen, he argued with Blum within the Party for rapid action, even in breach of legality. But he also turned to the movement outside. On 12 May 1936 he wrote: ‘popular mass committees must be built. Common meetings of Socialist and Communist militants must be organised.’ [24] And later in the same month, his most famous article appeared. Titled ‘Everything is Possible’ it argued for decisive governmental action, and for the creation of Popular Committees to push the government forward. [25] The title so fitted the mood of the time that Maurice Thorez, in a speech of 11 June, found it necessary to insert the phrase ‘Everything is not possible’.
To take the movement forward at the critical juncture of June 1936 a political leadership quite independent of Blum was needed. But Pivert followed a different path. Blum, seeking to co-opt and muzzle his most vigorous rival, offered Pivert a post of general responsibility for press, radio and cinema, a post which was in some ways equivalent to the Ministry of Information, though Pivert was to hold no ministerial title and have no say in cabinet decisions. Pivert consulted the Executive Committee of the ‘Gauche Révolutionnaire’; Daniel Guerin alone voted against acceptance. [26] (This was, of course, at the time when the CP decided to remain outside the government while giving it support).
But there was worse. As Guerin explained with some visible embarrassment, Pivert played a large role in developing the SFIO’s political propaganda:
On Marceau’s initiative, the Socialist Party devoted a film to the attack on the reverted leader’s life presenting him as one of the best servants of the French people, one of the best fighters for bread, peace and freedom. His features were reproduced on gigantic hoardings. When, on 7 June, the day after his presentation to Parliament, he came to the Velodrome d’Hiver to swear to the French people never to let himself be removed from power without a fight, his entry was greeted by an extraordinary spectacle. Projectors were trained on him. An orchestra played the Internationale. The militants were transformed into choristers. The young guard in blue shirts formed an eager double line. The faithful chanted endlessly till they were breathless: Long Live Blum! or Blum! Blum! The man behind this cult was Marceau Pivert himself. He believed in modern propaganda techniques. He had made the acquaintance of a scatterbrain whose real name was Serge Chakhotin, and whom he introduced to the Gauche Révolutionnaire under the pseudonym of “Professor Flamm” ... Marceau Pivert took on “Professor Flamm” in the service of the Blum myth. During the month which was to elapse between the electoral triumph and the effective accession to power of the Popular Front Government under socialist leadership, we marched like sleepwalkers and reacted as if drugged. [27]
Being thus caught up by the SFIO machine, Pivert could scarcely help becoming an apologist for the Blum government. For a while, he even adopted a casuistical defence of Blum’s refusal to send arms to the Spanish Republican forces. Pivert argued that a government exercising power in a bourgeois society could not be expected to send arms, but that the popular masses’ should take on the job. To his credit, Pivert soon realised the weakness of such an argument and dropped it. [28]
By early 1937, Pivert found himself in such disagreement with Blum’s internal and foreign policy that he resigned his position. Speaking to the Party’s National Council in April 1937, he declared: ‘We wish that the Party, by means of an autonomous policy, would escape from the present confusion, take hold of the discontent and anger, and turn them against the capitalist enemy. If it doesn’t do this, then popular anger will turn, first against the Government, and then against the Party.’ [29] Unfortunately, it was too late.
Pivert alone, of course, was not the ‘Gauche Révolutionnaire’. While the way their leader was tailing Blum must have inhibited the militancy of his disciples, the current also had some deeper political weaknesses. Daniel Guerin, describing his own activity in the Paris suburbs, gives us an indication of the weakness of the ‘Gauche Révolutionnaire’ strategy:
In my modest sphere of activity, on the Inter-Union Committee at Les Lilas, I took care not to politicise the strikes. I didn’t believe that it was possible, by adopting the attitude of someone with an axe to grind, to win the confidence of the working masses who were pouring into the unions. It would have been contrary to my nature, and, moreover both dishonest and clumsy, to take advantage of a trade union position to push the Party or the tendency to which I belonged. I scrupulously respected trade union independence and the workers I was responsible for never had occasion to suspect my intentions or purposes. ‘ [30]
As Guerin points out, such an attitude led to disastrous loss of opportunities:
’We had played the game of trade union legality too scrupulously. We had not dared to replace it with an embryo of the new legality: that of the “Soviets”. Eighteen months passed before reflection and perspective allowed me to develop and draw up a self-criticism.’ [31]
In the light of this failure to actually fight inside the trade union movement, the abstract programmatic demands of the ‘Gauche Révolutionnaire’ inside the SFIO became more and more difficult. It was one thing to nourish illusions in Blum’s leadership; quite another to apologise for the Party when it was merely tailing the Radicals. At the Marseilles Congress in 1937, where the Pivertists opposed SFIO participation in the Chautemps government [32], there were physical attacks on members of the left, with chairs thrown from the balcony. [33]
By 1938 it had become clear that the ‘Gauche Révolutionnaire’ could no longer remain in the party. The Pivertists were resolutely opposed to the politics of ‘national union’ pursued by the Blum leadership; their constitutional right to communicate their positions within the party was denied them, and there was little support to be won from the Zyromski tendency, which was becoming more and more openly pro-Stalinist. Some members, such as Guerin, welcomed the possibility of a clean break allowing them to build an open party. Others, including Pivert himself, seemed to have been more ambiguous on the question, and not wholly clear about the perspective.
At the Royan Congress of June 1938 Blum, invoking Jaures, waxed lyrical about the diversity of views permitted in the Party, which he compared to a ‘symphonic totality’, but concluded that since Pivert was guilty of indiscipline he must be expelled. Eventually the Pivertists were expelled by a vote of 4904 to 3033, with 370 delegates not voting. [34]
Nothing was left but to form a new Party. The PSOP (‘Parti Socialiste Ouvrier et Paysan’ – Workers’ and Peasants’ Socialist Party) was born. The initial hope had been to draw some twenty thousand members from the SFIO; in fact the PSOP’s numbers reached no more than about 6000. On the one occasion when the PSOP contested a by-election only 127 votes were gained. [35] It is hard to resist Victor Serge’s gloomy assessment that by splitting, the PSOP ‘lost its audience in a party of over 300,000 members, isolated its few thousand followers, and started a revolutionary movement just at the time when the working class was retiring into its own demoralisation. The split at Royan weakened the Socialist Party and created an unworkable alternative party.’ [36]
Nor did smallness mean clarity. The PSOP had still not made up its mind about the Popular Front; the newly founded organisation voted whether to affiliate to the ‘Rassemblement Populaire’ (the formal organisation of the Popular Front alliance), and decided not to by 100 votes to 83 with 11 abstentions. [37] The new Party rejected the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ (arguing that this had facilitated the transition from Bolshevism to Stalinism). [38] It did, however, insist on revolutionary internationalism: ‘There can be for us no national defence other than revolutionary defence, which supposes that the political and economic leadership of the country has passed into the hands of the toiling classes.’ [39]
Politically the new Party was quite isolated. One public meeting was broken up by 300 CP members, who physically assaulted Pivert, calling him a ‘Trotskyist murderer’. [40] In January 1939, when the French government closed the frontier to Republican refugees from Spain, the PSOP called on other left-wing organisations to demonstrate. None responded except a few Trotskyists, so the PSOP demonstrated alone; fifteen hundred were arrested. [41]
The approach of the Second World War created strains which the organisational and political structures of the PSOP could not bear. In 1939 the Party was rent by a debate on the question of ‘revolutionary defeatism’. While the positions were not dramatically far apart, the result was inevitably confusion. Pivert tried to make the best of a bad job by claiming that the differing positions ‘are the reflection of hesitations and contradictions which the revolutionary vanguard could only cover up on the basis of authoritarian dogma, which we repudiate absolutely.’ [42]
With such pride in confusion, it is hardly surprising that the PSOP was able to make little response to the outbreak of war. According to Craipeau, only in Marseilles (where the PSOP was controlled by Trotskyists) and Nantes was there any propaganda produced. [43] The PSOP, with its amateurish and libertarian organisational structure, was quite unfitted to meet the needs of a war situation, which required the ability to work semi-legally or clandestinely. Pivert is said to have given instructions to establish a clandestine committee of four, himself, Guerin, Lucien Weitz and Maurice Jaquier. But when war broke out Pivert was in the USA (on a speaking tour organised by Jay Lovestone), Guerin, was in Oslo and Weitz in jail [44], Within a few months the Party had disintegrated.
In June 1940, after the fall of France, Pivert addressed a letter to General de Gaulle, informing the General that ‘only the socialist revolution in freedom can liquidate fascism’ and offering to put at his disposal some ‘packets of political dynamite’. De Gaulle replied politely, but studiously refrained from responding to Pivert’s request to distribute revolutionary Marxist literature for him. [45] Such was the farcical ending of a tragic story.
The left wing of the SFIO was naturally a focus of attention for the small revolutionary left in France. Since their exclusion from the CP during the twenties the French Trotskyists had been fragmented and isolated. In 1934, on Trotsky’s advice, they entered the SFIO – the so-called ‘French turn’. [46] While pursuing a united front strategy towards the Pivertists (with whom they had worked closely since February 1934) the Trotskyists formed a distinct tendency. In a few areas they won some influence – thus by June 1935 they had over 20% of the vote in the traditionally left-wing Seine federation. They succeeded in exercising a force of attraction on the Pivertists – notably Pivert himself – who up to this point were working within the same tendency as Zyromski. Entry work lasted just one year, from August 1934 to August 1935, when the Trotskyists were expelled from the Seine Socialist Youth following their refusal to support national defence. It was at this point that Pivert split with Zyromski to form the ‘Gauche Révolutionnaire’ – a response to the Trotskyist influence, but also an attempt to discourage other departures to the left.
By the time of the formation of the PSOP, French Trotskyism was in an even more fragmentary state, and there was considerable disagreement about the attitude to be taken, but eventually most of the splinters came inside the PSOP. The PSOP accepted an invitation to attend the founding conference of the Fourth International as an observer, but in the end the invitation was withdrawn for security reasons. [47]
What assessment can be made of the achievements of this period? For Isaac Deutscher the ‘French turn’ ‘could not succeed’. It simply isolated the Trotskyists further from the CP rank and file and increased CP hostility towards the Trotskyists. [48] Pierre Frank, on the other hand, considers that the entry work was carried out with ‘remarkable political clarity’ which ‘renewed the ranks of the organisation by attracting a large number of youth’. [49] Both accounts seem exaggerated. The experience can hardly be considered a success, for the Trotskyists did not come out of the SFIO any stronger or more united than they went in.
But any alternative would probably have been worse. The small isolated forces of French Trotskyism could scarcely have built a significant independent organisation, certainly not within the timescale permitted by the rising level of class mobilisation and the threat of fascism. Entry work in the Stalinised CP was a virtual impossibility, and there was even little hope of making meaningful contact with the CP’s rank and file. Entrism was not a triumphant step forward, nor a significant strategic discovery. But it was better than a retreat into sterile propagandism. The left of the SFIO was an area in which revolutionary developments might have taken place: the duty of revolutionaries was to maximise that possibility.
Two further points should be made about the experience of ‘entrism’. Firstly, the Trotskyists were initially welcomed by all sections of the SFIO. The right regarded the acquisition of these ex-Communists as a useful publicity blow against the rival CP, while the left hoped that they would be allies in the internal debate. Both, in effect, hoped to co-opt them. The moment the Trotskyists began to make an effective intervention in the party they were expelled. Secondly, the ‘entryism’ of the ‘French turn’ was conceived as a short-term tactic in a potentially pre-revolutionary situation. It had nothing in common with the long-term ‘entrism’ developed by the Trotskyist movement in the post-war period, based on a notion of ‘boring (in both senses of the word) from within’ for an indefinite period (‘keep your head down for ten years and you get to be ward postal vote organiser’).
The key period in which the revolutionaries could have made a breakthrough was between February 1934 and June 1936. At this time of rising struggle mass work was essential. [50] After June 1936, the struggle was essentially on the downturn, and the battles defensive; the to-ing and fro-ing about the PSOP in 1938–39 was largely meaningless.
The key to the situation was the United Front, provided that this was correctly understood. 1934–36 in France was a period of massive radicalisation in the working-class: hundreds of thousands of people joined the SFIO and the CP; even more significant, the CGT grew from one million to five million in the course of 1936. [51] The demand for unity between the bureaucracies of the existing reformist parties was significant in as much as, and only in as much as, it related to the newly radicalised workers who wanted to fight, but who were reluctant to do so as long as they saw the self-professed ‘leaders’ of the class putting the interests of their own organisations first.
It is in this context that we can see the greatest weakness of the Pivertist left – their failure to fight for leadership inside the trade union movement. This may be attributed partly to the weakness of their proletarian base, and partly to their over-scrupulous hang-ups about the ‘independence’ of the unions from political parties. But there can be no doubt that this abstention was a disaster. For workers with no previous tradition of organisation of any sort catapulted into a general strike and occupations, the dividing line between politics and trade unionism could be nothing but a metaphysical abstraction. The CP, which suffered from no such scruples, not only recruited massively to its own ranks, but laid the basis of the fraction organisation that was to give it the tight political grip on the CGT that it retains to this day. [52] Trade union organisations can never be politically ‘independent’; the only question is what politics they are dependent on. The Pivertists simply gave the Stalinists a clear run.
Organisation and politics are not separate, and the collapse of the PSOP at the outbreak of war was no accident; Pivert’s refusal of the Bolshevik tradition led to the building of an organisation which, however attractive its open and democratic style might appear, was unable to stand up to the strain of war and repression.
The conclusion can only be that the Trotskyist tradition was correct in labelling such people as Pivert ‘centrists’. Centrism is not a term of abuse, but a precise categorisation. It points to a contradiction which revolutionaries must exploit, by respecting the positive as much as by denouncing the negative.
The lessons for today are clear. Marceau Pivert had more revolutionary integrity and fighting spirit in his little finger than Tony Benn has in the entire length of his body; the ‘Gauche Révolutionnaire’ was more openly and unashamedly revolutionary than any tendency in the Labour Party today. And yet they failed. Their lack of political clarity and organisational firmness prevented them taking advantage of the situation when the movement was at its peak, in June 1936. After that the struggle was on the downturn. As far as entrism is concerned, there is nothing in the record to recommend it to us. Certainly left social-democracy gave embryonic French Trotskyism a pool to swim in, without which it might have collapsed utterly. But if it is victory, rather than survival, which is in question, then the results are decidedly meagre. In the end the logic of entrism means that would-be revolutionaries end up defending and justifying centrists like Pivert, instead of exposing their weakness.

Notes
1. I use the term to mean a party which combines socialist aims, however long-term, with parliamentary practice. No reference is intended to the ‘Social Democracy’ of people like Jenkins, Williams, Owen and Rodgers, who have no interest in either socialism or democracy.
2. L. Blum, A L’Echelle Humaine, Paris 1971, p. 78.
3. As late as 1957 Guy Mollet cited Marx to justify the Suez invasion (Le Monde, 2 July 1957).
4. A Philip, Les Socialistes, Paris, 1967, pp. 66–67.
5. Blum’s 1936 election address in his Narbonne constituency, cited G. Lefranc, Juin 36, Paris 1966, p. 82.
6. SFIO figures from G. Lefranc, Le Mouvement Socialiste sous la Troisième République, Paris 1963, pp. 436–37.
7. D. Guerin, Front Populaire, Revolution Manquée, Paris 1936, p. 21. Guerin, at various times socialist, syndicalist and anarchist, author of major studies of fascism and the French Revolution, campaigner for colonial freedom and gay liberation, is one of the most interesting independent Marxist intellectuals in modern France. His book on the Popular Front, on which this article draws heavily, is based on close personal involvement with the SFIO left, and is dedicated to the memory of Marceau Pivert.
8. For details of this debate, see A. Rosmer, Lenin’s Moscow, London 1971.
9. Paris 1932. Preface by Leon Blum.
10. Guerin, op. cit., p. 82.
11. After the Second World War Pivert rejoined the SFIO and became an Executive member, but lost his position through opposition to the Algerian war. He died in 1958.
12. M. Thorez, Une Politique de Grandeur Francaise, Paris 1945, pp. 81–82, 66.
13. Trotsky, Whither France?, Colombo 1961, p. 104.
14. An alternative Trotskyist motion got 105 votes.
15. L’Oeuvre de Leon Blum (1934–1937), Paris 1964, p. 14.
16. Y. Craipeau, Le Mouvement Trotskyste en France, Paris 1971, pp. 123–4.
17. Trotsky summed up the force of rightward attraction that characterised the Popular Front in a single brilliant sentence: ‘Pivert clutches at Zyromski, who clutches at Laval.’ op. cit., p. 121.
18. Guerin, op. cit., pp. 93–4.
19. Trotsky, op. cit., p. 118.
20. An interesting example of Blum’s ambiguity is the question of votes for women. All the main Popular Front parties had agreed not to raise the demand for female suffrage (on the traditional grounds that women were influenced by priests and would vote for the right). But Blum gave office in his government to three women – the first French government ever to do so. One of the three was Cecile Brunschwicg, leader of the Union for Women’s Suffrage. It has been said of Ms Brunschwicg that ‘the radicals were all personal friends of hers and she agreed with them that female suffrage was too dangerous so long as the republic was in difficulties, which it always was.’ (T. Zeldin, Ambition and Love, Oxford 1979, p. 349).
21. Cited G. Lefranc, Juin 36, p. 99.
22. As outlined to the Chambre des Deputes, 6 June 1936. Blum’s idea that Parliament could push through a number of major reforms in a few weeks is reminiscent of recent equally Utopian suggestions emanating from T. Benn.
23. L’Oeuvre de Leon Blum (1934–1937), pp. 264, 278.
24. Le Populaire, 12 May 1936.
25. Populaire de Paris, 27 May 1936.
26. Guerin, op. cit., p. 113.
27. Ibid., pp. 107–8.
28. Ibid., p. 154.
29. Lefranc, Le Mouvement Socialiste sous la Troisième Republique, p. 339.
30. Guerin, op. cit., p 127.
31. Ibid., p. 129.
32. Ibid., p. 139.
33. Ibid., p. 173.
34. Lefranc, Le Mouvement Socialiste sous la Troisième Republique, pp. 357–8.
35. Guerin, op. cit., pp. 271, 226.
36. V. Serge, Memoirs of a Revolutionary, Oxford, 1967, p. 347. Serge is somewhat shaky on the facts, suggesting the GR resigned rather than being expelled, and overestimating the SFIO’s membership. But his feel for the general trend of the period is probably sound.
37. Guerin, op. cit., p. 225.
38. Ibid., p. 228.
39. Pamphlet of November 1938, cited in Y. Craipeau, Contre Vents et Marées, Paris 1977, p. 24.
40. Guerin, op. cit., p. 237.
41. Ibid., p. 255.
42. Craipeau, Contre Vents et Marées, pp. 27–31.
43. Ibid., p. 58.
44. Ibid., p. 43.
45. Guerin, op. cit., pp. 311–15.
46. The ‘turn’ was conceived as an international strategy. This article deals only with its effect in the specific French situation. A study of the results elsewhere would undoubtedly reveal the dangers of a small revolutionary tendency trying to make strategic generalisations on an international scale.
47. The most comprehensive account of French Trotskyism in this period is Y. Craipeau, Le Mouvement Trotskyste en France. J. Roussel, Les Enfants du Prophete, Paris 1972, is also useful. P. Frank, La Quatrième Internationale, Paris 1969, and J.-J. Marie, Le Trotskysme, Paris 1970, are much less satisfactory, seeing the past in terms of an apostolic succession leading to the present-day LCR and OCI respectively.
48. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, Oxford 1970, p. 272.
49. La Quatrième Internationale, p. 37. Frank himself split with the main group of French Trotskyists at the time of the break with the SFIO, and was accused by Trotsky of advocating the same ‘centrist’ positions as Pivert. Frank remained in the SFIO until his expulsion in December 1935.
50. In February 1934 the Trotskyist paper La Verité actually went daily, although it appeared on only three days (8, 10 and 11 February).
51. According to G. Lefranc, Histoire du Front Populaire, Paris 1965. Obviously in such a period precise figures are impossible to obtain, but there can be no doubt that there was massive growth.
52. Maurice Thorez showed the grasp of reality which made him a successful bureaucrat when he poured scorn on the SFIO left who claimed that ‘we’ve gone beyond the struggle for the beef-steak’. (Report to VIIIth Congress of PCF, January 1936, op. cit., p. 66).
 



The French Revolution: from 1793 to 1799
Georges Lefebvre
Routledge, 42s.
This second volume completes Georges Lefebvre’s history of the French Revolution. The work is the product of a life-time’s study of the Revolution, and has been almost unanimously praised by academic historians. Its qualities are erudition, precision, objectivity and comprehensiveness.
And yet these very qualities contribute to the feeling of inadequacy it leaves with the reader. Lefebvre rejects single-cause explanations of historical events. The only unity he gives to six years of political, economic and intellectual activity in all the countries of Europe is the unity of the untiring collection and classifying of facts. The results are often impressive; often trivial or superficial. We alternate between arithmetical problems (‘The king of Prussia marched on Mainz with 42,000 men and left 33,000 in Westphalia, while Wurmser supported him with 24,000 Austrians, who were to be joined by 14,000 Germans. England subsidised 20,000 Sardinians and 6,000 Neapolitans.’) and pocket encyclopedia definitions (‘Having destroyed metaphysics, Kant reconstructed a substitute founded on moral conscience, which, in essence, meant (to him) a return to divine intuition’). A person who had no knowledge of the French Revolution except from Lefebvre’s book would, despite the mass of facts, be bewildered as to why men had acted in this way in the first place. Lefebvre conveys, far better than most historians, revolutionary or reactionary, the complexity of the Revolution. But his Revolution is neither inspiring nor frightening; his books belong to an age and an intellectual environment for which ‘revolution’ is an abstract concept not a reality of life.
 



United We Fall
Douglas Hyde
Ampersand Books, 3s. 6d.
Mr Hyde was a member of the Communist Party for twenty years; he has now turned to hysterical anti-communist exposure-mongering. The value of the book can be judged by his claims that the British Shop Stewards Movement is ‘Communist-led’, and that modern Communist Parties follow closely the teachings of Lenin. Mr Hyde teaches us only one thing, about the Communist Party – its total failure to train its members in political analysis and judgment.
 



The French Radical Party in the 1930s
Peter J. Larmour
Stanford UP/Oxford, 68s
Though this book is of interest to the specialist rather than the general reader, it makes a valuable contribution to our knowledge of the blackest decade of this century. While giving a very readable account, Larmour also presents a wealth of factual material, though his own interpretation tends to give too much importance to the rdle of individual personalities. The French Radical Party, which governed France, alone or in alliance, from 1932 to 1940, was a party based on the peasantry and the petty-bourgeoisie, the very classes from which fascism drew its greatest support – in fact, the Jeunesses Radicales, the most lively section of the party, openly tended to fascist ideas.
The Radical Party was inadequate, both organisationally and ideologically, to resist fascism. It lacked real contact between the small group of Parliamentarians and its popular support, and was unable to finance itself. Its political philosophy was a confused jumble of freemasonry, anti-clericalism and the Spirit of 1789; above all it stood for ‘private property and public order’, but there seemed to be no political identity between its left and right wings. It is interesting to note that one of he main features of its programme – never implemented – was profit-sharing. And yet such a party was able to enter the Popular Front; its leaders were able to call Thorez ‘sensible’; and at times, it allied with the Communists against, the Socialists. The picture that emerges from Larmour’s book is one of the bankruptcy, not just of the Radicals, but of the whole French Left.
 



Democracy in France since 1870
David Thompson
OUP, 30s.
Crisis and Compromise: Politics in the Fourth Republic
P.M. Williams
Longmans, 55s.
‘France is the land where, more than anywhere else, the historical class struggles were each time fought put to a decision, and where, consequently, the changing political forms with which they move and in which their results are summarised have been stamped in the sharpest outlines.’
Engels’ words remain valid, and the study of twentieth century France is a fascinating one for socialists. For this reason we must welcome the appearance of two books marked by academic distinction. Thompson’s work (a revised version of a book published in 1946) covers the social and political history of the whole period from the Commune to the Fifth Republic, and is necessarily sketchy. Thomson’s approach is often excessively abstract (typified by chapter headings such as The National Vision or Has Democracy Failed?) and many of his judgments are highly disputable: he sees the Commune as the end, not the beginning, of a revolutionary tradition, and he holds de Gaulle to be a ‘great leader’; but as a factual account, serving as a general introduction, it can be recommended.
Philip William’s Crisis and Compromise, an up-to-date version of his Politics in Post-War France, makes a far more detailed analysis of a much shorter period. He presents, after a brief historical survey of the period 1945-1958, a study of the various political parties and groupings in modern France, and of the political institutions of the Fourth Republic – an unmanageable system which the ‘Left’, after thirty years of inability to offer an alternative, found itself trying to defend in 1958.
A mass of statistics and appendices make this a standard work of reference. Did you know that Mendés-France supported German Rearmament, and that Mollet defended the Suez adventure with a quotation from Marx? That in 1956 one of Poujade’s most fruitful sources of support was from former Communist voters? What paper wrote of the Algerian Nationalists: ‘It is necessary to mete out the punishment they deserve to the Hitlerite killers who took part in the events of the 8th of May, and to the pseudo-nationalist leaders ...’? L’Humanité, in May 1945. But the most appealing of the book’s 1402 footnotes is one referring to the problems of the complex and obscure list system of voting: in 1951 many Communists voted Trotskyist ‘by mistake’!
 



One aspect of the collapse of the old ‘New Left,’ so ably analysed by Peter Sedgwick in IS 17 and 21, has been the disappearance of the political discussion of popular culture. The New Left’s approach was open to criticism on two counts. First, they tended to make cultural questions central to their strategy, a symptom of their retreat from class issues in industry and politics. Second, their attitude often wavered between an elitist desire to propagate the standards of bourgeois culture, and a reactionary nostalgia for the art-forms of an earlier, less assertive working class.
But the Marxist reaction against the New Left had the unfortunate consequence of totally ignoring the problem. This journal, for instance, has never devoted an article to television, the cinema or popular music. The following notes are an attempt, on a very small scale, to remedy this situation. The time is apt. Pop music, long a topic of sociological concern, is now becoming directly involved in politics. A song dealing with nuclear war and integration problems in Alabama has made the top ten in both Britain and the US; Joan Baez urges her audience not to cooperate with the draft; political comments are surfacing in the correspondence columns of the New Musical Express; even the SLL have gone into the agency business on behalf of a beat group.
In this situation superficial generalisations abound everywhere along the political spectrum from old-style Stalinists who see everything since traditional jazz as ‘decadent,’ to Christian Crusade, who hold the Beatles to be part of a Red plot to hypnotise American youth. [1] Good left-wingers all too often adopt a tone barely distinguished from clergymen bemourning the decline of teenage morals.
One basic error is to see pop music as a ‘product’ – either of commercial machinations or of the pure aspirations of youth. In fact it is (like any art-form in a commercial society, only more so) squeezed out between two conflicting pressures. On the one hand the publishers and manufacturers, geared to the obsolescence principle, constantly promote new crazes. On the other, working-class youth seek a medium to express their experience in modern society. A well-plugged song has more chance of succeeding than an unplugged one, but its success is far from inevitable.
A close look at a selection of recent successful songs shows a set of recurring themes – themes which reflect both the pressures imposed on youth by modern society, and the reactions of youth to it. [2] It is possible to observe a constantly recurring set of conventions – some of which derive from a long tradition of popular song, others which belong specifically to our own age, and which often conflict sharply with many of the misconceived generalisations made about popular music. The first and most obvious convention is the centrality of the theme of love. 104 out of 134 records in the sample are concerned with love in some form – the rest are a miscellany of instrumentals, semi-folk songs and comedy numbers, with a couple of religious songs thrown in. But this emphasis on sex is in itself not remarkable – virtually every literary genre in every civilisation has given major importance to sex – and an art-form aimed primarily at an adolescent market could scarcely do otherwise. What is of interest is the way sex is treated, and in particular the approach to its social aspect. The view that pop music provides a positive incentive to promiscuity gains little support from an analysis of successful songs. What is above all striking is the ambiguity with which sex is treated. Manfred Mann’s recent hit, If You’ve Gotta Go, Go Now (Or else you’ve got to stay all night), is almost unique in alluding explicitly to sexual intercourse. Even direct references to kissing, touching, or holding hands are comparatively rare. In comparison with the treatment of sex by paper-back novels – or even television – pop songs are astonishingly chaste. Their terminology is the suggestive but vague one of ‘having’ and ‘loving.’
This avoidance of realism suggests the desire of writers of pop songs not to shock or upset an audience that is basically insecure. This hypothesis is reinforced by the predominance of the theme of failure and frustration. Of the 134 records in the sample, 42 deal with lost or unrequited love, and of the remainder only 41 can be said to be basically optimistic in tone. In an affluent, commercialised society, the official ideology – manifested above all in advertising – lays stress on success (with allusion to virility even in the most implausible contexts) at any price. Most pop music diverges sharply from this official ideology, and echoes the fears and sufferings that such a society produces in practice.
This is in fact the great value of pop music, in contrast to most other forms of art in our civilisation; that it offers expression to overt emotionalism. Its guiding principle is summed up in the lines:



‘If you cry when you’re in love,
Sure it’s no disgrace.’ [3]



The theme of public, unashamed weeping is (as much in the lyrics for male as for female singers) a common and a healthy one. It recalls the sensibility of the eighteenth century. Pop music, then, gives a more or less natural expression to the feelings of a generation that is insecure, and to some extent in revolt against the values of the society it lives in. But it also – and in this too it reflects the existing state of consciousness – shows a confused and passive attitude to society. The whole ideology of pop music is an individualist one. Many songs draw on the egocentric Romantic convention that nature is no more than a mirror reflecting the feelings of the individual:



‘The birds in the sky would be sad and lonely
If they knew I was losing my one and only.’ [4]



The aspirations are usually towards escape from the world into the security of purely personal relationships: thus I Want to Stay Here (and love you) [5], A World of our Own [6], etc. Thus, when reference is made to society, two themes emerge. First, society – particularly poverty – obstructs individual happiness. But, second, individuals can by themselves escape or overcome the pressures of society.
The theme of identification with the poorer classes is a common one:



‘I don’t care too much for money,
’Cause money can’t buy me love.’ [7]
‘He may not be a movie star,
But when it come to being happy, we are.’ [8]
‘Before it’s earned our money’s always spent ...
Babe, I got you babe.’ [9]
‘Sloopy lives in a very bad part of town
And everybody tries to put my Sloopy down.’ [10]



Once again the divergence from the official ideology of advertising – where identification is always with the affluent middle-class consumer – is striking. But the divergence is no more than a reversion to an older tradition: the conservative convention of folk-song and fairy-story where the simple poor are happier than the rich.
Occasionally the tone is harsher, as in the very fine record recently produced by the Animals:



‘In this dirty old part of the city
Where the sun refuses to shine ...
You’ll be dead before your time is due.’



But even here the chorused solution is an individual one – ‘We’ve gotta get out of this place’ – leaving the rest to rot. The most recent trend in pop-music – the rise of folk, ‘protest’ and sub-political songs, is not a break with the existing conventions, but merely a development of them. Bob Dylan, who has pioneered this trend, has had four Top Thirty entries; only one – The Times they are a-changing – has an explicitly social theme. Dylan is at his best in such songs as Like a Rolling Stone and Mr Tambourine Man (the Byrds’ version of which reached Number One), where he expresses, more graphically and in much less banal and stereotyped language, the same insecurity and frustration that has been a central theme of pop music for a decade.
By widening the range of pop music, Dylan has prepared the way for explicitly political songs. So far three have entered the Top Twenty – Donovan’s Universal Soldier (EP), Barry McGuire’s Eve of Destruction and Hedgehoppers Anonymous’s It’s Good News Week.
It would be dangerous to overestimate the significance of this breakthrough. The records share the individualism and quietism of all pop music. Donovan preaches a moralising abstract pacifism in tones of despair. Barry McGuire makes some acute observations:



‘Marches alone can’t bring integration’



but degenerates into abstract idealism:



‘When human respect is disintegrating’



and ends with despair:



‘This whole crazy world is just too frustrating.’



McGuire himself has said: ‘It isn’t a protest song and it was never meant to be. It doesn’t attempt a solution.’ [11] As for the Hedgehoppers, they merely seem to be cashing in on a fashion with a song that has little meaning.
Protest songs may rapidly disappear from the charts, or they may become a rather tedious fashion. Certainly, if they stay, they will mark a significant broadening of the range of pop music, in both subject matter and vocabulary. But the significance should not be overrated; these songs reflect the contradiction that has run through the whole tradition of pop music since the beginning of rock and roll. On the one hand, an urge to shock and rebel (which the beat of any rock record articulates much more clearly than the words); on the other, a directionless passivity. Protest songs may be symptomatic of a new mood among youth – but it is a mood that has existed since the beginning of CND in the mid-1950s, though the diluted radicalism of protest songs is reaching a wider audience than the folk music associated with CND ever did. Pop singers are not leaders, but tag along behind. As Trotsky wrote:
‘The traditional identification of poet and prophet is acceptable only in the sense that the poet is about as slow in reflecting his epoch as the prophet. If there are prophets and poets who can be said to have been “ahead of their time,” it is because they have expressed certain demands of social evolution not quite as slowly as the rest of their kind.’ [12]
When youth becomes revolutionary, and only then, will it get the popular music a revolutionary youth deserves. Till then, pop music serves as the bewildered heart-cry of an age in suspended transition.
 



Discrimination and Popular Culture
Ed. Denys Thompson
Pelican, 4s
Although most of the authors of the various essays in this collection have no political connections, their preoccupation with the problems of ‘popular culture’ is akin to that of the New ‘Left’ of a few years ago. The essays deal with different aspects of mass culture – advertising, television, press, cinema, pop music and design – but the treatment and underlying assumptions are strikingly similar. In every case the method is impressionistic; we are given quotations at length from advertisements, women’s magazine stories and pop songs, linked with assertions of a vague nature. Thus: ‘Nowadays more than ever the love theme is almost universal in commercial lyrics. But it must be love of a very romantic and sentimental nature’ (Donald Hughes). Perhaps this is true; perhaps not. What is needed is an analytical breakdown of the themes and forms of successful pop songs. But none of the contributors offers work of this kind. Hughes, in fact, blatantly distorts when he quotes Mike Sarne’s Come Outside as an example of ‘romantic and sentimental’. The argument, then, is conducted in emotional, not factual terms. Most of the authors show a certain lack of sympathy with the forms of art or communication they are dealing with, blended with an air of paternalist elitism.
The term ‘commercial’ constantly recurs in the essays, but this does not mean that there is any socialist analysis. David Holbrook feels nostalgia for the ages of Bunyan and Dickens; Michael Farr looks back to William Morris. But in fact, in all class societies, art has been a commodity to be bought and sold. The only new feature in the twentieth century is that the market has been vastly widened. Likewise, all the contributors fail to grasp the essentially dual nature of culture in a commercial society. Thus pop music is, on the one hand, crudely distorted by commercial pressures and the drive to maximise profit; on the other hand, just because it must appeal to a mass audience, it must to some extent reflect and embody the feelings and aspirations of a whole generation. In short, the problem of culture cannot be solved separately from the problem of society. In a way, some of the contributors recognise this; yet their proposals are depressingly naive: ‘subtle legislation’ (Holbrook), a design survey conducted by several industries based on ‘disinterested observation’ (Farr), a recognition of the need for ‘fuller and more continuous participation in the processes of government by real (and not formal) majorities of people’ (Graham Martin). In such a reformist framework, no problems, least of all those of culture, can be solved.
 



THE DEPARTURE of de Gaulle has come as a surprise to those who have been so bemused by his personality that they have ignored the real social forces in France.
In fact it shows that the movement begun last May is still very much alive. In the elections last June the alliance of de Gaulle’s blackmail and the Communist Party’s conservatism was able to produce a temporary swing to the right.
But while the student movement has gone into something of a decline, the working class has continued the fight. Other sections of the population, like peasants and small shopkeepers, who are very numerous in France, are becoming increasingly militant.
 
Reflects
Last May showed that it is possible to win these classes for a revolutionary line, if the workers take the lead.
At the same time, de Gaulle’s departure reflects the problems of French capitalism.
De Gaulle was brought in by big capital to end the Algerian war, which was a nuisance to it. He straightened up the constitution and helped integrate the unions.
But now big capital wants someone who will not have de Gaulle’s nationalist attitudes and who will help get France back in the US orbit.
Pompidou – of the Rothschild bank – is their man, though he may well be defeated if a centre candidate can group all the opposition parties, leaving the CP out in the cold.
 
Battle
But while the presidential manoeuvres go on, the real battle to build a new party to the left of the CP continues. The recent turn to a semi-revolutionary line by the formerly Parliamentary PSU and the slow moves towards unity among the left groupings, suggest that in the not too distant future such a party may play a significant role in French politics.
 



JUST ONE YEAR AGO France was at the climax of the greatest general strike in her history. It seemed that the Gaullist regime was on the point of collapse and that, just possibly, working class revolution was round the corner.
In London demonstrators raised the enthusiastic slogan ‘France today, Britain tomorrow’.
No one was able to predict the upheaval in France last spring. But what is even more remarkable is that scarcely anyone who observed the turmoil and enthusiasm of last May could have predicted the state of affairs a year later.
The bosses still run the factories occupied last May. The Communist Party still keeps Left-wingers away from the factory gates.
The hack politicians are still making alliances and and breaking promises. Elections are being held, in which no one can tell the difference between the two main candidates.  
And the overall peaceful atmosphere is broken only by the police brutality and right-wing thuggery which have existed in all the last dozen regimes in France. To a superficial observer, it looks as though May 1968 might never have happened.
This may seem excessively pessimistic. And, of course, it is.
 
Willing to fight
The first and greatest lesson of May was that despite so-called ‘prosperity’, ‘stability’, the working class is still ready and willing to fight.
There is no substitute for it in the struggle to change the world. We were quite right to ram this lesson home into unwilling ears.
The French events may have been influenced in the form they took by certain factors peculiar to France  –  the curiously inefficient education system, the historical tradition of fighting on the barricades. But in essence nothing happened in France that could not happen in Britain as well.
Having said this, it is important to try and see the French events in perspective. Already about a hundred books have been published on the subject.
This proves the deep problems the events posed for capitalists and revolutionaries alike. But it is still very difficult to estimate just how much and how little was achieved.
The events of last May were an episode in a very long process. To see them as anything else can lead to disastrous confusion.
The most obvious example is the theory of the role of students as a ‘detonator’ for a revolutionary situation. Students did play a vital part in the May events, but not a part that can be translated into other situations.
French higher education is, purely and simply, worse organised, worse provided for and more irrelevant than in most countries. Hence the particular sharpness of the student struggle.
To imagine that similar crises could be provoked at will is worse than an illusion. There are no short cuts to revolution.
France since the Second World War has provided an example of the trends of modern capitalism in their most developed form. Five-year economic plans (after the style of Wilson’s ill-fated National Plan) have existed ever since 1945.
The planning commissions (whose power is greater than that of parliament, even more a charade than in Britain) include representatives of all trade unions, including the Communists. In many factories the trade unions control the canteens  –  though not the production line.
It is this type of modern capitalism that all the orthodox political tendencies in France defend. As the political climate varies, the emphasis may change  –  sometimes the ruling class needs a right face to reassure its supporters, sometimes a left to delude its opponents.
With de Gaulle, a flood of rhetoric about the national tradition combined with a firm appeal to order. With Mendes-France, the trappings of a watered-down, modernised socialism. For Rocard of the United Socialist Party (PSU) even a bit of marxist jargon –  but he is not a serious competitor.
In this kind of capitalism, the working class develops in two contradictory ways.
It becomes increasingly divorced from politics. Its support for political parties and trade unions has shown a long-term decline since the Second World War, despite some increases lately.
But at the same time the nature of modern society is such that workers increasingly come up against ‘political’ questions  –  that is, questions affecting control and decision-making.
Hence the paradoxes of the movement in May – on the one hand its refreshing spontaneity, its direct concern with workers’ control, its elaboration of direct democracy on the shop floor and in the locality.
 
Capture leadership
On the other hand, the absence of political direction in the strike, the divorce between students and workers, the possibility for the Communist Party to capture the leadership of the movement.
It is important to recognise that June was neither victory nor defeat. There was no question of another all-out general strike. In May a whole generation of workers lost their political virginity – something that no one does twice.
The fears of fascism raised by the release of Salan and the return of Bidault have proved groundless. In the present elections, for the first time in many years, there is no candidate to the right of the Gaullists.
The events of the last year, from the devaluation crisis to the elections, show two important processes.
Firstly, the strike seriously affected France’s international economic situation. The luxuries of Gaullist foreign policy are no longer available. France will have to be a bit more orthodox  –  back up American imperialism in Vietnam and elsewhere, be nice to Israel and, probably, let Britain into the Common Market.
At the same time, there is a complete regroupment of political forces in France. The probable victory of Poher will lead to the emergence of a broad, adulterous union in the centre.
Many social democrats are already supporting Poher, the Defferre-Mendes-France team will doubtless join in on the second ballot perhaps after a bit of haggling over government jobs).
At the other end of the spectrum, Poher may get support from the left Gaullists, at the moment reluctantly backing Pompidou, and he should have no difficulty in coming to terms with most of the Gaullist Party. He will probably not need to dissolve the National Assembly.
A whole swarm of grey-headed career politicians from the Fourth Republic, like Radical Felix Gaillard, are crawling out of the woodwork on the look-out for office
Of course a Poher government will make no difference to anyone (except those who have well-paid jobs in it). The argument of a return to a more ‘liberal’ regime is laughable. Press censorship, for example, has been lighter under de Gaulle than it was under socialist Guy Mollet, a Poher supporter.
All this leaves the Communist Party out in the cold. In private, they must be regretting de Gaulle’s departure and hoping for a Pompidou victory.
Not just because Moscow prefers Gaullist foreign policy, but because a clearly right-wing figure allows them to campaign for the ‘unity of the left’. Without an electoral alliance with the socialists, the CP have no hope of becoming a serious force in parliament.
 
Damping down
While they are still very strong in industry (they have actually increased the number of factory cells during the 60s) they have no industrial strategy, but only a parliamentary one; thus they are damping down strikes during the election period.
In the long term, the CP are in a dead end. Hence the revolutionary left can grow, if it develops constructively beyond the positions of May.
Unfortunately, it is still hopelessly divided. The call made by the comrades of Lutte Ouvrière for a united revolutionary organisation has, as yet, met with little success.
Maoism, which played a leading role in May, seems to be on the decline, naturally enough, since it is essentially religious and not political. To know that the Great Helmsman loves you may be a great consolation in the face of tear-gas grenades but the Little Red Book offers no answer to basic historical questions such as why the present strategy of the CP was elaborated back in the thirties when the immortal J.V. Stalin was alive and well.
The PSU contains many good revolutionaries, but its politics are still technocratic and it talks in terms of alliance with the CP and Socialists. A thorough-going faction fight is necessary to clarify the issues.
The presidential candidature of Alain Krivine offers a chance for the revolutionary Left to establish itself. There may be reservations about the line of Krivine’s organisation, the Communist League (affiliation to the moribund Fourth International and constant invocation of Che Guevara do not indicatea concern for roots in the French workers.)
But if the campaign is carried on in parallel with steady work in the factories and with serious unity in practice between the Communist League, Lutte Ouvrière and other groups, a small but substantial advance may be made. If so, the next few weeks may be the most hopeful period since May last year.
 



‘But reality can be seized and penetrated only as a totality, and only a subject which itself is a totality is capable of this penetration ...’ [1]
The publication of Goethe and his Age [2] is a welcome addition to the works of Georg Lukacs available in English. [3] If Marxism is to offer an acceptable world-view to a new generation, the need for works of theory to embrace fields such as literature is very great, and Lukacs’ work can help to break down the deep parochialism of the British Left. [4] At the same time Lukacs’ literary writings contain many weaknesses associated with his political acceptance of Stalinism. There are signs that the bourgeois opponents of Marxism in the cultural field are giving up shadow-boxing with Zhdanov in favour of an attack on Lukacs. This short essay does not attempt a full account of Lukacs’ literary writings, but merely suggests some of their more apparent strengths and weaknesses.
Literature, along with philosophy, was Lukacs’ major interest in his early years in Budapest and Berlin. The First World War and the Hungarian Revolution of 1919 obtruded themselves forcibly into his academic world, and throughout the twenties, when his most notable work in philosophy and political theory was written, he seems to have abandoned literary criticism in favour of direct political involvement in the controversies of the Third International. Only after he had repudiated his earlier work and begun his long sojourn in Moscow did he turn back to literary criticism.
Lukacs’ capitulation to Stalinism cannot be interpreted in terms of cowardice or careerism. Rather it represents a response to the downward turn in the international revolutionary movement. Unwilling to take the desperate gamble of the Left Opposition, and horrified by the impact of fascism on the German culture he loved, Luckacs could see not alternative to Stalinism. One can see parallels not only with many of the old Bolsheviks, but with such writers as Ilya Ehrenburg. Marxism itself is not exempt from the historical pressures it seeks to study. In periods of working-class advance we find the emphasis on human action which characterises Lukacs’ History and Class Consciousness (1923); in periods of defeat, it is replaced by a mechanistic determinism which offers the long-term consolation that ‘history is on our side’. That Lukacs’ work is sensitive to such pressures is suggested by his support in 1956 for the Nagy Government – if not for the Hugarian working class.
In a sense, then, literature offered Lukacs a retreat from action, an alternative to the political defence of Stalinism. At the same time, his choice of the essay form in most of his literary writings has a deeper significance. In his first major work, The Soul and the Form (1911), Lukacs wrote an essay on the essay form, arguing that the essayist stood midway between the poet and the philosopher. The poet deals only with things, which are unproblematic; the philosopher with ideas and the solution of problems. The essayist, while being concerned with general problems, cannot provide solutions, and approaches the general only by way of the specific, frequently taking works of literature as his starting point. For Lukacs under Stalinism, the ambiguous form of the critical essay allowed him to pursue, in an oblique form, the problems that run through his earlier work. In History and Class Consciousness Lukacs wrote:
‘The category of totality, the domination, determining and in all fields, of the whole over the parts, is the essence of the method which Marx took from Hegel.’ [5]
He shows [6] that the achievement of such totality demands the transcendence of individualism. The individual – whether isolated capitalist or fragmented worker – sees the social world as subject to a destiny beyond his control. Action is possible only if he accepts the laws of society as ‘natural laws’, or if he retreats into a purely ethical position. The working class, organised in the form corresponding to its consciousness – the Party – is able to overcome the false dichotomies of bourgeois thought: individual and society, ethics and science, theory and practice, etc. [7]
This theme of totality is a crucial problem for working-class consciousness and organisation, for developing the ability to ‘perceive oneself and the instant of one’s action as a moment of the totality, of the process, to see “defeat” as a necessary stage towards victory.’ [8] But it all raises a central question for the study of literature.
Vulgar Marxism and the bourgeois tradition in the sociology of literature have converged in taking a one-sided point of view. They have attempted to situate works of literature within a social-historical totality, but they have neglected to study the way in which a writer creates a totality within the work. Just as a political organisation is not merely the product of historical conditions, but seeks actively to. change those conditions, so a writer is not merely the product of his age, but seeks, actively to comprehend it. A dialectical study of Shakespeare would not content itself by remarking that his plays centre around a class struggle of nobility versus bourgeoisie, but demonstrate how the dramatic form concentrates and concretises this struggle in a way quite different from a work of history or economics.
Hence the concern with literary form that marks all of Lukacs’ writings. The earliest treatments of this theme go back to his Hegelian phase before the First World War – The Soul and the Form (1911), and The Theory of the Novel [9] The latter work is made unnecessarily obscure by its abstract and at times curiously lyrical style, but it makes a significant advance in the exploration of the theme of totality. Under Hegelian influence, Lukacs relates literary forms to historical epochs. He contrasts the modern age with what he calls the ‘closed civilisations’ of Greece and mediaeval Christianity, a world less rich than our own, but less problematic because of the overriding sense of totality. To this age belongs the epic. With the collapse of this closed civilisation the novel appears – a form for which Lukacs attempts the following explanation:
‘The novel is the epic of a time when the extensive totality of life is no longer immediately given, of a time for which the immanence of meaning to life has become a problem, but which, nonetheless, has not ceased to aim at totality.’ [10]
There is no attempt to connect this disintegration of totality in consciousness with the specific social and economic forms of capitalism, but an important step towards a dialectical concept of totality in class consciousness has been taken. When Lukacs returned to the problem of totality in the novel with The Historical Novel (1937), he had gone through a complex destiny of revolution in Budapest and counter-revolution in Moscow, and it is necessary to separate the strands in his work with care. The final section, a crude eulogy of third-rate novelists prepared to appear on anti-fascist platforms, and complete with a reference to Trotskyist nuisances’ [11], is a Popular Front period piece. But the earlier section on the nineteenth century historical novel is a masterly analysis of literary totality. Lukacs shows how the historical novel is born from an awareness of his historical change produced by the French Revolution; and how, as a form, it represents an attempt at a methodological coming-to-terms with historical change. The most important distinction is that between the drama and the novel; the drama represents a ‘totality of movement’ – a closed system with complete economy of detail, while the novel represents ‘totality of objects’, a rendering of circumstances in all their richness. Thus he compares the treatment of the family in Shakespeare’s King Lear and Thomas Mann’s Buddenbrooks: in Shakespeare the ‘extreme and ... typical movements form a completely closed system’, while in Mann we see the ‘breadth and abundance of the real circumstances of family life ...’ [12] Scott, the great historical novelist, inspired Balzac, whom Marx and Lukacs agree in seeing as one of the greatest realist novelists of all time. The concept of totality is central to Lukacs’ theory of literary realism and the distinction he makes between realism and naturalism. In History and Class Consciousness he had argued that the whole is not the sum of the parts, but rather determines the parts. Therefore realism will not be achieved by the accumulation of factual details, but by the creation of coherent significant structures which give a place and a meaning to every detail. Naturalism, on the other hand, leads to the very opposite – the tendency in modem art to collage the sticking together of isolated observed details in haphazard juxtaposition. This is not totality, but on the contrary, the admission of failure in any attempt to create a meaningful totality. [13]
The concept of totality is also central to another theme in Lukacs’ work, the much more ambiguous one of humanism. The major essay in History and Class Consciousness, called Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat shows how capitalist production destroys man as a totality.
‘The process of labour is fragmented, in an ever increasing proportion, into abstractly rational partial operations, and this disrupts the relations of the worker to the product as a totality, and reduces his labour to a special function repeating itself mechanically.’ [14]
Such fragmentation in production necessarily leads to false dichotomies, such as reason versus feeling. In the work on Goethe and his Age Lukacs vigorously attacks the traditional views of literary history and the distortions of fascist intellectuals who seek to impose such false dichotomies on the history of German culture. The great age of humanism, which had realised in theory if not in practice the ‘unified and comprehensive development of the human personality’, was the Enlightenment. Lukacs demolishes the myth that Germany never had an Enlightenment (which would make it especially prone to fascism), and shows that despite certain reactionary sentiments on a purely political level, Goethe himself represents the culmination of the Enlightenment. But this very humanism, at times so powerful and healthy, and at times so abstract and pernicious, is a key to the great weakness of Lukacs’ work. In discussing the relation of the literary representatives of the petty-bourgeoisie to the class itself, Marx says:
‘According to their education and their individual position they may be as far apart as heaven from earth. What makes them representatives of the petty-bourgeoisie is the fact that in their minds they do not get beyond the limits which the latter do not get beyond in life’. [15]
Similarly Lukacs, in character totally alien to the narrow-minded thugs who held power in the Kremlin, is nonetheless a literary representative of the Soviet bureaucracy. Because of this, Lukacs is unable to see that the analysis he himself applied to the French bourgeoisie of the nineteenth century, that of a ruling class validating itself in the name of revolution, is equally applicable to the Stalinist ruling class. If he criticises this class, it can be only in the name of individual humanism, not from the standpoint of a class. Similarly, he cannot go beyond the point of view of the Communist Parties in the West, who derive their legitimacy from the Russian Revolution, and cannot therefore adapt to changed circumstances, such as the greater weight and sophistication of the working class. In short, for Lukacs history stops dead in 1917; a lucid analysis of political and literary events before then, but only a distorting parody of what came after.
For the modern world, Lukacs recognises two forms of realism, critical realism and socialist realism. The theory of critical realism depends on the belief that the bourgeois intellectual still has a positive role to play. The cult of peaceful coexistence actually led Lukacs to write in 1955:
The real dilemma of our age is not the opposition between capitalism and socialism, but the opposition between peace and war. The first duty of the bourgeois intellectual has become the rejection of an all-pervading fatalistic angst, implying a rescue operation for humanity rather than any breakthrough to Socialism’. [16]
Against this perspective, he sees as politically the most important task the building of a Peace Movement in which all ideological tendencies merge, and artistically the continuation of the great tradition of the nineteenth century liberal novel. The hero of this phase is Thomas Mann, compared to Goethe for his concern with the ‘totality of human relationships’. [17] Mann, with his development from a purely unpolitical stance to his courageous opposition to Hitler, fits the Popular Front paradigm perfectly. All that critical realism need do is to show ‘readiness to respect the perspective of socialism’. [18] The active presentation of the working class is unnecessary.
The concept of ‘socialist realism’ is a more sensitive one for Lukacs than it was for Zhdanov. Nonetheless, it implies the same basic conservatism. At worst, it is the realism of the accepted fact, the glorification of what is at the expense of what might be. At best it involves a critique of abuses in terms of individualist, and thus ethical, humanism. In the essay Solzhenitsyn and the New Realism [19], Lukacs attacks the art of the Stalin era as naturalism, not realism. But his praise is reserved for the portrayal of ‘a being whose humanity nothing could destroy or disfigure’, and he sees Solzhenitsyn’s work as being ‘a symbolic whole, with a meaning for all humanity’, in which ‘the origins of this bureaucracy and the groupings within it ... remain outside the bounds of the narrative’. [20]
Thus neither critical nor socialist realism goes beyond the limits of liberal humanism. What Lukacs leaves out of his picture is the writer who is revolutionary both in his conscious acceptance of Marxism, and in his treatment of literary form, who tries to write from the standpoint of the working class and its new modes of struggle, and develop new forms to fit the content. Yet such writers do exist – Sartre, Brecht and Breton, to name of three highly diverse cases – though most of them are an embarrassment of official Communism. In a controversy of the early twenties Trotsky argued against any idea of a specifically proletarian culture. [21] But Trotsky, the eternal optimist, did not foresee that fifty years after 1917 workers would be excluded from power in every country on earth. Lukacs in his very salutary concern for totality tends to concentrate on those writers who achieve complete totality within their work, in a harmonious construction rather than those who strive towards totality while engaged in struggle.
As a result, the formal potentialities of modern literature are underemphasised. And this is not merely the case when he is a hack supporter of censorship, as in his statement that Thomas Mann’s Dr Faustus in the ‘fullest artistic and intellectual confirmation’ of the decree of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union on modern music. [22]
More serious is his treatment of Brecht. Here he argues that ‘Brecht’s political didacticism, his attempt to impose intellectual schemata on the spectator turned his character into mere spokesmen.’ However Brecht developed in a later stage to the portrayal of ‘a complex dialectic of good and evil. Problems of society have become problems of humanity, subsuming the inner conflict and contradictions of the warring parties.’ [23] To assert that the only way to avoid didacticism is by retreating from politics to ethics is to avoid the very central problem of all Brecht’s work – and incidentally to stand History and Class Consciousness on its head. Similarly he argues that Surrealism has a positive aspect, as a stage in the evolution of Eluard and Aragon into socialist writers. But a greater poet than either of these, André Breton, remained a Surrealist while being a life-long revolutionary (albeit a Trotskyist). He is not mentioned. [24] Thus the problem of revolutionary art is again evaded.
In reading Lukacs it is important to criticise radically the heritage of Stalinism. Nonetheless, his concern with totality in form and content, and his humanism, when it is historical, and not abstract and ethical, will help lay the bases for a more wholly revolutionary literary criticism. Bob Dylan has lamented ‘I was so much older then, I’m younger than that now’. If only it were possible that the younger Lukacs might write a critique of the reified consciousness of his older self.
 
Notes
1. Histoire et Conscience de Classe, Paris 1960, p. 60.
2. Merlin, 36s.
3. Also available are Studies in European Realism, Essays on Thomas Mann, The Meaning of Contemporary Realism, The Historical Novel. Our gratitude to Merlin Press for publishing all but the first named may be tempered bv regret at the continuing absence in English translation of any major work written before Lukacs’ act of ‘self-critism’ in 1925.
4. As an example one may quote one of the best recent examples of literary criticism written by a committed socialist. Raymond Williams’ Modem Tragedy (Chatto & Windus, 1966), written in 1964. This contains one passing reference to the work of Lukacs, in which Williams comments that he appears to be more a post-Hegelian than a Marxist, without giving any indication as to which period of Lukacs’ work he is referring to. The work of the Lukacsian Lucien Goldmann on the ‘tragic vision’ is never mentioned. To regret this parochialism is in no way to endorse the thesis argued by Perry Anderson that in order to be a Marxist it is necessary to be foreign – or at least Irish.
5. Histoire et Conscience de Classe, p. 47.
6. In the essay Rosa Luxemburg, Marxist, Ibid., pp. 47–66.
7. For a full treatment of this theme cf. Lucien Goldmann, Is There a Marxist Sociology (IS 34).
8. Histoire et Conscience de Classe, p. 65.
9. Written 1914, published in 1920. Available in French translation, La Theorie du Roman, Gonthier, 1963
10. Ibid., p. 48.
11. The Historical Novel, p. 256. In the French translation (Payot, 1965, p. 301). Trotskyists are not merely ‘nuisances’, but ‘vermin’
12. The Historical Novel, pp. 92–95.
13. It is arguable that Lukacs, like Engels, seriously underestimates Zola in this connection, for Zola unlike his mediocre imitators, does produce a meaningful intertwining of individual and social destiny in his best novels
14. Histoire et Conscience de Classe, p. 115.
15. The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Moscow 1958, 1, p. 275.
16. The Meaning of Contemporary Realism, p. 92.
17. Essays on Thomas Mann, p. 50.
18. The Meaning of Contemporary Realism, p. 93.
19. The Socialist Register, 1965
20. Ibid., pp. 208, 206, 210
21. Literature and Revolution, chapter VI.
22. Essays on Thomas Mann, p. 71.
23. The Meaning of Contemporary Realism, pp. 87–88.
24. Ibid., p. 104.
 



FIFTY YEARS ago this week, on March 4, 1919, the Third International was founded in Moscow.
It is a date that deserves to be remembered by all who hold dear the ideal of international socialism.
The creation of a new International was the logical outcome of the First World War and the Russian Revolution.
In 1914, the Second International (the remnants of which still exist as an excuse for expense-account trips abroad for Labour Party leaders) had collapsed. ‘Socialist’ leaders in the different countries had lined up behind the slogans of ‘freedom’ and ‘national interest’.
Only a tiny group of pacifists and an even tinier group of revolutionary socialists had managed to put up any opposition to the war.
But from 1917 onwards a new mood came over workers, wearied by the pointless slaughter and inspired by the revolutions in Russia and the creation of workers’ councils there.
The next few years saw a wave of strikes in Britain, mutinies in the British, French and German armed forces, occupation of factories in Italy, revolutionary risings defeated in Hungary and Germany. World revolution seemed to be on the cards.
 
Argued
If is often argued, by both Western and communist historians, that the International founded by Lenin led directly on to Stalin’s Comintern of the 1930s. It is said that from the beginning the International imposed a centralised, Moscow-based leadership on the world working-class movement.
Nothing could be farther from the truth. Lenin constantly repeated that the Russian Revolution could not survive unless it spread to Western Europe.
The whole aim of the International was to develop a strong revolutionary movement in Western Europe, which Lenin freely admitted, might rapidly overtake the Russian Revolution.
Certainly the conditions imposed on members of the Third International were tough. But they must be seen in historical context.
Almost all the old labour leaders had betrayed their principles in 1914; a new generation of leaders was appearing, heroic but inexperienced.
 
Bandwaggon
Many of the old bureaucrats who had supported the war in 1914 were trying to get on the revolutionary bandwaggon. Many principled revolutionaries, like Sylvia Pankhurst in Britain, had sectarian ideas like refusing to work in the mass labour movement.
And time was running out. By the early 1920s the revolutionary wave was dying down and reaction was gaining the upper hand, with the victory of fascism in Italy foreshadowing events elsewhere.
The Russian leaders, with a successful revolution to their credit, fought for a hard line – but they fought honestly in open debate.
Under Stalin the International was turned into an instrument of Russian foreign policy. Congresses were rarely held. Instead Moscow had private talks with Communist leaders in the different leaders in the different countries.
Many of the leaders who founded the Communist Parties of Europe in the early 1920s resigned or were expelled. They were replaced by men loyal to Moscow.
Finally, in 1943, Stalin dissolved the International as a gesture of goodwill to Churchill and Roosevelt.
The Third International made many mistakes in its early years. But they were the mistakes of a mass movement building a new organisation in struggle.
Today, when capitalism is more than ever international in scope, the need for a workers’ international is greater than before.
But it is not enough to set up an international body. This is meaningful only when there is a world-wide struggle of mass movements.
Until then our job is to build a movement at home, and show solidarity to comrades abroad, from Vietnam to France. In so doing, we can be inspired by the early years of the Third International.
 






The solidarity movement in Britain has mobilised large numbers of people. IAN BIRCHALL says we must not restrict them to a single-issue campaign ...



‘Tan Hiep ... had a school and a church, neat houses and gardens, pigs and water buffalo, a useful irrigation system, and a population of more than 2,000 people.
‘Last night Tan Hiep was utterly destroyed ... by United States F-100 bombers and Vietnamese Skyraiders. Just before dark the jets dropped napalm into the hamlet followed by high explosive. Everything was either burned or blasted.’ (Guardian, February 28, 1960)
IN SPITE OF the bombing halt, in spite of the talks in Paris, the real war in Vietnam, the war on the ordinary people, goes on.
Since the beginning of last year it has been clear that the US in Vietnam are beaten, militarily and politically.
Morale among American troops gets lower and lower. Pot smoking and alcoholism are rife. There is a whole colony of deserters in Cholon, and recently an American negro was killed fighting for the National Liberation Front.
Corruption and inefficiency are so widespread in the South Vietnamese administration and armed forces that talk of ‘handing over’ to them is no more than a piece of tired rhetoric.
 
Nixon’s new line
The new Nixon government is anxious to come to terms with Russia and China. Nixon himself, once a hard-line anti-communist, wrote in Foreign Affairs (October 1967), ‘We cannot afford to leave China forever outside the family of nations.’
The question is not really whether the US gets out of Vietnam, but when and how.
Here economic factors become important. ‘Defence’ in the United States employs, directly or indirectly, over seven and a half million people. Annual military expenditure amounts to nearly $2,000 for every American family.
US capitalism would benefit from a withdrawal from Vietnam – providing it is not too quick and not too complete.
Business Week of July 27, 1968, calculates that if 50 to 100,000 troops remain in South East Asia, then the military budget would be reduced by $15 to $20,000 million (about a fifth of the total).
Here Nixon can expect sympathy and understanding from his comrades in the Kremlin. The New York Times of January 27 reported on a meeting of top Russian and American diplomats:
‘Perhaps most surprising were the hints given at the Westchester Country Club that the Soviet Union would welcome some continued American military presence in South Vietnam after conclusion of a political settlement in Paris.’
So Nixon will play a waiting game, continuing the peace talks, while trying to gain concessions through Moscow (and possibly Peking).
A sign of his double-faced strategy is the appointment as negotiators to the Paris talks of Henry Cabot Lodge, personal friend of Air Marshall Ky, and Marshall Green, former ambassador to Indonesia, and man behind the scenes in the murder of half a million Indonesian communists in 1965.
 
Continue the struggle
In this situation, the National Liberation Front have no choice but to continue, the military struggle. The Americans complain that new attacks by the NLF are a breach of the ‘understanding’ reached when the bombing was stopped last autumn.
But for the last 25 years, from Korea to Guatemala, from the Dominican Republic to Chicago, the US has shown that it ‘understands’ nothing but brute force.
Our solidarity with the Vietnamese people must continue to be whole hearted and unconditional. Big demonstrations, like the one planned for this Sunday in London must go on.
At the same time, however, it is important to go beyond the slogans and try to see the Vietnamese revolution in a world political context.
We support the Vietnamese revolution because it has the support of the mass of the people in South Vietnam. No guerrilla movement can survive without this popular support – as Che Guevara discovered in Bolivia.
It is, moreover, a revolution independent of the power blocs of East and West. Russia has tanks to spare for Czechoslovakia, but little more than words and outdated equipment for Vietnam.
China’s ‘cultural Revolution’ has led to trainloads of arms for Vietnam being captured for use in internal fighting(see the Financial Times, November 13,1968).
But the Vietnamese revolution is not a socialist revolution. The programme of the NLF appeals to ‘Rich people, soldiers, workers, peasants, intellectuals, employees, trades, youth, women.’ When, in 1945 and 1946, after the defeat of the Japanese, propertyless peasants seized the land, it was Ho Chi Minh’s leadership that punished them.
 
Revolution goes on
The Vietnamese people are fighting for the right to control their own country. But the withdrawal of US troops will be the beginning, not the end of the Vietnamese revolution.
A victory for the Vietnamese, however, will be concrete proof that popular forces can defeat any military machine. The French defeat in Vietnam was a major factor in sparking off the Algerian revolution.
A US withdrawal from Vietnam will inspire popular movements from Bolivia to the Philippines, from Mozambique to Thailand.
This does not mean that the US will necessarily make the same mistakes again that they made in Vietnam.
But t [text missing] ion in the under- [text missing] countries will be [text missing] by the fact that th [text missing] of Vietnam have p [text missing] nto advanced industr [text missing]
The [text missing] es as well,at hom [text missing] facing Nixon [text missing] mmed up in the Ne [text missing] t of January 10.
‘A [text missing] of the bombing, [text missing] xpansion of hostili [text missing] nite a new, explosive anti-war protest on and off the campus ... It could make the country virtually ungovernable?
 
Vietnam the spark
In France, Vietnam committees in many places developed into the Action Committees that played a central role in last summer’s general strike, in Britain, Vietnam has been a major issue for educating and mobilising the student movement.
And the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign has succeeded where Herbert Morrison failed. It has killed the British Communist Party.
Anyone who doubts this should read the article Unity and the Ultra-left by Ken Geering in the February 1st issue of Comment, a CP discussion journal.
 
Hysterical attack
Less than a year ago Comment published Betty Reid’s hysterical attack on Trotskyism in the VSC. Now Geering writes ‘The ultra-left, can rally 20,000 to 100,000 at the drop of a hat. We can’t.’
From now on the CP is merely a faction, tagging along behind.
There is now only one way forward for the Vietnam movement in Britain. It must turn increasingly to the working class.
Placards and banners calling for ‘workers’ control’ are excellent – but they are no substitute for the banners of union branches and shop stewards’ committees, which are still few in numbers on the big demonstrations – fewer, probably, than they used to be on the CND marches.
To win the working class, the Vietnam movement must go beyond a single-minded commitment to Vietnam. A New Society poll showed that 68 per cent of the 100,000 demonstrators on October 27 last year were against the capitalist system as a whole.
 
Just as vital
A campaign that restricts itself to Vietnam alone may well find that the leadership are a long way behind the rank and file.
The war in Vietnam may end. The war. in Britain, in the factories and estates, continues.
It is a quieter, less dramatic war, but for the future of humanity it is just as vital.
 



A HOLIDAY abroad need not necessarily be an escape from the class struggle; it may be a very useful way of meeting and discussing with socialists from different countries.
One particularly useful way of making contacts with socialists from a number of countries is at international student work camps
If possible, take a small supply of International Socialist literature with you – some sample copies of Socialist Worker and International Socialism and some IS pamphlets.
Most large towns on the continent contain some small bookshops specialising in Left-wing literature. Try to persuade them to take one or two copies of International Socialism and display it for sale.
Please let us know where you are going before you go, and let us have any useful information picked up, or addresses of contacts when you get back. Write to Edward Crawford, 25 Randolph Crescent, London, W9 (phone 01-CUN36 20).



 


Ian Birchall
London N9






 



The Permanent Revolution: The French Revolution and its Legacy 1789-1989
Geoffrey Best (ed.)
Fontana £4.95
The Peasantry in the French Revolution
P.M. Jones
Cambridge University Press £9.95
CAPITALISM will try to make anything into a commodity to be bought and sold – even revolution, providing it is safely in the past. So this year’s bicentenary of the French Revolution will see the market flooded with commemorative articles of various sorts.
Some, fortunately, will be useful articles, like Peter Jones’s book on the revolutionary peasantry which presents a synthesis of research done since the time of Georges Lefebvre. He describes the dynamic of peasant revolt, its development from anarchy to organisation, and shows how the bourgeoisie was caught in the cross-fire between nobles and peasants. Jones is too detached and objective to ever understand why the Revolution happened, but he can tell us quite a lot about how it happened.
Unfortunately, the best sellers are likely to be not solid works like Jones’s, but anthologies like Best’s. This is a ragbag of articles from eight contributors, including Conor Cruise O’Brien and George Steiner, who were presumably selected not because they have done any serious work on the revolution, but because their names look good on the cover.
The blurb claims that Best’s book “is not about the French Revolution then, but about the French Revolution now”. A worthy aim – unfortunately not one of the distinguished contributors has any perspective for approaching it. In 1978 the French historian Francois Furet declared: “The French Revolution is over.” By that he meant that the basic gains of the bourgeois revolution are now accepted by all sections of the political spectrum.
But Furet spoke too soon. Within five years France had seen the emergence of Le Pen’s National Front, which precisely did reject the basic gains of the revolution.
A repeated theme in the collection is the emergence of nationalism in the revolutionary period. As Steiner puts it: “The French Revolution woke into fierce being and enlisted within its energies that most trenchant of modern emotions: the tribalism of the nation-state.” And, with some reservations, the prevailing view seems to be that this is a good thing.
But things were not so simple. National consciousness did not spring spontaneously out of the revolutionary fervour. It was imposed by the ruling class as the result of a long process of struggle. For example, at the time of the Revolution in many areas only a small minority of the peasantry understood the French language. They did not spontaneously identify themselves as “French”.
And in the best essay of the book (Hew Strachan on conscript armies) we learn that two thirds of Napoleon’s army which invaded Russia were not French – so it was not patriotism that made them plod through the snow.
Norman Hampson’s review of historians of the French Revolution does its best to minimise the Marxist contribution. But his main target is Albert Soboul. And Soboul, despite his great merits, never broke free from the framework of Stalinism. The “progressive” nature of the bourgeois revolution is viewed through the spectacles of the Popular Front. Robespierre becomes a forerunner of Old Joe himself.
The anti-Stalinist historians of the revolution, like Daniel Guerin and Maurice Dommanget, who showed the embryonic proletarian revolution emerging within the bourgeois revolution, do not even get a mention.
Hopefully some publisher will celebrate the Revolution by reprinting Guerin’s Class Struggle in the First French Republic.
 



Dear Editor
As one who knew and worked with Tony Cliff over 37 years, I should like to add a few remarks to the various comments in the last issue of Revolutionary History (Volume 7, no. 4, pp. 183–94, 212–21). At the risk of being accused of sycophancy, I shall begin by saying that he was undoubtedly the most remarkable person I ever met, and that it was a privilege to have known him.
I felt some of the comments on Cliff’s autobiography (A World to Win, London 2000) were a trifle harsh. Perhaps comrades were not fully aware of the circumstances under which it was written. Cliff was awaiting a major heart operation, and had been instructed not to leave his home and to have complete rest. In such circumstances most of us would be happy to lie back and be waited on. But ‘rest’ was utterly foreign to Cliff’s nature, and he was determined to use the time. Repeatedly his phone calls dragged me out of bed at 8.00 a.m. to demand whether I had internal ‘byooletins’ from the 1970s.
Of course, under such circumstances the book could not be properly researched, and it is scarcely surprising that many names evaded Cliff’s memory. But it is nonetheless a fascinating document, in that it gives an account of how Cliff himself saw events. It does not, of course, preclude a properly documented history of the Socialist Review Group, nor a serious critical biography of Cliff, both of which I hope will eventually be written.
I do, however, agree with Duncan Hallas (Revolutionary History, Volume 7, no. 4, p. 185) when he says that Cliff was ‘indispensable’. Of course many others made important contributions. In 1968, I jointly authored with Cliff a short book on the French general strike; I suppose in some sense I was one of the leading figures in the organisation. Yet when I look back I realise how little I then understood of what was going on, and how much I learned from Cliff. Or rather, as Richard Kirkwood has very well put it, ‘like any good … educator he helped me to learn it for myself’ Programme of Cliff Memorial Meeting, 7 May 2000). Of course, if we applied Cliff’s methods and came to different conclusions from Cliff, we got the sharp end of a very sharp tongue. But that was all part of the learning process.
Jim Higgins writes off Cliff’s entire life as a failure. Since he invokes my ‘phenomenal memory’, I might mention that on Saturday, 11 October 1997, at 6.00 p.m. in the urinal of the Calthorpe Arms, Jim told me he had not read anything published by the Socialist Workers Party since 1980. So perhaps he isn’t the best qualified of judges. I’ve said what I had to say about the events of 1973–75 in a previous issue of Revolutionary History (Volume 7, no 1, pp200–3) and I won’t repeat myself. Personally, I always found Jim Higgins an amiable and amusing individual, and I should be quite happy to let bygones be bygones. But since he insists on scratching at the wound, let me say that the real difference between Cliff and Higgins is as follows: if Cliff had lost the 1975 faction fight, he would have got on with rebuilding what was left of his organisation; he would certainly not have spent the next 25 years writing articles about how badly he had been treated.
I don’t intend to list all of Cliff’s achievements here. Let me just mention two, which possibly outweigh the various alleged tactical misjudgements which Ted Crawford so painstakingly lists. Firstly, the Anti-Nazi League. As one who was politically active in the 1970s, I am quite convinced that this was the one time at which we did make a major impact on mainstream politics. After all, in many European countries the far right has grown much bigger than it ever did in Britain. If we don’t attribute this to the natural tolerance of the British racial character, then it can only be explained by the fact that the Nazis here were confronted, physically and politically. Sadly, the revolutionary left in France in the early 1980s did not do this, and Le Pen became a permanent fixture on the political stage. Of course, Cliff personally did not launch Rock Against Racism – but those who did, notably Roger Huddle and Dave Widgery, always acknowledged their debt to Cliff. (For the record, the ANL was not a ‘Popular Front’; a Popular Front is an alliance with the political representatives of sections of the bourgeoisie, for example, the French Radical Party. I think one student Conservative Association affiliated to the ANL, but otherwise there was no representation of bourgeois parties. Of course it wasn’t a classic united front either, it was a genuine innovation.)
Secondly, contrary to Al Richardson’s ill-informed assertion that the SWP’s ‘turnover … is proverbial’ Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no. 4, p. 245), the SWP has held together a group of experienced revolutionaries over a long period. I was recently at a meeting in Haringey where a comrade spoke of the IS-led campaign against council rent rises in 1967. To my knowledge, five of the comrades involved in that campaign are still in the SWP – three were in the room at the time. Many of the ‘veterans’ hailed in the pages of Revolutionary History spent much shorter periods in revolutionary organisations. The ability of the SWP to keep the loyalty of its membership owes much to Cliff’s principled but flexible approach to organisation and his hatred of all formalism.
If Jim Higgins and Ted Crawford want to see the real legacy of Tony Cliff, the organisation he built, I cordially invite them to attend the next Marxism. (Ray Challinor is already a regular attender and a much respected speaker.) Or do they not want the facts to get in the way of their prejudices?
Ted refers to the election campaigns of the late 1970s as ‘idiotic and adventurist’. This seems excessive – the campaigns were not successful, but they didn’t lead to any serious losses. Yes, we underestimated the strength of reformism – in Britain and in Portugal. But remember that not only the SWP, but also the Workers Revolutionary Party and the International Marxist Group contested elections in this period, so it was hardly a peculiarly Cliffite heresy. Indeed, one of the problems was that voters were sometimes faced with two or even three Trotskyist candidates on the same ballot paper; small wonder they chose none of them. Happily, the Socialist Alliance has learned from that experience.
Jim and Ted both claim Cliff was a bad judge of character, and invoke the spectre of Roger Rosewell. But all groups have their renegades. Cliff encouraged Rosewell, he was a gifted organiser, but when the break came Cliff’s epitaph was short and sweet: ‘Roger was a talented boy, but he had no guts.’ (Tina’s Café, Hackney Road, April 1974) More generally, Cliff’s errors of judgement sprang from an over-eagerness to encourage young comrades. It is, of course, far easier to sneer at enthusiasm than to nurture it, as Jim Higgins well knows.
I saw Cliff twice in the last three months of his life. Once was at the launch meeting of the London Socialist Alliance, when formerly hostile groups came together to share a platform. The other was at a rally at Wood Green to discuss the implications of the 1999 Seattle demonstration. Cliff was frail, and obviously very tired; some of the old fire had gone, but there was still tremendous enthusiasm that a new wave of struggle was emerging, albeit from a quarter not expected by Marxists.
Cliff could indeed be ruthless in defence of the organisation he had done so much to build. But we always knew he never demanded more of others than he gave himself. And he never forgot the moral and humane impulses that had made him a Socialist in the first place. Cliff was the most single-minded person I ever met – but he was also passionately devoted to his family, something of which his daughter Anna spoke movingly – and hilariously – at his funeral.
Cliff was the only person I ever met who had no taste for any kind of music whatever. I was therefore surprised to see him at a Skegness Rally with his head almost inside one of the loudspeakers. When I asked him if he liked the music, he replied: ‘It is my son in the band.’
And it wasn’t only his own family. In the early 1970s, it was reported to the Executive Committee that the Manchester organiser had knocked down a child in a road accident. There was much concern expressed by EC members (notably comrades Higgins and Protz) that the organiser might lose his driving licence and be unable to fulfil his duties. Only Cliff showed any concern about the well-being of the child.
Ian Birchall


Ted Crawford replies:
Jim Higgins can look after himself. Let me briefly reply to your criticisms of my appreciation of Cliff.
1. ‘… which possibly outweigh the various alleged tactical misjudgements which Ted Crawford so painstakingly lists.’ I like the word ‘painstakingly’. It suggests I have carefully looked at every jot and tittle. I have not. Some of these ‘alleged tactical misjudgements’ were rather important – for instance on the poll tax. But it is quite possible that I have misjudged Cliff, and that he could not swing the organisation on some of these issues – he was not a dictator – in which case my criticism stands as far as the SWP was concerned. Since it is not a monolith, there have always been political arguments within the SWP but ‘pas devant les enfants’. The opacity of the organisation means that disagreements among the leadership seldom surface outside a very narrow range of people, and most members may be blissfully unaware until the matter is all done and dusted – and sometimes not even then.
2. ‘I think one student Conservative Association affiliated to the ANL, but otherwise there was no representation of bourgeois parties. Of course it wasn’t a classic united front either, it was a genuine innovation.’ What I said was that these activities had ‘a considerable element of a Popular Front in them. Excellent in conception as many were, they have failed to take off, except to a minor extent with the Anti-Nazi League and that was the most Pop Front of the lot.’
I would maintain that the ANL had some Popular Front tendencies, but I never said that it was a fully-fledged Popular Front. But were there no Liberal Party branches or youth groups involved in it? There were vicars and individual liberals, of course.
3. ‘If … Ted Crawford wants to see the real legacy of Tony Cliff.’ Unlike Jim Higgins, I always attend Marxism to meet old friends, and have even been called to speak at meetings!
4. ‘Ted refers to the election campaigns of the late 1970s as “idiotic and adventurist”. This seems excessive – the campaigns were not successful, but they didn’t lead to any serious losses. Yes, we underestimated the strength of reformism … But remember that not only the SWP, but also the Workers Revolutionary Party and the International Marxist Group contested elections in this period, so it was hardly a peculiarly Cliffite heresy.’ So they did not lead to any ‘serious losses’ – by this I assume Ian means splits. Perhaps not, but there was an effect on the broad periphery, much of which thought that Cliff had lost the plot. But this is more difficult to measure. And to compare the SWP and put it on the same level as the IMG and WRP, which have both made a speciality of many types of idiocy and adventurism over a long period of time, scarcely seems a recommendation for the SWP’s and Cliff’s political judgement.
5. ‘Ted claims Cliff was a bad judge of character, and invokes the spectre of Roger Rosewell. But all groups have their renegades … Cliff’s epitaph was short and sweet: “Roger was a talented boy, but he had no guts.”’ Yes, all groups have their renegades but the IS/SWP has had very few. Most have moved to the soft left, a few are Labour MPs, the worst is a Blairite minister and/or a Lord. But Rosewell – Cliff’s Crown Prince – joined the hard right at the height of Thatcherism, and was a keen spokesman for its most criminal wing. And if Cliff thought that Rosewell had no guts (presumably for the struggle for Socialism) that shows his misjudgement. Rosewell was a ruthless, hard shit both personally and politically when in the old IS, and he remains so to this day – but on the other side.
But I have a lot of time for Cliff, and I do not believe that a totally uncritical stance enhances the man. In that I must disagree with Ian.
 



Andrei A. Zhdanov, secretary of the central committee of the Russian Communist Party, and J.V. Stalin’s front man on cultural and philosophical questions, departed this life in 1948, shortly after organising the suppression of the literary journal Leningrad. Among the journal’s crimes had been publishing the works of Anna Akhmatova, of which he said:
’These works can sow nothing but gloom, low spirits, pessimism, a desire to escape the vital problems of social life and turn away from the broad highway of social life and activity into a narrow little world of personal experiences. How can the upbringing of our young people be entrusted to her?’ [2]
But though the Russian bureaucracy’s answer to Mary Whitehouse has been dead thirty years, his ghost still walks when questions of Marxism, art and culture are discussed.
The Stalinist attempt to subordinate all literary and artistic activity to the political control of the state is still a living problem. It is this that explains why, in Russia, a writer of fiction like Solzhinitsyn can embody a political challenge which would be quite incompatible for one of his Western counterparts.
The easy response to the Stalinist domination of culture is the liberal response, a response calling on the magic concepts of individualism, spontaneity, ‘creative freedom’, etc. This has been the traditional response, not only of the right, but of much of the non-Stalinist left. It is also the response of Western Communist Parties trying to get rid of the bad name of Stalinism. Thus the Central Committee of the French CP proclaimed, in 1966, that
’... one should not, under any circumstances, limit the creator’s right to research ... the requirements of literature and art to experiment should not be denied or hampered, as such an attempt would do grave harm to the development of culture and indeed of the human mind.’ [3]
Now this was indeed a step forward for the French CP, which nineteen years earlier had let one of its leading intellectuals write of France’s most distinguished living novelist: ‘if Gide became disgusted with the Bolsheviks, it was because they were not pederasts.’ [4] But it is not nearly enough. In several countries in Western Europe, including Britain, we have today the possibility of non-Stalinist revolutionary organisations which will be, not sects, but parties, such parties will have to wage a prolonged and energetic ideological struggle. As well as the press which is central to party-building, they will have to turn out a flood of posters, cartoons, films, etc., They will have to relate to the cultural developments that have taken place independently of them, notably the recent resurgence of political theatre. And they will have to stand up to an ideological offensive from the forces of reaction, who are determined to reimpose ‘order’ by restoring orthodoxy in the content of education.
To face up to these tasks, they will need to look to a tradition which insists that literary and artistic activity have a vital role to play in the struggle for working-class power — a tradition which sees the separation of ‘art’ and ‘political propaganda’ as two incompatible species as meaning the impoverishment of politics as well as of art. And this means stopping looking over our shoulders for the spectre of Zhdanov, and discovering what is still alive and relevant in the traditions of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky.
’Art’ wrote Trotsky’, is one of the ways in which man finds his bearings in the world.’ [5] This apparently self-evident remark in fact lays the basis for a fundamental critique of accepted bourgeois ideas on art and literature. What it does is to deny that art is to be judged by its own standards; on the contrary it insists that artistic activity is one human activity among many, and can be judged only in comparison with the others. The bourgeois notion that there are such things as ‘literary’ standards, distinct from the moral, political or social, serves precisely to make literature harmless at the price of making it irrelevant. As the French Communist novelist Paul Nizan pointed out, conventional literary critics consider that an upper-class reception is a worthy subject for literature, but a strike is not. [6]
According to this mythology, when we read Proust’s account of the parasitic life-style of the pre-1914 aristocracy, we are engaging in an aesthetic experience – to question whether the decadent ponces who people Proust’s pages have any right to live like that is not so much churlish as plain irrelevant. On the other hand, a novelist who writes about a strike will find himself being accused of being ‘prejudiced’, of ‘dragging propaganda into literature,’ and so on.
The logic of ‘pure’ aesthetic values, free of any social considerations, is fascism. The aesthetic appreciation of a small elite is to be allowed to override any consideration of human well-being. Thus the Italian futurist Marinetti celebrated Mussolini’s invasion of Ethiopia with a manifesto which declared:
‘For twenty-seven years we futurists have disputed the idea that war is seen as anti-aesthetic ....war is beautiful, because thanks to gas-masks, to the terrifying megaphone, to the flame-thrower, to the little tanks, it founds the sovereignty of man on the subjugation of the machine. War is beautiful, because for the first time it brings into reality the dream of a man with a metallic body. War is beautiful, because it enriches a flowering meadow with the flaming orchids of machine-guns.’ [7]
A Marxist writer always starts from the perspective of the class struggle as a totality; he cannot permit himself the luxury of ‘pure’ art. Thus the playwright Bertolt Brecht, who perhaps more than any other writer has attempted to integrate Marxism into the very form of his work, never allows us to surrender to the illusion of the theatre, to the belief that what is on the stage is a self-contained reality and an end in itself. He constantly reminds us that the play is a human product, and that the problems presented in it have their solution outside the theatre.
Or again, the revolutionary novelist Victor Serge tells us in his Memoirs that for him literature is not something self-justifying, but rather a form of political action that is appropriate at some times and not at others. After years as a political journalist and activist, he found himself excluded from direct political action by his involvement with the Left Opposition. He comments:
‘I had renounced writing when I entered the Russian Revolution. Literature seemed quite a secondary matter — so far as I personally was concerned — in an age like this. My duty was dictated by history itself. Besides, whenever I did any writing, there was such a striking discrepancy between my sensibility and my opinions that I could actually write nothing of any value. Now that nearly ten years had rolled by, I felt sufficiently in tune with myself to write. I reflected that our own reactionary phase might be lengthy; the West, too, might be stabilized for years to come; and since I was refused the right to join the work of industrialization, except at the price of my freedom of opinion, I could (while remaining uncompromising as an Oppositionist forced into inactivity) provide a serviceable testimony on these time.’ [8]
In classic Marxist terminology literary and artistic activity are part of what is called the ‘superstructure’. Unfortunately, Marx’s Stalinist friends and his liberal enemies have combined to spread a deformed notion of what the term actually means. In this deformed version, it is assumed that there is an economic base consisting of the actual organisation of production in a given society, and a ‘superstructure’ which simply and passively reflects the economic realities underlying them. The political consequences are plain; if human consciousness just tags along behind economic reality, then how is the world to be changed — either by blind impersonal ‘historical laws’ or by some superior consciousness which somehow stands outside the superstructure (i.e. the all-wise, all-seeing party, its central committee or its general secretary).
Marx’s formulation is quite different. In the Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy he writes of ‘the legal, political religious, aesthetic or philosophic — in short, ideological forms in which men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out.’ [9] The last three words are crucial—the superstructure is not a mirror of reality, it is an arena of combat. Books, songs, posters, just like political organisations, are weapons in the war of classes. Both sides can use them, well or badly.
Now this notion of literature as a weapon in the class struggle is clearly a bit too red-blooded for some so-called Marxists. Thus, in the first issue of the journal of the Communist Party’s Literature Group, Red Letters, there was a review of Paul O’Flinn’s Them and Us in Literature [10] which begins:
‘The very title of this book indicates its crudity. For O’Flinn literature is a terrain in the class struggle in just the way that Fords Dagenham is. There’s “Them” (capitalists, reactionaries, bad guys) and they slog it out in the pages of English texts in much the same fashion as they do on the shop floor.’
Those of us who think that O’Flinn’s book is one of the most refreshing and concrete pieces of Marxist criticism for a long time are pleased to go on to read that Paul’s crudity is not just a personal defect, but ‘the cultural equivalent of the crass economism that dominates his favoured political organisation—the International Socialists’.
For Marx the class struggle was always paramount. He took a continuing interest in artistic — and especially literary — questions throughout his life precisely because he observed that they were an arena of the class struggle. And this, not because writers and artists had plunged into struggle on behalf of the oppressed, but because ‘capitalist production is hostile to certain branches of spiritual production, for example, art and poetry.’ [11]
Why? Because the whole dynamic of capitalist production is accumulation for accumulation’s sake, production for production’s sake. Any activity devoted to the ends of increasing human enjoyment or understanding runs counter to it. ‘The less you eat, drink and read books; the less you go to the theatre, the dance-hall, the public house; the less you think, love, theorise, sing, paint, fence, etc., the more you save – the greater becomes your treasure which neither moths nor dust will devour — your capital.’ [12]
As so often with Marx, his comments are even truer to-day than they were when he first made them. The offensive launched by Jim Callaghan and Shirley Williams to make education more responsive to the needs of ‘industry’ was based on exactly the same ideological presuppositions, playing off ‘production’ against the ‘aesthetic’. What it might mean in social democratic capitalist terms was summed up by Tribunite M.P. and Wedgwood Benn supporter Joe Ashton, in reply to a question on student grants:
‘Son, if I had my way, anybody studying how to produce a car or a TV set or a plane to beat the Japs and Germans would get £2,000 a year. The others passing their time on reading ancient Greek literature ought to get threepence a week.’ [13]
Of course capitalism sometimes turns artistic products into commodities — records, paperbacks, etc., But even here the logic of capitalist production is quite different from the logic of artistic production. Marx’s own example of ‘theatre directors who buy singers for a season not in order to have them sing, but so that they do not sing in a competitor’s theatre’ [14] could find a thousand parallels today, for example in the investors who buy famous paintings in order to hoard them where nobody can see them.
This hostility of capitalist society to art has been felt my many artists and critics since the mid-nineteenth century. For most the answer has been ‘art for art’s sake’, an escape into a world of artistic independence free from the pressures of any class. But for Marx the only alternative was the working class — and for him the working class was never an abstraction, always real, concrete horny-handed workers.
When Marx was a young man in Paris in 1844, he wrote a letter to Feuerbach, the German philosopher who had most influenced him, contrasting the high level of of philosophical discussion in the Paris working men’s clubs with the meaningless abstractions of German academic philosophy. [15] And in The Holy Family he scathingly attacked such idealists and elitists as Bauer, saying:
‘Were Criticism better acquainted with the movement of the lower classes of the people it would know that the extreme resistance that they have suffered from practical life is changing them every day. Modern prose and poetry emanating in England and France from the lower classes of the people would show it that the lower classes of the people know how to raise themselves spiritually even without being directly overshadowed by the Holy Ghost of Critical Criticism.’ [16]
Now it is a well-known fact that Marx and Engels were great admirers of the French novelist Balzac, and that Balzac, far from being sympathetic to the working class, was a highly reactionary Catholic monarchist who thought the Revolution of 1789 was the worst thing that had ever happened to France. But too much should not be made of this. We can always learn by studying the ideological productions of the enemy, and a novelist may speak more honestly than a politician or economist.
But Marx and Engels were always anxious to win writers to active support for the workers’ cause. In 1852 Marx wrote to the editor Joseph Weydemeyer, asking him to ‘compliment’ and ‘cajole’ the poet Freiligrath, in order to get him to write for the revolutionary press. [17] And in 1888 Engels wrote to an English novelist, Margaret Harkness, commenting on her novel of working class life, City Girl. His main criticism was that she had shown the working class ‘as a passive mass, unable to help itself and not even making any attempt at striving to help itself, whereas he asserts that ‘the rebellious reaction of the working class ... must therefore lay claim to a place in the domain of realism.’ [18]
This, of course, leads us into the question of ‘proletarian culture’. After the Russian Revolution a school of writers — the Organisation for Proletarian Culture, known as the ‘Proletcult’ — began to debate the questions of ‘proletarian culture’ and ‘proletarian literature’. Trotsky argued vigorously against them [19], saying that whereas the bourgeoisie had developed its own culture within feudalism for generations before taking political power, the proletariat had taken political power when it was still at a low cultural level. The main task in the period of proletarian power was for the working class to take over the cultural acquisitions of the past: Now clearly much that Trotsky has to say about the different historical evolution of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat is undeniable. But it is necessary to be extremely cautious about transferring Trotsky’s conclusions to the very different cultural and ideological conditions of the Western working class in the seventies. Anyone who believes that to be a ‘Trotskyist’ in cultural questions it is sufficient to repeat what Trotsky said in Russia in the early twenties should read a little article called The Struggle for Cultured Speech [20],where Trotsky argues about the vital task of stamping out swearing in the factories, and then ask themselves if this really forms part of the Trotskyist programme today.
Much more important than the rather sterile debate about ‘proletarian culture’ is the question of the relation of artistic activity to the building of the revolutionary party. In November 1905 Lenin wrote an article called Party Organisation and Party Literature in which he declared:
‘What is this principle of party literature? It is not simply that, for the socialist proletariat, literature cannot be a means of enriching individuals or groups; it cannot, in fact, be an individual undertaking, independent of the common cause of the proletariat. Down with non-partisan writers! Down with literary supermen! Literature must become part of the common cause of the proletariat, “a cog and a screw” of one single great Social-Democratic mechanism set in motion by the entire politically-conscious vanguard of the entire working class. Literature must become a component of organised, planned and integrated Social-Democratic Party work.’ [21]
Now this text was quoted by Zhdanov, and anti-Leninists have made great play of it to show the alleged continuity between Lenin and Stalinist cultural policy. Lenin’s defenders have tried to argue that the text doesn’t deal with so-called ‘creative’ literature at all, but this defence doesn’t stand up. Lenin was making no such distinction between Literature (with a capital L) and other forms of writing; fictional reportage was a common feature in the revolutionary press, and Lenin went to some trouble to get Gorky and other novelists to write for the party press.
But the real reason why Lenin’s text seems to have Stalinist overtones is because decades of Stalinism have corrupted our whole idea of what a party is. If a party is a one-way transmission belt bringing the wisdom of those who know (the Central Committee) down to those of us who don’t know, then all that Lenin could mean would be the issuing of Party directives telling writers how to write. But a revolutionary party is not like that. Joining the party is not an act of religious conversion, whereby one escapes from all one’s problems by abandoning one responsibility to the all-knowing party. It is a participation in a collective process in which one’s own thinking and initiative become more, not less important. An industrial militant who joins the party does not simply obey orders; the party’s programme and discipline provide a framework for him to work in, but his responsibility to translate that programme into the concrete needs of his workplace remains his and his alone. The analogy with the situation of the revolutionary writer is obvious.
The Stalinist tradition, on the other hand, offers two distinct and contrasting roles for the writer. On the one hand, there is the party hack, whose job it is to transmit party ideas faithfully. According to the official definition of ‘Socialist Realism’, the artist has to give ‘a truthful, historically concrete representation of reality in its revolutionary development.’ He has to take on ‘the task of ideological transformation and education of the working man in the spirit of Socialism.’ [22]
The alternative role is that of the Popular Front writer. For him the terms are much easier — a few anti-fascist declarations and carry on writing about sex, religion or whatever he made his name at. It’s much better if he doesn’t call himself a socialist — that way the platforms look ‘broader’. As Georg Lukacs, the major theorist of the Popular Front in literature put it:
‘Not everyone who looks for a solution to the social and ideological crisis of bourgeois society ... will be a professed socialist. It is enough that a writer takes socialism into account and does not reject it out of hand.’ [23]
What unites the definitions of these two roles is the underlying elitism. ‘Socialism’ is the already determined property of the party; there is no place for the imaginative contribution of the writer, no place for the writer who has broken with the bourgeoisie, but is still groping his way towards the proletariat.
The criticism of Zhdanovism, then, is not a criticism of form (that he tried to impose political ideas on literature) but one of content (that he did this in the name of anti-working-class politics). Speaking to the First Congress of Soviet Writers in 1934, Zhdanov declared that the task of Russian writers was:
‘... to struggle against all the remnants of bourgeois influence on the proletariat, against laxity, frivolity, idleness, petty-bourgeois indiscipline and individualism, greed and the lack of conscientiousness with regard to collective property.’
Jim Callaghan could hardly have put it better — make people work harder and stop them thieving from the state factories.
Zhdanov is asking writers to be the voices of a new class becoming conscious of itself. Because Trotsky never saw the bureaucracy as a ruling class, he did not pin down the role of Zhdanovism, and at times his criticism of Stalinist cultural policy lapses into such liberal declarations as ‘Spiritual creativeness demands freedom’. [24] But Trotsky was in essence very far from being a liberal, and in helping to found the International Federation of Independent Revolutionary Art [25] in 1938, he clearly recognised the need for a political organisation of writers.
If we are looking for a model of what the relationship between the party and the artist might look like, we could do no better than examine the relationship between Lenin and the novelist Gorky, author of The Mother and other proletarian novels. [26] Lenin shows enormous respect for Gorky as a writer, just because he recognises Gorky’s power to influence potential supporters of the movement. But this respect never takes the form of passive admiration; Lenin takes Gorky seriously, and therefore constantly argues and disagrees with him, always striving to persuade him of the correct political line.
The question of a satisfactory relation between the party and the writer is not a question of directives, but one of the political credibility of the party itself. When one of the most able political playwrights in Britain, David Mercer, can say ‘I have experienced a total crisis of conviction, not about social justice or political theory but about people. I am not afraid of revolution; I am afraid of revolutionaries’ [27], then our reaction should not simply be to gloat at Mercer’s erstwhile political colleagues, but to note a failure by the whole revolutionary left.
One more important question remains. If we argue for art and literature that is consciously committed to revolutionary politics, are we, as they say, ‘reducing literature to propaganda’?
Now as a digression it is interesting to note the way the work ‘propaganda’ is used in discussions of literature. If a writer seeks actively to persuade his readers of the desirability of a certain course of action, he will invariably be accused of ‘ propaganda’. Of ‘propaganda’, not of ‘advertising’. Now at first sight, it would seem that if you want to denigrate a piece of writing, just about the most pernicious thing you could compare it with would be advertising. Advertising seeks to persuade me to buy something I don’t really need so that someone else can make a profit, and it generally does it in a dishonest and manipulative way. Political propaganda is generally much more innocuous — I’ve never, for example, seen a leaflet that even remotely suggested that if I didn’t turn up on a demo then my virility would somehow be called into question. But, in the prevailing mythology, advertising is commercial, and so acceptable; propaganda is political and it isn’t. So it’s ‘propaganda’ that becomes the dirty word.
Nonetheless, there is a more serious point here. Any serious artistic production, poster or play, cartoon or novel, however committed, also contains an element of ambiguity. If the element of ambiguity is missing, the work will fail to persuade, because the ambiguity of art derives from the ambiguity of reality. As Tony Cliff writes, discussing the revival of Zhdanovism in the Chinese Cultural Revolution, ‘it demands a rejection of the validity of any artistic creation or tradition taken from the past, as these reflect the limitations of the individual. In “socialist realism” there are no Hamlets or Othellos — in the real world they are all too common.’ [28]
The ambiguities that run through all the best revolutionary socialist art derive from the ambiguities of reality. To take just two very obvious examples.
Firstly, the unevenness of working class consciousness. To align oneself with the historic role of the working class in no way bypasses the problem of the contradictions within the working class. Take two of the finest socialist novels ever written, Zola’s Germinal and Tressell’s Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists. Both draw a great deal of their power from the dramatisation of the relation between the committed socialist militant and the mass of workers; a relation that is not only problematic, but continually changing. Etienne Lantier in Germinal finds himself successively playing the roles of the isolated nutter, the orator winning wild applause, and the responsible leader trying to hold his supporters back from going too far. Or to take a more recent example, the Our Norman cartoon in Socialist Worker derived its strength from the erratic nature of the hero. One week Norman’s head was filled with reactionary junk from the television, the next week he seemed to have been reading the rest of Socialist Worker. The socialist realist hero Arnold had much better politics, but would have been a less successful vehicle for propaganda.
Secondly, the problem of ends and means. Revolutionary socialists accept that to achieve their ends they have to use highly unpleasant and brutal means. Revolutionary art will advocate the use of such means; what it must not do is to deny that the means are brutal, to suggest that the bullets won’t hurt and the blood won’t be real. As George Orwell points out in Inside the Whale, Auden’s poem Spain contains the line ‘The conscious acceptance of guilt in the necessary murder’. As Orwell comments, such a line could only be written by someone who has no experience of murder, by ‘the kind of person who is always somewhere else when the trigger is pulled.’
Perhaps the greatest example in socialist writing of the combination of commitment and ambiguity in a treatment of means and ends is the work of Brecht, a combination made all the more powerful by the fact that Brecht’s own politics, his willingness to accept Stalinist means, are very much open to question. To take a very simple example of Brecht’s approach, there is a short poem he wrote in 1931:



I hear that in New York
On the corner of Broadway and 26th Street
A man stands every evening during the winter months
and, by requests to passers-by, procures
beds for the night for the homeless who assemble there.
The world is not changed thereby,
the relations between men are not improved,
the age of exploitation is not shortened thereby.
But a few people have a bed for the night,
The wind is kept off them for one night,
the snow that would have fallen on them falls on the empty street.
Don’t put the book down, reader:
A few people have a bed for the night,
The wind is kept off them for one night,
The snow that would have fallen on them falls on the empty street.
But the world is not changed thereby,
the relations between men are not improved thereby,
the age of exploitation is not shortened thereby.



The poetic technique of simple inversion is almost childishly simple; but the point is clear. The poem is not impartial, objective or anything of the sort; it expresses outrage at the sort of society that generates poverty. The ambiguity lies in the problem of action, the dilemma of charity or politics, reform or revolution. Once again, Brecht knows which side he is on, but by taking the choice seriously he projects the responsibility on to the reader. Despite Zhdanov and despite the aesthetes, art can be a weapon in revolutionary struggle.

Notes
1. This is a revised version of a talk given to the IS Agitprop Conference in Manchester in September 1975.
2. Quoted in Craig (ed.), Marxists on Literature, Penguin 1975, p. 522.
3. Ibid., p. 528.
4. Jean Kanapa in Lettres Françaises, 20 November 1947.
5. Trotsky, On Literature and Art, Pathfinder 1970, p. 86.
6. P. Nizan, Pour une Nouvelle Culture, Grassee 1971, pp. 139–40.
7. Quoted in W. Benjamin, The Work of Art in the Epoch of its Technical Reproduceability.
8. V. Serge, Memoirs of a Revolutionary 1901–1941, OUP 1967, p. 262.
9. Marx & Engels, On Literature and Art, International General, New York 1974, p. 85.
10. Pluto Press 1975
11. Theories of Surplus Value, Lawrence & Wishart 1969, I, 285.
12. Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, Moscow 1961, p. 119
13. Labour Weekly, 16 January 1976.
14. Grundrisse, Penguin 1973, p. 282.
15. Letter quoted in L. Goldmann, Marxisme et Sciences Humaines, Gallimard 1970, p. 157.
16. The Holy Family, Moscow 1956, p. 181.
17. Marx & Engels, On Literature and Art, p. 122.
18. ibid., pp.115–6.
19. Literature and Revolution, Ann Arbor 1960, chapter VI.
20. Trotsky, Problems of Everyday Life, Monad Press 1973, p. 52.
21. Lenin, On Literature and Art, Moscow 1970, p. 23.
22. Quoted Slonim, Soviet Russian Literature, OUP 1967, pp. 160–61.
23. The Meaning of Contemporary Realism, Merlin 1962, p. 60.
24. The Revolution Betrayed, Merit 1965, p. 180.
25. Trotsky, On Literature and Art, pp. 115–121.
26. Cf. the collection, Lenin & Gorky, Letters, Reminiscences, Articles, Moscow 1973.
27. TV Times, 10 April, 1976.
28. Crisis in China, IS 29.
 






1978 must be a very bleak year to be a Maoist. China is praised by Margaret Thatcher while being denounced by the Albanian Party of Labour, hitherto its most loyal admirer. Chairman Hua has not only visited the long-reviled revisionist Tito, but has shaken the blood-stained hands of the Shah of Iran. Meanwhile at home the last remnantsof the Cultural Revolution are being mopped up; in an operation cynically described by Economist (9 September) as ‘Bullock-in-reverse’ the revolutionary committees established in the heady days of 1968 are being dissolved into new management committees.



* * *
Things were not always so. Back in the late 1960s the Cultural Revolution was putting millions of people on to the streets (It wasn’t always clear what they were on the streets for, but they were certainly there). In a Britain faced with the familiar combination of an impotent and rightward-moving Labour Government and a temporarily dormant working class, China looked like a beacon of revolutionary hope.
Slogans like ‘Getting rid of the stale and taking in the fresh’ were an inspiration to thousands of youth and students in Western Europe who occupied the Colleges and marched against the Vietnam war.
At the time the International Socialists (predecessors of the Socialist Workers Party) took quite a lot of criticism for their failure to share in the general euphoria about China. We were accused of ‘economism’ (only being interested in narrow trade-union issues) and of expecting the rest of the world to wait for the workers of Europe to wake up. (One critic went so far as to suggest we change our name to ‘national socialists’ because of our failure to recognise the Chinese achievement).
As it happened we were right, as ten years of fading illusions – from Chinese support for American foreign policy to the gaoling of those who originally inspired the Cultural Revolution – have shown. In itself, this is nothing to crow about. If China had been the socialist paradise and the storm centre of world revolution, then we should all have been a lot better off than we are today. And being right wins no prizes for revolutionaries; there are so many sell-outs around that predicting them isn’t exactly difficult.
There would be little credit, say, in having predicted Jack Jones’ capitulation five years before everyone else – unless that prediction was linked to the building of independent organisation that could fight the sell-out.
What does matter is what went wrong and why. I have enormous sympathy with those who are bored to the teeth with the debate about whether Russia/China/Albania/Outer Mongolia is state capitalist or a degenerated workers’ state. Few discussions have produced more metaphysical hair-splitting and historical trivia. But the debate cannot be evaded, for it concerns our very goal and purpose – socialism.
I recall a heated argument with an Egyptian comrade about whether or not socialism existed in his country. Finally he declared: ‘It all depends on what you mean by socialism’. He was right, of course. When we ask ‘Is China socialist?’ the important question is not about China, but about socialism. And if socialism is all about the self-emancipation of the working-class, and the democratic control of society by those who actually do the work, then China is not, and was never under Mao on the road to socialism.
The Chinese working class played little or no part in the Revolution of 1949. The Chinese Communist Party had a very small worker membership (less than 2 per cent) and the military defeat of the Kuomintang took place essentially in the countryside. As the People’s Liberation Army approached the great Southern cities, a proclamation was issued stating ‘it is hoped that workers and employees in all trades will continue to work and that business will operate as usual.’
In general the Chinese working class was very ill-organised at this time; the trade union movement hardly existed as a result of repression by the Kuomintang and the Japanese occupying forces. None the less many workers were encouraged by Mao’s victory into taking strike action; the role of the Communist Party was to get them back to work as quickly as possible.
Why this obsession with the industrial working class? China, after all, is an agricultural country and the vast mass of the population are peasants. True the Chinese working class was only a small part of the population, but this was true also of Russia in 1917, and there the working-class lead was decisive. Moreover, the Chinese working class had waged in the 1920s a series of epic struggles for their self-emancipation.
The Maoist strategy of peasant revolution was a response to the defeat of these struggles. Furthermore, the Chinese Communist Party was not based on the mass involvement of poor peasants; over the years it had changed its line on land reform, and zigzagged between rich and poor peasants.
Traditionally Marxists have argued that working class is the agent of socialism because in its experience of collective production it discovers the need for collective solutions to society’s problems. Every battle by workers, from the smallest picket line to the greatest strike, can be fought and won collectively or not at all. Land can be divided into individual plots, but a factory can only be collectively appropriated.
So if the workers are not the subject of the revolution, whatever collectivisation (nationalisation, etc.) takes place will be geared to the interests of the minority which ends up controlling the state rather than to the emancipation of those who actually work.
So if we look at what happened to Chinese workers after the Revolution of 1949 we shall not be surprised to find that it was productivity rather than workers’ rights which dominated. The right to strike was replaced by compulsory arbitration, backed up by a labour code dealing with absenteeism, lateness, poor workmanship etc. Every worker had to carry a labour-book containing his previous record. Piecework – a traditional capitalist method of maximising exploitation – became widespread. Output norms were raised and emulation drives organised.
The Chinese Communist leaders explicitly denied that China was ruled by the dictatorship of the proletariat; the country was said to be in the power of a class alliance. Yet at the same time they denied the need for autonomous organisation by workers. The trade unions were defined as having the following purpose:
“To strengthen the unity of the working class, to consolidate the alliance of workers and peasants, to educate workers to observe consciously the laws and decrees of the State, and labour discipline, to strive for the development of production, for the constant increase in labour productivity, for the fulfilment and overfulfilment of the production plans of the State.”
Behind the rhetoric China remains a deeply unequal society. The Cultural Revolution led to a shake-up among those in positions of authority – that was what it was all about. But it did not lead to any radical change in the relation between classes in Chinese society. Power remained in the hands of a small bureaucratic elite, and as a result the fundamental inequalities – between town and city dwellers, between workers and managers, between skilled and unskilled workers – persisted.
A German journalist who visited a Commune after the Cultural Revolution recounts:
“There are ten categories of payment. A strong man at the height of his power is in the first category, which means he gets ten points for every working day, no matter how much work he actually does. An unmarried woman gets seven; a married woman who has to care for her family gets six and a half.”
When he questioned this he was told:
“But a married woman devotes much of her working energy to her family ... Those are individual chores. Should the collective have to pay for work not done in the service of the collective?” (K. Mehnert, China Today, London 1972, pp. 52–3)
The fact of big differentials between living standards in town and country accounts for the desire of many Chinese country-dwellers (despite the myths of the revolutionary peasantry and the Communes) to move into the towns. The regime cannot permit this, so ‘socialist’ China imposes its own immigration controls with strict police supervision to prevent unauthorised persons entering the cities.
A society based on inequality and population control cannot be a democratic one. There is not, and has never been, any Chinese equivalent to the Soviets or workers’ councils that flourished all too briefly in Russia after the Revolution. The façade of mass participation during the Cultural Revolution disguised the fact that there were no structures for taking effective concrete decisions about how production was organised. Indeed, in 1967 the All-China Trade Union Federation was simply dissolved – hardly an indication of the viability or autonomy of that body.
The Chinese workers and peasants have no say in the real decisions about the society they live in. Top party leaders are purged and disgraced; Lin Piao – named in the draft Party constitution as Mao’s successor – was accused after his death of plotting against Mao. Similar accusations were heaped on the ‘gang of four’.
Now in any workers’ state there could be disputes among political leaders, and even the necessity to remove some leaders. But this would be done politically, with the differences argued openly and publicly, not with grotesque accusations that reveal the Party bosses’ contempt for the masses. Likewise, the Chinese masses were never consulted as to whether they wanted to support the crushing of a left-wing rising in Ceylon, or to welcome Richard Nixon while the bombs were falling on Vietnam.
Many sympathisers with China will admit these points, and yet claim that the Chinese leaders are doing the best they can, given the backward state they started from. Certainly the Chinese economy faces terrible problems, and the responsibility lies fairly and squarely with the imperialist powers – including Britain – who plundered China in the past.
The Chinese Communist Party can take credit for an impressive effort in the direction of modernisation and industrialisation. But this effort can be compared to that of those capitalists who industrialised Europe in the nineteenth century – a historic achievement, but nothing to do with socialism.
As revolutionary socialists in Britain we do not hesitate to demand equal pay for women and an end to immigration controls. To accept that something less is good enough for our brothers and sisters in China is – however unconscious it may be – an acceptance of the logic of imperialism, a willingness to concede that the third-rate it good enough for the Third World. But there is no Third World – there is one world system, and it is rotten ripe for socialism. Together, we and he workers of China can achieve it; a precondition is to rid ourselves of illusions.
* * *
Those interested in pursuing the arguments in this article further should read Nigel Harris’s new book The Mandate of Heaven, Quartet £3.00, a Bookmarx Club choice.
 



French workers face another five years of right-wing rule after the legislative elections on 12 March. In the first round of the elections, on 12 March, the Left narrowly led with just under half the popular vote. But in the second round the ruling right-wing majority romped home.
This dramatic turn around was partly a result of the rigged electoral system, which converted the right’s one per cent voting lead in the second round into a 90-seat majority. The revolutionary daily paper Rouge calculated that a left-wing MP needed 69,230 votes to be elected, while a right-winger needed only 52,345 to win.
The elections are also a defeat for the Union of the Left formed by the Communist and Socialist parties in 1972. The trade union leaders refused to defend jobs and living standards in the hope of a left-wing victory at the polls. They will now face heavy pressure from their rank and file to organise a real fight-back. Many militants are looking ahead to the ‘third round’ – the trade union struggle against wage cuts and unemployment.
IAN BIRCHALL and PHIL SPENCER give the background to the defeat and the struggles that will follow.
* * *




Organisations of the French left
Unions
CGT: Confédération Genérale du Travail (General Confederation of Labour)
CFDT: Confédération Française Démocratique du Travail (French Democratic Confederation of Labour)
FO: Force Ouvrière (Workers’ Strength)
Parties, etc.
PSU: Parti Socialiste Unifie (Unified Socialist Party)
CIR: Convention des Institutions Republicaines (Convention of Republican Institutions)
CERES: Centre d’Études, de Recherches et d’Éducation Socialistes (Centre for Socialist Study, Research and Education)
LCR: Ligue Communiste Révolutionnaire (Revolutionary Communist League)
LO: Lutte Ouvrière (Workers’ Struggle)
OCT: Organisation Communiste des Travailleurs (Communist Organisation of Workers)
CCA: Comités Communistes pour l’Autogestion (Communist Committees for Self-Management)
PCR: Parti Communiste Révolutionnaire (Revolutionary Communist Party)
CC: Combat Communiste (Communist Fight)
PCF: Parti Communiste Française (French Communist Party)
PS: Parti Socialiste (Socialist Party)



* * *

Union of the Left
The day after the Common Programme was signed by the Communist and Socialist Parties in 1972, François Mitterrand told a Congress of the Socialist International in Vienna:
‘Our fundamental objective role is to rebuild a great Socialist Party on the ground occupied by the CP itself – to demonstrate that of the 5,000,000 Communist voters 3,000,000 can vote Socialist.’
Though Mitterrand’s ambition has not yet been achieved, the Socialist Party is several per cent ahead of the Communist Party – a startling change from the early 1970s. It is important to understand the relation between the bases of the two parties in order to understand the continuing rivalry between them.
Though the CP has not held governmental office since 1947, it has maintained a mass base, and is an overwhelmingly proletarian party. At its 1976 Congress it had 491,000 members and the figure must now be well over half a million.
Of these, industrial workers make up 60 per cent of the total, and white-collar workers another 18 per cent. The Party has some eight thousand workplace cells. Its real base lies in its organisation in the CGT and in heavy industry.
It is important to remember that union power in the factories involves extensive influence. For example, the factory committee at Renault Billancourt has over two hundred salaried employees. This is a powerful lever of influence in the hands of whichever union controls. The CP also has a massive base in local government, with 1,400 mayors and 21,000 local councillors.
 
Isolation
But though the CP built its base in the long years of political isolation in the 1950s and 1960s it has renewed its membership considerably. At its most recent national conference, 58 per cent of the delegates joined the Party since May 1968. This shows the Party’s continuing ability to grow; it also shows that a large part of the membership must have joined the CP knowing it not to be revolutionary. Another sign of the increasingly social-democratic nature of the party is the fact that the daily sales of the CP paper L’Humanité is around 160,000, local dailies perhaps amount to as many again, but there are still many members who do not buy, let alone sell, the Party organ.
The Socialist Party is in effect a creation of the 1970s. The old Socialist Party of Guy Mollett, discredited by such crimes as the 1956 Suez invasion, support of torture in Algeria, etc. etc. was a parliamentary rump, as was shown by Gaston Defferre’s derisory result in the 1969 Presidential election.
But in 1971 the old Socialist Party merged with the CIR (Mitterrand’s organisation), and began to present itself as something quite new. The fact that Mitterrand himself had never been in the old Socialist Party was a great help.
The SP is less monolithic than the CP, and therefore more able to be all things to all persons. Its success depends upon being able to expand into three areas simultaneously: the CP’s traditional working class base; middle class sections who distrust the CP; and the post-1968 political left whom the CP would regard as ‘ultra-left’.
 
Doubled
Starting with 80,000 members in 1971, the SP had more or less doubled the number four years later. The SP has a relatively low percentage of industrial workers in its membership, perhaps between 5 and 10 per cent.
Its activists are predominantly white-collar and supervisory workers, and teachers. But the SP has worked hard to extend its trade union influence; in 1971 it had only 54 workplace groups; by 1976 it had over 700. But in terms of voters the SP’s working class penetration has equalled the CP’s.
An opinion poll of March 1976 showed that 36 per cent of industrial workers would vote Socialist and only 34 per cent Communist. Perhaps more alarming for the CP was the fact that in the age group 25-34, the SP was getting 38 per cent of voters, as against 25 per cent for the CP.
At the same time the SP is able to appeal to the new salary earning middle class in a way that the CP would not be able to. Indeed, the SP has been able to get the support of some layers of management and employers.
Last year some CFDT militants were disciplined for having allegedly produced a poster which showed a boss sitting on a worker’s shoulders, and captioned ‘Like your boss, join the SP’.
Thirdly, the SP is less monolithic than the CP even if is not more democratic. It therefore finds it easier to co-opt leftists and ex-leftists.
Many of its activists have been won from the PSU, which following 1968 had a leftist reputation. Michel Rocard, a skilful demagogue who was for several years in the leadership of the PSU, is now in the SP’s top ranks, and is widely tipped as Mitterrand’s successor.
Many SP activists belong to the organised left faction known as the CERES. The CERES – in many ways like the Tribune left in Britain – plays Mitterrand’s game neatly, by giving the SP a left face, but always lining up with the leadership when there are real difficulties.
The rapid rise of the Socialist Party provoked the bitter row which split the Union of the Left last September.
Under the leadership of Georges Marchais, the Communist Party has in recent years been trying to shed its Stalinist past and present itself as a moderate, reformist party. The difficulty was that the Socialists have, as we have seen, proved to be more successful at this game than the CP.
 
Abrupt
So last autumn Marchais performed an abrupt about turn. He demanded a renegotiation of the Common Programme, in particular to extend the list of nationalisations proposed by the left in 1972.
Mitterrand rejected this proposal and the Union of the Left split, entering the first round of the elections without any agreement to support each other in the crucial run-off on 19 March.
Behind the split lay the Communists’ fear of a repeat of 1947. At the end of the Second World War a coalition government was formed including both the Communists and the Socialists. The CP launched a ‘battle for production’ to prop up French capitalism.
Maurice Thorez, the general secretary of the PCF, told striking carworkers and miners: ‘We must all work harder, for the nation’. But once the Communists had done their job and contained working-class militancy, their socialist coalition partners turned on them and booted them out of the government.
The CP is only now emerging again from the political wilderness and is desperate to prevent another fiasco like 1947.
* * *

Revolutionary Left
May 1968 established the revolutionary left as part of the French political spectrum. Both in electoral terms, and in the context of the general ideological debate, revolutionary organisations are taken more seriously than they are in Britain.
Since 1968, the line-up on the revolutionary left has changed. The Maoists are less important now than they were in the early seventies, though one group, the PCR, produces a not unreadable daily paper. Various other Maoist splinters exist, and at least one has called for a vote for the right-wing parties as a blow against ‘social imperialism’.
Of the Trotskyist groups the most significant are the LCR (French section of the Fourth International), and Lutte Ouvrière.
Numerically the LCR is probably biggest. At its 1977 Congress it had 2,600 members, with another four or five thousand organised sympathisers. However, despite efforts, it has still not wholly broken out of the student milieu in which it made its first gains ten years ago.
Statistics presented to the 1977 Congress showed only 13 per cent of the members were industrial workers, against 22 per cent of students and 20 per cent teachers. 56 per cent of the members were under the age of 26.
Lutte Ouvrière has a much more solid proletarian base, giving far more priority to systematic work in the major factories. The price of this is a rigid organisation which restricts entry to those willing to accept the toughest definition of a revolutionary cadre.
Side by side with this workerist routinism, LO engages in what is often imaginative propaganda work, for example its successful fêtes held each year at Whitsuntide. The highly successful campaign of Arlette Laguiller for the Presidency in 1974 (winning nearly 600,000 votes) seems to have led to an excessive degree of importance being attached to electoral work, as well as a miniature ‘personality cult’ of Arlette herself.
 
Impossible
The paradox is that LO’s organisational approach makes it virtually impossible to use such propaganda campaigns as a means of building the organisation.
Somewhere between Trotskyism and Maoism lies the OCT, which originated from a split in the LCR, under the influence of the ideas of the Italian group Avanguardia Operaia, and subsequently expanded by various splinters from the PSU. The OCT in some ways avoids the weaknesses of both the LCR and LO, through its orientation to what is called the ‘workers’ and popular left’, i.e. the broad layer open to revolutionary ideas.
This should lead the OCT to a rank and file perspective; unfortunately it all too often drifts towards populism or spontaneism. At its worst this can mean irrelevances like the attempt to build a mass campaign against direct elections to the European Parliament.
Despite continuing splits to left and right, the PSU still exists, but its ambiguous attitude towards the Union of the Left probably disqualifies it from any serious intervention. Many other smaller groups exist; for instance Combat Communiste, which broke from Lutte Ouvrière on the basis of its ‘state capitalist’ analysis of Russia.
 
Clear
CC has a very clear analysis of the limits of the Left Union; while its size disqualifies it from any immediate impact, its ideas may be of some influence.
The LCR and OCT, together with a ‘pro-self-management’ tendency which split from the PSU called the CCA, are running a joint electoral platform. LO, which last year joined LCR and OCT in the municipal campaign, has refused to join, arguing that the platform does not clearly enough point to the limits of the Left Union.
While LO are probably right to see a rightist danger, especially in the LCR’s strategy of united front with the reformists, the LO platform stops short at saying that workers must fight their own battles, but without indicating the organisational or political means required.
But the most serious criticism of the whole revolutionary left is that over the last couple of years it has debated its strategy rather than taking any initiatives. No revolutionary group, for example, has made any serious attempt to organise the large numbers, of young unemployed in France.
In the post-electoral period, whatever the result, it will be the revolutionary left’s capacity to take initiatives that will determine whether it has any chance of winning a section of workers from the grip of reformism. There are, unfortunately, good reasons for doubting the potential of all the existing groups to do this.
For this reason the period after March 1978 may well see the beginning of a period of splits and regroupment.
* * *

The Trade Unions
If a Left Government in France is to succeed in reforming French capitalism without provoking a working-class upsurge, then the role of the trade union bureaucracy will be crucial. In some form or other, the Left Government will need a ‘social contract’.
However, for organisational and ideological reasons, such a ‘social contract’ will necessarily take a rather different form from the British experience.
The French trade union movement is deeply divided. The two major federations are the CGT and the CFDT. (Force Ouvrière, created in 1947 by American money and manipulation, is becoming less and less important; and there are a number of other splinters).
One result of the division is the relatively low level of union membership, probably around 20-25 per cent of the labour force. But the unions can often get support from non-unionised workers for specific actions like one-day stoppages. The French unions receive financial subsidies from the state.
It is a tradition of French trade unionism going back to the first years of the century that the unions are not affiliated to political parties, and that parties do not organise politically in the unions.
For example, Georges Seguy, general secretary of the CGT, was recently widely attacked for publicly calling for electoral support for the Communist Party, even though he made clear that he was not doing so in his official union capacity.
This apolitical attitude has two sides to it. On the one hand, the absence of formal ties means that the ‘don’t rock the boat’ attitude of Labour Party trade unionists is less widespread. It will be far easier to argue that the unions should stay independent of the state.
Yet at the same time the apolitical status of the unions is used time and again by the bureaucrats to ban any attempt at the organisation of political tendencies inside the unions, making the task of revolutionaries, and even of militants seeking some form of rank and file organisation far harder.
The CGT remains the largest federation, with probably over two million members, and its main strength in the traditional sectors of French, industry. Since the end of World War Two it has been under the effective political control of the French Communist Party.
The internal regime has been bureaucratic to the core, and dissidents, especially members of revolutionary organisations, have been regularly expelled. This still happens today, although is some places the balance of forces is no longer favourable to the bureaucracy.
In some recent factory elections, the CGT has been losing ground to the CFDT, though it still keeps its absolute predominance. The CFDT originated at the end of the First World War as a Catholic union, but since 1964 has had no formal Christian links.
 
Reputation
In 1968 it acquired a reputation as being to the left of the CGT (largely because, being smaller, it could take up demagogic left positions without having to bear the responsibility). It has subsequently grown faster than the CGT, and now has over a million members.
While formally unpolitical, its leadership has developed close links with the Socialist Party, and the Socialists clearly see it as an important counterweight to the CP’s control of the CGT.
In the early seventies the CFDT has a reputation for being more open and democratic than the CGT, but over the last couple of years there has been a witchhunt of leftists in the union, accused of being ‘cuckoos’ in the union’s nest.
Since, the defeat of the post office strike in late 1974, both CGT and CFDT have largely played the role of restraining struggle, with the unspoken aim of stressing their responsibility and moderation in the pre-election period.
Where they do launch actions, they are generally token one-day stoppages, with no more than a publicity value – and increasingly demoralising the membership.
 



IAN Patterson (International Socialism 97) is absolutely right to urge us to read Brecht’s poems. But his references to Brecht’s politics are, to say the least, misleading. Brecht, he tells us, was ‘revolutionary socialist’, who polemicised against the ‘Stalinist Lukacs’. Unfortunately, the record shows that Brecht was just as much a Stalinist as ever Lukacs was. When Brecht wrote that ‘hatred, even against baseness, distorts the features’, he was not indulging in comfortable abstract moralising about cracking eggs to make omelettes; he was justifying his own support for the crushing of the POUM, the Moscow Trials, and all the other obscenities of Stalinism. One of his best-known plays. The Life of Galileo, was written in explicit support of the Moscow Trials. Nor was he simply confused or misled. His friend, Walter Benjamin, tells us that Brecht was reading the writings of Trotsky in 1938. But he opted for Stalin.
If Brecht chose Stalinism, it was from a sense that all means were legitimate in the fact of fascism, and because he saw no viable alternative. It was a choice that many of the best working-class militants of his generation also made. It is the clarity and honesty with which Brecht describes his own choice that makes his poems and plays valuable for revolutionaries today; by understanding the mistakes he made, we can learn to avoid making similar mistakes ourselves.
Brecht today is a fashionable figure. The semioticians, sociologists of literature and theatrical trendies are quite happy with a cleaned up Brecht, reduced to the abstractions of theory and technique. The real historical Brecht was covered in dirt and bloodstains; for revolutionary readers this cannot and must not be forgotten.
 



Jean-Jacques Marie
Lénine
Balland, Paris 2004, pp. 504, Є25
TO write the biography of Lenin today is no easy task. To the intrinsic difficulties of the task are added the problems of the post-Stalinist era, in which Lenin has been abandoned by most of his erstwhile friends, but become a chosen target for those who wish to use the collapse of Stalinism to vilify the whole revolutionary tradition.
Jean-Jacques Marie is well placed to take on the task. Author of a monumental study of Stalin (reviewed in Revolutionary History, Volume 8, no. 3), he is an established scholar of Russian history and a long-standing activist in the Trotskyist movement. His new study of Lenin offers a wealth of information that will be of interest to all those concerned to study the strengths and weaknesses of Bolshevism free from the myths which have so often distorted it. Yet he has only been partially successful.
The main attraction of biography for readers is the way that it studies the interplay of public and private. But there is little private here – Lenin was a peculiarly single-minded individual, lacking the broad cultural perspectives to be found in the writings of Marx, Engels or Trotsky. Many years ago, Tamara Deutscher published a little book (Not by Politics Alone, Allen & Unwin, 1973) subtitled The Other Lenin. Unfortunately the book revealed quite clearly that there was no other Lenin. The revolution was his life. As Marie points out, he had comrades, but not friends. (p. 33)
The brief affair with Inessa Armand is related, though it seems to have been singularly uneventful. Politics intervened here, tragically. When she was taken ill in 1920, Lenin had her sent off to a sanatorium in an area which his officials assured him was safe. In fact cholera was rampant, and poor Armand died of her cure. (pp. 342–3) Doubtless this reinforced Lenin in his zeal against ‘Communist lying’ which preoccupied his last years. Lenin was apparently also capable of mildly sexist mother-in-law jokes: ‘The worst punishment for a bigamist is having two mothers-in-law.’ (p. 58)
Most interestingly, Marie claims that Lenin regretted the fact that he had no children (p. 15), and that in 1912 he attempted to adopt Zinoviev’s son. Zinoviev refused (p. 139). The child was later killed by Stalin; Marie speculates that if the boy had been Lenin’s adoptive son, Stalin might have spared him. But the point should be noted by those ultra-Bolsheviks who argue that committed revolutionaries should not be parents.
Lenin’s appreciation of aesthetic matters was also limited. In 1921, when he was, very reluctantly, having his portrait painted, Lenin commented that art had a certain propaganda value, but when that was exhausted, ‘we shall abolish it as useless’. (p. 388) Marie stresses that he was joking. But it does cast some doubt on the value of compiling collections such as Lenin on Literature and Art.
But Marie’s main aim is a more polemical one, to challenge the ‘dark or rosy legends’ (p. 13) that have accreted around Lenin’s name. Even before Stalinism turned Lenin into a quasi-religious figure whose thought could not be studied critically, Zinoviev had already begun to develop the Lenin cult.
Marie gives many examples of Stalinist falsification. Thus a Russian biography of Lenin tells us that at the January 1912 conference ‘the overwhelming majority of delegates were workers’. In fact there were just 14 full delegates, two of whom were agents provocateurs. (p. 133) Lenin is said to have always been suspicious of the police agent Malinowski, who was a member of the Bolshevik Central Committee. Actually Lenin was rather more gullible than some of his comrades. (p. 134)
Trotskyist myths are also challenged. For obvious reasons, Trotskyists, on the defensive against Stalinism, have always played down to the point of non-existence the differences between Lenin and Trotsky after 1917. As Marie shows, there was in fact considerable friction between the two men.
But Marie also defends Lenin against the virulent attacks of such as Stéphane Courtois, Solzhenitsyn and Volkogonov who seek to make Lenin responsible for the worst excesses of Stalinism, and therefore to show the revolutionary project as evil and dangerous from its very inception. Thus he takes up, and decisively dismisses, the old, old story that Lenin was a paid agent of the Germans when he travelled in the sealed train. (pp. 175–8).
In particular, he challenges the way in which Lenin’s critics, using quotations out of context, seek to depict him as a bloodthirsty brute. As he has little difficulty in demonstrating, the worst brutality was on the side of the Bolsheviks’ opponents. In the bitter conditions of civil war, there was no alternative to the utmost ruthlessness.
But he also points out that Lenin was prone to the use of exaggerated language. Often his demands that people be shot were pure rhetoric; nobody in fact was executed. Lenin often faced a situation when all too many officials were inert or soft, and he was driven to the most frightful exhortations in order to try to get some action out of them. (pp. 269, 320)
A Lenin stripped of myths is clearly a much more interesting figure. After all, if he never made any mistakes, it’s not very easy to learn from him. (‘Don’t invade Poland’ is quite a good motto for any future revolutionary leader.) Rather than the evil conspirator or the serene ‘great leader’, Marie shows us a Lenin who, in 1917 and after, was often unsure of where he was going, and had constantly to revise his perspectives. Since this is the situation most of us are in most of the time, it makes it easier to see Lenin as a ‘companion in struggle’ rather than as a Great Teacher.
Thus Marie shows that Lenin briefly advocated an insurrection in August 1917, before recognising that it would have been a disastrous folly. (p. 192) Or later, although it was Lenin who persuaded the party to accept the New Economic Policy, he was actually a late convert to the idea – in fact, in Marie’s view he should have advocated it much earlier. (p. 373)
A comrade recently put to me the argument that although Lenin was adept at changing his mind when confronted with changed circumstances, often quite rightly, he failed to make any self-criticism of his earlier positions, and thus made it harder for future generations to learn from him. There is some truth in this, but I suspect the basic reason is that Lenin never dreamed that his writings would be turned into scripture by his self-appointed followers.
Marie reveals the contradictions in Lenin’s view of religion. Before 1905, he was particularly keen for the party to work among members of religious sects, believing they provided a fruitful area of activity (pp. 81, 87). But a few years later he broke the agreement that the party press should be philosophically neutral in order to attack the ‘God builders’. In 1921, he intervened to prevent the slogan ‘Denounce religion as a lie’ being used on May Day. (p. 383) Pravda warned comrades not to offend the feelings of religious believers – something that might be noted by the veil-snatching wing of the French left. Yet at the same time he was helping to organise the expropriation of church property. (pp. 404–6) In short there is no ‘Leninist line’ on the question of religion; the argument remains open.
Marie’s work is thus a useful contribution to the development of a genuinely critical approach to Lenin and Bolshevism. Unfortunately, the book has also a number of weaknesses.
Firstly – and this may be the fault of the publisher rather than of Marie himself – it is distinctly unhelpful to anyone who wants to pursue his arguments and discoveries. There is no bibliography; references are given to the fifth Russian edition of the Works, often with no indication of the particular work or letter being cited, making it virtually impossible for non-Russian speakers to check out the arguments. The absence of an index makes it difficult to trace the many minor figures who flit in and out of the narrative; yet a grasp of the evolution of such individuals is vital to an understanding of how Lenin related to his party, his periphery and his opponents.
More seriously, the balance of the material presented is often questionable. It is understandable that Marie is anxious to present new material rather than tell the more familiar bits of the story. But while Lenin was a master of small-group manoeuvres, the real lessons come from the times when he interacted with the mass movement. Thus it is unfortunate that Marie devotes only two or three pages to the daily Pravda of 1912, with much more emphasis on petty disputes than on the experience of mass agitation. (pp. 138–41)
Similarly the account of 1905 is disappointing. The main point Marie makes here is that Lenin made a number of mistakes – delay in returning to Russia, wrongly estimating the rôle of the soviets, seeking unity with the Mensheviks – and that he learned to do better in 1917. (pp. 117–18) Doubtless true, but there is much more positive that could be said, in particular Lenin’s revision of his view of the nature and tasks of the revolutionary party.
Indeed, the account of events after 1917 is unremittingly gloomy. Marie describes in powerful detail the savagery of the civil war, famine, disease and corruption, and the relentless growth of bureaucracy, so that even before Lenin’s last illness his party was being taken over by young members who would prepare the way for Stalinism. In 1920, even the highest food ration was less than it was to be in Stalin’s gulag. (p. 350) Marie even goes so far as to claim that 1917 never actually smashed the state, and that the old state apparatus fused with the new Soviet state. (p. 296)
All this is doubtless true. These were grim years. But the other side of the picture scarcely makes an appearance. The soviets, erratic and short-lived as they were, did leave a vision of democracy that went far beyond that of the parliamentary pigsty. Legal reforms, notably in the area of the family and women’s rights, made a real change. The expansion of education and the new cultural initiatives transformed the lives of thousands. Despite the bungling and triumphalism of Comintern functionaries, the revolution did offer millions of workers throughout the world a new hope. Marie’s picture contrasts sharply with that to be found, say, in the writings of Victor Serge. The suffering and the corruption are all there in Serge, but so too is a powerful sense that despite everything, the whole enterprise was supremely worthwhile.
Indeed, Marie seems positively reluctant to draw political lessons. (There is an interesting, if hypercritical, account of Marie’s book in relation to the politics of his organisation, the Parti des travailleurs, at http://socialisme.free.fr/cps15_lenine.htm, the website of the followers of Stéphane Just, expelled from Pierre Lambert’s PCI in 1984.) Tony Cliff’s Lenin has been criticised for always drawing contemporary lessons from his account of Lenin. But for Cliff the past was always a tool for making the future. Marie has produced an important work of scholarship, but it is only raw material for the biography of Lenin that we need.
 



This year’s centenary of the birth of Jean-Paul Sartre will be
an ambiguous affair. [1] In France, and even in Britain, there will
be academic conferences and articles in the more intellectually
inclined papers and magazines. But enthusiasm will be distinctly
restrained. As Lenin pointed out long ago, the bourgeoisie tries to
convert dead revolutionaries into ‘harmless icons’. [2] But
Sartre – like Lenin himself – remains resistant to conversion. It
is scarcely possible to deny that he was both a great writer and an
important philosopher, but his political commitment still sticks in
the throats of our rulers and their intellectual errand-boys.
His steadfast opposition to French colonialism in Algeria and
American imperialism in Vietnam has all too many echoes for today’s
occupation of Iraq. His insistence on the unity of theory and
practice is anathema to the postmodernists, for whom the rejection of
the ‘unitary subject’ provides the ideal alibi for intellectual
and political inconsistency. Even on the socialist left some will try
to prove their political virility by stressing their differences with
Sartre rather than what they have in common. [3] So we can expect
tributes to Sartre to be qualified with quibbles about his role
during the German Occupation [4], and above all with the claim that
he was a supporter of Russian Stalinism.
Back in the 1950s and 1960s things looked very different. For
those of us who discovered Sartre in the aftermath of the political
crises of 1956 (Suez and Hungary), his plays and novels reflected on
the one hand alienation and the loneliness of individual freedom, on
the other a demand for responsibility, commitment and action. It was
a potent combination at a moment when the old certainties of
Stalinist Marxism had crumbled forever, and a new left was still
struggling to be born. In France Sartre’s opposition to the
Algerian War made him a hero for those campaigning against the war,
many of whom went on to be leaders of the student revolt in 1968. In
the 1960s Sartre and Bertrand Russell, the two most renowned living
philosophers, albeit from very different traditions, came together to
oppose the Vietnam War. They inspired many thousands of young people
who joined the anti-war movement, and in May 1968 Sartre backed the
insurgent French students from the very first day. In the aftermath
of 1968, when he sold banned socialist newspapers on the streets to
defy the state [5] and addressed a meeting outside the Renault car
factory, he seemed to embody the hope that Marxist theory and
revolutionary practice were coming together for the first time since
the 1920s.
 
Sartre’s century
Even the French so called ‘new philosopher’ Bernard-Henri
Lévy, hostile to Sartre’s politics, calls the 20th century
Sartre’s century. [6] He was born in the year of the Russian ‘dress
rehearsal’ revolution of 1905 into a bourgeois family; one of his
earliest political memories was of the Russian Revolution of 1917. He
died just before the rise of Solidarnosc in Poland in 1980. His
lifetime covers the historical epoch stretching from the birth of
Leninism to the death of Stalinism. Sartre witnessed the great events
of his lifetime, commented on most of them, and took part in a number
of them. He lived through a period marked by violence and social upheaval.
He had a successful academic career in the inter-war years,
studying in Berlin in 1933–1934, but scarcely seeming to notice the
Nazi regime. He was then best known for his novel, Nausea
(1938). In 1940 he was taken prisoner by the German army, and spent
time in a prisoner of war camp, where he wrote his first play. Later
he returned to France and briefly attempted to organise a resistance
grouping, Socialism and Liberty. In 1943 he published his first major
philosophical work, Being and Nothingness.
After the war he became famous with several plays and novels; he
launched the monthly journal Les Temps modernes, which was
intended to publish political and literary material from an
independent left standpoint. He was involved in the launch of the
RDR, a movement that stood for a socialism independent of both
Washington and Moscow. When this collapsed, Sartre moved for a time
very close to the French Communist Party (PCF), though he preserved
his political independence. But in 1956 he violently denounced the
Russian invasion of Hungary, and broke his links with the PCF. In
1964 he refused the Nobel Prize.
The years 1939–1962, in which most of Sartre’s major work was
produced, were a period of almost uninterrupted violent conflict for
his native land. The German Occupation gave way almost immediately to
national liberation struggles, first in Indochina, then in Algeria.
The centrality of violence in Sartre’s work cannot be detached from
this context. The question of racism, a central issue in the politics
of the 20th century, was of great importance to Sartre. His 1946 book
Anti-Semite and Jew attempted to give a psychological and
political explanation of anti-Semitism.
But if it is clear that Sartre’s work is deeply rooted in the
events of his own time, is he relevant to the 21st century? For most
of his life Sartre believed that the solution to the problems of
humanity must consist in some sort of socialist reorganisation of
society. For those who believe that the very idea of socialism is
obsolete, Sartre’s work can have little value other than as purely
aesthetic documents. Many would be only too glad to let Sartre’s
corpse fester under the ruins of the Berlin Wall. But for those of us
who believe that socialism – stripped of the monstrous deformations
of Stalinism – still offers hope to humanity, Sartre’s work
belongs not just to the 20th century, but also to the 21st.
 
Existentialism
Sartre first became famous – or notorious – as the
representative of the philosophy of existentialism. He did not choose
the label; it was imposed on him. He was often caricatured as being a
pessimistic philosopher, a gloomy figure who dwelt on the most
squalid and miserable aspects of human existence. And some of his
statements seem to justify such criticism. His novel, Nausea,
depicts a young writer confronted by the absurdity of existence, the
realisation that in a godless universe nothing has any meaning. It
contains the statement: ‘Every existing thing is born without
reason, prolongs itself out of weakness, and dies by chance.’ [7]
Sartre’s attack on conventional moral values and his defence of
the oppressed made him a natural enemy for those on the political
right. In the 1950s the young Jean-Marie Le Pen declared that ‘France
is ruled by homosexuals: Sartre, Camus, Mauriac’. [8] Sartre’s
main philosophical work, Being and Nothingness, is several
hundred pages long and frequently obscure, and it is not altogether
surprising that Sartre’s philosophy was often misunderstood.
However, some sections convey their message vividly, notably the
section on what Sartre called ‘bad faith’ (the strategies we
adopt to evade responsibility for our own freedom), with its
portraits, almost like short stories, of the café waiter and the
woman unsure how to respond to her lover’s advances.
A closer study of Sartre’s thought makes it clear that what
characterises it above all is a vigorous and indeed scandalous
optimism. Sartre acknowledged this in his 1945 lecture
Existentialism and Humanism, saying of his critics:
Their excessive protests [against existentialism] make me
suspect that what is annoying them is not so much our pessimism but,
much more likely, our optimism ... What is alarming in the doctrine
... is ... that it confronts man with a possibility of choice. [9]
The most fundamental assertion of Sartrean philosophy is that we
are condemned to be free – free in all circumstances. Even with a
gun held against my head, I can choose to resist – and die. Since
we are free, we make the world – there are no external obstacles
other than those we determine by the choice of our own projects. We
are responsible for the world as it is – and free to make it other
if we so choose. For Sartre there is no human nature: human society
is something quite independent of the laws of nature. Hence society
does not have to be as it is; it is possible to change the world.
Each of us is free to accept or reject our condition in the world;
even if we fail, we are always free to rebel. The laws of the economy
are quite different from meteorological laws, since they result from
human choice. There is no such thing as an ‘economic climate’.
Thus in Being and Nothingness Sartre argues that
‘destruction is an essentially human thing and ... it is man who
destroys his cities through the agency of earthquakes’. [10]
Earthquakes are a human creation. If there were no human beings, an
earthquake would be a purely meaningless movement of matter. It
becomes a catastrophe only when it comes up against the human project
of building a city. Sartre’s point is very relevant to the recent
tsunami. This was not a simple ‘natural disaster’ or an ‘act of
god’; the disaster was very largely the product of poverty,
inadequate precautions and the fact that warning systems were too expensive.
The central theme of all Sartre’s work is the question of the
unity of theory and practice. Sartre’s whole philosophy is geared
to the fact of human action; it centres on the question of values,
and hence is a highly moral philosophy, even though Sartre disavows
any kind of conventional moralising. This sets him firmly in
opposition to postmodernism, which is based on a quite willing
disjunction of theory and practice, leading to a fatalistic attitude
towards both knowledge and action.
This concern for the unity of theory and practice led Sartre to
become less interested in pure philosophy or pure literature, and
more directly interested in political questions. For Sartre writing
was not an activity separate from other human practices that could be
judged only by its own standards. In 1964 he caused great
consternation when he stated in an interview that ‘alongside a
dying child, Nausea does not make the weight’. [11] That he
should put Third World starvation and a novel in the same scales
seemed outrageous to many people. But such a comparison is central to
Sartre’s whole worldview.
 
Sartre and Marxism
Sartre’s concern with political action brought him into dialogue
with Marxism. This was not only a dialogue with the intellectuals of
the French Communist Party such as Roger Garaudy and Jean Kanapa, but
also with a number of independent anti-Stalinist Marxists such as
Pierre Naville, Claude Lefort and Daniel Guèrin. [12]
In 1960 Sartre published the Critique of Dialectical Reason,
in which he proposed to reconcile existentialism with Marxism. It is
a very long and difficult work; perhaps if Sartre had been less
famous, his publisher might have sent him away to cut it to half the
length, which might have been a great improvement. He never completed
the second volume, and he certainly failed to resolve all the
theoretical questions he had posed. But it does contain some very
illuminating passages, notably the section on the bus queue and the
storming of the Bastille discussed below.
For me, the question of whether Sartre was a Marxist does not seem
very important – indeed, such questions easily become almost
theological. What is important are the questions that Sartre asks
about Marxism, the challenges he puts to Marxists. (In general Sartre
is more interesting for the questions he asks than for the answers he
gives.) Certainly in the period after 1956, when many Communist
intellectuals in France and elsewhere broke with Stalinism and
started looking for ways to renew Marxism, Sartre made an important
contribution to the rebirth of Marxism as a critical and radical
method of thought rather than a sterile dogmatism.
For Sartre one of the most important questions was the place of
the individual human being in the Marxist explanation of the
historical process. This had long been a preoccupation of Sartre, but
it acquired additional relevance in the crisis of Marxism after 1956.
In 1956 the Russian leader Khrushchev had given his so called ‘secret
speech’ in which he denounced the crimes of Stalin. But
Khrushchev’s account was very much a psychological account. It is
undoubtedly true that Stalin was an extremely unpleasant and brutal
person – what Khrushchev did not and could not explain was why such
an unpleasant individual had become all-powerful in a so called
workers’ state.
In the introduction to the Critique of Dialectical Reason
Sartre discussed Marxist literary criticism and the ways in which
Marxist critics had analysed the French poet Valéry. As he put it,
‘Valéry is a petty bourgeois intellectual, no doubt about it. But
not every petty bourgeois intellectual is Valéry.’ [13] It is
important to point out that Sartre was not innovating here, but
rather reviving a current in Marxism which had been suppressed by
Stalinism. At the time of the rise of Hitler Leon Trotsky had
written, ‘Not every exasperated petty bourgeois could have become
Hitler, but an article of Hitler is lodged in every exasperated petty
bourgeois.’ [14]
By raising the question of the role of the individual in Marxism,
Sartre asked important questions for political practice which had
been neglected in the classic Marxist tradition. Marx argued that
class struggle was the motor of history; Lenin contended that a
revolutionary party was necessary for the conquest of state power.
But neither of them posed the existential question ‘Why should I
join, why should I get involved?’
Sartre thus came into conflict with the deterministic philosophy
that was current in the French Communist Party. In a polemic against
Sartre, Roger Garaudy wrote a passage in which he denied that he
exercised any free choice, or that he had any responsibility for his
own actions:
I AM A COMMUNIST WITHOUT ANGUISH. First of all because I
didn’t choose to be a Communist. I didn’t choose it because it is
not for me to deny the reality of the internal contradictions of
capitalism, of its crises and of the class struggle which is the
motor of its development. Since the day when the analyses of Capital
taught me the dialectic of history, I have found myself faced by a
compelling force. And at no moment have I the choice between Marxism
and those who deny it. I should gladly say, as Luther did to his
judges: ‘Here I stand: I can do no other.’ [15]
That Garaudy himself began as an orthodox Communist, became a
dissident Communist, then a Christian and finally a Muslim shows that
the explanation of individual conduct through historical laws is not
so easy.
Here again Sartre was not saying anything new. Rather he was
counterposing the genuine Marxist tradition to the crude determinism
of the Stalinist tradition. He quoted with approval the position
argued by Engels that ‘men make their own history, but in a given
environment by which they are conditioned’. [16]
Sartre developed his view that we are not the products of our
circumstances, but that we choose ourselves within our given
circumstances, in various biographical studies. Jean Genet was born
illegitimate, abandoned at birth and farmed out to a peasant family;
he soon found himself in a juvenile penal colony. He might have
seemed condemned to a life of crime on the margins of society;
instead he became one of the finest writers of his generation. Sartre
attempted to resolve this enigma in his book Saint Genet
(1952). Later he spent many years on a biographical study of the 19th
century novelist Flaubert, designed to develop in concrete fashion
the themes of the Critique of Dialectical Reason. Flaubert was
born into the middle class, yet instead of becoming a doctor or
lawyer like other members of his family he became a writer. Sartre
traces this back to his childhood slowness in learning to read. Yet
at the same time he analyses what it meant to choose to be a writer
at this time, examining ideas of literature in the post-Romantic
period. Sartre never completed the study, The Family Idiot,
but he provided a fascinating example of what biographical writing
involved. (He was, incidentally, strongly influenced by Isaac
Deutscher’s biography of Trotsky.)
Sartre’s concern for the role of the individual led him to
confront the question of morality. In 1947–1948 he wrote a
manuscript of over 600 pages on the question. He never completed it
to his satisfaction, and it was published only after his death. Here
he argues that the question of morality cannot be evaded: if we
attempt to exclude it from our analyses, it returns in one way or
another. As Sartre points out, the PCF had a private and a public
doctrine. In the manuals of Marxist theory capitalists acted
according to immutable historical and economic laws, but in the pages
of the party’s daily newspaper, L’Humanité, employers
were described as ‘wicked’. [17] At the same time Sartre insists
that morality is not autonomous, that it is impossible to impose
universal moral standards in a world in which human beings live in a
situation of gross inequality. It would only be possible to have a
real morality in a world where all human beings found themselves in
an equal situation; in the meantime the most important moral
imperative is to change the world.
The question of morality is therefore tied up with the question of
history. In his discussion of ends and means, Sartre rejected the
idea, held by some Marxists, that history has a pre-given end, which
it is possible to know, and towards which the historical process is
making its way. For Sartre there is no pre-given end to history –
how history develops will depend on human action and human choice.
Thus he wrote during the Second World War, ‘Tomorrow, after my
death, some men may decide to establish fascism, and the others may
be so cowardly or so slack as to let them do so. If so, fascism will
then be the truth of man, and so much the worse for us. In reality,
things will be such as men have decided they shall be.’ [18]
Today it is very clear that not only can we not talk about an
inevitable future, we do not have any certainty that, in human terms,
there will be a future at all. In his last play, Altona,
Sartre gave a vision of the world in the 30th century, when humanity
had disappeared and the only beings able to judge the history of
humanity were a court of crabs. Sartre was thinking of nuclear war,
but the crabs could well be swimming in the waters that will have
overwhelmed our cities after centuries of global warming.
Here again, Sartre stands in the classic Marxist tradition, the
tradition of Karl Marx, who wrote that each stage of the class
struggle leads either to a new and higher form of society, or to the
‘common ruin of the contending classes’. [19] As Rosa Luxemburg
put it, ‘socialism or barbarism’.
Sartre was also very much concerned with the question of
collective action. In his play In Camera three people are
brought together in a hotel room – a Latin American radical
journalist, a snooty upper class woman who has killed her baby and an
aggressively working class lesbian (the true heroine of the play).
Slowly they realise that they are all dead, and that they only have
each other to give meaning to their past existence. The play contains
what is perhaps the best known quotation from Sartre: ‘Hell is
other people.’ [20] But Sartre does not argue that human beings are
inevitably in conflict with each other and that collective action is
impossible. He notes the fact that it is very difficult to achieve.
This puts him in opposition to the rhetoric of the PCF in the 1940s
and 1950s, which presented the working class as an already formed
collective which could be counted on to act in a united and cohesive
fashion, a collective generally seen as identical with the Communist
Party or the trade unions under its control, a rhetoric which
announced that, for example, ‘the working class will not permit’
certain policies.
In the Critique of Dialectical Reason Sartre argued that
human groups could take two different forms. On the one hand there
was seriality, of which he gave the example of the bus queue. [21] In
the bus queue a number of human beings come together in the same
physical space. They share the same objective – to get on the bus.
But because of scarcity – there are not enough places – each of
them opposes the interests of the others, each is an obstacle to the
aims of the others. But sometimes seriality is replaced by the ‘fused
group’. Here the example is the crowd storming the Bastille. [22]
Again human beings come together in the same physical space to pursue
the same aim. But this time, rather than each being an obstacle to
the other, nobody can achieve their aim without the assistance of the
others. I cannot storm the Bastille on my own.
 
Sartre, Stalinism and political action
Sartre did not content himself with merely confronting Marxism on
the theoretical level. From 1945 onwards he made a consistent effort
to involve himself in political activity that was compatible with his principles.
Many of Sartre’s critics have attempted to discredit him by
claiming he was naive about Stalinism or even corrupted by it. The
recent study of Sartre by the former Maoist Bernard-Henri Lévy is
based on total rejection of Communism in its very essence – ‘it
was revolution as such which was perverse and criminal’. For Lévy
Communism is ‘that Sartrean passion, the object of his desire for
at least 30 years’. [23] The actual story of Sartre’s relations
with the USSR, the PCF and Communism is rather more complicated. He
made mistakes, some of which deserve vigorous criticism. But they
were mistakes made amid the difficulties of a multifaceted historical
period, and Sartre’s motivation was rather more complex than is
often suggested.
At the Liberation Sartre did not as yet see himself as a Marxist,
but he certainly used many ideas borrowed from Marxism. In October
1945 he decided to launch Les Temps modernes as a journal of
the independent left. Sartre was quite happy to co-operate with the
PCF, while at the same time maintaining a dialogue with other
Marxists and socialists. He recognised that the majority of French
workers felt an allegiance to the Communist Party, and considered
that the USSR, whatever its weaknesses, still at least aspired
towards socialism.
The PCF, however, saw Sartre’s popularity as a threat to its own
hegemony, especially over intellectuals and students. A flood of
books and articles were published to denounce Sartre and
existentialism. Roger Garaudy wrote a book about Sartre and others
entitled Gravediggers of Literature (1947). Sartre responded,
‘Gravediggers are honest people, certainly unionised, perhaps
Communists. I’d rather be a gravedigger than a lackey.’ [24] He
was attacked by name by Stalin’s cultural policeman Zhdanov, and
Les Temps modernes was condemned by the same figure for
publishing the decadent work of Jean Genet. In 1952 complaints were
made at a meeting of the PCF Political Bureau that factory libraries
(run by factory committees controlled by the PCF-led CGT union
federation) were ordering a book by Sartre. [25]
As the PCF attack got stronger Sartre began more and more to
stress his independence of both Washington and Moscow. In 1948 he wrote:
It would be strange if I were accused in New York of
anti-Americanism at the very moment when in Moscow Pravda is
denouncing me as an agent of American propaganda. If that did happen,
however, it would show one of two things – either that I am indeed
unhandy at my job, or that I am on the right track. [26]
In 1948, at the time of the Communist take-over in Czechoslovakia
and the Berlin blockade, Sartre joined with the former Trotskyist
David Rousset, and various other activists from the social
democratic, non-Communist and Trotskyist left to form the
Rassemblement démocratique révolutionnaire (Revolutionary
Democratic Assembly) (RDR). Its founding statement in February 1948
stressed independence of both blocs:
Between the rottenness of capitalist democracy, the
weaknesses and defects of a certain social democracy and the
limitation of Communism to its Stalinist form, we believe an assembly
of free men for revolutionary democracy is capable of giving new life
to the principles of freedom and human dignity by binding them to the
struggle for social revolution.
As Sartre put it in December 1948, ‘To refuse to choose between
the USSR and the US does not mean yielding first to the one, then to
the other, letting ourselves be tossed about between them. It means
making a positive choice: that of Europe, socialism and ourselves.’ [27]
Initially the RDR seemed to have great potential, with large
meetings and many enthusiastic supporters. [28] But the bureaucracies
of the Socialist Party and the PCF succeeded in preventing its
further expansion. Then Rousset and other leaders moved more and more
towards a pro-American position. By the autumn of 1949 it had collapsed.
Rousset then launched a campaign against the labour camps in the
USSR. Sartre’s position on this question is often misrepresented.
Sartre did not deny the existence of the camps, as some PCF members
did. Les Temps Modernes published several articles, including
one by Victor Serge, about the Russian camps. In an editorial in
January 1950 Sartre and his fellow editor Merleau-Ponty declared:
There is no socialism when one out of every 20 citizens
is in a camp ... Two years ago one of us wrote here that Soviet
society is ambiguous, and that both signs of progress and symptoms of
retrogression are found in it. If there are 10 million concentration
camp inmates – while at the other end of the Soviet hierarchy
salaries and standard of living are 15 to 20 times higher than those
of free workers – then quantity changes into quality. The whole
system swerves and changes meaning; and in spite of nationalisation
of the means of production, and even though private exploitation of
man by man and unemployment are impossible in the USSR, we wonder
what reasons we still have to speak of socialism in relation to it. [29]
However, Sartre refused to associate himself with Rousset’s
campaign because the latter had launched it in a right wing newspaper
– Le Figaro Littéraire – and refused to condemn
repressive regimes in the Western bloc, such as Greece and Spain.
However, Sartre now seems to have despaired of the possibility of
an independent left. He later claimed that before 1968 ‘there was
nothing to the left of the PCF’. [30] In fact his own writings show
that this was untrue. In the 1950s Sartre polemicised against Ernest
Mandel, Claude Lefort and Pierre Naville [31]; he was certainly aware
of the existence of the Fourth International and of the Socialisme
ou barbarie grouping which argued that Russia was state capitalist.
In 1952, when the government was taking repressive measures
against the PCF at the time of mass demonstrations against General
Ridgway, the new head of NATO, Sartre announced his ‘agreement with
the Communists on certain precise and limited subjects, reasoning
from my principles and not from theirs’. [32] For four years Sartre
became – almost – the model fellow traveller. But his motivation
was not the totalitarian mentality which Bernard-Henri Lévy
attributes to him, but a much more complex set of tactical considerations.
Firstly, as he had put it in 1947, ‘The majority of the
proletariat, strait-jacketed by a single party, encircled by a
propaganda which isolates it, forms a closed society without doors or
windows. There is only one way of access, a very narrow one, the
Communist Party.’ [33] The crucial fact about the Communist Party
for Sartre was not its doctrine nor its link to Russia, but the fact
that it had the votes of some 5 million workers and, through the CGT
union federation, led the best organised section of the working
class. And secondly Sartre’s alignment with the USSR was motivated
by Karl Liebknecht’s principle that for revolutionaries ‘the main
enemy is at home’. In a world divided into warring blocs, both of
them guilty of aggression, brutality and repression, Sartre insisted
that his first priority was to attack the crimes committed on his own side.
It is undoubtedly true that Sartre, especially between 1952 and
1956, defended the indefensible in Russian society. In particular he
published five articles in Libération in which he took a
naively uncritical view of Russian society and made some appallingly
dishonest claims about the freedom of criticism permitted there. [34]
However, it should be added that Sartre’s concessions to Stalinism
were relatively small in comparison to those of some of his
contemporaries. He never wrote anything comparable to Brecht’s
defence of the Moscow Trials. [35] British writers like Raymond
Williams, Eric Hobsbawm [36] and Edward Thompson [37], who made an
enormous contribution to Marxist understanding were, before 1956, far
more deeply implicated with Stalinism than Sartre ever was. In fact
his alliance with the PCF was short-lived. In 1956 Sartre denounced
the Russian intervention in Hungary, saying that socialism ‘is not
brought at bayonet point’. [38] But he denied the right of
criticism to those who had backed US imperialism in Guatemala in
1954, or who supported the Franco-British invasion of Egypt taking
place at that very moment.
But even before this break with the PCF Sartre’s position had
sharply diverged from that of the Communists over the war in Algeria.
As early as 1955 Les Temps modernes committed itself to a
course of opposition to the war that would soon run up against the
limits of legality. In October of that year an editorial statement
appeared under the title Refusal to Obey. This described
Algeria as a ‘colony’ (rejecting the official fiction that it was
an integral part of France) subject to ‘the most obvious
exploitation’. It went on: ‘A war is starting in North Africa; it
is up to the government whether to stop it, or, on the contrary, to
make it inevitable ... To this war, we say no.’ At this time almost
the only active campaigning against the war was coming from a handful
of anarchists and Trotskyists. [39] In 1956 the PCF voted in favour
of ‘special powers’ for the government to deal with the situation
in Algeria.
Over the next few years, Sartre’s consistent anti-imperialism,
and his courage and outspokenness in the service of Algerian
independence, were an inspiration to a new generation who had been
radicalised by Algeria, and who were repelled by the role played by
the traditional left in the PCF and the SFIO. In September 1960
Sartre was one of the most prominent signatories of the celebrated
Manifesto of the 121, drafted by Maurice Blanchot and Maurice
Nadeau. (Nadeau had been a Trotskyist in the 1930s and 1940s and
close to surrealist circles.) The statement declared:
We respect and consider justified the refusal to take
arms against the Algerian people. We respect and consider justified
the actions of those French people who regard it as their duty to
offer assistance and protection to Algerians oppressed in the name of
the French people.
The PCF did not support the Manifesto. But it was signed by
Alfred Rosmer, a veteran opponent of the First World War, the
surrealist André Breton, the historian and anti-imperialist
campaigner Daniel Guèrin and others from the non-Stalinist left.
In 1968 Sartre, siding with the students against the authorities
from the very outset, denounced the PCF for its attitude, which he
said was not revolutionary and not even reformist. [40] His position
on Russia also became much firmer. After the Russian invasion of
Czechoslovakia he spoke of ‘Soviet imperialism’ [41], while
saying that it followed different laws to US imperialism. He argued
that ‘it is impossible to reach socialism by starting from
Stalinism, for one will never reach anything except something whose
instrument has been Stalinism’. [42] In 1973, Sartre developed the
argument further by claiming that there was nothing specifically
socialist about nationalisation. If an enterprise was nationalised
while the capitalist structure was preserved, then what resulted was
‘state capitalism’. [43]
This was scarcely a man who worshipped Stalin or who was
essentially a totalitarian.
 
Sartre, violence and resistance
One of Sartre’s most important articles is called To Write
for One’s Own Age. [44] The strength of Sartre’s work is that
it is rooted in the problems of his own age, and it is therefore
dangerous to try and argue what Sartre would have thought of the very
different world in which we live. Yet such speculation may have some
value. Sartre lived through an age of violence, and much of his
thought revolved around the question of violence. So it may be
interesting to enquire what Sartre might have thought of the war
against terrorism in our own day.
Sartre is often seen as an apologist for violence and terrorism.
Many of his critics recall his visit to Andreas Baader of the
armed German group, the Red Army Faction, in 1974. But Baader
scarcely felt that Sartre was a supporter. He commented, ‘I thought
I was dealing with a friend but they sent me a judge.’ [45]
Sartre observed that throughout the course of history the holders
of power and privilege have not lightly abandoned their positions,
and that it has almost invariably been the case that they had to be
violently removed. Human history is, whether we like it or not, the
history of violence, and our present ills and privileges are rooted
in violence. Hence in Algeria, and later in Vietnam, he refused to
equate the violence of the oppressed with that of the oppressors. As
he wrote:
During the Algerian war I always refused to make a
parallel between the terrorist use of bombs, the only weapon
available to the Algerians, and the actions and extortions of a rich
army of half a million, which occupied the entire country. It’s the
same in Vietnam. [46]
The text often quoted to show Sartre’s support for violence is
his preface to Fanon’s The Wretched of the Earth. The
language is angry and at times provocative, but time and again Sartre
repeats the point that the violence of the national liberation
struggle is a product of, a response to, the existing violence of colonialism:
For at first it is not their violence, it is ours, which
turns back on itself and rends them ... It is the moment of the
boomerang, it is the third phase of violence; it comes back on us, it
strikes us, and we do not realise any more than we did the other
times that it’s we that have launched it. We have sown the wind: he
[the peasant fighter] is the whirlwind ... If violence began this
very evening and if exploitation and oppression had never existed on
the earth, perhaps the slogans of non-violence might end the quarrel ... [47]
Sartre was first practically confronted with the questions of
violence and terrorism during the German occupation of France. The
PCF, like the Iraqi resistance today, had a policy of killing as many
occupying soldiers as possible. Often the PCF was in fact sending its
own members to a certain death, so there is a close parallel with
suicide bombers. Moreover, the Nazis executed hostages in response to
attacks by the French Resistance. Sartre commented in 1944 that when
he wrote The Flies, ‘the real drama, the drama I should have
liked to write, was that of the terrorist who by ambushing Germans
becomes the instrument for the execution of 50 hostages’. [48]
Though Sartre saw the necessity for armed resistance, he was not
entirely happy about the means advocated by the PCF.
One of the philosophical questions that preoccupied Sartre
throughout his life was that of ends and means. His most extensive
consideration of the problem occurs in the incomplete manuscript on
morality from 1948. Here he was heavily influenced by a reading of
Trotsky’s short book Their Morals and Ours, where Trotsky
rejects the formulation that the end justifies the means in favour of
an argument that there is a dialectical interrelation between ends
and means. Sartre’s formulation was very close to Trotsky’s. [49]
As he put it later, ‘We are of those who say: the end justifies the
means; adding, however, this indispensable corrective: these means
define the end.’ [50]
So, for Sartre, the question exists on two levels. On one level
the violence of the oppressed may be justified by the greater
violence of the oppressor. But there is also the second question: the
effectiveness of terrorist methods in achieving the goal of a more
just society. Such a distinction is very relevant to today’s war on terror.
Sartre’s work does not give us a doctrine or a strategy in face
of today’s world. No organised political tendency can claim his
legacy. But in studying Sartre we see a man facing the problems of
his own age, a man grappling with the question of freedom and
responsibility, of morality and politics, of violence, of the
possibility of collective action. The way in which he asked the
questions may help those who are still seeking answers.
Note on reading
The main themes of Sartre’s work come across most powerfully in
his plays and novels. The best plays to read (or see if possible) are
The Flies (in which Sartre uses a Greek myth to condemn the
Nazi occupation), In Camera (where three dead souls form an
eternal triangle), The Respectful Prostitute (for which Sartre
was criticised for suggesting that there might be racism in the US!),
Dirty Hands (a political drama based on the assassination of
Trotsky), Lucifer and the Lord (a moral and political allegory
set in 16th century Germany), and Nekrassov (a satire of the
right wing press which still rings true today). There is a collection
of short stories entitled Intimacy (also published under the
title The Wall) in which The Wall (on the Spanish Civil
War) and Childhood of a Leader (on how a middle class
adolescent becomes a fascist) are particularly interesting. The three
novels of the Roads to Freedom trilogy (The Age of Reason,
The Reprieve and Iron in the Soul) give a fascinating
picture of France before and during the outbreak of the Second World
War, where a group of individuals are caught up by the historical
process and have to remake their lives.
Sartre’s major philosophical works tend to be very long and very
difficult. Sartre’s 1945 lecture Existentialism and Humanism
contains many oversimplifications, but is a useful introduction. It
also contains a confrontation with the Trotskyist Pierre Naville (who
organised the founding conference of the Fourth International).
Anti-Semite and Jew is a lucid and thought-provoking study of
the roots of racism. While the Critique of Dialectical Reason
is hard going, the opening section, published separately in English
as The Problem of Method, is fairly readable and introduces a
number of key problems.
Note that many of Sartre’s works have been published or
performed in English under several different titles. There are
various political articles and extracts from the Critique of
Dialectical Reason at www.marxists.org/reference/archive/sartre. The full text of No Exit (In Camera) is available at www.nyu.edu/classes/keefer/hell/sart.html.

Notes
1. This is a revised version of a lecture given in March 2005 at
the Club Voltaire in Frankfurt. Thanks to Mary Phillips and
Pete Glatter for comments and encouragement.
2. V.I. Lenin, State and Revolution, in Collected Works, vol. 25 (Moscow 1964), p. 385.
3. For example the bizarre claim that ‘Sartre was the wealthy,
well-connected chump who so often hangs around revolutionary circles
and understands nothing’. Ben Watson in Radical Philosophy 129
(Jan.–Feb. 2005), p. 44.
4. In recent years a number of Sartre’s critics have raised
questions about his behaviour under the German occupation, for
example the fact that The Flies was first performed at a
theatre formerly named after the Jewish actress Sarah Bernhardt and
renamed by the German occupiers. Such criticisms generally come from
people of a later generation, who fail to realise that the
institutions of a fascist occupation cannot be boycotted like South
African oranges. To survive one had to compromise. In the immediate
post-war period Sartre worked with a number of people who had
impeccable Resistance records, and some of whom, like Claude Bourdet,
had been in German concentration camps. None of them questioned
Sartre’s conduct. Certainly he was not a Resistance hero – he
never claimed to be – but the attacks on his record seem to be
motivated by spite rather than fact.
5. At a recent conference I asked Alain Geismar, then a leading
Maoist, what Sartre’s paper-selling technique had been like.
Unfortunately Geismar had been in jail at the time and was not able
to observe him in action.
6. B.-H. Levy, Sartre: The Philosopher of the Twentieth Century (Cambridge, 2003). The French title is simply Sartre’s Century.
For a critique of this work by the so-called ‘new philosopher’,
see I. Birchall, The Kiss of Death, Historical Materialism,
10/3, 2002.
7. J.-P. Sartre, The Diary of Antoine Roquentin [Nausea]
(London 1949), p. 180.
8. Cited in M. Winock, La Repuhlique se meurt, 1956–1958
(Paris 1985), p. 23.
9. J.-P. Sartre, Existentialism and Humanism (London 1948), p. 25.
10. J.-P. Sartre, Being and Nothingness (London 1957), p. 9.
11. Le Monde, 18 April 1964.
12. For a full treatment of Sartre’s debates with the
anti-Stalinist left see I. Birchall, Sartre Against Stalinism
(New York and Oxford 2004).
13. J.-P. Sartre, The Problem of Method (London 1963), p. 56.
14. L. Trotsky. Fascism, Stalinism and the United Front
(London 1989), p. 259.
15. R. Garaudy, Les Fossoyeurs de la litterature (Paris 1947), p. 79.
16. Engels in a letter to W. Borgius (and not H. Starkenburg as
some previous compilations incorrectly have it); K. Marx and F. Engels, Collected Works, vol. 50 (London 2004), p. 264.
17. J.-P. Sartre, Notebooks for an Ethics (Chicago 1992), p. 346.
18. J.-P. Sartre, Existentialism and Humanism, as above, p. 40.
19. Communist Manifesto, section I in K. Marx and F.
Engels, Collected Works, vol. 6 (London 1976), p. 482.
20. J.-P. Sartre, The Flies & In Camera (London 1946), p. 166.
21. Many younger readers will be unfamiliar with the concept of a
bus queue. They should ask their grandparents about the days when
people stood in an orderly line at a bus stop rather than clawing
their way over other people’s bodies to get on the bus.
22. J.-P. Sartre, Critique of Dialectical Reason I (London
1976), pp. 256–69, 351–63.
23. B.-H. Levy, Sartre, pp. 378, 3.
24. J.-P. Sartre, What is Literature? (New York 1965), p. 258.
25. P. Robrieux, Histoire interieure du parti communiste II
1945–1972 (Paris 1981), p. 299.
26. Sartre on Theatre (London 1976), p. 205.
27. Franc-Tireur, 10 December 1948.
28. I was told by Jean-René Chauvin, a veteran Trotskyist who was active in the RDR, that Sartre not only spoke at large public
rallies, but attended local branch meetings in the fifth
arrondissement of Paris.
29. The editorial was drafted by Merleau-Ponty, though fully
endorsed by Sartre. The text is reproduced in M. Merleau-Ponty, Signs
(Northwestern University, 1964), pp. 264–265.
30. J.-P. Sartre, Ph. Gavi, P. Victor, On a raison de se
revolter (Paris 1974), p. 41.
31. For details see I. Birchall, Sartre Against Stalinism,
as above.
32. J.-P. Sartre, The Communists and Peace (London 1969), p. 62.
33. J.-P. Sartre, What is Literature?, as above. p. 247.
34. 15, 16, 17–18, 19, 20 July 1954. (This was not the
present-day Liberation, which Sartre helped to found, but an
earlier paper of the same name.)
35. ‘With total clarity the trials have proved the existence of
active conspiracies ... All the scum at home and abroad, all the
parasites, professional criminals, informers joined them.’ R.
Hayman, Brecht (London 1983), p. 210.
36. In 1939 just after the Hitler-Stalin Pact. Hobsbawm and
Williams wrote a pamphlet defending Russia in the Russo-Finnish War
(R. Williams, Politics and Letters (London, 1981), pp. 42–43).
For Hobsbawm’s pre-1956 Stalinism see N. Carlin and I. Birchall,
Kinnock’s Favourite Marxist, International Socialism 2 : 21 (Summer 1983).
37. ‘Yesterday, in the Soviet Union, the Communists were
struggling against every difficulty to build up their industry to the
level of the leading capitalist powers: today they have before them
Stalin’s blueprint of the advance to Communism ... Thus have the
“claims” ... of William Morris, the “unpractical” poet, been
promised fulfilment!’ E.P. Thompson, William Morris (London
1955), pp. 760–761.
38. France-Observateur, 8 November 1956.
39. For a full study of the role played by Trotskyists in
solidarity with the national liberation of Algeria, see S. Pattieu,
Les camarades des freres: trotskistes et libertaires dans la
guerre d’Algerie (Paris 2002).
40. Interview in Der Spiegel, 15 July 1968.
41. Theatre de la Ville/Journal, November 1968.
42. J.-P. Sartre, Situations VIII (Paris 1972), p. 354.
43. Der Spiegel, 12 February 1973.
44. Ecrire pour son epoque, Les Temps modernes 33, 1948.
45. See The Slow Death of Andreas Baader at
http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/sartre.
46. J.-P. Sartre, Situations VIII, as above, pp. 34–35.
47. F. Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth (London 1965), pp. 16, 17, 20, 21.
48. Sartre on Theatre, as above, p. 188.
49. Notebooks for an Ethics, as above, pp. 159–68.
50. J.-P. Sartre, The Spectre of Stalin (London 1969), p. 87.
 



Pierre Broué (1926–2005) who died in July, was one of the most
important historians in the revolutionary socialist tradition.
Broué became a Trotskyist in 1944. It was not an easy time.
Militants faced lethal danger not only from the Nazi occupiers of
France, but also from the Stalinist Communist Party. Towards the end
of his life he returned to his roots, publishing a book investigating
the deaths of Pietro Tresso and three other Trotskyists killed on
Stalinist orders in 1943.
Broué always remained true to his initial commitment. After the
splits of the early 1950s he remained for over 30 years in the group
led by Pierre Lambert. The experience was not without friction –
Broué once threw a chair at Lambert during a meeting – and ended
with his expulsion in 1989. Right up to his death he continued to
write on current issues for Le Marxisme aujourd’hui, which
he edited.
From his experience as an activist he got an understanding of the
dynamics of political organisations and their relations to the ups
and downs of class struggles that could never be grasped by a
historian who simply remained buried in the archives.
For many years Broué taught at the University of Grenoble. His
lectures were popular and inspiring: a former student, Jean-Pierre
Juy, recalls that ‘he related the taking of the Winter Palace as
though he’d been there’. But his most important contribution was
the string of books he wrote, together with a huge number of
articles. He founded and edited the journal Les Cahiers Léon
Trotsky, devoted to the history of the revolutionary movement.
Broué was that rare combination, a scholar-militant. His works
show a tireless ability to trawl through obscure documents in
numerous languages in order to establish historical facts. But all
his wide-ranging work centred on one central question – the fate of
the Communist movement, born in 1917, which offered unprecedented
hope to humanity, and its transformation into the monstrosity of Stalinism.
His first major book was The Revolution and the Civil War in
Spain (1961). Earlier works, like Orwell’s Homage to
Catalonia, had shown how the revolutionary potential of 1936 was
strangled and betrayed by Stalinism and the Popular Front. But Broué
and his co-writer Emile Témime provided a comprehensive and fully
documented account of the events. His history of the Bolshevik Party
(1963) showed in remorseless detail how Lenin’s party was
transformed into the brutal and murderous instrument of Stalin’s
rule. The German Revolution 1917–1923 (1971) [reviewed
below] was probably his masterpiece.
Broué’s biography of Trotsky (1988) was consciously
written in order to correct and go beyond the three volumes by Isaac
Deutscher. Deutscher gave a magnificent portrait of the individual
Trotsky, but gave relatively little importance to his efforts to
build a new organisation to oppose Stalinism. Broué stressed the
importance of Trotsky’s long struggle to found a new international.
His final major work was a synthesis of his earlier writings, a
history of the Communist International (1997). Here Broué broke new
ground. Previous histories of the Comintern had come from Cold
Warriors who saw it as a conspiracy against human freedom, or from
Stalinists who simply suppressed all the real problems. Even
Trotskyist historians, faced with terrible isolation, tended to a
defensiveness in which they applauded everything from the early
pre-Stalin years – ‘the First Four Congresses’. Broué showed
that although the Comintern had its roots in massive social
struggles, it also had substantial defects from the very first day,
notably narrow-minded bureaucrats who thought the revolution could be
spread simply by mechanically copying Russian experience. As he put
it, history sometimes progresses ‘by stammering’.
Broué opened the way for a new, non-defensive history of the
early years of international Communism (though neither man might have
welcomed the comparison, his approach had much in common with that
adopted by Tony Cliff in his Lenin).
Broué did not limit his attention to the Trotskyist current. He
helped to rescue from oblivion many other individuals from the
history of the left opposition. He was the first to publish the
writings of Victor Serge from Germany in 1923 and he collected the
correspondence between Trotsky and Alfred and Marguerite Rosmer.
Broué’s work provides a vital foundation for the study of the
successes and failures of the 20th century revolutionary movement,
for the honest and objective understanding of the past that we need
if we are to be more successful next time.
Unfortunately, relatively little of Broué’s work is available
in English. The Revolution and the Civil War in Spain
(translated 1972) may still be available in libraries; The German
Revolution 1917–1923 had to wait 33 years for an English
version. It is hoped that it may be possible to produce a special
issue of Revolutionary History containing material by Broué
not previously translated. At all events, Broué has left us a
valuable legacy on which a new generation of socialist historians
will have to build.
 



Jim Higgins
Speak One More Time: Selected Writings
Socialist Platform, London 2005, pp. 191, £9.50
JIM Higgins (1931–2002) joined the Communist Party as a teenager, and left over Hungary. After a brief spell in the Socialist Labour League, he joined Tony Cliff’s Socialist Review Group in 1959. He was a leading member of the International Socialists throughout the 1960s, and became full-time National Secretary in 1972. Some 18 months later he was removed from his post, and after over two years of internal conflict he and a group of around 150 members were expelled in December 1975; they subsequently formed the short-lived Workers League.
I first met Jim in 1963. I was a postgraduate student, just discovering the microscopic world of the revolutionary left. Jim was a genuine worker intellectual; he had left school at 15, and all his subsequent education had been obtained through voracious reading and experience in left-wing organisations. Yet he had a breadth of knowledge that contrasted sharply with the narrow specialisation I had so often encountered in the academic world. (Such worker intellectuals were even then a rarity; a generation later and it is inconceivable that someone like Jim would not have gone to university. But perhaps the current Labour onslaught on higher education will yet give us another wave of worker intellectuals.)
The other striking thing about Jim was his monumental irreverence. Nobody, in his organisation or in the socialist pantheon, was immune from criticism and indeed mockery. There is a marvellous book review (unfortunately not collected here, but available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/higgins) called Is Almond a Nut?, in which Jim takes on, without any deference whatsoever, the distinguished political scientist Gabriel Almond, whose sub-Freudian analysis argued that Communists were redirecting hostility to their parents into ‘safer’ channels. Jim responds: ‘Now big though my father is, I have never considered him to be in the same class for violence as a capitalist state (not even a small one) and for a soft option I will take on my old Dad any day.’
Jim’s irreverence fitted well with the style of the International Socialists at this time. We were a tiny, marginal group and we knew it – in contrast to the SLL, who were a tiny marginal group who thought they were the vanguard of the proletariat. Whereas Tony Cliff’s humour always had a direct political purpose, Jim’s was generally politically incorrect and often straightforwardly vulgar. To some of the more solemn currents of the left, his attitude might appear frivolous. But Jim knew that, after the Holocaust and Hiroshima, you could either laugh or scream – and that those who laughed tended to keep on fighting longer.
In 1972, Jim was persuaded by Cliff to become National Secretary. He replaced Duncan Hallas, one of the finest socialist propagandists of his generation, but not a particularly good organiser. IS was growing rapidly, but was still rather chaotically organised. Jim’s brief was to introduce some order. Cliff’s talent was to grasp new tendencies, to focus attention on the priorities of the organisation. He needed someone to act as long-stop (if anyone understands this antiquated cricketing metaphor), someone to preserve balance, to maintain an organisational routine and pick up the tasks which were not priorities but were still essential.
It might just have worked. But it didn’t. Jim ran the organisation as he would have run a trade-union office. He was hard-working and dedicated, and issued a stream of branch circulars, all carefully numbered for reference. But he treated it as an office job, rarely travelling out of London. Cliff, meanwhile, toured the country tirelessly, enthused comrades, argued with them, and spent hundreds of hours on the telephone, persuading – and listening. As Roger Protz remarked to me, before the argument became hopelessly polarised, the National Secretary should be a ‘road job’ and not an office job.
These were exciting times. The year of 1972 had seen the victory at Saltley Gates and the government climb-down over the Pentonville Five. Just ahead was the February 1974 election, when a strike brought down an elected government. Cliff believed Jim’s formalism had become an obstacle, and arranged to have him removed.
Not surprisingly, Jim was extremely bitter. He had given up a job as a skilled Post Office engineer, with associated trade-union positions, in order to take a lower wage and work in a rather squalid office. In his resignation speech at the September 1973 National Committee, Jim recounted how he had discussed his doubts about taking the job with Cliff, and Cliff, in the biblical style he sometimes adopted, had responded: ‘You must measure your cloth three times.’ ‘And so I did’, said Jim, ‘but I forgot to measure the fucking tailor.’
Jim briefly formed an alliance with Duncan Hallas, who shared some of his concerns about Cliff’s current line. But Duncan was a pragmatist, and when the leadership made certain adjustments to criticism, he opted to go over to Cliff. For Jim, this seemed like a second betrayal, and bitterness was unassuaged. As he points out, he had been ‘quite fond of Cliff’. This is an understatement. Jim had been close to Cliff personally, as well as greatly admiring his theoretical achievement. If many of his writings from 1974 onwards, collected in this volume, display a tone not dissimilar to that of a divorced spouse, that reflects the enormous disappointment Jim suffered at this time.
I have written before about the 1973–75 split (see my review of Jim’s book More Years for the Locust in Revolutionary History, Volume 7, no. 1 [1998]) and I don’t want to repeat myself. Factional disputes of this sort can be highly destructive. After the split, I didn’t speak to Jim for over 20 years. Latterly he would occasionally telephone me about historical questions, and while he continued to abuse me roundly in print, in person he was his old jovial self. When Duncan Hallas died, he phoned me twice to discuss the obituary he was writing for the Guardian. He was clearly deeply moved by Duncan’s death; perhaps at last the bitterness was beginning to fade. But it also evoked thoughts of his own mortality – ‘falling off my perch’ as he put it. Within a few weeks he too was dead.
Much of what Jim continued to write about Cliff and the SWP (some of which is collected in this volume) was so marked by that bitterness that it failed to offer what Jim aspired to – a serious critique of his old organisation. John Palmer writes of Jim’s hatred of ‘sectarian Talmudists and timeservers’. Often Jim implies that all those who remained with the IS/SWP fall into this category. Those of us who decided, on balance, to stay with Cliff as the best option going, and who have subsequently made our modest contribution to the socialist cause within this framework, can hardly accept this.
The articles in this slender volume show a powerful brain and a wonderful sense of humour. It is hard to dislike anyone who describes debating with Sean Matgamna as like ‘arguing with warm jelly’. (On a good day Matgamna himself might smile.) There is a wealth of information and entertainment, but two main themes predominate: Trotskyism and trade unionism. On the former, Jim’s position can be summed up as a great, if not uncritical, admiration for Trotsky, combined with a deep contempt for much of what has passed as Trotskyism over the last 60 years. His essay Let Us Praise Leon Trotsky, published in International Socialism at the time of the dispute with Cliff, was written as a covert polemic against what Jim saw as Cliff’s preoccupation with Lenin. It stands as a good introduction to one of the century’s great revolutionaries. In another article, Jim describes the thrill of discovering Trotsky during the crisis of the British Communist Party in 1956, something that was to stay with him for the rest of his life.
The absurdities – and worse – of self-styled Trotskyists are also well represented. The collection opens with a brilliant piece from 1964, Weekend with the Lumpentrots, depicting in Jim’s inimitable style a Young Socialist weekend school disrupted by the sectarian antics of Keep Left. It is hilariously funny – but also rather sad; one wonders if there were any young people for whom this occasion was their first (and if so almost certainly their last) encounter with the revolutionary left. His brief piece on Gerry Healy for the Spectator is quite appropriately savage.
Ten Years for the Locust, his account of the early years of British Trotskyism, is a much more serious piece of work. For those of us who encountered it in the early 1960s, it opened up an area of history that was almost completely unknown, and did so with a judicious balance of respect and criticism. If it has now been superseded by the more scholarly studies of Bornstein and Richardson, it remains a pioneering contribution.
The collection contains several substantial essays on the history of the labour movement, from the foundation of the Communist Party to the Minority Movement. There is a carefully balanced piece on the success and failure of the IWW, and another about breakaway trade unions. The latter was written in response to the Pilkington Glass strike of April 1970, following which workers, disgusted at the undemocratic and ineffective General and Municipal Workers Union, set up a short-lived breakaway. These pieces appeared in International Socialism in the years after 1968, and were directed at a largely new membership who often knew more about Russia, France or Cuba than the labour movement of their own country. They were a valuable contribution to the education of a new generation, and it is good to have them in print again. In particular, Jim repeatedly stresses the need for patience, an important corrective as the exaggerated hopes of 1968 began to fade. Yet if patience is certainly a revolutionary virtue, so is the ability to seize the time.
Personally, I found the second part of the book, containing articles written after Jim’s departure from the International Socialists, less satisfying than the first. As an SWP member I am doubtless prejudiced, but while revolutionaries should always welcome serious and well-founded criticism, I found that all too often the polemic was not sufficiently focused. One of the last pieces Jim wrote for Socialist Worker before his expulsion was an obituary of James P. Cannon (included in this collection), entitled Magnificent Disciple Who Lost His Way. I don’t know if the title was Jim’s own, but it would make a good summing-up of Jim’s own career.
Certainly Jim’s wit was unimpaired. There is a little piece on Glasgow from the Spectator which will amuse many (if they are not Glaswegians). If it appeared in the Spectator today, poor old Boris Johnson would be sent scurrying over the border to apologise. Fortunately even Jim could not find any grounds on which the current state of Glasgow could be blamed on Tony Cliff. There is also a thoughtful and balanced piece entitled Trotskyism in the USA.
But as soon as Jim approaches his old organisation, the heart seems to dominate over the head. At one point, he states that what Tony Cliff thinks is ‘a matter of supreme indifference to me’. It is of course Jim’s absolute right to feel thus, but it does somewhat undermine his status as a commentator on the SWP’s politics. He does not appear to have studied the later writings of Tony Cliff or of other SWP members, nor to have given any close attention to the party’s activities.
The Anti-Nazi League, which undoubtedly had a real impact in blocking the rise of the far right in Britain, is dismissed as the SWP moving ‘from one sensation to another’. Jim attributes to Cliff the view that there are universal principles of Leninist organisation, whereas the whole of Cliff’s four-volume study of Lenin is devoted to the destruction of the myth of the immutable ‘Leninist Party’, and the exposition of the view that Lenin constantly adapted his organisational views to meet the political needs of particular situations. He generously commends the work of Revolutionary History, yet states that this work is ‘anathema to the confirmed sect-dweller’, carefully ignoring the contribution to Revolutionary History made by ‘sect-dwellers’ from the SWP and elsewhere.
Jim is absolutely right to insist that the organised labour movement is a central concern for revolutionaries, and that all socialists must encourage systematic work within the trade union apparatus. But there is a failure to acknowledge the massive changes that have taken place in the British trade-union movement. In the 1974 IS internal document reproduced here, Jim stresses the ‘main emphasis on building among manual workers’. Yet the notion of ‘manual worker’ was already problematic – is a nurse a manual worker? And over the coming decades the traditional areas of manual employment – above all mining – were to be seriously reduced. In Jim’s repeated reassertions of the centrality of the working class, there is no recognition of these changes – or of the work done by SWP writers like Chris Harman and Alex Callinicos in analysing them.
Cliff is belaboured for his alleged assertion that ‘mature shop stewards and lay trade union officials were bent’. (I have never found this claim in Cliff’s writings, and would be grateful to any reader who can give me chapter and verse.) Yet the growth of full-time convenors, etc., in the 1970s was a shift which required serious analysis. In an article urging us to move on from Leninism, Jim calls for ‘new strategies and perspectives’. But he gives us no clue what these are to be.
One article I had not seen before is an internal document from the Workers League in 1977. Jim is replying to four comrades, including Paul Mackney (now General Secretary of NATFHE), who were in favour of merger with the International Marxist Group. I have not seen the document to which Jim is replying, so it is hard to judge the debate fully. But Jim expands on his view that the Trotskyist tradition is ‘bankrupt’, and defends his view of a rank-and-file movement.
The development of rank-and-file groups under the influence of the IS was an interesting development in the 1970s. While there was a model in the 1920s Minority Movement, the whole thing was an experiment, and mistakes were undoubtedly made. In any case, it was soon brought to an end by the downturn in struggle in the late 1970s. Jim accuses the IMG of having no concept of rank-and-file work because they formed an explicitly ‘socialist’ teachers’ organisation. Jim’s claim is that revolutionaries could not directly address the mass of workers with revolutionary ideas, and must find a trade-union intermediary. How the trade-union struggle would spill over into socialism was left rather vague. Now Jim’s ideas are in many ways similar to Cliff’s at the time. But given the particular ideological role of education, his objections seem a little strange. Was he really suggesting that revolutionaries should try to work with teachers who favoured expulsions, taught the glories of the British Empire – but vigorously supported higher pay for themselves?
I will not conclude by praising Jim. Perhaps his old comrade Fred the Communist-spiritualist was right (see Why Did You Join the Party?) and there is an afterlife; if so, I can imagine Jim’s raucous contempt for any attempt to flatter him beyond the grave. If 1975 came round again, I would again support Jim’s expulsion. But Jim was a part of the history – often trivial but sometimes inspiring – of the revolutionary left in the later twentieth century, and he deserves to be remembered. Those who produced this little book have done him – and us – a service.


Ted Crawford adds:
It is, I fear, not only Jim Higgins who too much remembers past faction fights – so does our reviewer Ian Birchall. Not that Ian says anything that is not truthful – he is far too honest a scholar to indulge in anything more than a little suppressio veri with perhaps a tiny hint of suggestio falsi. But it would be quite untrue to say that Jim was removed from the National Secretaryship of IS solely for administrative failings, indeed the way he worked according to Ian sounds remarkably like the role that Cliff requested of him – again according to Ian. No, there was a political struggle and it arose from difference of perspectives. In Jim’s rather exaggerated words: ‘Cliff thought the revolution would occur in three months times, and we thought six months.’ Or, more precisely, both factions had absurdly over-optimistic views of the future, but Cliff was more wildly wrong than Jim. Of course these political differences were reflected in sharp personal antagonisms, they always are in any political fight, but the politics there were – together with, as generally happens, very nasty tactics on the part of the leadership. A further complication was that the situation was an extremely difficult one, the broad political and economic situation was unprecedented (it always is), and the lines in the faction fight were very unclear and confused. What was true, and what decided me to back Jim, was that in the branches we were suddenly told about his removal, there was no advance warning, and the whole struggle had been carried out without any consultation with or knowledge of the membership. It had the air of a coup. (I make no claim to omniscience, for at the time I was as confused as anybody.)
And there was a ruthlessness in Cliff who plucked Jim out of an important trade union job, which might have been justified on the eve of revolution, but clearly not in the circumstances of 1972. True Jim must have shared Cliff’s perspective to a considerable extent to allow it to happen, but, not to beat about the bush, both were very wrong. And if you are a revolutionary you cannot afford to be wrong for, if things do get real, you will swiftly end up dead. We were light years away from a revolutionary situation, so, in Jim’s case, he was faced not with annihilation but with having to start again and make a living which cannot have been totally easy at his age, even for someone of his great talents. Of course, Cliff was never bothered by that vulgar necessity. In retrospect with all the advantages of 20/20 hindsight, we can see that we were coming to the end of the unprecedented 25-year boom, that the world economy for the next 20 years would grow far more slowly but would not suffer a disaster on the scale of the 1930s, and, in the case of Britain, we would see the defeat and consequent emasculation of the organised working class. Apart from the defeat of the class, I remember all the economics of this being accurately foreseen by Michael Kidron at a meeting in Leeds in 1974 or 1975, but this does not seem to have been taken on board by the IS/SWP leadership.
So I am sorry that Ian found the second half of the book bitter and one-sided whenever it talked of the SWP. In fact in view of what had happened, I think there was extraordinarily little bitterness, entertaining abuse yes, but that was Higgins. But alas, the SWP like every other little tendency prefers not to go over its own history, above all where this contains possibly disgraceful or even stupid elements. (Yes Ian, exactly the same is true of Lutte Ouvrière, for the only people who cannot have a stall at their Fête are the GET or Groupe d’étude trotskyste of Richard Moyon.) Higgins was a dangerous polemicist to have around, but the response to him was of course silence from the SWP publications. But a party is not built by shouting ‘Rah! Rah! We are the Champions!’, and, Ian, no party or group is spotless and without stain. Proud vaunts about the Anti-Nazi League (was there really a threat of Nazism in this country?) count for much less if we remember how it was comrades from the Militant (who later left it) who got the Anti-Poll Tax campaign moving, a real mass movement far more proletarian and less moralistic than the ANL, and that the SWP, despite Ian’s claims, did not at that point have ‘the ability to seize the time’. They followed rather than led that movement, and I emphasise it was a Movement and did not belong to any little sect. The same thing happened at the time of the miners’ strike when the SWP started off on it own sectarian way until jolted into reality – to its credit maybe – but it does not say much for its so-called ‘leadership’.
Arguments in favour of the SWP, or any other tendency on the Trotskyist left, would be far more persuasive if there was a frank admission and discussion of past mistakes, both recent and long ago, with a sharp look at how we could all learn from them. It might even educate younger comrades. Of course, this silly triumphalism is not unique to the SWP, but it is more obvious here as it is the largest tendency on this tight little island. As an example, the little Socialist Appeal Group with a membership of less than 100 boring old codgers in this country has far more people in the Third World than anyone else, and vastly more than the SWP affiliates of the IST. But this is never mentioned before the membership of any rival groups – Pas devant les domestiques! – any more than Grant and Woods explain to their people in Venezuela that they are irrelevant in Britain compared to the SWP. Triumphalism triumphs.
How we miss Jim, who could spot a phoney a mile off, who was not bound by orthodoxy, but whose eye was always on the ball of working-class emancipation. I am delighted if SWPers will learn something from this little book, even if it is something as basic and commonsensical as the idea of transitional politics which runs through so many of these articles.
 



An Opposing Man
Einst Fischer
Allen Lane, £6.00
ERNST FISCHER, the Austrian Communist and writer who died in 1972, was an intellectual of broad interests, who writes sensitively about his childhood, his mother and his sister. He was also, for at least 25 years of his life, a Stalinist hack.
By saying this I am not trying to smear Fischer. On the contrary, this is precisely the problem which he is trying to solve himself in these memoirs, written shortly before his death. His first chapter is entitled, simply but significantly, Was that Me? He quotes at length, and with obvious shame, from his pamphlet Destroy Trotskyism. The interest of Fischer’s book is not just that it shows an old man coming to terms with his own life; it can help us to understand the fantastic attraction that Stalinism exercised over a whole generation of the European left.
Basically, Fischer gives two reasons why he joined the Communist Party, even though at the time he was ‘fully conscious that I was opting for the cause and against myself, against my capabilities and my inclination.’
The first was the rise of fascism, which Fischer observed at first hand in Austria and neighbouring Germany. He shows how the leaders of the powerful Austrian Social Democratic Party, men like the learned Marxist and brilliant parliamentary orator Otto Bauer, abdicated responsibility when the real crunch came. Though critical of the German CP’s failure to oppose Hitler effectively, Fischer came to see the Communists as the only people prepared to fight fascism.
The second, closely related, reason, was Russia. In face of the threat of fascism, Russia seemed to offer an alternative, and Fischer, like so many others, was prepared to swallow his criticisms.
In strictly political terms, Fischer’s retrospective analysis has little to offer. Fischer may express sympathy for the new wave of revolutionaries in the sixties, and even argue that the Communist international was on the wrong lines from the early twenties. But he still endorses the political line of the Seventh Congress of the Communist International, the so-called ‘Popular Front’, the alliance with ‘progressive’ and ‘anti-fascist’ sections of the bourgeoisie. Yet it was this line which led to tragic defeat in Spain; and the whole logic of it is to refuse the independent organisation of the working class on its own demands.
Likewise, Fischer still believed to the end of his life that Russia was still on the side of socialism. It was because of his intransigent opposition to the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia that Fischer was finally expelled from the Austrian Communist Party in 1969. Yet if one believes that Russia is in some sense socialist, then the invasion can, in the last resort, be justified.
But when Ernst Fischer is remembered, it will above all be as a literary critic, as the author of The Necessity of Art. And if his memoirs are seen as a work of literature rather than as political guidelines, they are well worth reading.
Fischer’s story contains many vivid pictures of political life between the wars. As a young soldier in 1918 he collapsed from exhaustion on to a hay cart, and awoke to find himself elected to a soldiers’ council. Later, as a Social Democratic agitator, he used to travel around giving lectures on Plato, as an excuse to discuss democracy when formal political meetings were outlawed. For this and much more the book is well worth borrowing from a library.



The Philosophy of Art of Karl Marx
Mikhail Lifshitz
Pluto Press, £2.70 hardback, £1.35 paperback.
MOSCOW in 1933 was not a good place for developing marxist theory. The sectarian ‘Third Period’ was about to give way to the opportunist Popular Front. In the cultural field a crude insistence on class values was to be replaced by an unprincipled loving up to the representatives of the ‘progressive bourgeoisie’.
That Lifshitz was able to produce this valuable little essay under such conditions is a tribute to his scholarship—and to his ability to keep his head down. The book, short though it is, goes beyond the limits of its title. By tracing one particular theme, he gives us an intellectual biography of Marx, showing how his ideas on art developed as part of his overall view. For it is only in such a context that the question is of any interest; otherwise Marx’s tastes in literature would be no more significant than his taste in wine.
Lifshitz begins with the early Marx’s relation to HegeL Hegel saw knowledge as a means of reconciling the contradictions in reality; an attitude which Marx scorned as a refusal to struggle. Marx preferred the Romantic tradition which saw art as an activity which could help to transform reality.
Since art is an aspect of man’s attempt to actively transform reality, it necessarily comes into conflict with capitalist society. For capitalism reduces everything to its value expressed in terms of money; even the greatest work of art can be measured as of the same value as a certain quantity of manure. Hence Marx, for all his hatred of censorship, shows that bourgeois ‘freedom’ merely replaces the tyranny of the censor by the tyranny of commercialisation.
Where Marx differed from the Romantics was that he did not believe that the problems of art could be solved in artistic terms. As Lifshitz points out, Marx lived at a time when the interest in literature and art was giving way to an interest in sociology and economics. There was a future for art – but only in the context of the revolutionary transformation of society. Lifshitz sums up Marx’s view with the slogan: ‘Art is dead! LONG LIVE ART!’
This leads straight into the question of proletarian literature. Here Lifshitz provides a valuable counterbalance to the work of Lukacs, who always stresses the value to marxists of works which remain within a bourgeois framework. As Lifshitz shows, Marx believed that as capitalist society became more and more incompatible with aesthetic values, the proletariat offered the best source of inspiration for literature.
Writing of Marx’s treatment, in the German Ideology, of Eugene Sue’s novel The Mysteries of Paris, Lifshitz says:
‘The Mysteries of Paris deals with various types of the lumpenproletariat; but even in these sunken representatives of a great class, Marx found many traits far more deserving of the artist’s attention than the prosaic monotony of bourgeois relations. Marx considered virile determination, fighting ability and strength of character to be among the best subjects for artistic treatment. And he not merely pointed out that plebeian-proletarian types are fit subjects for literary treatment; he actually spoke of literature as originating in the “lower classes of the people”.’
Here, however, Lifshitz’s analysis comes to a stop. There is no attempt to look for the proletarian writers of the thirties. Lifshitz was clearly unwilling to praise hacks, yet unprepared to champion the unorthodox.
And the limitations mar even the treatment of the nineteenth century. The most surprising gap in the book is that it makes no mention of a man who was both a major intellectual influence on Marx and a great revolutionary poet in his own right – Heinrich Heine, author of one of the first great poems of proletarian revolution, The Weavers.
But despite such omissions, we should be grateful to Pluto for making available an interesting volume which, in its 108 pages, raises more questions than many ponderous works of five times the length.
 






THE IMPORTANCE of developments in Portugal since the April coup can hardly be exaggerated. The situation has gone far beyond what was envisaged by those who made the coup. In the process a question mark is being put over not only the future of Portugal itself, but also the futures of its Spanish neighbour in the Iberian peninsula and of the whole of Southern Africa. The outcome of the present upheaval in Portugal will be of decisive international significance.



Exactly how events are going to turn out in the weeks and months ahead is still unclear. But these events can only be understood against the background of a deep rooted crisis in Portuguese society.
 
Origins of the coup
THE ECONOMIC basis of the ruling class has been undergoing substantial changes in the last 20 years. The economy remains the most backward in Europe, with output per head at only two thirds the Spanish level. But some industrial development has been taking place, gradually changing Portugal from an overwhelmingly agricultural country to one where industry plays an important role. In 1950 half the population lived off the land (in agriculture, fishing or forestry) and only a quarter worked in industry; by the late 1960s the proportion in industry had risen to 35.5 per cent and that in agriculture fallen to 33.5 per cent.
This change has been based upon a massive inflow of foreign capital into Portugal and the Portuguese African colonies. There are 200 companies in Portugal associated with British capital, with total investments of £300 million. They include Plesseys, GEC, Babcock and Wilcox, British Leyland, BICC, British Steel Corporation, Rootes-Chrysler and Metal Box. Other international companies, notably ITT, are also there.


 



‘A safe investment’ – an advert in the Economist in February shows
the extent of Portugal’s foreign investments



Their aim is to exploit the low-paid labour of the Portuguese working class. In Lisbon, the capital, the average wage for a 45 hour week is between £7 and £10; elsewhere wages are even lower. In some districts infant mortality is as high as 10 per cent and the Portuguese have the lowest life expectancy in Europe. Low wages in Portugal have been directly responsible for unemployment in Britain as production has been shifted.
In the 1972 Plessey annual report Sir John Clark noted that ‘significant contributions to profits continue to come from South Africa and Portugal’; at the same time he regretted the ‘need’ for rationalisation and closures in Britain.
But Portugal has faced grave social and economic problems for some time. Firstly, the problem of inflation has been even more acute than elsewhere in Europe – last year inflation reached 21 per cent, and the projected figure for 1974 is 25 per cent.
Secondly, there has been massive emigration from Portugal. There are two million Portuguese workers employed abroad (as against a population of eight and a half million in Portugal); they are seeking better wages and avoiding military service. As a result there are serious labour shortages inside Portugal; for example, all public building work in Lisbon is now being done by immigrants to Portugal from the Cape Verde Islands.
And overshadowing everything has been the problem of the continuing wars in Africa. The African colonies used to be a massive source of wealth for the Portuguese ruling class and the foreign capitalists, chiefly British, who they worked with. While Portugal itself was a backward, agricultural country, the tight-knit ruling oligarchy ran the third biggest empire in the world.


 


But rebellions in Guinea, Angola and Mozambique in the 1960s pushed the cost of maintaining the empire ever upwards. Military expenditure rose from one fifth of the budget in 1960 to more than 43 per cent today.
Such scale of arms spending has made impossible any attempt to deal with the grave social problems that face the majority of the Portuguese people. More importantly for the ruling class, it has prevented the expansion of Portuguese industry keeping up in any way with that in the rest of Europe.
As the Economist pointed out two years ago:
‘Many of the bright young men rising to prominence in the banks and the economic ministries are ready to argue very strongly that the price of holding on to Africa has been the diversion of investment funds from vital development projects in the home country.’ (26 February 1972)
 
Spinola’s Programme
THE COUP finally came when some of Portugal’s biggest monopolies decided that the time had come to change course. One of these, Champalimaud, which controls banks and the steel industry, had for some time followed a ‘liberal’ line, reflecting the fact that it was more closely linked with European capitalism than with African investment. Champalimaud was closely linked with a group of foreign trained technocrats who had had some influence in the early years of the Caetano regime. They were closely associated with the journal Expresso, which advocated a policy of reforms and liberalisation. Also associated with them was the former Education Minister Veiga Simao (a graduate of Manchester and Cambridge Universities) who had begun the reform of Portugal’s archaic education system by developing technical and vocational education.
Shortly before the coup another of the big monopolies, CUF, which owns 10 per cent of Portuguese industrial capacity, moved to a position of opposition to the regime. CUF has many interests in Africa and traditionally has been much more reluctant to consider decolonisation, but recently has been increasingly anxious about the outcome of the colonial wars. It was a firm owned by CUF that published Spinola’s book which advocated a political solution to the African wars.
This recognition of a need for a change of line by the monopolies coincided with the growth of discontent among the army, and in particular the middle-ranking army officers. This discontent had at first been economic in origin; soldiers were badly paid and had to do four years military service. There was a serious shortage of officers, so that many career officers had done several tours of duty in the colonies, and reservists up to the age of 36 were being recalled for service. Many workers of military age emigrated rather than serve; it is estimated that there were over 100,000 draft dodgers throughout Europe.
The discontent in the army was growing even though the Caetano government had recently increased pay; there had been demonstrations in the Military Academy. More and more the demand for economic improvements was spilling over into the demand for an end to the colonial wars.
At home too there was considerable pressure for an end to the wars; demonstrations had taken place, and there was a significant anti-war movement amongst Catholic priests.
General Spinola was the person best suited to bring together the big monopolies on the one hand, and the captains’ movement in the army on the other. Spinola’s past – as a supporter of Franco and Hitler – hardly gives him credentials as a progressive.
As governor and commander in chief in Guinea-Bissau, Spinola followed a policy described by Dr Manuel Boal, one of the leaders of the liberation movement PAIGC, as ‘systematic terrorism’.
‘He bombed defenceless villages in the liberated zone, destroyed our crops and always burned hayfields at the end of the dry season to prevent us constructing huts for the rain season ... He is a man with blood on his hands and a smile on his face.’
One of his feats was to help in organising the murder of the PAIGC leader Cabral.
Spinola was popular with the army as a general who always led from the front line rather than from a position of safety. At the same time he differed sharply from the traditional crudely racialist approach of Portuguese colonialism; he believed it was necessary to try and win support of the native population. He tried to introduce methods similar to the American ‘Vietnamisation’ programme, and engaged troops in work such as school-building.
When Spinola came to the conclusion that the African wars were unwinnable, he dissociated himself from the Caetano regime. His book, Portugal and the Future, published in February this year, was a bombshell; it was the first time anyone in such a position had admitted that a purely military solution to the African wars was impossible.
Spinola’s actual proposals combined ambiguity with Utopianism. He stopped far short of urging complete independence for the colonial territories, preferring such phrases as a ‘scheme of the plurinational state type’ and ‘federal solution cemented by solidarity’. His hopes that political agreement could be established with the liberation forces were at best naive. Yet in the total dead end that Portuguese imperialism had reached his proposals seemed the best available.
Spinola’s role in the present situation is to act as a skilful manipulator. The ‘captains’ movement’ in the army wants to follow much more radical policies than the big monopolies; Spinola has to try and keep both happy.
 
The Coup and the Popular Movement
SPINOLA’S problem was that he could not implement his programme for satisfying the new needs of Portuguese big business without getting rid of the old regime. And he could not do that without paralysing the repressive forces that had kept the mass of the population in check previously.
Whatever the desires of the most advanced groups of capitalists, whole sections of the Portuguese ruling class continued to benefit from the Caetano regime and from the African war. And most of those who ran the machinery of repression itself could see no future for themselves without Caetano and his policies: they were prepared to direct repression against all those who wanted a change, even army officers acting in the interests of other sections of the ruling class.
This was shown some weeks before the coup, when Spinola was dismissed from his position in the army and those officers who moved in his support were thrown into prison.
Hence the contradiction involved in Spinola’s coup: he was acting in the interests of those same monopolies that had previously built up the machine of mass repression, but to protect the position of his supporters, he had to stop that machine working. The inevitable by-product was that the terror directed at the mass of the population disappeared overnight.
Two years ago, a senior government official told the Economist,
‘Portugal is like a pressure cooker, the lid has been kept on for a very long time and if some fool lets all the steam out at once, the thing will blow up.’
That is exactly what Spinola was forced to do. He had to prevent the exercise of power by the secret police in order to protect his own pro-capitalist supporters. But when he did that, he inadvertently permitted the mass of the population to give expression to all the discontents that had been accumulating for half a century.
In the explosion that followed, a process of radicalisation took place far greater than Spinola intended. He did not aim to dismantle the hated secret police, the PIDE, but that is what has happened as a result of spontaneous mass pressure.
All this confronts Spinola with a basic dilemma. The disruption caused to the state machine during the coup means that he cannot yet rule by direct repression. He depends instead on the popular support which exists for some of the measures with which he is identified.
In particular, the workers, peasants and soldiers who support Spinola see him as the man who is going to end the colonial wars. If he fails to do this, he will not survive politically. Yet the actual process of disentangling Portugal from Africa is going to prove very difficult. Portuguese (and British) big business certainly does not want to write off its massive investments there. But the liberation movements know that it is their own successes that have produced the crisis in Portugal and are unlikely to agree to any compromise formulae. Guinea (but not Cape Verde) may get independence fairly quickly, but Mozambique and especially Angola will prove much more difficult to deal with.
 
The Working Class Movement
THE SITUATION since the coup has opened up fantastic possibilities for the Portuguese working class. The temporary paralysis of the machinery of repression, the sudden upsurge in the popular movement, the fraternisation between sections of the army and the people, the dilemmas facing the new government, all constitute elements in what could be a pre-revolutionary situation. What is lacking is any effective revolutionary leadership for the working class.
During the years of repression, it was very difficult for any real workers’ movement to develop. Under the fascist constitution of 1933 trade unions were controlled by the state, strikes were illegal and strikers could get several years in jail. Riot police and secret informers combined to suppress any trade union militancy.
When Caetano came to power in 1970, he allowed partially free trade union elections, but retained a government right of veto. In 18 out of 21 unions anti-government lists were elected to the executives. But when one of the strongest unions – the bank employees – led a strike in the Lisbon banks, the whole union executive was replaced by an administrative commission, and the secretary general was jailed. The experiment in liberalisation rapidly came to an end.
Nonetheless, there has been a strong tradition of working class struggle in Portugal over recent years. In January 1969 over 70,000 workers were involved in strike actions. In November the same year the Liznave shipyards were occupied by 5,000 workers, and there have been other occupations of factories threatened with closure. In July 1970 riot police broke up a meeting of Lisbon airport workers discussing a wage increase, killing one worker.
What is missing above all in the present situation is a working class party able to give a political focus to this tradition of struggle and begin to raise the question of working class power.
The only organisation that has real roots in the working class is the Portuguese Communist Party. The other political traditions of the Portuguese working class, such as anarcho-syndicalism, were completely destroyed by the decades of repression. Although the Communist Party suffered heavily from the repression, it maintained its organisation, and has more or less complete political monopoly of the organised left.
The Communist Party’s policy in the present situation seems to be to try to come to an agreement with the Junta, offering its services to keep the working class movement in check in return for political recognition and a place in the provisional government.
In its first statement after the coup the party ‘fervently saluted’ the armed forces which toppled the previous regime and said that it would combat ‘adventurist’ left wing groups (quoted in the Financial Times, 6 May 1974). It went on to insist that it should be part of the provisional government being formed by Spinola. The Times noted that
‘the mildly worded Communist statement barely mentioned the colonial wars and it openly condemned certain popular takeovers, criticising impatient left wingers.’
The Communist Party has not restricted itself to words alone. The Guardian has reported that
‘their leaders worked over the weekend to prevent a crippling strike at the national steef works across the River Targus from the capital... In helping to prevent a crippling confrontation at the plant, the Communists have, for the time being at least, thrown their weight behind the junta.’
To the left of the Communist Party the only significant organisations are groups of Maoists. These developed largely under French influence, and their impact is mainly confined to the student movement, which has been engaged in permanent confrontations over the last few years. Although in principle the Maoists should have an opportunity to extend their influence in the present period, their ultra-left and sectarian conduct makes it unlikely that they will do so.
As for the Socialist Party, it has virtually no base at all. It consists of a group of lawyers, doctors, etc, gathered around Soares. Soares himself is a moderate Social Democrat, distinguished by personal courage and honesty; he is uncompromised by fascism and has been jailed 12 times. His role will be to act as mediator between Spinola and the Communist Party.
 
Prospects
THE BRITISH press, from The Times through to the Morning Star, have greeted the changes in Portugal with enthusiasm. They have stressed the joy in the streets of Lisbon, the feeling of national freedom and unity, the Morning Star proclaiming in its headlines. ‘A people united will never be beaten again’ (2 May 1974).
For revolutionaries, however, it is important not to be carried away by the mood of euphoria. The dismantling of the secret police, the emptying of the jails, the freedom for workers to organise, are all positive achievements of enormous importance. But the history of the working class movement internationally over the last century and a quarter shows that unless immediate steps are taken to intensify class struggle, such achievements can be reduced to nothing in a matter of months.
Reading accounts of events in Lisbon in the days after the coup, one is vividly reminded of Marx’s account of the revolution of February 1848 in Paris, when one section of the bourgeoisie was overthrown by another aided by the middle classes and the workers.
‘The provisional government which emerged from the February barricades necessarily mirrored in its composition the different parties which shared in the victory. It could not be anything but a composite between the different classes ... this was the February revolution itself, the common uprising with its illusions, its poetry, its visionary content and phrases ...
‘In the minds of the proletariat, who confused the finance aristocracy with the bourgeoisie in general ... the rule of the bourgeoisie was abolished with the introduction of the republic. At that time all the royalists were transformed into republicans and all the millionaires of Paris into workers. The phrase which corresponded to this imaginary abolition of class relations was fraternity, universal fraternisation and brotherhood. This pleasant abstraction from class antagonism, this sentimental reconciliation of contradictory class interests, this visionary elevation above the class struggle, this fraternity was the real catchword of the February revolution... The Paris proletariat revelled in this magnanimous intoxication of fraternity.’
But the euphoria of February 1848 was shattered four months later when the fundamental class divisions in modern society showed themselves to be more important than temporary divisions of interest within the ruling class. The bourgeois republicans consolidated their rule by turning the guns of their armed forces on the working class:
‘Fraternity, the fraternity of the antagonistic classes, of which one exploits the other, this fraternity, proclaimed in February, written in capital letters on the brow of Paris, on every person, on every barracks-its true, unadulterated, its prosaic expression is civil war, civil war in its most frightful form, the war of labour and capital. This fraternity flamed in front of all the windows of Paris on evening of 25 June (1848) when the Paris of the bourgeoisie was illuminated, while the Paris of the proletariat burnt, bled, moaned unto death. Fraternity endured just as long as the interests of the bourgeoisie were in fraternity with the interests of the proletariat.’
The lesson of 1848 has been repeated dozens of times since. Whenever one section of the ruling class turns against an established authoritarian government for its own reasons there are always powerful forces within the working class movement who try to hide the fundamental reality of class antagonism beneath a load of verbiage. Talk of ‘national unity’, ‘popular unity’ or ‘anti-fascist unity’ is used to justify leaders of the workers’ movement working hand in glove with the exploiting class. This leaves the ruling class free to disrupt the ‘unity’ when conditions are most suited to its own victory.
That is, of course, exactly what happened in Chile. For three years the leaders of the Communist and Socialist Parties preached ‘the unity of the army and the people’. At the end of that time, the generals felt secure enough to turn their guns on the people. Now in Portugal, the same reformist politics is leading the Communist Party to call for a ‘government of national unity’ containing both Spinola and themselves.
But the ‘unity’ which has emerged since the coup can only be a very short-lived unity. Clashes will inevitably develop between the interests of big business, which backed the coup in order to rationalise its exploitation of Portuguese workers and the African colonies, and the interests of the workers and colonial people who suffer from such exploitation.
When such clashes take place, what will matter will not be fine phrases about ‘national unity’, but the organisation, morale and physical force at the disposal of the rival classes.
Neither the Portuguese bourgeoisie nor the top army officers involved in the coup are politically naive. They will be preparing now for such an eventuality. They know that their political position has been weakened somewhat by the by-products of the coup – the break-up of sections of the police, the loosening of army discipline as part of the armed forces has fraternised with the workers and students.
They will work, behind the scenes, in the coming weeks to build up alternative police structures and to re-establish their control over the troops. They know they need time to achieve this, and will use alliances with Socialist, and Communist leaders to gain such time – providing such leaders promise to leave the state machine itself alone.
They have already indicated how this is likely to work, with talk of a provisional government headed by Spinola who would ‘appoint the civil provisional government, to be made up of persons representative of political parties and currents and also independent individuals who identify themselves with the aims of this [i.e. the military’s] programme’.
The Portuguese ruling class will hope that once it has reconsolidated its hold over the state machine, that it will then be able to dictate to the left wing parties terms for continued involvement in the government – basically that they use their influence to hold back workers’ living conditions. If the workers’ parties were unable to deliver the goods, the senior officers would then be able to threaten a return to direct repression.
The Portuguese left can prevent any such development. But only by following a policy quite different to that of the Communist and Socialist parties. The rank and file of the armed forces are clearly much influenced by the widespread popular distaste for the old order at present. The spontaneous reaction of workers to the coup has been to push for a purging of the state machine and for development of their own independent organisations.
The way to prevent reconsolidation of the repressive machine is to carry forward such spontaneous developments, to organise the rank and file soldiers against their officers, to step up the struggle over wages and conditions. In this way the disruption of the state machine can be spread, rather than be contained, and the involvement of the masses in the popular movement can grow even deeper.
But the precondition for any such development is rejection of the notion of ‘anti-fascist national unity’. A ‘government of national unity’ will of necessity operate within the bounds of the capitalist system and will therefore have to reject the demands of workers for real improvement in their living conditions and the demands of rank and file soldiers for an end to the power of the officers. It will hesitate about abandoning Portuguese rule in Africa. The danger is that some sections of workers will become disenchanted with political activity as they see that the ‘anti-fascist’ regime offers them little more in terms of living conditions than did the fascist regime, and that the more independently-minded of the rank and file soldiers will be cowed into submissiveness by the continuing power of the officers.
The only guarantee against a return to repression, perhaps on the Chilean scale, is the development of a revolutionary organisation that openly opposes the military and any provisional government, and which campaigns for the destruction of the present state machine and its replacement by working class power.
 



Levine
Rosa Levine-Meyer
Pluto, £1.25 (mail order only).
Red Rising in Bavaria
Richard Grunberger
Arthur Barker, £2.75.
THE FAILURE of the German Revolution in the years following 1917 is the great tragedy of our century; a successful revolution in Germany could have altered the course of world history. To understand that failure is therefore a key task for Marxist historians, and these two books, both dealing with the short-lived Bavarian Soviet Republic of April 1919, are valuable to the extent that they help in that task.
Revolutions attract cranks, and they are marked by episodes of lunacy. Mr Grunberger is aware of this, and reminds us of the fact with a patronising irony which rapidly becomes tiresome. He catalogues some standard ultra-left errors but otherwise has little explanation for the bloody defeat which the Bavarian Soviet suffered.
His book, however, contains one gem. He quotes in full what must be the greatest telegram ever sent – by Lenin to the Bavarian Soviet leaders:
‘Have you (1) set up workers’ councils, (2) disarmed the bourgeoisie and armed the workers, (3) confiscated stores of clothing and other supplies, (4) expropriated factories and estates, (5) doubled or trebled the wages of farm labourers and unskilled workers, (6) confiscated all paper and print for the publication of popular leaflets and of mass newspapers, (7) introduced a six-hour working day with an additional two to three hours spent in administrative tasks, (8) compelled the bourgeoisie to give up accommodation to allow workers immediate access to rich apartments, (9) taken over all the banks, (10) taken bourgeois hostages, (11) introduced bigger food rations for workers than bourgeois, (12) mobilised all workers for the defence of the council regime and (13) mobilised the adjacent villages through propaganda.’
The key to the situation was the workers’ councils, which had existed since the previous November, though the Social Democrats had tried to reduce them to purely subsidiary functions. The recognition of the role of Soviets was the central contribution of Eugen Levine, the leading Communist in the Republic, who was executed shortly after it fell. His wife’s biography of him is essentially a personal memoir, and on that level alone it is a moving work. But it also gives a glimpse of a man who, tragically, was never able to develop fully as a Marxist, but who was grappling with the central issue of workers’ power.
For Levine Soviets were the central core. He rejected any attempt to by-pass Soviets on the ground that only the workers’ own hard struggle could emancipate them. And though he predicted that the Bavarian Republic would soon be crushed, he argued:
‘We want to know what we are dying for. I know it from the example of Russia. There in the towns where a properly run Soviet was crushed by superior enemy forces, the idea of Soviet rule had taken such deep root that it was almost always resurrected once the enemy had been driven off.’
For Levine the principle of recall was the central feature of the Soviet. Not because of some abstract notion of democracy, but because a delegate must be constantly judged in practice by those he represents:
‘The cornerstone of a Soviet Republic is the factory council. The workers are not organised regionally, but in the factories, where they are together every day, where they can get to know each other in the course of their daily work, and where elections of functionaries are held on totally different principles. There the workers know whether their representative is a mere babbler or a man who can stand his ground.’
Not that Levine neglected the role of the Party, as Stalinist historians have accused him of doing. On the contrary, he stressed the importance of Communists in the Soviets:
‘A Soviet Republic can be founded only by Soviets, not by individuals and only if a Communist majority stands behind them. For only Communists can pursue a Communist policy.’
And he participated in the reorganisation of the Communist Party into factory cells to assist its operation in the Soviets.



Labour Movements in the Common Market Countries
Marguerite Bouvard
Pall Mall Press, £7.25.
THIS BOOK is short, shoddily produced, and costs over seven pounds. One may presume it is addressed to employers and aims to help them with their labour problems. They are badly served. The book is ardently pro-European, full of praise for unions that have co-operated with the Common Market, sharp in condemning those that have opposed it. Yet every time Bouvard goes beyond rhetoric to hard fact, she provides more ammunition for those who argue that workers have nothing to gain from the EEC.
The principle of upward harmonisation of working conditions in the EEC gains lip-service from politicians of all complexions. But in practice national states will not surrender their powers in this of all fields. The Rome Treaties contain no provisions for a European social policy and the European Commission has no powers to achieve upward harmonisation.
The actual achievements in this field have been very limited. The agreement signed in 1968 to harmonise the length of working time of Agricultural Wage Earners applied only to full-time workers, not to seasonal labourers, and in any case had no legal basis and so was no more than a recommendation. Though a committee of employers and trade unionists in the steel industry has been meeting every six months since 1956, at the employers’ insistence it has confined itself to collecting documentation aind made no attempt to conclude Europe-wide agreements. When the European Commission called a conference in 1962 to discuss coordination of social security systems, the national governments attended only as observers to stress that they would in no way be committed.
The most glaring failure is in the field of equal pay for women. Here Article 119 of the original Rome Treaty lays down that equal pay for women and men must be achieved. It took until 1961 for the member states to agree what the article actually meant; they then fixed 30 December 1964 as the deadline for the end of discrimination; since then the Commission has issued reports listing the gross inequalities that persist.
On trade-union co-operation in the EEC Bouvard gives an equally depressing picture. The Executive Committee of the European Trade Union Secretariat was restructured in 1967; as a result it proved too unwieldy to meet for the next two years. The Trade Union Secretariat had neither the money nor the staff to do its job properly.
Don’t buy this book; but if you’ve got a grudge against your library get them to order it.
 



Dare Call It Treason
Richard M. Watt
Chatto and Windus, 30s.
We must be grateful to Mr. Watt for his valuable study of the mutinies in the French Army between May and September 1917. Although he has some rather reactionary prejudices, and has filled the first part of the book with a great deal of material about the earlier stages of the war which can be easily found elsewhere, he has produced an interesting narrative. Although there were 110 separate outbreaks of mutiny, with altogether 100,000 men involved, there is still too little known about the subject; an ignorance contributed to by the French Army’s continuing refusal to disclose details.
We may agree with the author that the mutinies arose from despair rather than revolutionary convictions – an amply justified despair, for in the first two and a half years of the war a French life was lost every minute. Mutinies rose not against the war itself, but rather in protest at minor injustices, such as being sent back to the front out of turn. Drunkenness, presumably induced by the unbearable conditions of the trenches, was a contributory factor.
But the mutinies contained a genuine revolutionary potential. The influence of events in Russia was strongly felt, and in some places Soldiers’ Councils on the Russian model were set up. The military unrest was paralleled by growing industrial militancy, notably a strike of women armaments workers. In many mutinies the soldiers tried to return to Paris, apparently with an incoherent desire to take power. Watt notes the ‘ominous thrill’ felt by soldiers as they realised ‘there were too many of them to be punished.’
Nonetheless, there was never any hope that the mutinies could succeed, for the struggle was a completely fragmented one. The crushers of the mutinies were able to play off one section of the Army against another; the cavalry, having a traditional sense of superiority to the infantry, was used to suppress revolts, and Indo-Chinese troops were used against strikers in Paris. Above all, the very spontaneity of the mutinies meant that they were isolated from one another. The mutineers had no theoretical or organisational leadership to which they could turn; pacifist leaflets and newspapers had some influence on the mutinies; but the politicians of the Left were either hopelessly corrupt, like Almereyda, or hopelessly constitutional, like the pacifist deputies, who were horrified at the thought of using false passports. Even Jaurès had been infected by patriotism in 1914, leaving the Left bankrupt. And so the mutinies were smashed; better conditions were conceded to the soldiers, but ruthless executions were carried out.
This story bears witness to the tenacity and courage of ordinary workers – and to their impotence when without leaders, theory or organisation. With nothing but experience of the trenches to guide them, it took the soldiers three years to free themselves from the illusions of patriotism – next time we shall not have so long.
 



The Fight for the Tory Leadership
Randolph S. Churchill
Heinemann, 7s. 6d.
It is hard to see why this book was written (unless of course someone is making money out of it). Seven and six for a 160-page paper-back is unduly expensive for the most worthwhile book; but this, despite its storm of publicity, contains barely enough substance for a magazine article. The book traces the fortunes of the Tory Party over the last two and a half years, retelling stories which are already all too familiar. After saying (p.55) ‘This is no place to recount in detail the events that constitute the Keeler affair,’ Mr Churchill devotes the next 23 pages to the tedious tale. The book is crammed with ‘facts’, but for the most part they are a meaningless collection. Thus ‘In Blackpool 4,000 representatives from the 547 English and Welsh constituencies were gathering. The Chieftains had arrived off the 1.35 from Euston and at 7.15 Macleod gave the Press the news that the Prime Minister would address the Conference on Saturday.’ And a few pages later we are given the complete passenger list of the plane on which Mr Churchill travelled back from Blackpool. Out of 155 pages, approximately 55 are devoted to direct quotation of the press, speeches, election results, etc. In a book dealing with the role of the press some such quotation was necessary, but this seems excessive. The notorious Cabinet paper is not in fact quoted, and in any case dealt only with routine procedure. For any real revelations, such as how Macmillan’s illness was so brilliantly timed, we shall have to wait many years yet.
The whole narrative must be seen refracted through Mr Churchill’s rather quaint prejudices. Thus at the time of the 1962 Cuban crisis, ‘In some quarters there was near panic actively fomented by Dr Stephen Ward.’ But it is nonetheless interesting to observe the ruling class fighting among themselves. We learn how the Times deliberately suppressed reporting President Kennedy’s (admittedly meaningless) letter to Macmillan about his role in the Test Ban Treaty. The overall mood is of the arrogance of the ruling class. Public opinion polls showed that only 9½ per cent of the people supported Home, as against 39½ per cent supporting Butler; there is no indication that this was even a factor in the decision.
This is an essentially superficial book. Mr Churchill is generally amusing and not infrequently acute in his references to Harold Wilson, but he is totally unable to understand the Labour Party. The real issues never emerge. The 1962 dock dispute, Cuba, unemployment, make brief and disconnected appearances; there are hasty references to Tory disagreements on Africa and economic policy. But in general the squalid struggle for power is shown in a vacuum and hence made totally trivial. The book serves no purpose, unless it is to increase contempt for the whole system of institutions by which we are ruled.
 



The French Army: A Military-Political History
Paul-Marie de la Gorce
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 50s.
M. de la Gorce traces in this book the role of the Army in French politics from 1890 to 1962. He provides us with a wealth of factual detail, and some shrewd insights into the attitudes of the officer class as he follows the history of the Army through the Dreyfus case, the First World War, the Russian Revolution, the rise of Fascism, the Second World War, Indochina and Algeria.
Such a study is of value from two points of view. It can help us to understand the exceptionally significant part played by the Army in France in recent years, and the peculiar psychology of France’s present leader. It also provides evidence on the general problem of the relation of the Army to the State. The French Army has always been an anti-socialist weapon as much as an instrument of national defence. The Army was used frequently against strikers in the years following 1906; in 1919 it participated in the overthrow of Bela Kun; in the 1930’s there were several anti-Communist and Fascist networks within the Army; since 1945, the Army leadership has come increasingly to see as its main enemy international communism, which it has equated with the colonial revolution. But the French Left’s policies towards the Army have been generally ineffective. After 1870 the ‘extreme Left’ campaigned for conscription; Jaurès’s first reaction to the Dreyfus Affair was ‘Let him be shot if he is guilty’ (though the offence was not capital); Leon Blum’s Popular Front Government took measures to strengthen the Army; Bayet and Herriott, supporters of the Popular Front, invoked the name of Joan of Arc.
Both in peace and wartime there have been violent clashes between the military and political leaderships, and the policies of the reactionary officer class must not be equated with the will of capitalism. Large sections of the Army opposed Algerian independence, but French capitalism has easily accommodated itself to it.
Nonetheless, de la Gorce concludes: ‘Any risk of social revolution in France would entail the risk of renewed military interference in the political domain.’ The Army poses a serious problem to socialists in all lands; and we are entitled to an answer from all those prophets, of Westminster or of Moscow, who proclaim a peaceful transition to socialism.
 

