

Armed insurrection against “Butcher” Machado has again threatens to break out in Cuba and various guerrilla bands of workers, peasants, American adventurers and filibusterers and petty bourgeois office seekers appear to have commenced operations in various parts of the island.
At last it appears that the comic opera “Tropical Mussolini” is on his last legs. Machado for eight years has done his best to advance the financial interests of Wall St. and himself through the most intense exploitation of the Cuban working class, the suppression of the labor movement and the amassing of an enormous personal fortune.
The Machado regime, by the most brutal repressive measures, carried through against all political and class opponents with little or no pretence of legality. Instead of playing his enemies against one another he has succeeded in uniting them all against his regime, depending for his support on a strong bureaucratic governmental apparatus, a pampered military and police force and American imperialism which, through ambassador Gruggenheim and in the interests of the sugar trust, he held the economics life-strings of the island. Now, however, even those Wall Street financial circles whose interests he has been so willing in his own brutal, blundering fashion, have withdrawn their support and thrown their weight into the scales against him.
 
Machado Position Untenable
Macado’s position has become untenable with the whole social basis of his rule swept from under him. The brutal methods of violence and terror have been counter-balanced by the desperation of the masses suffering the effects of the sharpest economic crisis in the country’s history. The Cuban working class, nourished by revolutionary and anti-imperialist traditions, and led largely by Communists and syndicalists, has at no time abandoned its opposition to the regime and has managed, in spite of the murder, imprisonment and exile of its strongest cadres to keep alive in the masses the spirit of proletarian struggle. The suppression of the workers’ and students’ movements, the indecision and cowardice of the petty-bourgeois oppositionists, and the ever-present threat of American intervention under the Platt Amendment are important factors that have served to prolong a situation that would not be otherwise possible.
The antecedents of the bourgeois revolutionary leaders indicate the road they are likely to follow. During the period of his presidency, Mario Menocal, the leader of the present revolt was a recognized collaborator and instrument of the sugar interests.
The workers, who have suffered most from the Machado tyranny, and by whose exertions combined with those of the bourgeois opposition and the sugar trust, the regime is now due to fall, must not be off their guard. At the very least, the legality of their organizations must be secured, together with the right to free assemblage lifting of the censorship over the press and mails, and freedom for all class war and political prisoners. Should the workers’ movement really gain in strength circumstances will warrant the demand for nationalization of the sugar industry that constitutes the principal industry of the island. But an attempt at actual seizure of the sugar mills, which would inevitably entail an armed proletarian insurrection for the seizure of political power also, would be premature from both objective and subjective considerations of the present situation.
 



Open warfare has at last broken out between Peru and Colombia for control of the small Amazon port of Leticia. It is possible that this conflict together with that between Paraguay and Bolivia for possession of the Gran Chaco, may develop into a continent-wide war, with British and American imperialism supporting the opposing sides.
The official Communist party press in its estimation of the situation assumes that there are already two clearly defined blocs of Latin American lackey governments servile to the interests of British and American imperialism respectively. It is however pure light-mindedness to jump at conclusions after the fashion of the Daily Worker experts who analyze every Latin American problem regardless of its complexity, according to the magic formula wherein British imperialism unconditionally supports one side while Wall Street has all its stakes on the other.
It so happens in this case that both the United States government and the League of Nations, which latter can hardly be called an exclusive instrument of Wall Street, have declared themselves in support of Colombia in the Leticia dispute. On the other hand the British Blue Shirts (Fascists) have recruited a foreign legion in England which is aiding Bolivia in the Chaco war. The Daily Worker considers every factor in Bolivia’s favor as due to the pressure and influence of Wall Street imperialism. Perhaps even the British Fascists are puppets of American finance capital!
 
Unrest In Peru
While an insane war hysteria appears at the moment to dominate the mass psychology in Colombia, there is very deep social and political unrest in Peru. One of Sanchez Cerro’s reasons for warring against Colombia at the present time, was to utilize an appeal to national patriotism as a counterbalance to the forces and tendencies aimed at the overthrow of his regime. But the Peruvian dictator is playing with fire; anything short of a quick decisive victory, and that is unlikely, certainly a revolutionary overturn in the near future. The petty bourgeois A.P.R.A. which opposed Sanchez Cerro in the last elections, and which together with the Communist party, was recently involved, in a series of minor uprisings which culminated in the “putsch” at Trujillo last fall have already conducted in Lima and other Peruvian cities a number of protest demonstrations against the war, resulting in clashes between the workers and the armed forces of the government and in numerous arrests.
 



Another revolt accompanied by a wave of terrorism has broken loose in Cuba. The guerilla outbreaks in the central and eastern provinces of the island are only one, and perhaps not the greatest of the dangers threatening the dictatorship. In the cities and especially in Havana, virtual civil war exists between the “A.B.C.” student terrorist organization and the famous “porra” at the service of the murderous pseudo-bouapartist Machado regime.
“Butcher” Machado is now singing his swan song and the vultures are already darkening the sky in preparation for the feast. A change of government means new concessions, new contracts, new loans, and a shake-up in those quarters where political jobs are given out.
With the increasing intensification of the crisis in the sugar industry, due to high tariff walls in the U.S. and Europe, the competition, with the growing beet sugar industry of the consumer countries, and the ever-increasing warehouse surpluses, the Cuban government’s financial income has been reduced to a minimum. For many months, school teachers and other government employees have been unpaid, but until very recently, enough funds have been available to keep the army and police “loyal”. At last however it appears, even these, the almost sole remaining supporters of the regime, are wavering. Recent dispatches from Oriente Province report serious defections in the garrisons of several small towns.
The armed outbreaks appear to be inspired by the sector of anti-Machado forces which is favorable to American intervention. The principal leaders of the Opposition Junta wherein are represented most of the different bourgeois and petty bourgeois cliques are opposed to intervention at this time as this would interfere with their own hopeful plans for the distribution of political posts and economic advantages among themselves.
Machado’s main support rests to day on the governmental bureaucracy and the armed forces of the state power. The several national bourgeois groups and the foreign companies (with exceptions) as well as the proletariat and peasantry, are all desirous of his elimination. The very survival of the dictatorship for such a long period has been due largely to the conflicts existing in the camp of its enemies. It would be naive to expect any decisive action of the proletariat at the present juncture, but it is certain that Machado’s overthrow would he immediately followed by sharp struggles among the various sections of the national bourgeoisie and the conflicting imperialist interests.
The Roosevelt administration has not yet determined on a definite course. The conflicting interests of the rival sugar companies are engaged in back-stage arrangements, and in dickering with the State Department and with Cuban politicians both in and out of office. Senator Borah and Hamilton Fish have declared themselves in favor of American intervention under the terms of the Platt Amendment. The recent appointment of Sumner Welles, assistant secretary of state, us the new American ambassador to Cuba, indicates a change in policy on the part of Washington although it gives no clear indication of the course that policy may take in the next few months.
The experiences of Nicaragua and Haiti are too recent to be easily forgotten. They demonstrate the inadvisability – for the imperialists – of intervention, excepting as a very last resort. In Nicaragua, after combating Sandino unsuccessfully for six years, the U.S. Marines gave way to the more effective policy of diplomacy and dollars. The scandal growing out of the Haiti intervention is no less an argument against the same tactics in Cuba. Although full legal justification for-such action can be found under the Platt Amendment, the responsibility accruing to the U.S. Government therefrom, would in all likelihood be so onerous as to offset any advantages obtained.
General Menocal and the other bourgeois opposition leaders are all anxious to serve Wall Street and themselves by replacing for Machado’s crude dictatorial methods (products of a decadent pseudo-bonapartism), some form of constitutional bourgeois rule, in which the different and foreign and native capitalist interests can collaborate “democratically.” Life however is destined to demonstrate the impracticability of any such arrangement, and in anticipation of its failure, preparations are already being made, strategic positions already being bargained for, whereby the various participants expect to derive advantages for the conflict that will follow Machado’s overthrow.
The new reciprocal tariff agreement between the U.S. and Cuba is an attempt to reconcile these contradictions. Any such stabilisation however can only be of a passing nature. Cuba being essentially a one crop country, presents an extreme example of economic contradictions which can find no permanent solution under capitalism.
 



Every effort will be made by the Calles-Rodriguez regime to prevent the Mexican peasants from rearming themselves, and to disarm those still in possession of rifles. During the last four uprisings the peasants participated on the side of the government against the counter revolution. The next uprising will find them aligned against the government which has gone over bag and baggage to the counter revolution. During the past revolts the armed peasant guerrillas proved themselves more than a match for the troops of the regular army many of which supported the rebellions. They are therefore a factor to be reckoned with in the coming events.
For many years the Mexican peasants and their organizations have played an important role In the country’s politics, always however as tools of the different bourgeois and petty-bourgeois political groups which paid them off with broken promises or a few rusty guns. The very nature and composition of the peasantry and its organizations naturally prevented them from at any time, playing a really independent role.
In 1926 most of the scattered local, regional, and state organizations were federated into the National Peasants League, at which all tendencies were represented. This congress did much to cement the relations between the Communists, the peasants and the bourgeois government. The Communist Party dissolved itself into the peasant movement, and rather than building an opposition within it, served as a bridle to keep the more radical elements among the poor ejidatarios and peons from resisting the policies of the rancheros and petty politicians in the leadership. These same leading functionaries of the National Peasants League (Galvan, and Co.) were mostly all members of the Communist party. They did very much as they pleased; Tejeda, then Minister of the Interior, supported the organization with Galvan and Co. on the payroll; and the party dragged along in their trail, boasting in its reports to the Comintern of “our peasant organization of 300,000 members”. But this was only one episode in the opportunist history of the Mexican C.P. Party publications were maintained by government officials and the party’s principal footholds in the labor unions (Jalisco, Tampullpas) were owed primarily to the support of the local politicians who used the Communists as a counter-weight to the reformists of the CROM who were at that time very powerful in national politics through the Partido Laborista.
In 1929, with the inauguration of the “Third Period”, and after the farce of the march days (discussion in the party on armed insurrection which terminated in support to the government) the splits commenced. Galvan finally broke away, and denounced the party. Thenceforward there was a series of splits and counter-splits, expulsions and counter-expulsions in the peasant organizations. Galvan meanwhile has gone to his just reward, but his tradition remains in the main current ot the peasant movement which, under the name “National Peasants League ‘Ursulo Galvan’ (Genuine)”, serves today as the mainstay of Tejeda’s political apparatus. Another section is dominated by the National Revolutionary Party or local politicians affiliated to it, while still other fragments are affiliated to the Workers’ and Peasants’ Bloc, and a Left wing peasant movement dominated by the Communist party.
It has been seen that Colonel Adalberto Tejeda, has for many years exercized great influence over large sections of the Mexican peasantry. With the approaching 1934 presidential elections in sight, Tejeda is making a play for power. As principal inspirer of the split within the P.N.R. out of which the “Left Socialist Party” was born, he appears as sponsor of a radical “proletarian-agrarian” program. At the same time, he is seeking unprincipled alliances with other political groups (Soto y Gama, “Partido Laborista”, “Partido Antireeleccionista, etc.) which are if anything farther to the right than the P.N.R.
There is every probability that large sections of the peasantry and even of the proletariat will support Tejeda because of his “radicalism”. Meanwhile the Communist Party considers Tejeda as the “main danger” in much the same manner that “Social-fascism” was considered before the advent of Hitler.
* * * *
This is the second of a series of articles on political developments In Mexico. In the next issue, we shall attempt an analysis of Tejeda’s “Left Socialist Party”.
 



The threatening clouds of approaching civil war once more discernible on the Mexican political horizon. The revolution, which since 1910 has cost that country more than half a million lives, with a minimum of benefit for the toiling masses, again shows signs of surging forward.
The attempt of the national bourgeoisie and the newly rich of the revolution, grouped together under the leadership of ex-president Plutarco Mias Calles, to firmly consolidate and perpetuate the one-party rule of the National Revolutionary Party (P.N.R.) at last seems to have encountered an obstacle that may upset their plans for strangling the revolution at its present bourgeois stage.
A strong Left wing led by Adalberto Tejeda, ex-Governor of Veracruz and calling itself the Left Socialist Party, representative of the radical petty bourgeoisie and various peasant groupings, has definitely split off from the dominant party, and has elaborated its platform, which in spite of demagogy and confusion presents certain positive features. This new party has openly proclaimed its intentions to participate in the elections in opposition to the candidate of the official and heretofore almost omnipotent P.N.R. An election in Mexico, especially under such circumstances as those created by the profound economic crisis, can mean nothing but an armed struggle for power between the opposing groups. All the political forces of the nation are now aligning themselves for the impending clash.
The National Revolutionary Party (Calles-Portes Gil-Ortiz Rubio-Rodriguez) has moved constantly towards the Right since 1928, and especially within the last two year period. While the demagogy of the ruling clique has suffered little change unless it be to appear each time more radical in its phraseology, the government of the revolutionary bourgeoisie of 1910, turned counter-revolutionary, has been unable to satisfy the needs and demands of the masses. It has demonstrated its unwillingness and inability to solve the democratic tasks of the revolution, and the stage is being set for the next act. 1924–29 Kuo Min Tang Policy of the C.P.
During the period included roughly between the years 1924 and 1929, the revolutionary workers’ movement, and especially the Communist Party, permeated with a national and peasant ideology, product of the soil of the country itself and strengthened by the opportunist colonial policy of the Communist International, supported with a mildly critical attitude the “revolutionary” bourgeoisie personified in Calles-Obregon. The several counter-revolutionary uprisings, of the clergy and feudal landlords, were suppressed by the government, thanks in large part to the collaboration of the peasant masses led by members and sympathizers of the Communist Party.
Late in 1928 however, with the stabilization of the bourgeois counter-revolution and the adventurist turn in the Communist International (third period) the relations between the party and the bourgeois politicians were rapidly altered.
For several months the party worked with the perspective of an independent armed insurrection to take, place simultaneously with the revolt of Generals Manzo, Aguirre uud Escobar. When this rebellion finally materialized however, in March of 1929, the ultra-Leftist slogans of the “third period” were found not to have completely overcome the prejudices of the majority of the party’s opportunist central committee. What actually happened is that the “party’s” peasants again cooperated efficaciously with the ruling bourgeois faction in putting down the reactionary militarist uprising.
 
Attempts to Crush the C.P.
Before the last echoes of the civil war in the north had died out, the government drove the Communist party and all of its auxiliaries underground. Several local Communist leaders, most prominent among them, Jose Guadalupe Rodriguez, agrarian leader of the state of Durango and member of the Central Committee of the party, were executed on charges of plotting revolt. Other Communist, trade union and agrarian leaders were murdered, almost all of the foreign comrades were deported and dozens of the best militants of the revolutionary organizations were imprisoned.
A definite period of reaction set in now that the ruling bourgeoisie felt sufficiently strong to no longer require the cooperation of the C.P. and its supporters.
The National Revolutionary Party was then formed in order to better regulate and coordinate the interests of the ruling class and to inaugurate “institutional” rule. Within this party, Calles, while remaining in the background, was enabled nevertheless to dominate the policies, and soon showed himself very adept at playing the different factions within his party against each other, thus assuring his own hegemony over the whole.
Through the enactment of the Federal Labor Code, against which the C.P. struggled valiantly, the labor organizations were placed in a decidedly subservient role in relation to the government.
 
The “Institutional” Regime and the Crisis
In every other field, the national bourgeoisie of the P.N.R. vaunting its “institutional” program, has attempted to consolidate its position in an attempt to interrupt the permanency of the Mexican revolution, and perpetuate their class rule.
Many enormous difficulties of an economic nature presented themselves. The world crisis has not spared Mexico. The collapse of the petroleum industry and the fall of the price of silver would certainly have plunged the country into turmoil before now were it not for the agrarian base of the country. Large sections of the proletariat are scarcely a generation removed from the peasantry, and by returning to the family corn and bean patch have managed somehow to weather the crisis. It is estimated that there are close to a million unemployed in the republic. Mass deportations of unemployed Mexicans from the United States has not helped matters.
 
Recovery Ballyhoo of the P.N.R.
Elaborate plans for public works, highways and irrigation projects, and schemes for colonization of the unemployed on farms, have been announced and in some cases commenced. The Mexican bourgeoisie has learned much from the ballyhoo methods of its North American counterpart. Dozens of plans, programs and campaigns have been launched, an enormous amount of money appropriated, most of which promptly disappears into the void.
As in other countries, attempts were made to solve the crisis by a national program of economic self-sufficiency, an idea which is of course inevitably doomed to failure because of the oneness of world economy.
The reactionary character of the government’s program is becoming apparent to the whole nation. Mass discontent and radicalization grows apace, although the Communist party has been unable excepting in isolated cases to break through its shell of illegality, and take a decisive part in the growing struggles of the masses. The sectarian policies of the party with its splitting tactics on the trade union field, and its ultimatistic attitude towards all non-Communist workers, have hindered the party’s growth.
The general sympathy towards the ideas of Communism is growing rapidly. This is expressed in a distorted form through the activities and program of Tejeda’s “Left Socialist Party”.
* * * *
In the forthcoming issues of The Militant, an attempt will be made to analyze the Mexican agrarian problem and the character of the “Left Socialist Party” as well as the role that the Communists must play in the next stage, if they are to assume their proper place as the proletarian vanguard.
 



The Cuban revolt to oust Gerardo Machado has been successful. So general was the opposition to the “butcher” that Ambassador Welles, who was attempting to eliminate Machado peacefully, was not given time to bring his “mediation” to the hoped-for conclusion.
The disaffection of the army was the last straw necessary to swing the scales against the dictator proving that the Cuban generals still recognize the master’s voice. American imperialism, after many months of bargaining with anti-Machadist elements, had at last spoken clearly and the army shifted its allegiance.
There is every indication that the rank and file of the army would have mutinied en masse against their officers and supported the already nation-wide general strike of the workers and petty-bourgeoisie, if their superiors had not come forward in support of the revolt at the time they did.
All the decisive forces were against the perpetuation of Machado’s Porrista regime. The workers and peasants together with the urban middle classes were the first to take up the struggle openly, American imperialism during the whole period since last February had given signs of its intention to peacefully replace Machado before a mass uprising that might carry the change too far could get under way. On July 1st, the imperialist representative, U.S. Ambassador Sumner Welles, commenced his negotiations for that end, with the frank cooperation of almost all of the bourgeois opposition elements. The masses however, understanding in a confused and general way that some maneuver was afoot, took the offensive under the leadership of Communist and radical petty-bourgeois elements. The general strike proclaimed in the first days of August received the wholehearted support of the Cuban working class, and was also utilized by the bourgeois oppositionists inasmuch as it was directed against the Machado regime. Wall Street’s “mediation” move had failed, and now the only way to check the mass revolt was to be found in going along with it. The army caught between two fires, both of which were directed against the government, joined the movement at the eleventh hour, and in the interests of Wall Street thus assuring the downfall of the dictator before the insurgent masses should get entirely out of control. Machado gone, Dr. Cespedes was hurriedly sworn in as provisional president and has already at this writing commenced to bring repressive measures to bear in order to check the mass movement, which barely commences to show the first signs of abatement.
Once unleashed, following the first reports of the “butcher’s” flight, the fury of the populace was uncontrollable. The National Palace was sacked as were also the private homes of many of Machado’s personal supporters and those of all his cabinet ministers. The offices of El Heraldo de Cuba Machadist daily were wrecked and the presses demolished. Many workers and soldiers under the leadership of members of the “ABC”, systematically hunted down and slew those who had most distinguished themselves as murderers and torturers of enemies of the old regime. The police were either neutralized or powerless to interfere. Colonel Antonio Jimenez, chief of the “porra”, Machado’s extra-legal strong arm force, infamous for its prosecution of revolutionary workers and students, was among the first to encounter the wrath of the enraged populace. Jose Magrinat, who was sent to Mexico by Machado in January 1929 to assassinate comrade Julio Antonio Mella, did not even have time to scurry for his hole like the proverbial rat. In all, a score or more of Machado’s “finest” have been killed. If the “butcher” himself escaped it was only due to his superior alacrity and better protection.
The deposed tyrant, now in refuge at Nassau in the Bahama Islands, may yet meet the fate of his cohorts. Meanwhile, he does not intend to suffer any unnecessary personal inconvenience, as is evidenced by the large sums of money mounting into millions of dollars, that have in recent years been deposited by him in foreign banks, doubtless in anticipation of such a contingency.
American imperialism will now be able to consolidate its forces in Cuba. A “new deal” for Cuba is already being spoken of quite opcnlju and the sending of four American warships to Havana is not so much an episode of it is symptomatic of the spirit of this “New Deal”. Attempts will be made to smooth over the differences and contradictions of imperialism and native capitalism at the expense of the workers. This new situation will open broad perspectives of struggle for the Cuban workers, as no possible arrangement under capitalism can solve the contradictions of Cuba’s economy except at the expense of the workers.
The new situation is pregnant with great possibilities for the Communist party and the proletariat. But in order to fulfill its role, our party must analyze realistically all the factors in the situation. The present mass movement raised by the general strike must be utilized to the limit in order to better entrench our party among the masses, democratic demands must be raised and consistently fought for in order to gain every possible advantage from the period of confusion that is bound to ensue, and which the “concentration” government of de Cespedes, even with Wall Street’s direct and complete support, cannot entirely eliminate.
Hundreds of exiles and political prisoners are returning to Cuba from their places of exile abroad, and from the detention colony on Isla do Pinos. Among these in addition to Communists are also many petty bourgeois aspirants for political jobs. Among these latter, a jockeying for power, hardly intended to calm matters, is bound to take place. All indications point to a period of internal struggles among the diverse sectors of the bourgeois and imperialist camps. If an attempt at a democratic regime is made, it can only be temporary as the continued crisis is not such as to permit of democratic forms. Some form of bourgeois dictatorship under imperialist tutelage is inevitable. The only road out of Cuba’s permanent economic crisis is that of the proletarian revolution. But if this is to be seriously considered the Cuban Communists must lay aside their opportunist slogan of an “anti-imperialist and agrarian revolution”. This slogan can only lead the proletarian vanguard deeper into the slough of nationalism.
 



The political crisis in Cuba appears at last to have reached a definite climax. The pressure of the working class and the petty bourgeois masses aimed at the overthrow of “Butcher” Machado, has thrown a monkey wrench into Ambassador Welles’ attempts to solve the impasse by arbitration. Strikes initiated by the revolutionary workers in Havana as a protest against the intervention of Wall Street’s viceroy as mediator in the island’s politics, spread throughout the island affecting all industries and partaking of the nature of a general political strike. Even the Chamber of Commerce organizations in some places are giving their support to the movement. Mass demonstrations in Havana and other cities have created a situation that at this writing the police and military have been unable as yet to dominate.
 
Mass Murder
Machine guns are being used indiscriminatingly against all groups gathering in public places and the list of dead and injured mounts rapidly. While the overwhelming majority of the population is being brought into action, all of the bourgeois opposition groups which are united only in the demand to dethrone the Machado dictatorship, are exerting their chief energies to attempts to canalize the movement and keep it under their control. The Communist party, while not in any sense having the hegemony of even the workers on strike, counts nevertheless with broad sympathies among the masses.
For many months the American imperialists, who have a dominating control of the Cuban sugar industry and of most of the island’s minor industries besides, have realized that Machado’s regime was in its decay stage and incapable of further serving their interests effectively. Any one of the principal leaders of the opposition (Menocal, Mendieta, Gomez), all of whom have extensive interests in the sugar industry themselves together with the imperialists, would be equally willing, given the power, to serve Wall Street interests, and would, be able to do so in a less crude and more efficacious manner.
 
Behind the “Arbitration”
It was the realization that Machado’s overthrow could only led to a long drawn out struggle among those very elements now collaborating in the opposition, which might give the Communists and other extremist elements an opportunity for struggle and growth, that led the Roosevelt administration to seek a means of compromise through mediation. The revolutionary mass movement is not only the workers’ protest against the arbitrary interference of the U.S. State Department, but is also an attempt on the part of the Cuban masses to seek the revolutionary way out of the political impasse and the economic crisis which has been continual in the island ever since the collapse of the sugar industry in 1925.
The colossal failure of American armed intervention in Nicaragua and the scandals attendant on the occupation of Haiti, have made the State Department reluctant to intervene with armed forces in Latin American countries if other methods can possibly be used. However the situation in Cuba may easily develop to a point where Wall Street will demand armed intervention. Steps are already being taken to facilitate rapid movements of armed forces to Cuba on a moment’s notice. Several U.S. marine and navy units are already prepared to embark. Washington dispatches indicate that the 1st Artillery Brigade now in N.Y. State and about 1,000 marines stationed at Quantico, Va., would be the first to be moved.
In this regard the American Communists must raise the slogan “Hands off Cuba”.
The Cuban masses require and Street’s government in order to overthrow the dictator who until a few scant months ago was able to continue in power, thanks principally to the support of the American imperialists.
 
Correct Policy Decisive
Our party in Cuba has the opportunity to play a leading role in the struggles now developing in that country. Its influence in the coming period will depend almost entirely on the correctness with which the party reacts to the situation. If the proper slogans are advanced and the correct tactics pursued, the Communist party may well find itself in the direct leadership of the Cuban working class. In order to achieve this however, a definite break must be made with the errors of opportunism and of adventurism, which find their expression in the confusion of national with class slogans, and terroristic tendencies. The Left Opposition of the Cuban Party is conducting an intense struggle for the correct Leninist policy.
 



The Problem of the Coming Revolt and the Peasantry

The Agrarian Question in Mexico in the Light of the Coming Revolt
 



The period of governmental reaction initiated under Portes Gil in 1928, also marked the cutting short of the agrarian reform. Only a small section of the peasantry was satisfied with the manner in which this reform, based on Article 27 of the 1917 constitution, had been carried out. Of those lands expropriated from the feudal landholders, the best were generally seized by the politicians and generals of the revolution. Most of the remaining arable tracts remained in the hands of their old owners on some pretext or other. The barren hillsides, rocky, dry, stream-beds, and otherwise undesirable lands were left for the peasants. Every hectare of this land has been paid for with peasants blood and even when they have received it, all kind and color of strings are tied to it.
In some cases, those villages which have shown greatest militancy during the early period of the revolution, were given satisfactory grants or ratified in the possession of lands they had forcibly seized, in order to silence them and set them up as a barrier to hold back the great mass of landless peasantry who were being “fed” on promises and government surveys.
 
Ending the Land Reforms
The newly rich, having themselves acquired great landed wealth in the course of the revolution, now found it necessary to seek alliances with the remaining, politically crippled, feudal holders and wealthy ranchers in order to preserve their own booty. A new policy was then instituted by degrees in one state after another, to wind up all pending agrarian matters and declare the land reforms at an end. Not only was this done but the breaking up of the “ejidos” (communal land grants) was also ordered. This constituted a still greater betrayal of the interests of the peasant masses without the aid of whom the democratic revolution of 1910–1917 would have been impossible.
From time immemorial and antedating the coming of the Spaniards the peasant villagers owned their land in common. In some cases the soil was tilled in common also and in others by the individual families but without any private land tenure. These commons, called altepetlalli under the Aztec regime, were the direct forerunners of the ejidos of more recent times.
Many of these village commons remained intact until comparatively recent times although the tendency in the colonial period was for the Spanish hacendados to absorb and destroy the primitive village economy, converting the peasants into peons or serfs of the haciendas. There were a number of peasant uprisings but prior to 1810 these did not acquire great strength. The Mexican war for independence was, especially in its first stage, the revolt of a land-starved peasantry fighting for the restitution of its communal holdings. Other revolutions since that time have had the same objective, culminating in the Zapatista movement of 1910–1919. Another such uprising is now in the offing.
 
Communal Aspirations of Peasants
Traditionally, the bulk of Mexico’s peasants aspire to communal holdings. Left to themselves they seldom abandon common ownership for individual tenure, although the land is almost always subdivided by the village council for cultivation in small lots by individual heads of families. Primitive methods of cultivation, however, make collective-farming impractical excepting in rare instances.
Realizing the danger to their communal unity and the consequent strengthening of their enemies, if the village commons are broken up, the peasants prefer collective ownership. Most of them realize that individual tenure at this time would weaken their position as a class and would only serve the hacendados by playing the individual small and middle peasants against each other.
Two short years ago, the high priests of the National Revolutionary Party, to which at that time the major portion of the peasantry nominally adhered, launched a campaign for the subdivision of the “ejidos”. The peasants were told that their dignity as human beings, their duty to their families and their individual interests required the breaking up of these communal grants into individual parcels. Many of the peasants succumbed to the arguments of the politicians, especially when the leaders of their own organizations, many of them middle-class ranchers themselves, counselled support of the new government policy.
In several regions however, the peasants revolted on a local scale and the government linked its attack on the ejidos to a campaign to disarm the peasants, thousands of whom still held arms loaned them by the government during the reactionary revolts. In 1932, there were numerous sporadic outbreaks in the states of Michoacan, Jalisco, Sacatecas and Guanajuato. These local uprisings were easily suppressed and the military reports appearing in the press, usually referred to them as bandit or Catholic outbreaks. All news was, of course strictly censored.
In the state of Veracruz, the hostility of the peasants to the government assumed such an alarming aspect that the whole state was placed under military rule in order to forestall a general uprising. The Tejeda political faction dominant in that state, being unprepared to undertake a genuine armed insurrection at that time, although it was itself more or less closely identified with the defiant peasantry, was willing to compromise with the federal authorities. Large sections of the peasantry were disarmed although many of them offered resistance locality. At present the strictest watch is kept by the federal authorities to prevent the rearmament of these elements. It is known that many have secret arms caches. Arrests are being reported of peasants being caught with arms in their possession. A letter just received by the writer of these lines, from a peasant living near the port of Vera Cruz, says in part,
“The government has taken our arms away, and even now a few days ago in Villa Jose Cardel if you entered on horseback carrying the machete (cane knife) you use to work with, the federal soldiers would take it from you. So you see we must be careful and keep our eyes wide open.”
* * * *
Ed. Note: This is the first of two articles on the Mexican Questions by comrade Negrete. The second will appear next week.
 



A state agrarian congress was held in Puebla, Mexico, from February 1st to 4th. The whole affair was very carefully organized by those sponsoring it and its petty bourgeois character was clearly distinguishable from the first speech to the last.
Governor Leonidas Andreau Almazan, governor of the state of Puebla, presided at the opening session, and numerous other bourgeois politicians were present including Governor Adalberto Tejeda of Vera Cruz, the governor of Guanajuato, representatives of the governors of the states of Yucatan, San Luis Potosi and Tlaxcala, and a host of senators, deputies and petty politicians of all colors from the “pink revolutionists” to the blackest reactionaries. The national anthem was sung by the 1,500 delegations present and every one received food and lodging during the period of the congress at the expense of Governor Almazan. In short, for those of us who have a bit of a memory, it appears to have been very similar to any number of former Mexican agrarian congresses, in which during the “Kuo Min Tang” period of the Mexican movement, the Communist party collaborated with Tejeda, Fortes Gil and others, in the “organization of the peasantry”.
In the Puebla congress, the closest collaboration was to be noted between the “Left” petty bourgeois politicians (Tejeda, Almazon, Cedilla) and all of the closest henchmen of the late Galvan, our party’s kulak-“Communist” leader of former times. Among the “Galvanites” present in the rôle of collaborators of Almazan, Tepeda and Co. were Caroline Anaya, Isaac Fernandez, Juan Jacobo Torres, Vargas Rea, Enrique Flores Magon (Martinez) and Celso Cepeda. Another “Galvanite”, Julio Cuadros, was elected president of the congress. Also present, having already definitely abandoned the ranks of Communism, were several ex-Right wingers of the Mexican Communist Party including German List Arizubide, Raul Argudin, and Luis G. Monzon, all of whom treated the assemblage to a barrage of liberal “revolutionism” in the form of speeches.
The congress accomplished absolutely nothing for the poor peasants. Why should it? That is not why it was called together. A reunion of this nature can only serve the political interests of those that organize it, and is consequently unable to be of any aid to the poor ejidatarians and landless peasants. The whole affair had the aspect of a comical dramatic sketch in which many of the most outstanding political representatives of the opposition petty bourgeoisie appeared as actors, the peasant delegates being nothing but bored spectators waiting for the curtain to ring down and the barbecue to be served. There was not, as in the Vera Cruz state agrarian congress, celebrated in Jalapa at the end of October, any Communist fraction whatsoever. The voice of our party was heard only through the leaflets distributed among the peasant delegates by outsiders having nothing to do with the meeting.
Several very pertinent questions suggest themselves to us at this time. What has happened to the dozens of agrarian communities in divers parts of the state, where our party is supposed to have had such extensive influence and “control”? Where are the thousands of peasants of Atlixco and other sections of the state, who supported the “Workers and Peasants Bloc” in the last presidential elections? Let the party leaders explain why there was no Communist fraction at the Puebla state agrarian congress if, as they shout from the housetops, the party is now so much stronger, more consolidated and more steadfast than ever before.
The Puebla congress represented a new step on the part of the “Left” elements of the petty bourgeoisie to fortify their positions, increasing their pressure in this way on the federal government. These “Left” elements with their promises and their demagogy will utilize the peasants as cannon fodder in their attempt to seize power. All that was dealt with in the congress concerning the armament of the peasants, the democratization of the army and the continuation of the agrarian reform, is something more than simple demagogy to fool the peasants. It indicates the determination of Tejeda, Almazan and Co. to carry the struggle to other fields when the opportune moment arrives. The role of the Communists in the coming struggle between the two bourgeois factions is a question deserving of the most profound attention and study.
In its manifesto of February 25, 1930, the central committee of our party affirmed in the most cock-sure manner, that Ortiz Rubio would succeed in uniting the whole of the bourgeoisie, the large landowners of both the new and the old regimes, into a single counter-revolutionary bloc, establishing a complete “fascist state” in the service of American imperialism. This analysis was completely false. Our “theoreticians” forgot the whole series of internal contradictions within the national bourgeoisie, and underestimated the remaining strength of British imperialism. In November 1930, however, after the Jalapa agrarian congress at which Tajeda-Almazan showed their teeth to the ruling faction of Ortiz Rubio, the leadership of our party changed its analysis again and decided on an independent armed insurrection simultaneous with the outbreak of hostilities between the bourgeois factions. According to the statement of one of the Mexican Party leaders himself (The Communist, March 1931) it was a speech of Manuilsky given in Moscow that gave the first inkling to the Mexican Party leadership that perhaps a putsch wasn’t quite the thing yet. The “third period” is kicking its last and the poor third periodites of the smaller parties of the Comintern are just beginning to find this out.
What is necessary now in order to assure the party of the best utilization of the developing situation in Mexico, is a real Leninist analysis of the whole situation in which Mexican realities are considered in relation to the world economy in general. Without such a correct policy we will be certain to repeat the blunders and failures of March 1929.
 



This January tenth is the second anniversary of the death in Mexico City of comrade Julio Antonio Mella, assassinated by hirelings of the Machado regime in Cuba. With Mella’s death the Latin-American and world Communist movement lost one of its ablest and most devoted fighters. The murder was only one of a long series committed by the Wall Street-supported Cuban dictator on the persons of working class leaders. Too numerous even to mention have been the Communist party members and leaders and the militant trade unionists assassinated by the “tropical Mussolini” in his attempt to impede the growth of a strong working class movement capable of overthrowing what is doubtless the most odious of all the puppet regimes of Latin America. Assassinated on the streets, tortured to death in their cells, fed to the sharks of Havana Bay, massacred in the streets, the number of Cuban revolutionists murdered in this struggle is already legion and the total continues to mount under the pressure of the general industrial crisis and general mass discontent on the island.
For a number of years comrade Mella was the outstanding leader of the Cuban movement. Even in his student days, he distinguished himself notably for his educational activities among the Havana workers with the organization of the “Universidad Popular – José Marti”, and for his leadership in a number of student movements, so intense in their agitation against the Machado regime, that Machado had to close the National University in 1925.
 
Exiled from Cuba
Julio Mella, together with a number of other comrades, mostly Communists was framed up by the Havana police in a supposed “bomb plot”. They were held illegally without trial for some time in spite of the efforts of the workers and students to have them freed. Finally, through a 19 day hunger strike, which brought about a continent-wide protest movement, Mella’s liberty was granted on condition that he immediately leave the country. He was sent to Honduras, from which county he was deported to Guatemala and then re-deported to Mexico. The Mexican government of Calles, at that time posing as an anti-imperialist government, offered him asylum.
In Mexico, in spite of continual disagreements with the opportunist heads of the Mexican party, Mella soon became one of the outstanding leaders. Because of instructions, the Mexican party practically compelled Mella, as well as many other foreign comrades, to dedicate themselves to anti-imperialist work almost exclusively. Mella was for a considerable period general secretary of the Continental Secretariat of the All America Anti-Imperialist League, and in this manner his energies were to a great extent side-tracked from the fields where he would have been most useful to the movement. Later, however, for a period in 1928, Mella occupied provisionally the general secretaryship of the C.P. of Mexico. But upon the return of the delegation from Moscow after the Sixth World Congress of the Comintern, comrade Mella was not only removed from this provisional post but was also summarily removed from the Central Committee, upon the insistence of the right wing C.E.C. led by Martin (Sitirner) and Carrillo. In a former period Mella had been accused of “Trotskyism”, and only through a formal renunciation of the point of view of the Left Opposition which was probably the greatest political mistake of his party career, was he allowed to remain in the leadership.
At the time of Mella’s occupancy of the general secretaryship, the C.E.C. for the first time discussed seriously a definite break with the national bourgeoisie. During the whole past period, the orientation of the party on trade union questions had continually been towards work within the CROM, and in an “autonomous” sense only insomuch as a close collaboration with “progressive” state governors made this possible.
At the time of the breakdown of the CROM, when whole labor federations of states and of trades (Puebla, printing trades, etc.) were declaring themselves independent of the reformist center under the Left slogan of “against the bureaucracy,” etc., the convocation of a unity conference of the autonomous unions became quite opportune. Such a step, if taken at the right time, would have served to separate not only “our own” unions of Jalisco, Tamaulipas, etc., from the local politicians, but also would have prevented the Obregonists from establishing their hegemony over the organizations recently rebelled from the CROM.
 
Mella Against the Right Wing
At this time it was inevitable that large sections should reorientate themselves on this question, and comrade Julio Mella was among the first to come forward in the Mexico City branch in support of the calling of a trade union unity conference for the formation of a new center. For this reason, and through a revival of the old “Trotskyist” accusations, the Right wingers denounced him as disloyal and he was remove d from the C.E.C.
In September 1928, an emergency conference of the party was called to discuss the change in the political situation. At this conference, Martin demanded the expulsion of Mella for the crime of working against the party line in the direction of “dual unionism.” The Right wing proposed a united front with the reformists against the Obregonists (and Left wing CROM members) who were splitting the unions. But instead of Mella being expelled from the party at that time, he was successful, together with the Mexico City delegation, in rallying the whole conference, with one exception, to a struggle against the opportunist tail-endism of the Central Committee. This is not the time and place to discuss at length the manner in which the C.E.C., still dominated by the Right wing, carried out the decisions of the September 1928 conference. From a policy of sabotaging the decisions they soon flopped over, under the influence of the new winds from Moscow, to an adventurist sectarian position. Lack of mobility in the most opportune moment, and lack of serious organization afterwards, wrecked from the start what might have become under a more able leadership, the greatest force in the Mexican labor movement.
Much of Julio Mella’s activity while in Mexico was wrapped up in the organization known as the ANERC (Association of New Revolutionary Emigrés from Cuba) and the publication of its Cuba Libre (Free Cuba). Numerous differences arose between the comrades of the Communist fraction of the ANERC in Mexico and the C.E.C. of the C.P. of Mexico, and the relations between Mella and the party leadership became exceedingly tense towards the end of 1928. In the very last days of the year, barely two weeks before his assassination by the agents of President Machado, comrade Julio Mella was expelled from the party by the decision of the C.E.C. They had taken advantage of a very rash letter in which he had declared his inability to collaborate with the party leadership, tendering his resignation. No excuses for this great mistake on Mella’s part can be made but it goes without saying that the C.E.C. adopted anything but the correct attitude when he was so summarily expelled. One week later, that is about January 3, 1929, Mella requested a reconsideration, making a complete recognition of this error on his part. It was decided to reinstate him in the party, with the stipulation that he was to hold no posts of responsibility for a period of three years. On January 10th he was shot dead in the street by Machado’s assassins ...
 



The Communist Party of Mexico is no exception to the general crisis in the Comintern. For many years it was but a very small organization with little ideological foundation and an extremely weak organization. Due to the general development of the petty bourgeois and agrarian revolution, the party from the time of its foundation was permeated with more of a peasant’s than worker’s ideology, and its press always had a greater circulation among the peasantry than in the industrial centers. It was common in those times to hear members of the party Central Committee state that the Mexican Revolution and the Russian Revolution were almost the same thing. The party comrades were always the first to applaud the liberal petty bourgeois measures of the “Leftists” in the government, giving to these elements an almost unconditional support. Almost all of the party’s work among the masses was done under some disguise or another, and party candidates never took part in elections although numerous party members occupied government posts as “agrarians”, “laborites”, “anti-clericals”, etc.
At the time of the Sixth World Congress, the third period was discovered, and immediately the party right-about turned and loped off at the double quick. All of the reforms instituted by the government of the petty-bourgeoisie, which had until then been considered revolutionary gains, were now denounced as counter-revolutionary. The sell-out of the government to American Imperialism, meant that the bourgeoisie had “betrayed” the revolution, and it became a crime overnight for any party member to even sustain personal relations with anyone at all in the government, with which the party had so recently collaborated. It became then the chief earthly desire of every member, to see how often he could be arrested. Even the Mexican section of the I.L.D. converted itself into a simple instrument for attacking the government, driving itself into illegality before the party.
The party press, taking advantage of the objective revolutionary situation created by the bourgeoisie’s capitulation to imperialism and the struggle between the government and reaction, announced that the proletarian revolution was at hand. The masses were called upon to seize the factories and the land; all power was demanded for the Soviets (there were no Soviets, and the party did not give instructions as to their organization – but these are only “details”). Many of us, intoxicated by the excitement of the moment, impressed by the unrest among the peasantry, and overestimating the strength of the party, did not take into account the fact that there was not a simple local of the party or Y.C.L. that was not in disorganization at the time. Fortunately for the Mexican workers and peasants, the C.C. talked and shouted until what was considered the moment for action had passed by. The government of the bourgeoisie, aided by Wall Street, managed to hold its seat and since then has dedicated its attention to the consolidation of its power.
The Communist Party, which due to its romanticism had already slackened up its fundamental work among the masses in order to dream of insurrections, new found itself deserted by the masses that formerly had looked to it for leadership.
Then the expulsions began. First came the agrarian leaders of the National Peasants League who are mostly elements that never should have been admitted into a Communist Party, because of the petty-bourgeois class interests that they represent. Shortly after, with the arrival of two “Third Period experts” in the form of the C.I. and Y.C.I. representatives, the true Stalinization of the organization began. Tendencies and deviations were discovered in the most unlooked for places, and where they were not discovered they were invented. Two ex-Right wingers that came as reps had to make themselves shine in Moscow. The political guillotine commenced to function with extraordinary regularity and precision cutting both to the Right and to the Left. Almost a dozen C.C. and ex-C.C. members of the party and Y.C.L. have been expelled since last September.
The last victim was Jose Gallardo, General Secretary of the Y.C.L., who was sacrificed last week because his report given in Moscow, where he attended the plenum of the E.C.Y.C.I., concerning the organizational strength of the Mexican party, did not agree with the report rendered by the C.I. representative in Mexico.
Together with the “ cleaning of the ranks” on the part of the C.C. has come an intensified repression on the part of the government. At a moment when the party’s influence among the industrial workers is zero, and its influence over the peasantry has dropped more than sixty percent, the Y.C.I. representative together with S., the party C.C. representative in the C.C.Y.C.L. “discovered” that anti-militarist work was not being carried on in Mexico. Half a dozen circulars were sent out demanding an eight hour day for the soldiers and calling on them to form regimental committees, and to send their officers to Hell. This was done in an abstract manner and without any relationship to movements among the proletarian masses. The concrete result was a general repression on the part of the government against the Y.C.L. organizations of the eight largest centers, including the imprisonment of most of the C.E.C. of the Y.C.L.; disorganization of all national youth work and also all youth work in the capital. Ten foreign comrades were expelled from the country and five natives have been interned in the penal colony of the Islas Marias. During these recent repressions, the “ bolshevized “ party has not been able to carry out a single real mass protest. It is also of interest to note that the valiant M., the Y.C.I. representative, found that this was the best time to leave the country, which, he did without even notifying the C.E.C.s of the Party or the League. For six weeks now the Mexican Y.C.L., which a short while ago was stronger than the party, has been unable to budge. Even its funds have been confiscated by the C.E.C. of the party. Money is scarce and the bureaucrats must eat.
This is, briefly, the situation existing today in the Mexican Communist movement. Since the beginning of the “third period”, with the “radicalization of the masses,” the Mexican party has lost eighty percent of its membership, most of its mass influence and contacts, and its weekly organ El Machete. It is now almost completely “bolshevized”. With a few score more members that get disgusted or are thrown out, it will be completely so.
The task of the Communist Opposition, of recent formation and still in its infancy organizationally and politically, consists in saving what is left of the party and Y.C.L. organization, regenerating the movement along true Bolshevik-Leninist lines. The saner elements of the party and youth realize this, and by one means or another we shall manage to build up in Mexico a real Communist Party, capable of leading the proletariat in its struggles.



Mexico City, February 8, 1930


 
Rosalio Negrete



 



The period from April 1929 until August of the same year when the III Congress of the Young Communist Federation of Mexico was celebrated, was one of rapid progress for the Mexican Communist Youth movement. From a small number of non-functioning units, composed mostly of peasants with a disorganized central apparatus, an organization of 660 effective members in over 30 units and a central executive in which half a dozen departments functioned regularly was built up. During this same period, it is well to observe, the Communist Party of Mexico was disintegrating and losing one important position after the other, in the trade union and anti-imperialist movements, and also in the “Workers and Peasants Bloc” that had been formed opportunistically through concessions to the petty bourgeois directors of the National Peasants League (Galvan and Co.).
The national plenum of the C.C. of the Party was obliged to recognize in July 1929 that the youth federation had a better status than the Party and it was generally accepted that the Y.C.F. had more effective members in its organization than the Party itself.
 
The Apparatus Men Get Busy
At this stage, preparations for the III National Congress of the Y.C.F. of Mexico were made and a representative of the Young Communist International, comrade Matlin appeared on the scene. Already there had been several minor struggles on technical questions between the C.E.C. of the Y.C.F. and the C.E.C. of the C.P. in all of which the personal political interests of E. Sormenti, representative of the Party C.E.C. in the corresponding organ of the Y.C.F., were to be seen. Sormenti utilized the C.E.C. of the Y.C.F. as a “big stick” to win his ends in the C.E.C. of the Party.
A very weak political thesis, destructive in its analysis of the past work of the Y.C.F. and with proposals tor the immediate commencement of numerous new “political” tasks was presented by the representative of the Y.C.I. who, it goes without saying, had a very deficient knowledge of the situation, the strength and possibilities of the youth federation. In this thesis it was proposed to commence at once the formation of youth sections in the unions agrarian organizations and in the Red Aid, the organization of nuclei in the army, the organization of a National Sports Federation, of a League of Youth against imperialism, and to call at an early date a national convention of the Red Pioneers. It was declared imperative that the Y.C.F. commence immediately all of these tasks.
When the opposition group continued in it demands that definite stress be laid on the more important work of organization, and the trade unions, and that the anti-militarist, anti-imperialist, young peasants league and youth section of the Red Aid be considered not of immediate importance with practical rejection of the last three the “guardian of the Holy Grail” from Moscow threatened us with expulsion should we insist on carrying the points of difference to the floor of the congress. After some minor changes regarding the criticism of past work, the draft thesis was accepted. In order to prevent a split in the Federation, the opposition group agreed not to bring the question up at the congress.
The congress took place without any opposition to the line of action laid down by the presidium which was controlled by Matlin and Sormenti. Veiled accusations were made against the “liquidationist”, “social democratic” and “anti-Communist” tendencies, of the oppositionist comrades and by employment of true Stalinist methods, such as declaring that “foreigners” could not form part of a Central Committee (!), the new C.C. and C.E.C. were named. Perhaps realizing that the new C.E.C. would have to work under the dictatorship of some Party or international representative and for fear of developing leadership it was decided that no General Secretary should be named, and that all political functions should be carried out collectively by the C.E.C.
Immediately the deficiencies of the new C.E.C. were to be observed. The different theses approved at the congress were not sent to the units or even to the regional committees. All of the work Of the C.E.C. fell into disorganization as no one knew where or how to begin. All the scolding of Matlin and the nearness of the “imminent” workers and peasants revolution could not get the new apparatus to function. The only work that did not become completely demoralized was the press and Pioneer work. Delegates were no longer sent to the interior to carry on . direct work with the units and with the masses.
Knowing that an anti-militarist campaign would be certain to bring down a still more severe repression of the movement by the authorities, and without counting on any real mass support, this work was given not only preference by the Y.C.F. but was actually turned into the principal task of the organization. The spirit of adventure always found in the youth was appealed to, and the comrades in different parts of the country vied with one another in seeing which local could get the generals exasperated first.
No sooner had the campaign been commenced than the repression struck with full force. In a period of about two months all the leading elements of the eight largest urban locals were imprisoned, including the whole C.E.C. with the exception of one comrade, besides many Party and trade union leaders. About 20 foreigners were deported from the country, five comrades (of whom four were members of the Y.C.F. and one of the C.E.C.) were exiled to the penal colony in the Pacific Ocean and the Y.C.F. of Mexico was reduced to complete impotence. The “mass” demonstrations were few, rickety and ineffective. In the midst of all this, after organizing the expulsion of the writer of these lines from the Party and the Y.C.F. for his criticism of the line in Mexico and disagreement with the general splitting policy of the Comintern abroad and greasing the slides for others, Matlin fled cowardly from Mexico, without so much as notifying the Central Executive Committee.
 
Expulsions Continue
At the present time the expulsion fever continues to rage full blast in the C.E.C. of the Y.C.F. which seems to be about to result in its expelling itself. It may be interesting to note that the present C.E.C. of the Y.C.F. of Mexico is composed of one alternate, named in the congress, and two comrades, both of them quite incapable of national direction and who were not elected at the congress.
There is still hope however. This lies in the reorganization of the Young Communist forces in Mexico under the banner of the International Left Opposition. When the present “Left” turn of the Comintern takes its inevitably sharp Right turn, and the sane young Communist elements in Mexico (and there are many) realize the correctness of cur position, we may hope for a rapid improvement of the situation. Those who have striven for the building up of the Y.C.F. of Mexico will not stand quietly by while the organization is smashed under the combined blows of the governmental reaction and the Centrist bureaucracy.
 



Brazil is the fourth South American country to overthrow the government in the course of the last three months.
In Bolivia and Peru, with the sympathy of the great masses, the liberal bourgeoisie staged triumphant movements, and supported by British imperialism managed to defeat the feudal elements which for years, while in power, had worked hand in hand with Wall Street financial interests.
In Argentina the pro-British government of Hipolito Irigoyen was turned out by a military coup of the big bourgeoisie supported by American imperialism. A virtual reign of terror was then instituted against the proletarian organizations. The Communist and anarchist press has been suppressed and several anarchist and anarcho-syndicalist leaders have been executed.
The Brazilian revolt, however, is in reality a much more complex affair than either of the other three countries mentioned. Brazil is in area the largest country in the Western Hemisphere and has a population of 39 million, concentrated principally in different parts of the east and the south. Throughout this immense area the industries and agricultural products are quite diversified and the local governments which have a surprisingly great amount of local autonomy, even to the point of having their own armies, represent generally speaking the respective interests of the local exploiters. The principal crop in the country is coffee, with rubber as an important second and cacao, livestock, grain, mining, etc., also quite important in their respective regions.
The deposed Brazilian government was above all a representative of the coffee interests as was quite natural with coffee as the outstanding commercial product. Brazil produces the bulk of the world’s coffee. During the period of crisis which, especially inasmuch as coffee is concerned, has been very long, the government of Washington Luiz has attempted all sorts of schemes to protect, by artificial means, the interests of coffee growers. First came the valorization plan by which the surplus product was stored to force a rise in prices on the market. After the failure of this scheme, loans were secured in BOTH Great Britain and the United States for the protection of these coffee raisers and to relieve the crisis in the industry. The liberal bourgeoisie whose interests conflict violently with those of the semi-feudal coffee producers protested energetically against these extensive foreign loans which benefited the coffee industries alone.
The recent rebellion was brought about by a combination of all the opposition forces, especially those of the petty bourgeoisie, and representing generally the interests of most of the secondary industries of the country. Counting on a wide mass support, which was natural as a result of the years of dictatorial rule under the Washington Luiz regime, the rebellion was initiated by the action of several states and after some fighting was enabled within a few weeks to dominate the country. As the ship was sinking, the army (whether acting for the coffee growers or not still remains to be seen) threw the president overboard and attempted a compromise with the rebels. The compromise being rejected, the army officers, glad to have saved their own brave hides, were obliged to cede to the demands of the new regime.
 
A False Analysis of the Situation
The Communist Party of Brazil, and in imitation of it, the American Party also, have continually painted the Washington Luiz government as being pro-British, picturing the interests of the semi-feudal coffee interests as identical with those of British imperialism. Although they quite correctly point out that British investments in Brazil are double those of the U.S., they fail to consider that the enormous majority of the Brazilian coffee crop is marketed in New York. This is an entirely false and over-simple analysis of the real case, as both imperialisms are deeply interested in Brazilian coffee, while the secondary industries are controlled some by one imperialism and some of the other. Inasmuch as the rubber industry is concerned, the Washington Luiz regime has shown decided favoritism to the Ford interests as against their British rivals.
Our comrades of the Leninist Left Opposition in Brazil, through their monthly organ A Lucta de Classe have demonstrated clearly the incorrectness of the official Party’s analysis, and have further pointed out that in Brazil, due to the complexities of the economic structure, with the existing diversification of products, each region having its staple, and a mutual though conflicting interest on part of both imperialisms as regards the most important product (coffee), it is impossible to say that either of the two leading imperialist powers actually supported, in the true sense of the word, either one of the two Brazilian parties. Both imperialisms made pacts and agreements with both groups as the particular situation required.
The action of the Wall Street government in rushing to the aid of the old Brazilian regime on the eve of its collapse, undoubtedly induced to lend its support in exchange for promises of future juicy concessions, demonstrates the falsity of the C.P.’s analysis and goes a long way towards confirming that of the Brazilian Left Opposition. Only acrobats can believe the analysis which declares, in the October 21 issue of the Daily Worker, that Wall Street, after having supported the rebellion, turned a triple somersault and flew to the aid of the regime that had already been fatally weakened through its own efforts. The Wall Street millionaires are shrewder politicians than certain of the Daily Worker’s star reporters and are certainly not fools enough to do that.
The official press of the American Communist party has dealt very absurdly with the whole problem from the outset. Until the appearance of the aforementioned article the Worker and the other Party organs shouted loudly that the rebellion was supported by Wall Street. The most ludicrous instance of bureaucratic stupidity of the really naive kind to be found in this already too-much-abused “Third Period” appeared in the Freiheit (Oct. 11, 1930), in an article informing us that a “Mass Communist Uprising Captures the Third Largest City In Brazil.” Nothing was said in the Daily Worker concerning an event, which were it true, would have been of enormous revolutionary significance. In reality all that happened (we were forced to find out through the New York Times), was that during a street demonstration of workers in Bahia, several plate glass windows were smashed and a few street cars were overturned. (We will be called counter-revolutionists for saying this, as we are almost every other time that we tell the truth.)
 
The Party Putsch
In Rio de Janeiro however, it seems that the party comrades, staged a melée, in an attempt to “capture power” ... and were suppressed with numerous casualties, after a couple of hours by the troops and police. The Daily Worker commenting on this last isolated outbreak, which bears all the ear marks of a suicidal putsch, says in its issue of October 28, “The fight of the workers under the leadership of the Communist Party of Brazil shows the deep going radicalization of the masses and the fact that the workers and poor peasants are beginning to put forward their independent demands against their own bourgeoisie as well as against all imperialist forces.”
The C.P. of Brazil has, unfortunately, already discredited itself before the masses because of its “anti-imperialist” adventures and its election fizzle with the “Workers and Peasants Block.” It is incapable with its many opportunist and ultra-Left defects of leading the masses effectively in struggle.
Our small Left Opposition group in Brazil has already in its ranks a number of serious revolutionary fighters expelled from the Party for their consistent struggle against the opportunism of the leadership. The Bolshevik-Leninists of Brazil have before them the task of rallying about themselves the best proletarian elements of the Party in order to reconstitute and build the Brazilian Communist movement, for the organization of the working class and the struggle for Communism in Brazil.
 

