


That the passing of Grace Lee Boggs, a remarkable Chinese American author, activist and humanist philosopher should merit a statement of condolence from President Barack Obama was quite fitting. Grace had been an inspiring and courageous organiser for the Civil Rights and Black Power movement in the US and had worked alongside Martin Luther King, Malcolm X and Rosa Parks.
In 2008 she championed Obama for “providing the authentic, visionary leadership we need in this period,” even comparing him to Martin Luther King, and so it was only right that Obama returned the compliment.
Yet if someone had told the young Grace that after her passing she would receive praise from the White House, she would have been incredulous. For what Obama’s statement neglected to mention was that during the 1940s and 1950s Grace had been a revolutionary socialist who, working in collaboration with figures such as CLR James and Raya Dunayevskaya, made important contributions to Marxist theory.
In 1942, in an article for the Trotskyist journal New International, she had explicitly warned that black Americans “must be wary of regarding every man of their own race, especially those whom the ruling class favours by appointment, as having more than the most superficial colour identity with them ... The government knows the usefulness of Negro administrators to help it maintain its oppressive rule ... Whether Negroes take their orders directly from the white Jim Crow ruling class or from the coloured henchmen or colleagues of this class, the Negro’s lot will remain the same under the existing social order.”
Grace was born Yuk Ping or Jade Peace, Americanised to Grace Chin Lee, on 27 June 1915 above her father’s Chinese restaurant in downtown Providence, Rhode Island, one of seven children. After moving to New York when her father’s business expanded in the “Roaring Twenties,” Grace experienced something of the widespread racism against Chinese Americans.
Her intellect and talent for independent critical thinking saw her aged 16 decide to defy expectations and study philosophy at Barnard College, where she was one of only three students of colour. Amid the Great Depression, Grace later recalled that “what troubled me as an undergraduate major in philosophy was that my professors were an elite who saw themselves as ‘pure reason’ in search of Truth  –  having nothing to do with the world.”
 
Passion
Grace completed a PhD at Bryn Mawr College in 1940 on the American pragmatist philosopher George Herbert Mead, though her emerging intellectual passion was for reading Hegel in the original German. For her, “Hegel was like music.”
Her colour and gender meant Grace had no hope of securing anything but the most menial teaching post, so she moved to Chicago, where she came across the Trotskyist Workers’ Party agitating against poor housing conditions.
In 1941 black Americans were also on the march, and there was a tremendous response to a call by black trade union leader A. Philip Randolph for a March on Washington which successfully forced President Roosevelt to end racist discrimination in the booming war-time defence industry.
As she recalled, “I was attracted to the black movement because Jim Crow in 1940 was so barbaric and because I viewed black struggle as the catalyst for revolutionising this country.” Grace had seen something of the power and potential of a mass movement from below for the first time, and “decided that what I wanted to do with the rest of my life was to become a movement activist in the black community.”
During the Second World War Grace worked alongside mainly black women workers in a defence plant in Brooklyn, New York. She was thrilled by the camaraderie among her fellow workers and helped organise black history classes in coffee breaks.
In 1941, through the Workers’ Party, Grace had had the fortune to meet the black Trinidadian Marxist CLR James, who stopped by Chicago on his way back from organising sharecroppers in south east Missouri.
When he found out I knew German and had studied Hegel, we sat down almost immediately on the red couch in my basement room and began comparing the texts of Marx’s Capital and Hegel’s Logic. That was the beginning of our close collaboration of 20 years.
Grace learnt her Marxism through joining James’s small current within US Trotskyism, known as the Johnson-Forest Tendency (from James’s and Dunayevskaya’s pseudonyms, “J.R. Johnson” and “Freddie Forest”).
Under her own pseudonym “Ria Stone” Grace soon emerged as a leading theorist of this group, and would later co-author several pioneering works of Marxist theory with James and Dunayevskaya, including The Invading Socialist Society and State Capitalism and World Revolution.
Grace was particularly convinced by James and Dunayevskaya’s Marxist analysis of the Soviet Union under Stalinist dictatorship as a form of state capitalism rather than any form of socialism. As she recalled in an interview in 2000:
“Regardless of whether the state or private capitalists owned the means of production, Soviet workers in the process of production were still being exploited, dehumanised, and deprived of their ‘natural and acquired powers’ in the way described by Marx in Capital.
“I was attracted to the state capitalist position on the Soviet Union because it seemed much more dialectical. It embodied much more the way of thinking of Hegel, whom I had studied, because it recognised that new contradictions could arise out of great struggles for liberation and that progress did not take place in a straight line. I was also rather attracted to it because it emphasised the humanity of the workers rather than property relationships.
When Dunayevskaya found a Russian translation of Marx’s 1844 Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts in New York Public Library, Grace translated three of Marx’s essays from the original German into English, and in 1947 these were published by the Johnson-Forest Tendency, their first ever publication in English.
 
Dehumanisation
That year she also wrote an afterword to The American Worker, a detailed analysis of class struggle at the point of production written by a General Motors worker Phil Singer (under the pseudonym Paul Romano), which stressed the importance of Marx’s theory of alienation  –  developed in the 1844 Manuscripts  –  to understanding the dehumanisation which accompanies exploitation in the labour process.
In 1950 the Johnson-Forest Tendency broke with the official Trotskyist movement to form their own independent Marxist current, and in 1953 Grace moved to Detroit, finding work as an office worker in the local car plants. She soon married James Boggs, a member of the group and a militant at the local Chrysler-Jefferson car plant  –  an organic intellectual of the organised black working class. On their honeymoon in Alabama the couple had to sleep in their car because Southern motels refused to accept mixed-race couples.
The post-war economic boom, the development of new technology in factory production, the conservatism of the trade union bureaucracy and the lack of response from most white workers in the US to the growing Civil Rights movement led Grace and James Boggs to declare in 1961 that the US working class was “backward and bourgeoisified.” For them hope now lay in revolutions in the Third World and marginalised outsiders such as young black people.
This abandonment of Marxism’s stress on the centrality of the working class as the agent of change in society led the Boggses to politically split with CLR James in 1962. Grace’s subsequent tireless and heroic work as a local anti-racist organiser in Detroit nonetheless won her an audience among militants around the League of Revolutionary Black Workers in Detroit  –  and so confused the FBI that they thought she must be “Afro-Chinese.”
The defeats of the liberation movements which had reached their height in the late 1960s by the 1970s and 1980s now led James and Grace Boggs to shift even further away from Marxism towards what they called “dialectical humanism,” which sought to “advance beyond the idea that all radicals have held  –  that in order to advance socialism, you must first smash capitalism. We have to advance towards the new society by projecting an entirely different way to live and by building new social ties.”
In the face of the devastating de-industrialisation of Detroit, the one-time jewel of US industrial capitalism, James and Grace Boggs now saw the fight as not primarily one to save jobs and defend public services but to try and “re-civilise our society” through fostering “collective self-reliance,” “creating support networks to look out for each other and moving onto community gardens and greenhouses, community recycling projects, community repair shops, community day care networks, community mediation centres.”
 
Creative
Grace Lee Boggs did much to clarify the classical Marxist conception of the revolutionary and creative role of the working class at a time when Stalinism meant that for many people socialism had come to be seen merely as state ownership without revolutionary democracy or workers’ control. Even though she moved away from this she remained an eloquent moral critic of capitalism.
Moreover, her record of activism from the 1941 March on Washington against Jim Crow up to the Occupy movement in 2011 ensures that she will rightly be remembered and honoured. In the words of veteran American radical Dan Georgakas  –  co-author of the classic work on the League of Revolutionary Black Workers, Detroit: I do mind dying  –  Grace Lee Boggs was “a long-time legendary figure in Detroit and in the black liberation movement.”
As that movement re-emerges to confront the systematic murderous racism of the US state and society under the banner #BlackLivesMatter it can learn much from her life and work.
 

tone: China - Colossus of the East (February 1944)




Grace Lee Boggs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Ria Stone
China – Colossus of the East
The National Revolution and the Imperialists
(February 1944)

From New International, Vol. X, No. 2 (Whole No. 83), February 1944, pp. 47–50.
Transcribed & marked up by Damon Maxwell.
Proofread by Einde O’ Callaghan (May 2013).

For the last seven years, substantial sections of the American bourgeoisie have taken upon themselves the job of spokesmen for “heroic China.” By so doing they have created among the American people an unprecedented interest in the future of the people of China.
After the First World War the American bourgeoisie took the lead in furthering imperialist exploitation of China. They will do so again after World War II unless the American workers are alert to the aims of American capital and assert their class solidarity with the Chinese masses.
 
Part I – Background of Revolution
Modern China has never known a state of normalcy. For over half a century the constant miseries of her close to half a billion people have been punctuated and deepened by foreign wars, civil wars, revolutions and counter-revolutions. These political upheavals have occurred against a background of changing economic conditions, bringing into play new popular forces and ideas.
Ancient China was invaded innumerable times, but the invaders never brought with them a revolutionizing culture. For two thousand years before the British bombardment of Chinese ports in the early nineteenth century, the old static economy was constantly reproduced. Dynastic heads were cut off, but the peasants invariably found the new dynasty but another surname for the old social order. Warlords, landlords and emperors joined hands to exploit the peasant masses or, in rivalry among themselves, rode to and fell from power on the strength of the peasant revolts. In the middle of the seventeenth century the peasant rebels achieved such strength that the foreign enemy had to be invited in from Manchuria by the bankrupt Mings to suppress them. For the next two hundred and fifty years the Manchus ruled the country as foreign conquerors, unable to alter the pattern of Chinese culture or stabilize the conflicts between the Chinese masses and their exploiters.
 
The Bankruptcy of the Manchus
The entry of Western imperialism in the nineteenth century disrupted the old economic structure, introducing new classes, new chaos, new struggles. In the West, the invaders themselves were undergoing revolutionary economic and political changes, forcing them into conflict with one another. As the decades passed, China more and more became the battlefield for these conflicts which were put aside only when the Chinese masses became a serious threat to all imperialism.
China’s handicraft industry declined almost to zero as she became a market for the cheaper machine-made goods of the West. Merchants and officials in the coastal areas became compradores for foreign trade and capital and with their accumulated profits bought up more land and expropriated the peasants. The unemployed artisans and uprooted peasants formed the mass base for the Taiping or Great Peace Rebellion of 1850–65. Wherever this rebellion succeeded (and at one time the rebels held sixteen of China’s eighteen provinces), there were instituted not only agrarian reforms, such as destruction of land titles, but also bourgeois and national reforms, such as stimulation of the internal market, abolition of slavery, and suppression of the British-sponsored opium trade. The ultimate failure of this embryonic bourgeois and national revolution was dictated by British and American imperialism, acting directly through their soldiers and indirectly through their compradors. The Manchus who had, in the first place, been called in to suppress the peasant masses, now found themselves forced to call upon more powerful foreign forces to protect their rule. The strength of the revolutionary masses had reached new heights. But just as the primitive agriculture and handicraft of China had been unable to compete against Western manufactures and industry, the Chinese peasants and artisans were unable to win out against foreign guns and steel bullets. Kept “peaceful” by two hundred years of Manchu occupation, they had only their religious fanaticism and occult practices to arm them against modern weapons.
Nevertheless, for several decades, the Chinese masses kept China in turmoil, battering down the Manchu dynasty, already spent from its efforts to limit the inroads of Western capitalism. Every sign of weakness on the part of the Manchus was a signal for an uprising against the privileged classes. Every sign of strength among the masses was a signal for the Western powers to come to the defense of the decadent Manchus. This triangular pattern will be reproduced in every great crisis of modern China.
 
Birth of the Chinese Bourgeoisie
In the first few decades of Western imperialism, the Chinese ruling class had played a comprador role for the imperialist merchants and exploiters of China’s natural resources. As imperialism took on the character of capital export after the Sino-Japanese war, industry began to develop in the treaty ports. The defeat of the Manchus by the rising Japanese bourgeoisie exposed once and for all the weakness of the old ruling class. It thus both stimulated more wanton aggression by the imperialists and called forth a Chinese bourgeoisie to take over the reins of the nation. In the inviting security of foreign-controlled coastal China, the Chinese landlords and commercial capitalists became industrial capitalists, building cotton and weaving mills, match factories and silk filatures. Banks were established and a Chinese bourgeoisie with its fingers in commerce, industry and finance was born. This new class required progressive political reforms for its new economic role, but it was too weak to exact these from the old feudal regime. The imprisonment in 1898 of the young emperor, enlightened by bourgeois pressure, demonstrated the futility of the bourgeois intellectuals as the political instrument of China’s industrial revolution.
China’s need for an agrarian and industrial revolution, however, did not rest in the bourgeois intellectuals. The increasingly pauperized masses in the countryside had begun to recuperate from their exhaustion after the unsuccessful Taiping rebellion. Famine, the incessant plague of a country without modern transport, added to the unrest. At the turn of the century, the masses rose again. This time their accumulated grievances against the Manchus could be deflected against a new enemy – the foreign invaders whose railways and missionaries had penetrated beyond the coast. These revolts, known as the Boxer Rebellion, were again doomed to failure. Perverted by the decadent Manchu bureaucracy, again organized only with primitive and esoteric practices against modern weapons in the hands of strong imperialist forces, with no key position in the new Chinese economy, the rebellious masses went down to defeat by the Powers. These carried out the counter-revolution with a brutality and a ruthlessness not exceeded by Hitler’s crimes in Europe today. The Allied forces occupied Peking, where Britain and Germany, supported by the United States, became the dominant powers.
Nevertheless, the masses had tasted some fruits of their growing power. It was the unwillingness of the Manchu soldiers to fire upon the peasants which had forced the Empress Dowager to turn the revolt into a struggle for national liberation. Moreover, the Boxer soldiers had joined in battle with the combined armies of European, Russian, American and Japanese imperialism, and acquitted themselves creditably. Foreigners in the interior had been compelled to flee to the ports or leave the country entirely. What the ruling class had been too weak to achieve had been accomplished by the peasant masses. Only the revolutionary activity of the Chinese masses had saved China from being divided up, like Africa, among the Powers.
 
The Republican Revolution
During the next ten years hardly a year passed without riots and insurrections. The Empress Dowager was compelled to make all sorts of promises of popular government and reform. The scene of the popular movement had begun to shift from the countryside to the coast, and even beyond that, to the overseas areas where Cantonese emigrants had become workers and shopkeepers, and Chinese students had come to learn about the West. The 1905 revolution in Russia is the contribution of this decade to the history of mass struggle. From this time on, the sections of the Chinese population most intimate with the modern world will play the decisive role. Modern forms of struggle, the boycott, mass demonstrations, strikes and cooperation between the civilians and soldiery will replace simple violence reinforced by charms and other occult weapons.
By 1911 these methods, utilized by petty capitalists, merchants, intellectuals and workers, had enabled the petty bourgeoisie to overthrow the Manchu dynasty, which had become a complete slave to foreign imperialism. Again, famine is the scourge which drives the masses to action, while the stimulus for the Chinese capitalists is a Manchu railway sell-out to German, British, French and American bankers.
Sun Yat-sen, the leader of the republican movement, stood half way between the old China and the new. In his early youth he had close association with the Taipings. In his later years he fraternized with Western missionaries, bankers and overseas Chinese. Sun Yat-sen was a petty bourgeois humanitarian with the limitations of his class and of his time. His methods for achieving the “Three People’s Principles” (San Min Chu I) of nationalism, democracy and livelihood, reflected his lack of contact with the developing mass movement, his confidence in the Western imperialists and his semi-conspiratorial leanings. Instead of calling upon the masses to oust the imperialist exploiters, he bowed before the Powers and asked them for benevolent cooperation. Instead of calling upon the masses to achieve self-government through exercise of political liberties, he asked them to accept preliminary periods of military rule and political tutelage by the enlightened intelligentsia. Instead of agrarian revolution and wide-spread economic reorganization, he advocated gradual equalization of rights in the land and restriction of capital. With no economic base in Chinese society. Sun Yat-sen and his followers utilized the method of playing one military clique against another. Thus, a few months after his election to the presidency of the young republic, Sun Yat-set voluntarily resigned in favor of Yuan Shih-kai, a warlord notorious for his betrayal of the enlightened emperor in 1898 and for his support of the foreigners against the Boxer revolutionists in 1900. With the aid of the Powers, Yuan then proceeded to suppress all efforts to introduce reform into China. With the aid of American capital, he attempted in 1915 to restore the monarchy, only to be frustrated by the pressure of Great Britain, Japan, Russia and France.
 
Division of China Among the Powers
The Powers, which were as one when social revolution threatened in China, were at loggerheads as soon as this threat was removed. The death of Yuan Shih-kai in 1915 and the inter-imperialist war in Europe threw China into a civil war between the feudal warlords, each backed by a rival imperialist but united in their determination to maintain the feudal system of exploitation. The Powers were more generous overlords of the Chinese ruling class than the Manchus had been. They did not require civil service examinations for the right to exploit the masses, and they provided comfortable and safe foreign settlements where the landlords could escape from the rebellious peasants.
Up to and during the First World War, regional armies, made up of the ever-increasing floating population, were to aggravate the misery of the Chinese masses by banditry, battles and military requisitions. Lacking modern communications and divided by dialects, the mass movement was forced into local channels and dominated by local warlords. Throughout, the rival imperialist powers continued the economic invasion which drove the peasants to banditry, and the political and financial maneuvers which kept the provincial armies at each other’s throats. Every progressive Chinese movement was refused recognition by the Powers. Every sign of reaction was encouraged. British assistance to the warlords in 1922 enabled them to oust Sun Yat-sen from Canton, where he had set up a relatively democratic government. The American government took the initiative in refusing to permit China to recognize the Soviet government. The Washington Conference in 1921 marked America’s assertion of dominance in the Far East. At this conference, Japan’s rape of China in the Twenty-one Demands was confirmed by America as a blow to Germany, Britain and Russia. At this conference, also, the Americans provided the formula whereby maintenance of foreign troops in China was legalized.
 
The Proletariat Asserts Itself
China’s participation in the First World War had merely provided the front behind which the rival imperialists could work out their schemes for repartitioning the country. Nevertheless, the war gave Chinese industry a chance to expand, comparatively unhandicapped by competition with foreign production and the world market. Out of this development of the productive forces grew a bolder Chinese bourgeoisie intent on ousting the foreign imperialists. The development of the bourgeoisie as a class, however, was inevitably accompanied by the development of an industrial proletariat, locked in conflict with both foreign and Chinese employers within the process of production. The concentration and organization of the mass struggle accompanied the concentration and growth of industry. For the first time in modern history, China had given birth to a class strong and united enough to oust the imperialists. Leading the agrarian movement which was organized rapidly into peasant leagues, the workers in the major industrial areas of China carried out a revolution from 1926 to 1927. The success of this revolution depended on the masses pursuing a clear-cut policy of class struggle against their native exploiters at the same time that they raised the slogan of national liberation. Even the sketchiest acquaintance with China’s previous history demonstrated without a doubt that “only the deepening of the revolution could save it” from the Allied forces. These, as always, stood ready to intervene the moment the Chinese ruling class needed their aid against the Chinese masses. This time it was the weakness in policy rather than the weakness in arms which doomed the rebellious masses to failure. The misleadership of the Third International, deluding the masses into a reliance on the Chinese bourgeoisie and landlords, brought about the betrayal of the revolution. The native exploiting elements, an inseparable amalgam of landlords, industrialists and bankers, led the Kuomintang. Confronted with a proletarian revolution, these elements now compromised with the foreign imperialists, who had learned to exploit class differences in the nationalist movement as they had exploited regional differences a decade before.
True to its traditions, the Chinese ruling class bowed to the foreign enemy to save itself from the native proletariat and peasantry. With the aid of foreign gunboats and money, Chiang Kai-shek beheaded the mass movement and brought the Chinese bourgeoisie to power. In the main industrial areas of China, there was instituted a naked anti-labor dictatorship. Now the bourgeoisie came to power on the wave of mass revolt as once the feudal dynasties had triumphed.
From the petty bourgeois radicalism of Sun Yat-sen, the Kuomintang had developed into a full-fledged bourgeois party with many of the political instruments of a fascist government. Blue Shirts, C.C. Corps and other terroristic agencies were organized to stamp out every sign of struggle among the masses.
The power and position of the new regime is symbolized by the appellation “Soong Dynasty.” Chiang Kai-shek derives political prestige as the successor to Sun Yat-sen. His wife is Mei-Ling Soong, the sister of Madame Sun Yat-sen. The Minister of Finance is T.V. Soong, Mei-Ling’s brother. And still another Soong is married to H.H. Kung, the Minister of Industry, Labor and Commerce. Three of the four members of the Joint Bank Board are members of the Soong Dynasty; the Generalissimo is chairman. China’s traditional nepotism has taken on modern bourgeois dress.
After the success of the counter-revolution, the remnants of the mass movement retreated to the interior where, under the leadership of Chinese Communists, local peasant uprisings and wars against the Kuomintang armies brought scattered successes and failures. For a period, the agrarian movement, less subject to the “direct operations of the hangmen of the counter-revolution,” rode high. Poorly armed and fed, these peasant forces fought innumerable heroic battles with the armies of Chiang Kai-shek, whom the imperialists supplied with the most modern weapons. After a defeat in 1934, they were finally forced to withdraw to the Northwest. Even then despite the series of disasters which they had undergone, the desperate peasants within the Communist-led armies showed their courage and discipline under the rigors of the “Long March,” one of the most remarkable mass expeditions in all history.
 
America and the Counter-Revolution
Since the defeat of the 1927 revolution, Chiang Kai-shek’s claim to hegemony over China has rested entirely upon his support by the imperialist powers, jointly or severally. As one who could be trusted to preserve the treaty privileges of the powers in China, the Generalissimo has never ceased to be the recipient of political support, money and arms. The Powers have encouraged by every possible means every expedition of Chiang’s which would keep alive the flame of internecine war and prevent national defense of China from imperialist aggression. Without their support the devastation of the country and the massacres of millions of Chinese by Chiang’s armies could never have occurred. Whenever any opponent of the Generalissimo’s has shown signs of strength, the Powers have not hesitated to intervene with troops to wipe him out, as at Shantung in 1928 against Chang Tso-lin, or at Shanghai in 1932 against the Nineteenth Route Army under Tsai Ting-kai In both cases, Japanese troops played the hand, but the Powers, especially the United States, dealt the cards. American officers built up the Chiang Kai-shek air forces during the ’Thirties for bombing expeditions against Communist and other opponents of the Generalissimo, including hundreds of thousands of civilians. Only the mutiny of some of Chiang’s troops in 1936 and their flight to join the rebel forces of the South prevented another bloody massacre by American-sent airplanes. Long before Pearl Harbor American silver purchases in China made the Chiang Kai-shek government at Nanking a financial dependency of the United States.
Throughout, the Powers have drawn the line at aiding the Chiang Kai-shek government when it has been a question of resistance to imperialist aggression.
 
National Liberation for the Chinese Masses
It is for this reason that the mass movement in China during the last ten years has tended to assume nationalistic form, i.e., of resistance to Japan as the most overt aggressor. Not only for underlying class reasons, but also because of Chiang’s patent subservience to American imperialism, the mass movement was also bound to be anti-Chiang Kai-shek. The national and class struggles in China have hence been inextricably intertwined. The nation could be defended only by combining the struggle against Chiang Kai-shek with the struggle against imperialism. The policy of the Chinese Communists before 1935, which called for struggle against Japan and against Chiang Kai-shek, aroused popular support throughout China. The heroic defense of Shanghai against the Japanese by the Nineteenth Route Army in 1932, over the active opposition of Chiang, symbolized to the Chinese masses their potential power and the treachery of Chiang. The kidnapping of the Generalissimo at Sian in 1936 by the troops of the Young Marshall was further evidence that the peasants in the North were willing to carry on a combined struggle against Japan and against Chiang Kai-shek. Again, it was the disastrous policy of the Kremlin and the treachery of the warlord leaders in the North which misled the masses into a popular front with Chiang Kai-shek. Even Agnes Smedley, notorious as a Stalinist fellow-traveler, reports that a “wave of cynical resentment against the Soviet Union swept through Sian” when the Kremlin instructed the Chinese Communists to see to the Generalissimo’s release. [1]
Not only China’s whole past but all subsequent events have demonstrated that the Chinese ruling class is unable to conduct the national defense. In their own interests and in the interests of their imperialist sponsors, the Chinese exploiters have never abandoned the struggle against the Chinese masses nor hesitated to accede to imperialist demands for dividing up China in return for support against mass rebellion. Only the revolutionary activity of the masses has prevented the partitioning of China among the Powers.
Up to the Lukouchiao incident of July 7, 1937, and even after it, Chiang was unable to decide whether his main enemy was at home or in Tokyo. The revival of industry in China after the world depression had strengthened the Chinese bourgeoisie and emboldened it against the Japanese aggressor. But with more than the usual hesitation of the bourgeoisie to institute a national war for liberation, it continued to hope that Japan could be deflected by threats and appeals to the other Powers.
The war against Japan has been going on for more than six and a half years. During these years, however, it has not been one China but several Chinas that have been fighting. Roughly, these China’s may be classified as Chiang Kai-shek’s China in the Southwest, the China controlled by the Communists in the North, and the China of the East under Japanese domination. [2] In the first, the bourgeoisie is linked inextricably with Anglo-American imperialism; in the second, the leadership has ties with Russia. In the third, the proletariat is locked in class as well as national opposition to the Japanese and is beyond the direct control of the Chinese bourgeoisie. Analysis of these three Chinas will repay the revolutionist well. For as Japanese imperialism crumbles in the Far East, the conflicts between these Chinas will sooner or later break out in civil war and social revolution.
(To be continued)

Footnotes
1. Battle Hymn of China, New York 1943.
2. Approximately eighty per cent of China’s territory is “free” and about sixty per cent of her population. The exact size and population of the different areas are impossible to determine. Military retreats and victories and mass migrations shift the picture constantly. Natural disasters, like famines, droughts and floods, and man-made disasters, like war and expropriation, have made millions of Chinese a migratory population.
 

one: China Under Japanese Domination (May 1944)



Grace Lee Boggs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Ria Stone
China Under Japanese Domination – IV
Japan and the Capitalists in Eastern China
(May 1944)

From New International, Vol. X No. 5 (Whole No. 86), May 1944, pp. 154–156.
Transcribed & marked up by Damon Maxwell.
Proofread by Einde O’ Callaghan (May 2013).

(Continued from last issue)
Japanese control extends over all the areas of China which had been industrialized to any degree before the war.
All Chinese factories which were not destroyed were either seized outright or reorganized under joint Sino-Japanese management. “Cooperating” Chinese, in North China at least, usually continued to get half of the profits from their own enterprises. [1] To Northern China, where little industry had been developed before the invasion, Tokyo sent heavy and light machinery to extract profits from Chinese labor. [2] Mineral deposits were developed and communications built to transport needed raw materials to Japan. Japanese manufacture became the source of supply for Chinese workers and peasants.
The Chinese bourgeoisie met this economic aggression either by “cooperation,” flight or reorganization of their firms under Western control (until Pearl Harbor). Many of the Western capitalists welcomed the Japanese as protectors of foreign “rights” in China.
Politically, the Japanese tried to gain the favor of the Chinese bourgeoisie and the Western capitalists by their program for the eradication of communism. At Peking they set up a regime, now known as the Political Council of North China, under Wang Keh-min, erstwhile president of the Bank of China. At Nanking they set up Wan Ching-wei as president of the “National Government of China” and as “true” leader of the Kuomintang.
To the Chinese the Japanese posed as the liberators of Asia from Western imperialism. [3] To meet this political offensive, Britain and America, on October 10, 1942, announced the relinquishment of extraterritoriality. In a counter-offensive, on January 10, 1943, Japan signed a treaty with the Wang Ching-wei government, relinquishing extra-territoriality and promising to restore to the Nanking regime all rights in Japanese concessions as well as in those which her army seized from Britain. The native bourgeoisie had desired this for years but had been unable to wrest it from Western imperialism. The puppet regime at Peking expressed “sincere thanks to the Japanese authorities for their kindness and this impartial step, which selfish Britain and America had never even dreamed of.”
 
Japan and the Proletariat in Eastern China
Very few reports have come through from the Japanese-occupied cities of China and the data on the proletariat is therefore extremely limited. The most complete study has been made of Shanghai [4], and this key city has thus been chosen as the chief subject of the present section.
Shanghai has been for more than half a century the crucible in which conflicting imperialist and class forces could be seen in struggle. At Shanghai was concentrated the majority of foreign and native mills and factories, banks and motor vehicles. It was at Shanghai before the war that the Japanese had their largest industrial investments. It was at Shanghai that the workers carried out an insurrection in February 1927 and it was at Shanghai that Chiang Kai-shek found sufficient bourgeois and imperialist support to dare his open betrayal of the Chinese revolution.
At Shanghai, from 1927 to 1937, the workers were most hostile to the Chiang Kai-shek government, which in cooperation with the Japanese and Western employers had clamped down on the right of Chinese workers to organize and strike, destroyed their unions and killed or imprisoned their leaders.
Before the outbreak of hostilities, industry in the International Settlement was employing 200,000 to 250,000 workers. The outbreak of the war brought a sharp decline to an industrial payroll of only 27,000 in December, 1937. At the same time, hundreds of thousands of refugees flocked in from war-torn China, seeking employment in foreign industry and safety beneath Anglo-American guns. The cessation of industry, combined with the tremendous influx of refugees, reduced the Shanghai workers to living in camps, scooping refuse from garbage pails for food, and finally in large numbers finding their last resting place in the huge piles of exposed corpses that littered the streets.
By December, 1938, however, Shanghai industry had staged a remarkable recovery. The number of employed workers had again jumped to 237,000. This phenomenal gain was possible and necessary principally because of the huge mass of cheap labor that was available and which, unemployed, constituted a threatening political force to both Japanese and Western capitalists.
The Japanese invaders needed rice for their populations at home and took it. Wealthy Chinese saw the enormous profits in rice speculation and hoarded. Living costs for the workers soared. By 1940 the real wages of the Shanghai workers had fallen to 55.43 from the 1936 index of 100.
The administrators of the International Settlement refused to control prices on the ground that it “was better for Shanghai to have rice at a high price than no rice at all.” This was all very well for those gentry and capitalists who could pay the high price. The masses in the streets rioted seventy times in December, 1939, and in June, 1940, staged another epidemic of rice riots.
In the eight months of 1937, preceding the declaration of war, 80,820 workers had been involved in 213 strikes. When war came, the worker was thrown out of his job and his main thought was simple survival. Gradually as the war moved away from Shanghai and industry recovered, the proletariat began to revive its pre-war militancy.
In 1938 there were thirty-four strikes and in 1939, ninety-six. By October 1940, the number had jumped to 247 for the first ten months alone. These strikes involved 110,642 workers. The strike movement of 1940 indicated that the proletariat, although competing hard even for the chance at employment, was no longer demoralized.
From the beginning of the war to May 1939, the Shanghai labor unions had maintained continuous relations with the Chinese national government. During this period, strikes were discouraged by the Kuomintang because they might embarrass the Anglo-American employers, whose aid Chiang wanted against Japan. From May to November 1939 labor activity was stimulated by the Japanese against Western employers. The Japanese formed a Chinese Republic Workers League as a means toward this end but dropped it like a hot potato when they found it impossible to control. Next the Japanese organized the Chinese Workers Welfare Organization. This organization was disbanded when the Western employers refused to bargain with it. In the fall of 1940 there was a large-scale transport strike, partly political but basically grounded in the miserable working conditions of the strikers. All ruling elements recognized this strike as a danger to the peace and order of Shanghai and combined to break it. In December 1940 there occurred a police strike.
Thus, when last heard of, the Shanghai proletariat was proving itself unmanageable by the Japanese and a danger to the combined dueling forces of Shanghai.
The destruction of so much Chinese property and industry in the early months of the war diffused the Chinese bourgeoisie. After Pearl Harbor the Western capitalists were forced to flee. The Shanghai proletariat found its old native and Western enemies displaced as social powers. Chiang Kai-shek, that deadly foe of the Shanghai proletariat, was there-tore forced to appeal to it to undermine the Japanese occupation. As early as 1939, Chiang was speaking to the workers in the following vein:
“As your spirit is the most revolutionary, so your faith in the ideology of resistance must be firmer and firmer as time goes on ... You must realize that your strength is as great as that of our soldiers at the front ... Strengthen your organizations ... Those of you who work in factories, if only you would refuse to work, then our enemy would not be able to make any profits.”
Against the Japanese and the Chinese Quislings, no serious force exists in Shanghai except the Shanghai proletariat – a proletariat which has no reason to love the Chinese ruling class and which has seen itself sacrificed time and again to rival national and international armies. In Asia, as in Europe, it is the proletariat which has been left to bear the bur-dens of living under the invaders and on whom therefore the bourgeoisie must rely for the national resistance.
We still know very little about the activity of the Shanghai proletariat today. Compared to the magnitude of its task, it is very small. But it has exhibited its revolutionary temper and capacity before, and it will not stand alone.
 
The Allies of the Shanghai Proletariat
Not only will the Shanghai workers find allies among the peasants throughout China. In backward Southwestern China, industrialization by the Chiang Kai-shek government is creating a proletariat, still small in numbers but being organized by the government itself in large-scale production and into unions. In the North the Japanese imperialists are bringing an industrial development hitherto unknown in this region.
In Southern China, for forty years the breeding place of revolutionary sentiments, significant changes have also taken place. From Hong Kong and Canton, thousands of workers have fled to their homes in the interior, bringing with them their training in the class struggles of capitalist production and their revolutionary experiences.
After the First World War, returned workers from the West played an important role in the organization of Chinese trade unions. Before the Second World War, overseas Chinese were, for the most part, petty bourgeois merchants and proprietors or employees in small shops, owned by their relatives. Today Chinese workers in the United States, for example, are for the first time employed in any numbers in the basic industries or conscripted into the modern American army.
The overseas Chinese workers have experienced the harsh discrimination of Western society and have no illusions about Anglo-American friendship for the Chinese. Generally known is the refusal of Chiang Kai-shek, under British pressure, to permit Chinese soldiers under Tsai Ting-kai to participate in the defense of Hong Kong. The British preferred to let Hong Kong fall into Japanese hands rather than risk its defense by a large Chinese army.
The virtual peonage in which Chinese merchant seamen have been held in British ships and the refusal of the American government to permit them on shore have already resulted in riots and violence.
Finally the foundations are being laid in Eastern China for international class solidarity between the Chinese and the Japanese masses. The Japanese policy of developing North China industrially has brought the largest influx of Japanese settlers, peasants and workers. The Chinese have discovered a new kind of foreigner, an invader who has coolies as well as gentlemen. As many as 25,000 Japanese army “engineers” have labored alongside 63,000 Chinese coolies to build bridges. Japan’s imperialist policy has created a situation in which class solidarity can be forged on the basis of common misery in the process of capitalist production.
Already Chinese soldiers and seamen in Japanese-officered troops and ships have mutinied and brought their arms and ships over to the Chinese. [5] Every action of this kind brings closer the inevitable demoralization in the ranks of the Japanese invasion forces.
 
Conclusion
After the First World War, the revolutionary upsurge passed to Asia only after it had spent itself in the West. The war had been fought primarily on European soil. Japan had taken advantage of the European war to begin her assertion of independent imperialist action in China. China during the war and for years thereafter was at the nadir of her political power. Nevertheless, China had developed industrially during the war. And the revolution which had precipitated the end of the war had been a semi-Asiatic revolution. It was therefore inevitable that the workers and peasants of China should assert themselves, as they so heroically did, in the 1925–27 revolution. [6]
The Second World War in reality began in China and is an Asiatic as well as a European war. The war, in Asia as well as in Europe proper, brought to a head the incompetence of the bourgeoisie to carry through the defense of the nation. As a result, soon after the beginning of the war, and in China even before, the process of differentiation between the masses of the people and the old ruling classes was taking place on a geographical basis.
At the end of the war, revolutions will occur all over Europe. These events cannot fail to produce effects at a very early date both on the bourgeoisie and the proletariat and peasantry of Asia. The collapse of Mussolini, brought about by the Italian workers, shook the whole Axis camp. The effects of the collapse of Germany will be immeasurably more drastic on the sole remaining Axis partner. Whether the proletariat and peasants of Japan or China or India will be first to move into action, it is impossible to say. But from the pre-ceding analysis, we may safely anticipate that the Chinese masses will play a dramatic and decisive role in the world revolutionary upsurge after the Second World War.

Footnotes
1. America’s Hole in Asia, by Harry Paxton Howard, New York, 1943, page 255.
2. Japan Fights for Asia, by John Goette, New York, 1943, page 154.
3. Before Pearl Harbor the Germans offered Britain a plan to save the International Settlement from Japanese hands. The price was German representation on the Municipal Council of the Settlement. Fear of popular indignation at home kept the British from accepting the offer. Goette, op. cit., page 224.
4. Economic Shanghai: Hostage to Politics, by Robert W. Barnett, Institute of Pacific Relations.
5. New York Times, June 30, 1943, and September 15, 1943.
6. In Japan itself, from 1918 to 1923, hardly a year passed without virtual civil war between Japanese workers and peasants and Japanese government forces. (Howard, op. cit., pages 85–86)
 

tone: China - Colossus of the East (February/May 1944)



Grace Lee Boggs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Ria Stone
China: Colossus of the East
(February/May 1944)

From New International, Vol. X No. 2 (Whole No. 83), February 1944, pp. 47–50, Vol. X No. 3 (Whole No. 84), March 1944, pp. 79–84, Vol. X No. 4 (Whole No. 85), April 1944, pp. 126–128 & Vol. X No. 5 (Whole No. 86), May 1944, pp. 154–156.
Transcribed & marked up by Damon Maxwell.
Proofread by Einde O’ Callaghan (May 2013).

I. China – Colossus of the East

II. The China of Chiang Kai-Shek

III. China Under the Stalinists

IV. China Under Japanese Domination
 

tone: China Under the Stalinists (April 1944)




Grace Lee Boggs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Ria Stone
China Under the Stalinists – III
National Revolution and Peasant Revolt
(April 1944)

From New International, Vol. X No. 4 (Whole No. 85), April 1944, pp. 126–128.
Transcribed & marked up by Damon Maxwell.
Proofread by Einde O’ Callaghan (May 2013).

(Continued from last issue)
Ever since the great Russian Revolution of 1917 the Chinese masses have been inspired by the example of the Russian workers and peasants. From 1920 to 1927 they flocked to the banner of the Communist Party so that it grew almost overnight into a mass party. Even after the betrayal by the Stalinists in the 1926-27 revolution, the Red Armies in the interior were able to attract millions of peasants by driving out the landlords and sponsoring the division of the land.
Compromises with rich peasants and isolation from urban workers finally made it impossible for the Soviet districts to resist Chiang Kai-shek’s armies, and the Communists migrated to the Northwest. The “Long March” to the Northwest is itself a testimony to the strength of the Chinese masses in their desperation and to the great symbolic hold of the. Russian Revolution over their aspirations.
Today there are three main areas either completely or partially under Communist control or influence. These are:

The frontier area, made up of the Northwest provinces of Shensi, Kansu and Ningshia.

This area, west of the Yellow River and South of the Great Wall, is bounded on the north and west by Mongolia and Tibet. It has been one of the most backward sections of China and has a population of only approximately two million. The government of this area is a direct continuation of the Chinese Soviet Republic, formally liquidated when the anti-Japanese United Front was formed, but maintaining complete autonomy from the Chinese National Government.
 
The “Border Region,” made up of the Northeastern provinces of Hopei-Chahar and Shansi.

This region is completely within Japanese lines, and within it the Communist-influenced governments compete with the Japanese provisional government militarily, economically and politically. The old provincial governments are negligible, functioning only in unoccupied corners of their provinces or in exile. On a smaller scale than Chiang Kai-shek’s regime, they are but another variant of that modern phenomenon – the government in exile.
 
The New Fourth Army zone in the Yangtze Valley, made up of sections of the East Central provinces of Anhwei, Kiangsu, Kiangsi, Fukian and Chekiang.

In this area the Chinese Soviet Republic functioned before the “Long March” to the Northwest. Although officially abolished by Chiang in January 1941, the main forces of the New Fourth Army probably continue to function within the Japanese-occupied zones, where Chiang’s armies cannot reach them.

While differences exist between these areas in the degree Communist influence, autonomy, etc., they all exhibit the pattern of peasant revolt. The most informative and complete study of this pattern in China has been made by E. Taylor in his book, The Struggle for North China, with the Border Region. The latter will therefore be used as an example of the three areas.
The outstanding characteristics of peasant revolts are their local, dispersed and temporary character. Their possibilities and limitations have been classically described by Engels in his study, The Peasant War in Germany. The successes and failures of the Chinese Soviets from 1928 to 1934 are a modern instance of the inability of peasant armies to achieve the agrarian revolution on a national and permanent scale without the leadership and cooperation of the proletariat. Today, in occupied China, the temporary character of the successes of the guerrillas against the Japanese may be summarized in the statement that the Japanese rule by day and the Chinese guerrillas by night.
The unsuccessful national revolution of 1900, known as the Boxer Rebellion, had been a Northern movement. The republican revolution of 1911 had developed out of a Southern movement. Northern China, unlike Central and Southern China, barely experienced the revolution of 1926–27. The last orderly government in the experience of the population was the Manchu dynasty. The Kuomintang had never made serious inroads.
The cities of the North had remained picturesque souvenirs of ancient feudal China. Peking, for example, had been from 1900 on little more than a garrison for foreign troops and a center for imperialist intrigue. Industrialization in the North had been confined to the communications required by the imperialists to exploit the natural resources of the country. The areas lying between the railroads and roads were a hinterland, partially if not completely self-sufficient. However, relative to Southern and Central China, there is in the North a larger agricultural proletariat because the poor productivity of the land requires farming on a larger scale. [1]
 
The Bankruptcy of the Local Gentry
This economic and political background dictated the possibilities and necessities of Japanese expansion. With very little difficulty they were able to overrun the chief cities and railroads. For the rest, they were compelled and had the opportunity to introduce a new order for the people. The peasants at first put up no resistance “because the invasion directly and immediately threatened the security of the landlords ... When the poor peasants witnessed how the landlords were forced to become refugees overnight and to run for their lives, they were not sorry to see their rich oppressors suffer for a change.” [2]
The principles of the Japanese New Order were eradication of the evils of the Kuomintang, eradication of Communism, and the pan-racial unity of Asia. For the San Min Chu I, or Three People’s Principles of the Kuomintang, the Japanese substituted the Hsin Min Chu I, or New People’s Principles. In reality, the New People’s Principles meant that there would be no reduction of land rents, no revision of land taxation, no regularization of land tenure and no revision of village usury. Hence a fair proportion of the gentry were willing to become allies of the Japanese.
All over the world today, popular sensitivity to collaboration with the invader exists on an unprecedented scale. However, in Asia even more than in Europe, the war brought to a head the social uselessness of the local gentry. In China, where the landlords could not claim any social function as managers, the Japanese found no social force of any consequence to collaborate with them in funding their New Order. If the Quislings stayed in the villages, the guerrillas branded them as traitors and meted out suitable corporal punishment. If they fled to the Japanese-occupied cities, their property at home was confiscated. In the cities, only a few were needed for fronts. The rest actually were competitors of the Japanese second “army” of merchants, officials and administrators. Many of the gentry therefore found it more expedient to re-main in or return to the villages and join in the anti-Japanese United Front. This shuttling back and forth did not help the “face” of the would-be Quislings. In some places, to restore their prestige, the landlords called themselves guerrilla commanders whenever they could gather five or ten people together. The landlord forces, in reality, permitted the activities of traitors in their areas, never attacked the Japanese and, instead, harassed the real popular guerrilla forces.
The Japanese occupation was also in the dilemma of encouraging the old classical education for political purposes, although the economic development of occupied China required vocational training of the masses. Without giving this technical training they could neither repair the economic damage they have caused nor promote large-scale development.
 
The Development of Mass Resistance
The inability of the Japanese to give political, economic and social stability to the occupation tremendously facilitated the tasks of the Communists in rallying the people for resistance. Functioning virtually within a vacuum, the Communists had the opportunity to create a new form of government. Their limitations have been self-imposed in accordance with the Stalintern’s policy of a united front against Japan.
The population had been accustomed by many decades of brigand armies to taxes without public services, and forced labor to landlord and warlord. To gain their support in the resistance it was necessary to point out a new road of cooperation between the military and the civilian. As in the days of civil war with Chiang Kai-shek, the Communists have had to depend upon guerrilla tactics; surprise and mobile warfare in small groups, self-reliance of lower officers, and capture of ammunition from the enemy. In the end, however, the basis of guerrilla tactics is the willingness of the population to cooperate.
The ignorant, illiterate and impoverished people had to be given something to fight for at the same time that they were shown an enemy to fight against. This has been achieved by direct but moderate economic reforms, such as suspensions or reduction of rents to landlords and interest to usurers, regulation of share-cropping and lowering of taxes. The property of traitors (comprising ten to twenty per cent of the land in this region) has been confiscated and redistributed, pending the “repentance” of the traitors. Army auxiliaries have been created to assist the peasantry in farming their land and to minimize the burden of supplying the military.
As in some areas of Chiang Kai-shek’s China, industrial cooperatives have been organized to produce the essentials for consumers and for the army. [3] Throughout there has been an emphasis on economic self-sufficiency and hence an employment of all hands in productive labor. Since no external trade with the Japanese is permitted, there has been a limitation on such crops as cotton. Production of essentials by simple handicraft has been restored to supply the population and keep labor from migrating to the cities. But economic penetration knows no borders, and despite border government control of trade, smuggling has been widespread.
Politically, the population of the guerrilla areas has been given a new sense of human dignity by its participation in village mobilization committees and county political councils. The principles of universal suffrage and political democracy have been instituted. For this role the people have been given education which, while limited mainly to political agitation, has opened up to the masses a whole new world. These are peasants who have depended entirely upon one man in a whole village to read and write their letters, and who have sold their daughters to repay a twenty-dollar debt. Today they grasp at even token recognition of their humanity.
In some places the villagers are so well organized in the anti-Japanese movement that they will evacuate their homes when the Japanese approach, bury food, remove all animals and utensils and retire into the hills.
The Communists, in line with their appeasement of Chiang Kai-shek, have persistently discouraged the increasing class tensions arising between the peasants and the landlords. In the tradition of peasant wars, the victories of the masses are nullified by compromise with the middle class. The Communist Party is pledged not to accept more than one-third of the elected positions in any local or hsien government. In the border region there is a farmers’ union in which the landlords are not permitted membership. The efforts of this union to gain economic advantages for the class it represents are discouraged by the United Fronters.
The party itself has admitted that it had difficulties in convincing the ranks of the Eighth Route Army to accept the United Front policy.
“... The men do not fully understand the reasons for such actions, some men actually accusing their leaders of ‘counter-revolutionary orders.’”
The Communists have sought to remove all obstacles in the way of those gentry who may wish to return from the occupied areas. The border government actually collects rents for absent landlords and holds them in reserve for the prodigals’ return. Mao Tse-tung, the Communist leader, has summarized the compromise policy of the Communists beyond any misunderstanding:
“Regarding agrarian problems, on the one hand, we advocate a policy of reducing rents and interests so that the peasants can have clothing and food; on the other hand, we are also carrying out a policy of recognizing the payment of rents and interest as obligatory so that the landlords can also have clothing and food. Regarding the relation between labor and capital, on the one hand, we are realizing the policy of helping the workers so that they may have food and clothing; while on the other hand we are also carrying out a policy of industrial development which will provide the capitalists with profit.”
There can be no clearer statement of anti-revolutionary policy.
The compromise policy of the Stalinists against the Chinese bourgeoisie in 1925–27 brought death, imprisonment and disillusionment to hundreds of thousands of workers in Industrialized China. Their compromise policy against the rich peasants in 1933 brought pessimism, mass desertions, and eventually defeat of the agrarian revolutions following in the wake of the proletarian revolution. Their pressure for the release of Chiang from Sian in 1926 produced cynicism and confusion among the soldiers in the Northern armies. Today the threat of the foreign enemy holds the people together in the United Front. As the end of the war approaches, the class tensions will emerge more openly. After the war, the Chinese Communist Party will have more difficulty in imposing the Kremlin’s will on masses who have fought, and died by the thousands, in a supposedly revolutionary cause.
 
Training for the Social Revolution
Today the peasants are being given invaluable training for the social revolution. They have learned that bona fide national defense depends on them and that there is political meaning to their instinctive rebellion. They have learned that rights must accompany responsibilities and they are learning to enjoy popular government. They are acquiring a modicum of literacy and tools for self-expression and they are also receiving some industrial training through the Indusco movement. They have learned how to deal with the treacherous gentry by assassination and by confiscation of property. They have seen a popular army in the process of development and become part of it, acquiring the consciousness that the sword belongs to the community. Into the backward North there have migrated thousands of peasants and intellectuals from the South, where they have lived in closer contact with the modern world.
Moreover, the Chinese masses in Communist-controlled China have been indoctrinated with an international outlook. The Soviet districts regarded themselves as part of the world proletariat. The course of the civil war and the conquest of Abyssinia were followed with intense interest. In view of this background, it is possible to credit the report of a split in the Chinese Communist Party over the dissolution of the Comintern.
The border region has also stressed solidarity between the Japanese and the Chinese masses against their common enemy, the Japanese militarists and capitalists. The Eighth Route Army especially employs the technique of indoctrinating Japanese prisoners and sending them back to educate their comrades-in-arms.
This training in the techniques of social revolution is constantly on the verge of overflowing into practice. No modern revolution has been able to linger for long at the bourgeois democratic stage. It has either moved forward under the impulsion of the masses or succumbed to bourgeois dictatorship. Hence the intense mutual hostility of the China of Chiang Kai-shek and the China that is Communist-led. [4] Ideas and techniques cannot be limited by geographical boundaries, nor hemmed in by mass armies made up of peasants.
As Trotsky said in 1928:
“... With a new rising wave of the proletarian movement ... one will be able to speak seriously about the perspective of an agrarian revolution.”
(To be continued)

Footnotes
1. Forms of Farm Labor In China, Agrarian China, page 69.
2. The Organization of a Typical Guerrilla Area in South Shantung, by Wang Yu-chuan, appendix to The Chinese Army, by E.F. Carlson.
3. It is generally agreed by everyone except the enthusiastic sponsors of the Indusco movement that even the very moderate success of the movement is only a temporary phenomenon, possible only because of wartime isolation of various areas from the world and national market. Out of a proposed 30,000 corps, only 2,800 have been established with 80,000 workers. For an uncritical appraisal of Indusco, see China Shall Rise Again, by Madame Chiang Kai-shek. For more critical accounts, see Snow, Battle for Asia, and Mitchell, Industrialization in the Western Pacific.
4. The New York Times of September 8, 1943, reports that Communists numbering 10,000 made two unprovoked attacks against the pacification corps in Southwestern Shantung on July 20 and August 6. In the summer of 1943, five divisions of Chiang’s best armed and fed troops were moved into the Northwest area away from the Japanese front. At the Plenum of the Kuomintang in September 1943, a resolution was adopted accusing the Chinese Communist Party of subversive activities and calling upon it to fulfill its promise to abandon the Communist movement, dissolve the Soviet government and disband the Red Army. Only one of seven Communist delegates attended the subsequent session of the People’s Political Council. See Amerasia, October 1, 1943.
 

tone: The China of Chiang Kai-Shek (March 1944)




Grace Lee Boggs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Ria Stone
The China of Chiang Kai-Shek
The Kuomintang Government and the Classes
(March 1944)

From New International, Vol. X No. 3 (Whole No. 84), March 1944, pp. 79–84.
Transcribed & marked up by Damon Maxwell.
Proofread by Einde O’ Callaghan (May 2013).

(Continued from last issue)
From the very first years of imperialist aggression against China in the nineteenth century to the present day, the Chinese ruling class has proved itself incompetent to defend the nation. In 1895 the Manchu government of China fought the Japanese in the Sino-Japanese war. The masses saw no reason to take any interest in the conflict and China rapidly went down to ignominious defeat. Five years later the masses of North China took the initiative in struggling to drive the foreigners out of China. The Powers, comprising eight nations, were forced to take extraordinary measures before they finally defeated the Boxer rebels. The Chinese masses had taken the first steps on the road of proving that they alone could defend the nation.
Between 1915 and 1922, the Powers, with Japan and America in the lead, were proceeding apace with the partitioning of China among the imperialists. The Chinese landlords and bourgeoisie were powerless to prevent the process. In 1925 the proletariat took the initiative in organizing the struggle against the imperialists. When the movement reached the heights of proletarian revolution, the Chinese bourgeoisie allied itself with the imperialists to suppress the masses. In the tradition of the Mings in 1644 and the Manchus in 1860, the Chinese ruling class preferred foreign intervention and occupation to national leadership by the Chinese masses.
From 1931 to the present day, the Japanese, striving for imperialist hegemony in Asia, have occupied one section after another of the Eastern coast of China. The Chinese ruling class has again proved itself unable to resist the invaders. The years since 1937 have proved conclusively that the struggle against imperialism in China can be conducted only through the independent struggle of the Chinese masses. The Chinese ruling class, true to its traditions, can only carry the ball for one or another of the imperialist teams.
 
From the National to the Imperialist War
At the beginning of the war with Japan in 1937, the Chinese bourgeoisie was concentrated in the coastal areas of Eastern China. It was reluctant to risk the property destruction which was entailed in war with Japan and conscious of the hostility of the Chinese proletariat. When resistance was finally forced upon it both by popular pressure and by the imminence of total absorption of Chinese industry by the Japanese, the bourgeoisie continued to hope that the Western Powers would be drawn in without much delay on its side. Within a few months, however, it became apparent that the West was too engrossed in its own pressing problems to give immediate aid. Moreover, the foreign capitalists, loyal to imperialism as a whole, tended to regard the entrance of Japan as a force which could keep law and order in China. The property of the Chinese bourgeoisie was either completely destroyed or absorbed by the Japanese imperialists.
Even then a good section of the bourgeoisie was reluctant to pursue the scorched earth policy and transport capital and machinery to the interior for reconstruction. Instead they flew to the areas under Anglo-American protection with their liquid funds, there to sit out the war in luxury and comfort.
However, the more politically-conscious elements among the bourgeoisie realized that if they all fled abroad or to safety in the International Settlement, the interior would be left to the communists to mobilize the masses in a national resistance movement.
The retreat to the interior was gradual and accompanied by frontal resistance to the Japanese. During 1938 the national government was practically located in Hankow. Popular pressure resulted in the formation of a People’s Political Council by Chiang Kai-shek and the official recognition of the new Fourth Army in the Yangtze region, composed of various elements under the leadership of communists.
The end of the Hankow period was heralded by the fall of Canton and completed by the loss of Hankow in October, 1938. With the retreat of the National Government to Chung-king in Szechuan Province, the differences between Chiang Kai-shek’s China in the Southwest and those of the communists in the North and the proletariat in the East were accentuated both geographically and politically. Wang Chin-wei fled to become a Quisling for Japanese-occupied China. Tension between the New Fourth Army and Chiang’s forces increased, and the New Fourth was finally officially abolished in January 1941 after refusing to obey government orders to move North.
Chiang’s speech at the inaugural session of the People’s Political Council on July 6, 1938, had revealed the pressure exerted on him to “rally the nation’s political strength and to mobilize all the people for direct participation in the war.” The political consciousness of the people became indispensable to the Chinese government. [1] While still in partially industrialized Hankow, Chiang was forced to admit that the period of military rule had given way to that of political tutelage.
By 1939, however, Chiang is again placing his reliance in the Western “democracies.” Moreover, he asserts that “judging by present conditions not only has our program for the period of political tutelage received a serious setback but much of the work of the period of military rule has to be done all over again.” (Speech of February 2, 1939) The old story of the Chinese ruling class abandoning the masses for the sake of imperialist alliances was resumed. With Chiang’s return to the Anglo-American camp and Wang Chin-wei’s flight to the Japanese there was initiated in Asia the pattern which has since marked the European scene. The native bourgeoisie is divided into satellites of the two rival imperialist camps. Like the European bourgeoisie, the Chinese bourgeoisie has its government in exile at Chungking, completely dependent upon the Allied imperialists and psychologically remote from the fighting front.
The war of resistance has been mapped out by Chiang into three stages: retreat, stalemate and counter-offensive. Unable to fight aggressive battles without giving greater concessions to the people, the Generalissimo has been content to withdraw and carry on harrying actions against the Japanese during the stalemate period. The counter-offensive begins when Anglo-American imperialism underwrites it.
In the early years Chiang was forced to appeal to the Japanese masses. On July 7, 1938, he addressed the Japanese people as “My friends. ... From the very beginning of the conflict, we have regarded as our enemy only your militarists but not the people of Japan, people like ourselves....” A year later, Chiang said: “Our people in the war zones should try by all possible means to make the enemy soldiers who have been deceived by their militarists and forced to come to China understand that aggression is the way to self-destruction and death, while opposition to war is the way to salvation and life.”
These appeals to the Japanese masses were dictated by the pressure of the appeasers at home. Chiang urged these to hold out, promising that the Japanese would soon collapse from internal dissension. Today, however. Sun Fo, president of the legislative Yuan, is more confident. Says he:
“Whereas the Chinese revolution started as a spontaneous movement of the Chinese people led by the Revolutionary Party as their vanguard, the proposed Japanese revolution will have to be initiated and introduced by the victorious United Nations after defeating the Japanese military power.” [2]
Two months after Pearl Harbor, the Generalissimo and Madame Chiang traveled to India to act as Asiatic spokesmen for the Anglo-American imperialists. [3] To the Indian masses, determined to fight for independence from Britain, Chiang addressed these insolent words:
“The anti-aggression nations now expect that in this new era the people of India will voluntarily bear their full share of responsibility in the present struggle for the survival of that free world in which India must play her part.”
American and British imperialism were willing to pay Chiang well for his counter-revolutionary role in the Far East. From 1938 to 1940 America had made three loans to the Chungking government, all politically timed to offset Axis moves and economically secured in Chinese tin and tungsten: a loan of $25,000,000 in 1938 after Wang Chin-wei’s capitulation to the Japanese; a loan of $20,000,000 when Japan decided in 1939 to “recognize” Wang’s regime as the national government of China; and a loan of $25,000,000 in 1940 after Vichy had agreed to Japan’s occupation of French Indo-China.
In the summer of 1941, when war between American and Japanese imperialism was only a matter of time, a loan of $100,000,000 was made. The attack on Pearl Harbor sent Chiang Kai-shek to India, and brought Lieut.-Col. Stilwell and a $500,000,000 loan from the United States to China. It also meant the loss of Burma and the closing of all doors into China from the South. As a result, this comparatively large credit could not be used for foreign goods. The Chinese government has therefore used it as security for a large internal loan to which the bourgeoisie is forced to subscribe. Thus, an almost direct relationship of interdependence between the Chinese bourgeoisie and the American government has been established. From 1928 to 1937 America was the patron of the Nanking government. Today, the Chungking dollar is linked to and completely dependent on the United States Treasury.
 
The Government and the Chinese Bourgeoisie
During the first eighteen months of war the government’s main industrial role was providing aid for the transportation of private industry from the coast and lending capital to en-able it to resume production. By 1939, however, the government had begun to play a more decisive role in industrial development. Besides guaranteeing profits to stimulate production, the state found it necessary to establish government enterprises in basic industries. On January 24, 1940, the Ministry of Economic Affairs announced the nationalization of iron and steel. [4]
This trend toward a state-controlled capitalism has been partly necessitated by the large capital requirements for basic industry. But government monopoly exists also in salt, sugar, tobacco, matches, tea and wine. The reasons for state intervention in production are political as well as economic. Many members of the bourgeoisie have been reluctant to develop the West, the years from 1925-27 having revealed to them the social and political dangers of breeding a proletariat. Speculation and profiteering bring more immediate gains with less risk. [5]
The role of the government in economic life was formally recognized in the National General Mobilization Act of 1942. [6] This act gave the government almost unlimited power in civil and economic life for the duration.
 
The State and the Proletariat
Government control of industry has been accompanied by government regulation of the trade union movement. Since 1940 the trade unions of “Free China” have been under the control of the Ministry of Social Welfare in Chungking. All union officials are appointed by the government. Under war-time regulations, all workers must join unions, and strikes are prohibited. The Chinese Association of Labor, the only official federation, claims a grand total of 422,652 workers throughout “Free China.” [7]
In the spring of 1943 the Chinese executive Yuan passed a set of eighteen regulations to freeze workers in industrial and mining fields. Workers in these industries must register with their respective authorities and are not allowed to leave their occupations unless dismissed by their employers. Employers may not dismiss workers unless the latter have violated specific regulations under the present law. Workers incapable of their jobs may be dismissed; those over fifty are allowed to leave if physically unfit. Factory or mine owners, if forced to suspend business for over a month, may dismiss workers. Workers and employers are treated as individuals not only in their relations with each other but also with the authorities. There is no mention of unions in any of the negotiations. [8]
Virtually nothing is known about the activity of the proletariat in Chiang Kai-shek’s China. According to Freyn, who betrays no sympathy for labor, “in its sixth war year, China can look back on a record free from strikes, lockouts and other signs of unrest which elsewhere accompany a deterioration in the standard of living.” [9] Mass resentment appears to be directed primarily at the profiteers on the market and at the government for being liberal with these elements.
 
The State and the Profiteers
In Chiang Kai-shek’s China the landed gentry and the merchants control the retail market. Nowhere in the world have there been such fantastic increases in retail prices. From an index of 100 in 1937, retail price level in Chungking had climbed to 1722.9 in 1941. In March 1942 the general price index was 3799. Today the increase ranges from 7,000 to 10,000, depending on the area.
Appeals for rice donations have been made to the general public. One appeal brought 30,000 piculs from ten Szechuan counties. The average donation was twenty to thirty piculs; the favorite concubine of the former Szechuan governor was credited with hoarding 70,000,000 piculs.
Finally, the government was forced to take increasingly drastic measures against the hoarders. For example, the former Mayor of Chengtu was paraded through the streets of Chungking and shot in public. The price of rice thereupon dropped from $180 a picul to $90. But the landed gentry soon recovered, and a few months later the price per picul was $160. [10] In January, 1943, Chungking put price ceilings on 656 commodities. By spring the prices were rising again and had reached sixty-seven times their pre-war levels. [11]
The rise in prices is especially hard on the urban population and the soldiers. The workers, whose labor is essential to production, have been able to force some wage increases despite the forbidding of strikes. After protest parades by Government workers of the white collar class, the government was forced to institute a system of partial payment in rice to these workers. The armed forces, with no recourse, continue to suffer.
In some villages, farming and home industry enable the people to maintain a bare subsistence level when crops are good. But in many areas millions face starvation because of general devastation and famine. Toisan, for example, in the South, formerly depended for its rice on Siam, Burma and French Indo-China, all now in Japanese hands. Moreover, it has been hit by famine after occupation and reoccupation by the Japanese. The Toisan peasants are forced to sell their children in neighboring cities.
The white collar workers and petty bourgeois intellectuals, who constitute only three to four per cent of the population, can only plead for political democracy, petty reforms, increased government supervision, and a place in the bureaucracy for themselves. [12] Among the masses of the people, the unrest does not take overt form, so far as we know. [13] But every measure taken by the government against the profiteers, however ineffective, reveals the pressure of the masses. Every failure of these measures points out more clearly the need to overthrow completely the wealthy classes against whom the government is admittedly so “liberal.”
 
The Peasants in Chiang Kai-shek’s China
Throughout Chiang Kai-shek’s China the land hunger of the masses and unproductive land ownership by the gentry are the most obvious features of the landscape. [14] The average Chinese family farms nineteen mow, or a little over three acres, the smallest acreage in the world except for Japan. Eighty per cent of China’s farmers are tenants or part tenants. Tenant farmers tilling one acre must pay as much as fifty per cent of their crop to their landlords. Such high rates makes it much more profitable for landlords to lease their land rather than manage it on a large-scale productive basis. The inevitable result is the prevalence of small farms, lack of technical improvements and a disproportion between industry in the cities and agriculture in the country. [15]
In Szechuan, seven per cent of the landlords own but do not till seventy per cent of the land. They spend their time in trade, banking, usury and the social and political duties of the gentry – namely, squeezing taxes, rent and interest from the laboring peasants. Funds loaned to the farmers at comparatively low interest by the government, e.g., for cooperatives, are tunneled through this gentry, and by the time they reach the farmer the customary usurer’s rate has been approximated. [16]
The war, with its scarcities and fluctuations of currency, has increased the polarizing tendency toward wealthy land-owners, on the one hand, and the landless peasantry on the other. The landlords receiving rents in kind and paying taxes in cash [17], were able to hoard and take advantage of favorable price rises and currency changes for profiteering. With their profits they bought up new land. The middle peasants, who paid taxes in cash but received no rents in kind, have been almost swept away.
Land that was worth C$100 in 1931 is now worth more than C$70,000 in Chungking. This increase is due not only to overcrowding. As the China Information Bulletin puts it:
“Land is indestructible. The hoarding of land is therefore highly profitable, thus resulting in the gradual concentration of ownership in the hands of a small portion of the people.” [18]
This acceleration by the war of the progressive impoverishment of the peasantry had to be checked by the government if it was to be able to demand additional sacrifices for the war. Hence in 1941 the land tax was revised. Provision was made for taxes in kind and for compulsory purchases of food-stuffs by the government. This was aimed to reduce hoarding and force the landlords to accept a larger share of the tax burden.
But laws against the gentry are useless when the administration of the laws remains in the hands of the gentry. In the past, government measures ostensibly aimed to effect rent reduction and resale of land to the tenants have been success-fully frustrated by this political power of the landlords. [19]
In China is has always been as difficult to distinguish the rents from the taxes as it has been distinguish the landlords from the government, both nationally and locally. The bureaucracy is a “communal landlordism” which by its juridical role is able to mobilize greater political and military power for the suppression of mass discontent. Rents, taxes and interest are literally forced from the peasants at the point of a gun by special guards. These guards, known as the Min-Tuan or “pacification” forces, are estimated at two million in Free China and are using one million of China’s scanty supply of rifles for the protection of property rights. [20]
The agricultural proletariat in China is relatively small compared to that in the advanced countries, not only because of the absence of large-scale farming but also because of the prevalence of feudal relations. Tenants are forced to repay their loans of equipment and grain in labor on the land of the rich peasants. Rich peasant families take in concubines instead of hiring wage-earning laborers. The system of early marriage in China also owes its continuance to the economic reality that it is far more advantageous to acquire a daughter-in-law than to hire a laborer by the year. The poor peasants in turn must marry off their daughters early because it saves food for other mouths. In certain sections of China slaves are maintained for house and field work. [21]
China’s whole past history proves that the Chinese peasants do not accept their hardships passively. The recourse to banditry and the kidnapping of the rich is a form of social protest. In some places the wealthy gentry supply these bandits with food rather than undergo the formality of being kidnapped and ransomed. They know that it is useless to kill off the bandits because more will spring up where others are destroyed. [22]
Peasant riots and organized refusals to pay rent reached their height during the 1925–27 revolution and the ensuing years of agrarian revolution. The attitude among many peasants is: “If there is no rebellion, how can the poor continue to live?” [23]
In 1936, when the government conscripted poor peasants for work on the Szechuan-Hunan highway, the laborers organized many riots, in some cases disarming the local militia, killing their foremen and destroying the local engineering offices. [24]
We do not possess facts and data on the activity of the peasants in Chiang’s China today. But we are familiar with their revolutionary temper in the past, and we know that they are being organized by the government itself in labor battalions and in the army. At the end of the war they will be in a position to utilize this training to eradicate the private-property relations in land, the condition which has been for so long the curse of the Chinese peasants. As in the Russian Revolution, the men from the front will introduce “into the business the heavy determination of people accustomed to handle their fellow men with rifles and bayonets.”
 
China’s Peasants in Uniform
The well educated classes, who have always been a vested interest in Chinese society, are exempted from fighting in the Chinese army. The army is a coolie army of nearly ten million men. The only exception to this is the cadre group of 300,000 men (thirty divisions) who are the “Generalissimo’s Own,” militarily trained by German army officers. The officers of the regular army are provincial leaders with no professional military training and with the social background of the local gentry.
In his ragged cotton uniform, with hand-made and often mended straw sandals and hat, carrying a rifle, a rice bowl and a pair of chopsticks, the Chinese soldier marches endlessly from one front to another, living in deserted temples and stables. He may have volunteered to get the rice allotment which is the only food provided the soldier by the government. More likely, he was conscripted on the village system, which enables the local gentry to buy off military service for its sons. On his way to the training depot, he was probably roped together with other conscripts to make sure they all got there. His officers force him to perform labor service for the large landowners, for which the commander, and not the men, receives the compensation. In many cases he is locked in at night by his officers. [25] His pay check is about one American dollar a month.
Such an army can continue to fight as well as it has only because of its belief that it is fighting for national liberation and because of the lack of any clear alternative method of struggle. The effectiveness of this army against the Japanese has declined during the years 1937–42. An analysis of casualties inflicted by the regular Chinese army indicates a drop to 32 in 1943 from the 1937 base of 100. [26] The causes of this decline are partly the changes in China’s foreign supply position. But the change is also rooted in the declining morale of the army. The realization that despite enormous casualties (estimated at five million) their battles “cannot be expected to have an determining effect on the war as whole” (this was stated by a Chinese government spokesman, New York Times, July 24, 1943), must raise serious doubts in the minds of these ragged heroes.
The government of Chiang Kai-shek has too little to offer the peasant millions who make up the regular Chinese army. To the peasants, the Kuomintang promises land reform, but to the landlords it promises compensation for all land redistributed. Few people know better than the Chinese peasant that the landlord is his implacable enemy who must be deprived of all wealth before rural reform can be undertaken.
In most cases the people do not look upon the armed forces as their liberators. [27] Because of the meagerness of supplies to the army from the government, it is necessary for the soldiers to live off the land. As a result it is often difficult to distinguish the regular armed forces from the bandit irregulars who for centuries have lived by military requisitions and looting of the masses.
 
Chiang Kai-shek Plans for the Future [28]
Chiang’s plans for economic reconstruction after the war provide for a state-controlled capitalism with the aid of foreign capital. This is clearly outlined in the resolution passed by the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang in September, 1943. [29] State supervision is taken for granted as the general rule and only such “industry which may be entrusted to individuals or industries which will be less suitable for the state to operate shall be privately operated. The government in some cases shall give such industry the encouragement and protection of the law ... Industries which assume the nature of a monopoly shall be state-operated. The government shall stipulate specifically what constitutes state-wide industries and what constitutes private industries.” According to the Twentieth Century Fund report of 1943, Chinese “industrial development will proceed under state guidance and to a large extent under state ownership and direction. The shortage of private industrial capital in China, the absence of a vigorous industrial class and the large financial problems involved are presumed to necessitate state control.”
Within recent months the Chinese bourgeoisie has accompanied its pleas to America for more guns with cordial invitations for investment of capital. Under old Chinese regulations it was required that fifty-one per cent of stock interest in joint capital arrangements must be Chinese, and a majority of the board of directors, as well as the chairman and general manager, must be native. The new resolution passed by the Kuomintang asserts that “hereafter no fixed restriction shall be placed on the ratio of foreign capital investment in joint enterprises. In the organization of a Chinese-foreign joint enterprise, except for the chairman of the board of directors, the general manager need not necessarily be a Chinese.”
An American was recently appointed acting inspector-general of the Chinese Maritime Customs Service. In the past the imperialist power controlling China’s customs revenue has been able to dictate which clique should rule in China. Before the war Britain was strong in the administration of the Chinese customs service. The United States, Britain and Japan played approximately equal roles in the foreign trade of China. Japan and Britain did not hesitate to collaborate against America, nor America and Japan against Britain. [30] Today, Chiang is completely committed to string alone with American imperialism. His participation in the Cairo Conference is ample proof that Chiang Kai-shek’s China will never play an independent role in the fight against Japan.
The pro-fascist leanings of the Kuomintang government are revealed in Chiang’s plans to maintain national government troops in a good number of provinces and employ army officers as local administrators. The demobilization of China’s army of eight to ten million men would only reinstate in an aggravated form the situation of latent unemployment that existed in China before the war. Employment must also be sought for the increasing number of army officers. The sharpness of the class struggle will demand even more severe repression than existed before the war. The promises of constitutional government given by the recent Kuomintang plenum are more empty than they have ever been. [31]
Finally, the reactionary character of Chiang’s plans for the future are unmistakably revealed in his Spiritual Mobilization and New Life movements. These movements, loudly acclaimed by Western as wiping out old Chinese habits of spitting and opium smoking, are in reality aimed at perpetuating the old feudal social relations and substituting spiritual food where material food is needed. [32] On an intimate local scale, Chiang is attempting to reinstate the pao-chia system whereby households are the units of responsibility under government supervision. [33]
But the Chinese people have been uprooted by forty years of wars and revolutions. The family system has been broken up by the entry of nearly ten million men into the armed forces. Provincial barriers have been broken down by the melange of dialects within the army. The national outlook of the Chinese masses has been broadened by the propaganda that their struggle is part of a world struggle against fascism and reaction. The planes flying overhead, the use of medicines and surgery, and the demands made up the population to care for the wounded have gone far to emancipate the Chinese from old superstitions, ancestor worship and the old religion. In the huts of the most backward areas, placards with political slogans have replaced the ancestral tablets with their Confucian proverbs. After the 1911 revolution, the queues and bound feet which symbolized servitude to the Manchus began to disappear. In the 1925–27 revolution the bobbed hair of the women was a sign of popular emancipation. To-day, the Chinese soldier in a uniform of shorts, shirt and tie and the emancipated Chinese woman in slacks and blouse symbolize a new freedom.
For centuries the Chinese people have borne the heavy load of taxation for a bureaucratic landlordism and an expanding military, civil and party bureaucracy. The taxation envisaged for a bureaucratic capitalism will only increase this load. The Chinese people have been actively engaged in a struggle for national liberation from Western as well as Japanese imperialism for half a century. They have reached the stage where further concessions to “friendly capital” strikes both at their pride and their stomachs. Japanese conquest of British colonies in Asia has reduced the white man’s prestige in China and increased the Chinese sense of their own potential power.
Everywhere the struggle is for the creation of a new world to supplant the old. Even Chiang must speak constantly in terms of revolution and pose as the revolutionary leader.
Today the conflict between Chiang Kai-shek’s old world and the new world vaguely present to the masses takes the amorphous forms of resentment and passivity. In the flux of the post-war struggles this contrast will be sharpened into vigorous conflict. For nearly half a century the Chinese ruling class has been able to deflect the rebellion of the Chinese masses to a struggle against the foreign invaders. Today the foreign enemy is Japan; yesterday it was the Western powers. Tomorrow the Chinese people will have engaged the forces of every imperialist power. No people can capture the admiration of the whole modern world and not demand the opportunities commensurate with its sacrifices.
(To be continued)

Footnotes
1. See the Program for National Assistance and Reconstruction adopted by the Kuomintang Party Congress, emergency session at Hankow, March 29, 1938, reprinted in Amerasia, April 25, 1943, pages 118–120.
2. New York Times, October 10, 1943.
3. This is not to gainsay Chiang’s desires to create a Chungking-Delhi axis against Western imperialism. He has denied it often enough to show that Britain and America are telling him to abandon the dea – or else. ...
4. China After Five Years of War, Chinese News Service, 1942, page 94.
5. In September, 1940, Chiang rebuked these profiteers: “Billions of dollars of unproductive capital are available in the interior; but instead of being diverted to regular channels, they are employed for personal gains and such illegitimate transactions as hoarding and manipulation. Some private individuals simply sort away their money.” Free China’s New Deal, by Hubert Freyn, MacMillan, 1943, pages 43f.
6. For a copy of this act, see Freyn, pages 250–258. The act empowers the government, whenever necessary, to “restrict the people’s freedom of speech. publication, writing, correspondence, assembly and organization.”
7. Allied Labor News, April 15, 1943.
8. Ibidem, May 1943.
9. Freyn, op. cit., page 130.
10. Freyn, page 123.
11. Freyn, page 130.
12. See Amerasia, April 25, 1943, for an analysis of little parties in Kuomintang China.
13. The American government maintains a strict censorship on all news emanating from Chungking, and nothing unfavorable to the Chiang Kai-shek regime is permitted to emerge.
14. See Agrarian China, Selected Source Materials from Chinese Authors, published in Chinese periodicals during the 1930s. Compiled and translated by the research staff of the Institute of Pacific Relations, 1938. As in feudal Europe, churches and other “educational institutions” are large and owners. It took the 1927 revolution to sweep many nuns and monks from their temples. Change in Land Ownership and the Fate of Permanent Tenancy, Agrarian China, page 22.
15. The Present Land Problem in China, Agrarian China, page 60.]
16. The Experiences of a District Director of Co-operatives, Agrarian China, pages 211–216.
17. More often than not the landlord’s control of the local administration enables him to pass the land taxes on to the peasants directly.
18. New York Times, July 23, 1943.
19. The Latest Agrarian Policy of Kuomintang, Agrarian China, page 155.
20. Edgar Snow, The Battle for Asia.
21. Agrarian Laborers in Kwangsi, Agrarian China, page 80.
22. Changing China, by G.E. Taylor, Institute of Pacific Relations, 1942.
23. This remark was made by a group of embittered women to a government field worker. This worker reports that the peasants have no faith in government measures and that their most urgent demand is “not the remeasurement of land for tax consolidation but rather something which would give them a chance to breathe beneath the heavy pressure of their landlords.” – Experiences of an Official in the Land Tax Consolidation Bureau, Agrarian China, page 153.
24. Labor Tax in the Building of the Szechuan-Hunan Highway, Agrarian China, page 110.
25. Amerasia, September 1943, page 276.
26. Ibidem, July 1943, page 229.
27. The Chinese Army, by E.F. Carlson, pages 30–34)
28. See Chungking Considers the Future, by Gunther Stein, Far Eastern Survey, September 7, 1943.
29. New York Times, September 26, 1943.
30. Britain’s dominance In China depended on her alliance with Japan and on the French fleet. America’s policy in Manchuria In 1931 won Japan to her side sufficiently to doom the British. The fall of France In 1940 ended Britain’s chances for falling back on French support.
31. See Amerasia, October 1, 1943, for a devastating analysis of the emptiness of these promises In the past.
32. Pearl Buck’s incessant pleas for more aid to China betray both her realism and her hypocrisy. Familiar with the Chinese ruling class from long residence in China, she was well aware that they might turn to Japan if American imperialism neglected them. Knowing the hatred of the Chinese for the British Imperialists, she is also anxious that America free herself from the suspicion that she is united with the British Empire. What this “friend of China” fears most of all is a strong Asia united against the West. As she herself says:
“I shudder to think what the future will be with Russia established, as indeed she already has been, as the world’s greatest military force. When China establishes herself, as she will undoubtedly do, as another great military force; when the people of India, freed by their own efforts, as they are determined to be tree, will be a great potential power.”
Invoking the spirit of Thomas Jefferson, Mrs. Buck appeals to the American bourgeoisie not to industrialize Asia, but keep these people what they “have hitherto been, to our great good fortune, peaceful agricultural peoples.” Asia, November 1943.
33. “This system with every ten families as the unit, was originally used as a measure for common defense but has long been utilized by the authorities as a means of demanding community responsibility and as an additional instrument for the maintenance of peace and order.” Agrarian China, page 212. The Generalissimo’s Western-educated wife is apparently more aware of the general need for material reform. However, she wholeheartedly endorses the Generalissimo’s spiritual path as an immediate substitute. See her book, China Shall Rise Again, Harper’s, 1940. The Generalissimo’s Russian-educated son, Chiang Ching-kuo, is magistrate of Kanhsien.
“His methods and Ideology are called communistic or fascist by people who object to his authoritarian ad-ministration. His system is called state socialism by people who dislike regimentation.” (New York Times, November 13, 1943)
 




(Continued from last week)
The Nationalists propose to abolish the three whites who have, since 1936, been the Native Representatives in the House of Assembly. This installation had been Smuts’ sly trump card to calm the questioning and critical outer world and to disorient the black masses at home, for thereby he had presented himself in liberal guise.
To smokescreen their offensive against the non-European masses, and to smash all the meager political and industrial organizations and illusory rights which still linger on, the Nationalists intend to begin with the outlawing of the Stalinist party and the relegating of colored voters to a separate roll with a limited membership and the abolition of the dummy Native Representative Council, at best a deceptive and meaningless cipher, created by Smuts only to throw dust in African eyes.
 
Relations with the British Empire
The Nationalist victory also focuses the multitude of problems arising from the economic control of British finance capital over South Africa.
The first reaction of the London Stock Exchange to Smuts’ defeat was a 25,000,000 pound panic slump in South African gold and industrial stocks.
British investors, sure of a Smuts victory which would have conferred greater security on this their “safest area” for investments, were greatly perturbed at his unexpected defeat. But the victory of the traditionally anti-British Nationalists will not loosen the grip of British imperialism over South Africa.
The Nationalists are not strong enough, politically or economically, to pursue any independent policy in relation to the concentrated economic and political power of British imperialism and its agents in the country itself. In terms of overall European support, they are still in a minority. The total votes for the United Party and Labor Party combined was 551,590 and for the Nationalists and Afrikaaner Party, 443,719. The Nationalist victory was gained by the overwhelming support of the platteland (rural districts), which have a preference of 30 per cent in the electoral quota, giving the Nationalists a majority of parliamentary seats.
Any moves against British capital would dislocate and reduce to chaos the economic structure of South Africa. As Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, the major gold baron of South Africa, declared: “For the gold mines it will be business as usual with the door still open for genuine British investment.” (Sunday Express, London, May 30, 1948)
The Nationalist victory might kill South Africa’s mushroom industrial boom, by frightening away its chief prop, British money, now to come under close government scrutiny.
The strategic position occupied by South Africa in imperial defense will not be drastically affected. South Africa is geographically hemmed in by British possessions. Britain still maintains her protectorates (Bechuanaland, Swaziland and Basutoland) which border on the Union, still hasher naval base at the southern tip of the continent in Simonstown, and surrounds South Africa from the north with a hump of colonies.
The present government will only be more discreet than was Smuts, who too openly trumpeted South Africa’s affiliation to Britain.
The Nationalists will hold themselves a little dearer, bargain more with Britain, secure more concessions in tariff and other commercial matters, use South Africa’s gold to maneuver between Britain and America. But they will not break the chain of empire.
 
Significance of the Vote
The elections in South Africa are significant in that they have pushed to the forefront a group of Calvinistic god-fearing lords of the sjambok, whose ideological antecedents date back to the Voortrekkers of the 19th century, who packed their oxwagons to escape the slogans and practices of a liberalism that filtered half-heartedly through from Europe to the Cape. Aided by British imperialism, they were both later to destroy all signs of this early liberalism.
The election reveals most pungently that South Africa is one of the most abysmally backward and reactionary areas in the world.
But the election might serve to shake the non-white workers, tribalists, teachers, mine laborers and farm toilers, the African, colored and Indian peoples as a whole into a realization of their identity of interests, and might serve as a sharp break into their habitual conditions of existence, to give a new impulse to the speedier growth and consolidation of a united national liberation movement.
To protect themselves, as a whole, against these new attacks, and to regroup and mass themselves from that starting point, the creation of a national liberation movement will provide the means with which to fight on the whole arena for their democratic, national and social emancipation.

Note by ETOL
1. The identification of Grace Lee Boggs as the author of this article is tentative, based on the fact that it the author’s name is the same as one of her pseudonyms.
 




JOHANNESBERG, South Africa – The South African general election is a unique event in world politics, outside the openly totalitarian countries. This election, democratic only for the white minority, delegated to this minority the right to decide in totalitarian fashion the fate of the black majority of South Africa’s population.
In South Africa, democracy and totalitarianism constitute the two heads of the white ruling class. This election was openly fought on what is known in South Africa as the”color question,” i.e., the most effective, the most methodical and organised way of keeping the non-white mass in its servile place.
Although both white camps – United Party (Smuts) and Nationalists (Malan) – are agreed and united in their ruthless determination to maintain the economic, social and political slavery of the non-white toilers, there are minor cleavages in their policies toward this key question.
 
Social Bases of Parties
These differences reflect the differing social bases on which these two political blocs support themselves. The United Party is the political receptacle of the predominant economic interests of British finance capital and the Rand mining lords, the local industrialists and the most prosperous farmers, and through the white labor party, of the aristocratic white workers. The Nationalist Party gives political voice to the wounded memories of the Boers who have not yet forgotten the 1903 war, the rising Afrikaaner intelligentsia and businessmen, the poor whites in town and country. They gained the support, this time, paradoxically enough, of the most Tory group of British imperialists, led by one Colonel Stallard, a former minister of mines, and they formed an alliance with the Afrikaaner Party (which has the support of the fascist Ossewa-Brandwag organization).
Below the outward appearance of economic boom and unruffled political stability which was Smuts’ pride, there exist subterranean layers of nervousness, apprehension and alarm in the European ranks which the United Party was not able to dispel.
The small but definitive victory of the Nationalist combination (79–74 seats) articulates a crisis mood in the country, particularly in the rural areas, which has now come to the surface. Stemming from some of the most economically insecure and consequently the most politically jittery strata, this precarious electoral victory vociferates their search for more trenchant defences against the non-white slave foes.
 
Main Issues in the Election
Cutting across all other issues – rising cost of living, acute housing shortage – was the color question. It superimposed itself onto every plank of the election platforms of both parties. The main issues were broken down along the following concrete lines: the “menace of Communism” and the nationalist interpretation of “Apartheid” (segregation).
The “Communist menace” is the shibboleth used by the white ruling class to express their fear and uneasiness of both the expansionism of the new Russian imperialism abroad and the danger that is inherent in the yet unexploded non-white mass at home.
Smuts stole the opposition’s thunder by deftly and pompously assuming the toga of an international elder warrior-statesman warning against the invading forces of Russian police-state “Communism.” In his home country he was not in anyway disturbed about the dangers of communism. His own smoothly running and ruthless police regime, curbing and harassing the non-white masses, was adequate to cope with any opposition movement that might develop.
Malan, on the contrary, concentrated his demagogic fire on the menace of communism at home, and called for a more ferocious use of the segregation sjambok which Smuts had helped to fashion. On the farms, on the mines and in the African reserves, the policies of British imperialism and of the Nationalists coalesce in their support of the migratory labor system and the slave-like conditions for non-whites which prevail.
Their differences in approach and estimation can be most graphically traced on the issue of segregation in the towns. Smuts, more astute though not by any means less reactionary or brutal, recognized that the industrialization of South Africa, which in the war and post-war period has been developing apace, was completely dependent on the labor of the African. He was prepared, consequently, to accept the already accomplished fact of their more or less permanent presence in the towns on the basis of segregation.
 
Population Trends Provoke Offensive
Smuts’ policy of segregation put the African into appalling slum ghettos or locations, fenced in from the outside white areas, strictly supervised and police-controlled. Africans in industry have no trade-union rights, no right to strike, and no political or democratic safeguards, this policy of Smuts is the deadline for the existence and functioning of industry.
Malan, on the other hand, giving expression to the more backward hidebound and conservative section of the backveld and of the poor whites in the cities, saw the increasing influx of Africans into the towns as (a) draining away the farmers’ labor supply, (b) creating potentially incendiary black fortresses in the towns. Confronted by the demands of industry and the urge of the Africans to escape from the hopelessness of the reserves and the brutalities of the farms, the Nationalists’ political blood pressure mounts like mercury in the tropical sun.
They look with the gravest concern at the following comparative population figures of Africans in the towns:



 


    


No. of Africans
in Urban Areas




1911


   508,142




1921


   587,000




1936


1,142,622




1946


2,067,370



They therefore propose, in the words of Mr. Strydom, M.P. (Nationalist leader for the province of Transvaal) that “... the native must only be allowed to a European area as a temporary worker. His wife and children must remain behind ... If, however, they are given the opportunity of developing in the European areas they cannot be suppressed and a blood bath must follow ...” (Forum, July 19, 1947, p. 15)
Smuts also recognized the explosive potentialities of the urban African situation. But unlike his Nationalist opponents, he does not think that they cannot be suppressed, or that more stringent measures than those already in force need be taken to maintain the status quo.
The Nationalists consider this Smuts setup as – dangerous liberalism! To counteract this liberalism and to quell the concentration of African workers in the towns, they propose to tighten and bind together the countless draconic laws already firmly regulating African urbanization.
How far the aid of more policemen and the sanction of their Calvinistic god can make more infallible the already foolproof setup existing, remains to be seen. For even the Nationalists will be forced to recognize that judicial and sanctified laws are never stronger than the elemental material and economic pressures to which they must conform. But the Nationalists will attempt to force back some of the African labor, at present stream-ing to the towns, and give the white farmers more black slaves.
(Continued next week)

Note by ETOL
1. The identification of Grace Lee Boggs as the author of this article is tentative, based on the fact that it the author’s name is the same as one of her pseudonyms.
 



The report of the President’s Commission on Higher
Education, now being released in installments, is one of the most
significant social documents ever published by the U.S. government.
It is a public confession by an official body that a crisis exists in
this crucial field of contemporary society.
The Commission members represented the cream of America’s
crop of professional educators and publicists. Not only were there
deans and college presidents, but also Rabbi Wise, President of the
American Jewish Congress, Mark Starr, educational director of the
International Garment Workers Union, Murray D. Lincoln, president of
the Ohio Farm Bureau Federation, Douglas S. Freeman, editor of the
Richmond, Va., News Leader.
The Commission begins its report with a recognition of the
“worldwide crisis of mankind.” And in the field which
they, as “civic and educational leaders,” know best, they
are terrified at the gap which exists on the one hand, between
“Scientific knowledge and technical skills,” and on the
other, the “social and political defenses against
obliteration.”
 
Terror-Stricken
The Commission is further appalled at the “over-specialization”
in professional education, and the lack of “human wholeness and
civic conscience which the cooperative activities of citizenship
require.” It bewails the “provincial and insular mind”
in a period when the “oneness of the modern world” is so
undeniable. It bemoans the lack of equality for the poor and the
Negro and Jewish minorities, at a time when the U.S. “sorely
needs” to develop “leadership” and “social
competence.” No less important, it is terror-stricken at the
explosions that are inevitable, given this inequality.
Undoubtedly, the members of this exalted Commission would be
the first to accuse Marxists of “idealism,” “crass
materialism,” “economic determinism” and all the
other epithets by which the bourgeois intellectuals justify their
role as the hired prize fighters for the ruling class. Yet the
critical situation which they describe is merely the concretization,
within the field of education, of the contradiction which scientific
socialists have long realized would bring capitalist society to a
inglorious end. What the Commission is actually talking about is, in
Marxist terminology, the contradiction between the development of the
productive forces and the antagonistic social relations.
It is because capitalist production mutilates the worker to a
fragment of a man that the professions can only breed
super-specialists. It is because under capitalism the nation must
compete on the world market in imperialist rivalry with other nations
that the population is provincial, is patriotically mobilized by the
state behind a single nation. It is because under capitalism the poor
are only required for the most unskilled labor in field and factory
that there is unequal educational opportunity.
 
The Real Solution
The contradiction between scientific progress and social waste
cannot be resolved by giving more courses in social sciences or by
adding “men of broad knowledge, men of imagination and
understanding and wisdom” to teaching staffs. It can, in
reality, only be resolved by building a new world society in which
the exploitation of the workers has been abolished, and the
competitive world market destroyed.
How closely these educators approach the answer, and yet how
blinded they are by the typical illusions of the intellectual, is
indicated by the “radical adjustments” which they
recommend. As the first principles of higher education in our time,
the Commission proposes that all the people of the nation should be
given:
“Education for a fuller realization of democracy
in every phase of living.
“Education directly and explicitly for
international understanding and cooperation.
“Education for the application of creative
imagination and trained intelligence to the solution of social
problems and to the administration of public affairs.”
Turned right side up, these principles are the principles of a new
socialist society. That is, if in their daily lives, the workers had
democracy, that is control over production; if the workers could
employ the modern development of the creative imagination and trained
intelligence for which the modern development of the productive
forces has prepared them – then education for all the people of
the nation would be democratic, international and creative. On the
other hand, without such a revolutionary change, education will
either continue in its present crisis, or like the rest of society
assume the facade of “social responsibility and organization”
along the lines of Hitler Germany.
 
More Funds
Unable to see through to either conclusion, the President’s
Commission tries to find refuge from its own analysis by proposing –
an expansion program. It calls upon the state to devote more funds
for scholarships, to erect more colleges, and to set up more
committees. As if by increasing the QUANTITY of education, the
QUALITATIVE contradiction could be resolved!
The more students there are, the more acute will become the crisis
in the academic world. The Commission itself admits that there is a
“high degree of student mortality” because higher
education is unstimulating and unchallenging. Witness also the
dissatisfaction of the veterans who make up 55% of the present
college enrollment. Moreover, in the weakest link of higher education
today, the teachers colleges, it is not lack of resources which is
creating a crisis. As was dramatically revealed by the nationwide
teachers’ strike in 1946–47, American capitalism cannot even
recruit sufficient teachers. Before the war the turnover in public
school teachers was 10%. Today it is 20%.
The American ruling class cannot convince the teachers that
they are missionaries of an all-conquering and superior ideology and
therefore should subordinate the problem of their livelihood to their
civic responsibility to capitalist society. Many teachers, walking
the picket lines, discovered that their revolt against the city
fathers brought them greater respect from students and parents than
they had ever received as guardians and purveyors of capitalist
ideology in the classroom.
It is a commentary on the bankruptcy of the capitalist ruling,
class today that the sweeping changes necessary in the spheres of
higher education depend upon the workers at the base of society.
 



Thousands of Chinese attacked and burned down the British
Consulate and other British buildings in Canton last Friday, Jan. 16.
The British were forced to move their citizens to Hong Kong. The
stormy demonstrations in Canton were followed by giant
anti-imperialist parades of students in both Shanghai and Hankow.
The immediate cause of the demonstrations was the action of the
British imperialist authority in evicting Chinese, squatters from
Kowloon. Kowloon, together with, Hong Kong, is still under direct
British control and serves, as a constant reminder to the Chinese of
the exploitation and indignities which they have suffered at the
hands of the British for over a century.
 
Extreme Corruption
There are strong indications that the demonstrations were
originally stimulated by the C.C. clique of the Kuomintang. This
clique, known as the Tammany wing of the Kuomintang, is directly
based on the landlords and big capitalists. Notorious for its
corruption, police terrorism and its refusal to entertain any
compromise, with liberalism, this clique has been steadily losing
ground.
Even the U.S. State Department has become skeptical of the ability
of American billions to prop up Chiang kai-Shek as long as the C.C.
clique remains in control. Of the estimated two-and-a-half billion
dollars which Wall Street has poured into China since the end of the
war, about 75% has gone into graft and corruption.
 
To Gain Support
The British have been throwing support to the “Political
Science group” of the Kuomintang, the so-called Liberals. By
encouraging the anti-British demonstrations, the C.C. clique
evidently thought it could deal a blow to its rivals and at the same
time gain popular support among the anti-imperialist masses.
But the peaceful demonstrations soon got out of hand. The
violence of the masses terrified the Chiang Kai-shek government; and
as cue man, the whole Kuomintang mobilized its police force to guard
British property and, arrest the demonstrators. Even news of the
uprising was hushed up in the official press to keep it from
spreading.
The “May 30 Incident” of 1925, is still, fresh in the
memories of the Chinese capitalists and landlords, when British fire
on a demonstration of students and workers unleashed revolutionary
activity throughout the country.
 
Fantastic Inflation
The civil war which has been going on in China with only
occasional breaks since 1927 is proof that Chiang Kai-shek, as the
representative of the Chinese capitalists and landlords, can neither
free the country from imperialism nor begin any serious economic
reconstruction. 80% of the national budget today goes for military
expenses. Inflation has reached the incredible level where a 10,000
dollar Chinese note exchanges for eight American cents. Three of
Chiang Kai-shek’s generals, taking with them three Kuomintang
divisions, have deserted the sinking ship of their leader and gone
over to the Chinese Stalinists.
 
Brute Force
The Kuomintang maintains – its rule simply by brute
force. The whole country is in the throes of the spreading civil war.
The crime of the Chinese Stalinist leaders is that, in the present
explosive situation, they have refused to link the peasant movement
in the countryside with the workers’ movement, which is
concentrated in the big cities along the East Coast.
Events such as the recent demonstrations in Canton, may be the
spark, however, to rouse the workers into widespread action and the
eventual leadership of the peasant movement.
 




The Generalissimo’s lady – Madame Chiang Kai-shek – has just arrived home in China after spending several months in the United States, collecting honorary degrees and posing for the press in cap, gown and velvet hood.
Due to the present concentration of Allied military might on the European continent, the Missimo’s activities and those of China are receiving a minimum of attention, insofar as they might, deflect the interest of the American people.
Roosevelt and Churchill are one-continent-at-a-time strategists – first Africa, then Europe, then Asia.
The Allies are undoubtedly concerned with the ultimate defeat of Japan and the recapture of the privilege of exploiting the colonial peoples. Today, however, the problems of storming the European fortress and controlling the revolutionary sentiments of the imprisoned masses are sufficient to occupy the military and political energies of Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin.
It is significant that Madame Chiang Kai-shek was not invited to attend the recent conferences in Washington between Roosevelt and Churchill in Washington. The excuse of distance was certainly not in order. Nor could it be pleaded that this woman’s place is in the home. For Madame Chiang Kai-shek was formerly head of the Chinese National Commission on Aeronautical Affairs, which is a branch of the National Military Council. Today, that position, like every other, critical office in China, military, financial and political, is occupied by the husband, the Generalissimo.
The exclusion of Madame Chiang Kai-shek from that conference underlines the subordinate role which China’s fight against Japan has assumed in this global war. Right now the armed forces of America and Britain are not available for Eastern action in sufficiently large numbers to carry on simultaneously the war against Japan and against the colonial masses of Asia, in whose eyes America and Britain have been so discredited.
Roosevelt and Churchill are anxious only that China remain in the war and keep Japan occupied. The last thing they wish is that Chinese manpower be the decisive factor in the defeat of Japan. Suppose Japan were forced to withdraw from Manchuria, China and Burma by predominantly Chinese forces while the Western powers were still engaged in fighting Hitler. China could then take a path independent of the United States and Britain.
Even if a victorious Chinese army were officered, armed and financed by Anglo-American imperialism, the defeat of a major imperialist power by the forces of a semi-colonial nation would give a tremendous impetus to the masses of all Asia to undertake independent action for national liberation against all imperialisms.
Today, American and British military activities in the Far East are primarily confined to capturing and constructing the strategic bases for a major offensive against Japan. According to their plans, this offensive will be carried out by Western armies and navies. To this end, they inch up the islands, clear the seas and exploit the labor of the Asiatic peoples to build air bases, roads, etc.
It is not without interest that most, if, not all, recent references to the United Nations are confined to the United States, Great Britain and Russia. China is obviously a “poor relation.”
 




Next time you go into a restaurant and pay its pre-1929 prices, ask the owner why. Nine times out of ten, he’ll mention not only the rising cost of food, but also the wages he has to pay his help to keep them. And if you look like you have a profession or belong to the middle class, he’ll add a dig at the unions.
Next time you read in the newspapers about a demand for higher wages in industry, or make such a demand yourself, notice the threat of the bosses, implied or explicit, to raise prices if the increased wages are granted. For example, in the needle trades strike of a month ago the manufacturers refused the increase on the ground that there was ceiling price on dresses. And, more recently, businesses ordered on a forty-eight-hour basis by presidential decree have threatened a rise in prices because of overtime wages.
 
Government Based on Profit System
The average worker (not to speak of labor leaders who don’t want to encroach on the profit system) senses the bosses’ predicament. And, unable to see any alternative to the profit system, he is often willing to see the boss get higher prices for the goods which he, the worker, has produced. For example, a needle trades worker was explaining to me the other day how the workers in her shop had no grievance against their boss because he had already signed with the local to grant the wage increase – provided Washington punctured the ceiling on clothing prices. She has to do alterations and dressmaking in her home after hours in order to support her family, but she doesn’t connect this with her boss and the profit system which he represents.
Nor does she realize that she and workers like her would take an indirect wage cut through the higher prices her boss gets. Like the boss, but with less Justification, she takes for granted the profit system, and only hopes that the wages she receives under the system will enable her to give reasonably nutritious and adequate food to her family and keep reasonably warm and fashionable clothing on their backs. The government obviously takes for granted the profit system, and has no intention of jeopardizing it. For example, Prentiss Brown, head of the OP A, has stated that “in some cases where the forty-eight-hour week might force higher prices [due to overtime], he would be inclined to discuss with the War Manpower Commission the feasibility of exempting the employers from the order rather than permitting the higher prices.” (New York Times, February 16)
Superficially, this sounds like an attempt to protect the consumer from higher prices. Actually, however, it is clear that Prentiss Brown, like the rest of the Administration, will go to any lengths to keep the gap between wages and prices which is the source of profit. But to maintain this gap he will lower or maintain wages at their present low level, rather than “permit” prices to rise. Why? Because prices on the whole cannot be altered simply by decree or arbitrary will. They depend upon the value of the commodities produced, and this in turn is in the long run determined by labor productivity and technological conditions beyond the control of either the capitalist or his government representative.
Thus, for example, price rises in consumer goods today are due to decreasing labor productivity caused by such factors as enormous labor turnover, depreciation of machinery with difficulties in replacement, overtaxing of labor from long hours, etc. The restaurant man, who could once fix an icebox leak simply by calling in a plumber, uses a head waiter to do it. The government, far from being able to decrease or put a ceiling price on these goods, acts to raise them by lengthening hours and decreasing labor efficiency, withdrawing experienced workers into the Army or defense industries; and curtailing machine production for consumer goods. “Legitimate” price increases due to increased costs therefore occur. When these are supplemented by the sheer cheating and gouging of the consumer because the latter must buy at whatever prices, we have both the profit system and “profiteering” – revealing the capitalist system at its rottenest.
 
The Problem Will Be Solved by Socialism
Once the socialist solution to the problem of wages and prices is recognized, how criminal, rather than pathetic, appears the plight of the “poor boss who can’t make a profit if wages go up and prices don’t rise proportionately.” Under capitalism or the profit system, it is necessary to maintain and, if possible, increase the gap between wages (or what it costs in labor power to produce goods) and price (or the exchange-value which those goods have on the market). This gap exists because the worker only receives the price of his labor power and no share in the values he creates.
Under socialism, there will be no wages at all – in the sense of remuneration to the worker only to replace the labor power or energy he has expended. There will be no prices or market values in the sense of goods obtainable only on the basis of paying for them at their value. Under socialism, men will receive a share of what has been produced by the common social labor. They will receive it on the basis of having participated in that social labor (in one way or another), and not, as in capitalism, on the basis of the amount of expended energy which must be replenished. (The latter is the way THE WORKER receives his “share” under capitalism; the capitalist receives his “share” because he owns the means of production and can buy the worker’s labor power.)
Under capitalism, the worker, on Saturday or at the end of his work week, receives wages which simply go to refurbish him for another Monday. Sunday is the day of rest (if you’re lucky and don’t have to work on Sundays, too), when you try to feel as strong and able to work as you did the Monday before. And so it goes on for the worker under capitalism – a continuous but tapering spiral (broken only by unemployment), with the worker never quite catching up to his strength of the week before, but always forced to go to work on Monday, anyway (if it isn’t depression time and he has a job).
Under socialism, all this is changed. Goods are produced for the use of men and NOT for the profits which they bring in to bosses. Labor power is no longer regarded as a commodity to be bought and sold. It is not purchased at all, let alone purchased at the lowest possible price to keep it alive and able to produce more value. Men, under socialism, will work and produce useful goods. But they will produce these for their mutual needs and for their mutual development. The sufficiency of goods which men and machines can create will be given to men to develop their bodies so that their minds can grow rich in the wealth of human knowledge, esthetic appreciation and artistic creation. From day to day, from week to week, and from year to year, the spiral of possible individual activity will widen rather than taper, as human productive and intellectual achievements increase.
Men, no longer fettered by the necessity of working not only for their own material maintenance, but for the bosses’ even more material profits, will be freed to live more fully. The time that each must work will be small, yet the goods produced for all to enjoy will be plentiful.
Then, surely, will he who even thinks of “reasonable profit” be jeered at as a barbarian out of the past dark ages. He who talks about prices chasing wages will be talking gibberish, for men who have been freed from the capitalist system will also have been freed from wage labor, price and profit.
That is why, instead of the conservative motto, “A fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work,” workers must inscribe on their banner the REVOLUTIONARY watchword: “Abolition of the wage system!” Socialism is the ONLY answer!
 




(In the February Reader’s Digest, and reprinted in full page ads in newspapers all over the country, is an article by Eric Johnston, president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, entitled Your Stake in Capitalism. Henry Kaiser’s endorsement of this article as something “America needs just as much as ships” (!): challenges every worker to understand and make the socialist answer.)
American industry has come out with its manifesto. The American bosses are fighting for capitalism and they state it “without apology.” Gathering into their ranks all those labor “leaders” who see no alternative to the profit system, they seek to delude workers into the belief that swelling profits is the way to bring heaven on earth t0 labor and not merely to business.
Who Should Get Labor’s Product?
Mr. Johnston, citing William Green for his authority, demands for the bosses a “fair and just return upon their investments.” Labor, says he, “cannot get anywhere by starving capital.” But why should the bosses get a return on “THEIR capital”? What do they mean when they say it’s “theirs”?
Such capital is “theirs” only by virtue of property “rights” – “rights” written into law by themselves to maintain the fiction of justice for their confiscation of the produce of labor. The source of such capital is no mystery. Capital represents the stored-up labor of millions of workers accumulated in the hands of the bosses. Nor is the role of such capital any. mystery. “Capital,” the great teacher of socialism, Karl Marx, said, “is dead labor that vampire-like only lives by sucking living labor and lives the more, the more labor it sucks.”
Mr. Johnston would have us believe that the bosses should not only continue to own the already-amassed labor which they have confiscated. With the greed of every capitalist, he also believed that the additional labor daily stored up in machines by the sweat and toil of the workers should “return” to the bosses.
Once workers realize, however, that the “return” should be to them instead of to the bosses, they will have begun to see the socialist solution.
Mr. Johnston warns business that it “can get nowhere by starving labor. When it starves labor, it is starving the purchasers of its own product” (emphasis mine – R.S.). How smugly he takes for granted that the product belongs to the boss. And how cleverly he ignores the fact that capitalism, by its very nature, moves toward an actual curtailment of the consuming power of the masses at the same time that it tinfolds limitless potentialities for consumption.
It is the very essence of capitalism to keep labor at a minimum point, just sufficiently above the starving point so that it can continue to produce – never enough above this point so that the worker could save for a period of not working. The boss has no other interest in the worker. Meanwhile, however, all the accumulated labor of the workers, stored up in machines, becomes ever more potentially productive of goods which, utilised for the workers, would unfold possibilities of unlimited development.
But, capitalism, no matter how it plans and hopes and prays, would never actually be able to do more than drive the worker to the bedrock of subsistence – although there is plenty to provide a featherbed of luxury for all.
Only socialism, where the stored-up labor is utilized for the social good, can realize the potentialities of human productivity and spiritual development. Only when accumulated labor belongs to those who produce it – to the worker who turns the wheels, instead of to the capitalist who clips the coupons – will men parallel in their human daily life the physical grandeur of a Boulder Dam.
 
Labor Has No Stake In Capitalism
Mr. Johnston would also have us believe that government bureaucracy is the only alternative to capitalism. Because the government occasionally interferes with individualist excesses said profiteering (e.g., ceiling prices to keep the sky from being the limit, indictment of Anaconda, etc.), the bosses are often annoyed by its actions and forget that these annoyances protect the profit system by postponing mass indignation at its root evils. And so, Johnston would have labor believe that the government is a third party, standing above the class conflict and tending toward totalitarian rule in the interests of neither the bosses nor the worker.
What Johnston refuses to admit is that the government, while the bosses own the means of production, can only rule in the interests of the bosses’ system. Likewise, if the workers owned the means of production, the government would rule in their interests.
Johnston urges the cooperation of labor and business, but claims that by cooperation he does not mean “surrender, either by business to labor or by labor to business.” However, as has been so clearly illustrated in Vichy France, cooperation with a dominant group can only be collaboration in its interests. With this in mind, workers should close ranks and cooperate only with its own brothers to achieve socialism, spurning the pleas of the Johnstons and the Kaisers to take out a stake in capitalism.
 




The Anglo-American coalition waited five days before announcing to the people of Italy, Germany, the rest of Europe and the world that they had negotiated an armistice with the Badoglio government. There were obvious military reasons for this delay. But there were even more important political reasons, based on their fear of the independent action of the European masses.
For weeks there had been a strict censorship on news from Italy. The Italian workers, who had been out in the streets of Milan and Turin, vigorously demonstrating for peace, suddenly dropped out of the news. The last we heard of them they were protesting Badoglio’s protection of himself by declaring Rome, an open city, while up North the Allied bombs devastated Italian cities and mercilessly killed Italian workers. We heard too that Badoglio trembled because the refugees flocking into Rome from the bombed areas included revolutionary political elements who threatened his rule.
 
The Secret Armistice
The armistice between Badoglio and Eisenhower was kept secret for five days so that the American and British armies would have time to occupy Italian cities, and hold in check these revolutionary elements whom Badoglio himself could not handle. Badoglio feared their wrath as much as he feared that of the Germans and much more than he feared that of the Anglo-Americans. To save himself and the Italian ruling class, he was willing to permit the bombing of Italian cities and the killing, of Italian soldiers to continue for five days until Anglo-American armies, could arrive on the spot, and he himself could escape safely to Sicily.
The cowardice and impotence of the European capitalists are here dramatically revealed against the courage and power of the working masses. Badoglio is safely wined and dined in Sicily in a manner befitting a member of the ruling class, while in Turin, Milan and other Italian cities the workers desperately man anti-aircraft guns, wipe out German shock troops and carry on organized guerrilla warfare in the streets.
The secret deal between Badoglio and Eisenhower indicates the shape of things to come throughout occupied Europe and in Germany itself. Thus, the Italian armistice sets a pattern. Even the liberal press has asked whether it may not be employed elsewhere. This time it was only five days before the announcement of the armistice. Next time weeks may elapse after the conclusion of an armistice between the German ruling class and the Allies.
 
Will It Be Repeated?
The German ruling class, fearing the explosive anti-fascist wrath of the German masses and soldiers, may agree with Churchill-Roosevelt to keep secret an armistice until such time as enough of the Allied forces can arrive in Paris, Munich, Vienna, Berlin and Hamburg to keep the French, Austrian and German masses in hand. The European ruling class fears its own workers and peasants more than it fears the Anglo-American ruling class. So a bloody war can be continued until the moment that their safety is guaranteed by a pre-arranged military occupation.
The American workers have a personal stake in the revolutionary events taking place in Europe and in the conspiracies being perpetrated and plotted. They have a right to know the heroic steps that the German, Italian and other European workers are taking against Hitler. They have a right to know what deals the Allies are ready to make with fascists and collaborationists who have been converted by the fear of Hitler’s defeat.
They are not interested in protecting the lives and property of the Badoglios, Thyssens, Petains, etc., from the pent-up wrath of the oppressed European masses. They are not interested in preserving these elements for a, peaceful public trial by the Anglo-American-Soviet rulers after the war. Let the European masses dispose of their own oppressors and betrayers – they will do it with the dispatch and thoroughness required.
 
“Open Covenants, Openly Arrived At”
The American labor movement must make it its business to find out what independent anti-Hitler steps are being taken by the European masses all over Europe, and especially in Germany, and let the European masses know! It must make it its business to find out what counter-revolutionary steps the Anglo-American bloc is taking all over Europe and for Germany itself, and let the European masses know!
It must insist that the censorship be lifted, that secret diplomacy be abolished, that the news of invasions and surrenders be immediately broadcast to France, to Norway, to Greece, to Germany, so that the misery of these people, starving and dying under Hitler’s oppression, may continue not a minute longer, and so that they may have time to deal with their betrayers and oppressors themselves.
The pretensions of the Administration that it is following in the footsteps of Woodrow Wilson – open covenants, openly arrived at – is not borne but by the succession of events. A shroud of mystery and a veil of secrecy surround Allied action far in excess of that required by military needs.
 



In the spring of 1941, A. Phillip Randolph aroused the hopes of the Negro masses by proposing a March on Washington. This march was to demonstrate how Jim Crow discrimination against Negroes could no longer be tolerated. It was planned as a movement to put pressure on the Roosevelt Administration, which was then moving toward a war abroad while forms of Hitlerism against the Negro existed at home.
About a week before the scheduled march, when all over the country Negroes were preparing to move, Randolph “postponed” the march. The reason for the, “postponement” was the fact that Roosevelt, after conferences with Randolph, and in the face of a mass Negro march, issued an executive order against discrimination in the war industries. The order also set up a Fair Employment Practices Committee to investigate discrimination in the war industries.
Nearly a year has passed since the issuance of that executive order, No. 8802. On all sides it is admitted that Jim Crow is still boss in the war industries. Except for a few “token” jobs, Negro workers find themselves either refused “defense” jobs or given the most menial jobs. Meanwhile grievances pile up.
Throughout the South and even in the North, scandalous pogroms, known as army camp “riots,” are visited upon Negro soldiers. Secretary Knox sets up a Jim Crow naval unit through which Negroes who aspire to be sailors can be employed in shipyards at low military pay instead of the usual civilian rates. Colored women can only obtain domestic work, despite the daily cry of the press for more women workers in the defense plants. In the South, as Mark Ethridge, former president of the FEPC recently stated, the poll tax denies to Negro workers “even the right to protest” against the exploitation of cheap labor.
 
Mass Pressure Needed
In the face of this mounting injustice, the March on Washington Committee in New York has planned a mass protest rally to be held at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday, June 16. This mass demonstration deserves the support of every Negro. The white workers must prove their solidarity with Negro workers by showing up en masse at the Madison» Square Garden rally. MADISON SQUARE GARDEN MUST BE PACKED ON JUNE 16 WITH ALL THOSE WHO HATE DISCRIMINATION AND INJUSTICE.
The March on Washington Committee is demanding more enforcing power for the Fair Employment Practices Committee. It is demanding the opening of the armed forces to Negroes on the basis of equality. And it is demanding the abolition of all economic and political discrimination against the Negroes.
The making of these demands is obviously necessary. But even their partial achievement is possible only if they are backed up by militant mass Negro pressure and mass action, and supported by trade union and workers organizations.
But an examination of the March on Washington leaders reveals their reluctance to arouse real mass pressure. The leaders to whom the Negroes look today are those with a history of labor struggle. For example, the standing of A. Phillip Randolph in the Negro community is based upon his record of militancy in the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. Negroes are predominantly workers. Those to whom Negroes look for leadership are those who function as leaders of labor organizations.
 
Leaders Curb Mass Pressure
At present, however, the labor leaders of the Negro masses are those who prefer negotiations with the top people in Washington. They curb the natural inclinations of the masses because they, as leaders, are afraid that mass action might go “beyond bounds.”
These Negro reformist leaders make specific demands, grantable under pressure without seriously disturbing any of the powers-that-be. Such was the demand in the original March on Washington call – for an executive order to stop discrimination in industry.
The Negro people find little satisfaction in these orders. General orders to cease discrimination or specific punishments for those who have discriminated mean very little to the Negro masses. These measures are necessary and acceptable as far as they go. But the Negro masses as a whole do not have the time nor the
money through which they can bring action against discriminating firms. Such orders can help only one individual here and there – isolated cases and not the masses as a whole. They are face-saving devices for the Administration and the masses know this.
The Negro masses felt betrayed when the March on Washington was called off last year. They had been promised militant mass action but were given only wordy concessions. They were refused the opportunity to demonstrate their strength publicly. They did not get jobs en masse. They didn’t want simply an investigation of a few cases when Jim Crow pervades the whole rotten employing system.
Today the Negro masses still want to march. They want Randolph to live up to the militant words which are characteristic of his speeches. They want him to lead them into the mass actions which he has told them over and over again is the only means to achieve results. The Negro masses want a March on Washington.
 
Randolph Remains Reluctant
But Randolph, since Pearl Harbor, is even more reluctant than before to call for a March on Washington. Like most of the other leaders of the March on Washington movement, he supports the war for “democracy” abroad. In the New York March on Washington Committee, as reported by one of its members, there has even been discussion of “postponing” the Madison Square Garden rally because it may disturb “national unity.” But the pressure of the Negro masses is too great and it is unlikely that the leaders would dare to “postpone” even an indoor rally.
The New York March on Washington Committee raises the slogan “Winning democracy for the Negro is winning the war for democracy.” This slogan, simple and “militant” as it may sound, is nevertheless just another way of sponsoring the “Double V” campaign of the Pittsburgh Courier. Pretending to fight for democracy at home while at the same time sponsoring the imperialist war abroad, these campaigners for “Double Victory” actually straddle the issue and subordinate the struggle against domestic oppression to “national unity.”
The Negro leaders wish to be appointed to positions in the war administration to carry out more efficiently the job of rallying the reluctant Negro masses behind the imperialist war effort.
 
White Workers Must Support Movement
The Negro leaders are equally hesitant in calling upon white workers’ organizations for support of the March on Washington movement. They have in fact excluded white participation in the movement. From one point of view this exclusion of white participation is understandable. It is understandable that Negroes want to demonstrate their own mass strength. The development of an organized Negro mass movement and of Negro leaders is a crying need of the Negro workers. Moreover, the Negroes do not want an influx of Stalinists who may dominate the movement and then betray it if the needs of Stalin require a quick shift of the party line.
However, while excluding white workers’ participation, the March on Washington committee invites such white “friends of the Negro people” as Pearl Buck and Wendell Willkie to speak before them. The report is that both these “friends” have declined the invitation. Evidently they fear that even a Madison Square Garden Rally may disturb too drastically the “national unity” which they treasure more than the struggle for Negro rights.
Trade union and white workers’ support for the March on Washington movement is essential if the Negro masses are to achieve some of their immediate objectives and demands. Day by day, trade unions are realizing that white workers cannot be free while black workers are branded. The basic interests of the two groups of workers are identical and the colors of their skins mean nothing in their common struggle against exploitation.
The Negro workers want jobs. They want equal jobs – not Jim Crow jobs such as the Higgins and Sun Shipyard Jim Crow projects. Only when they get jobs on an equal basis with other workers will the color line be broken down politically and socially. Solidarity in the shop and in the union between black workers and white workers is the only genuine and effective weapon against Jim Crow. The employers want to segregate Negroes from other workers. They refuse to employ Negro workers on an equal basis because they fear solidarity in the working class. Racial antagonism is fostered and the supply of cheap labor can be maintained because competition between workers can be intensified on the basis of color.
 
The Jobs Are There
Today millions of jobs exist for all workers in the war industries. To get these jobs, despite the Jim Crow attitude and policy of the employers, the masses of Negro workers must demonstrate publicly and militantly. White workers must give their full support to these demands.
The Negroes must march on Washington to prove to government officials and. to employers all over the country the mass strength which lies behind their demands!
They must march on Jim Crow plants to prove to each employer that Negro workers will not longer stand by passively and suffer want and privation while jobs are available!
They must demand that workers, Negro and white, be the enforcing power for any executive orders ostensibly leveled against Jim Crow.
In the final analysis it is only when workers themselves, Negro and white, through their labor unions and factory committees, regulate the assignment of workers to jobs in production and in fact establish workers’ control over production, that the demands of the Negro workers can really be achieved.
The Workers Party supports the March on Washington proposal. Class conscious workers understand that through the initiative and mass actions of Negro workers in conflict with their political and economic oppressors, Negro workers will develop their class consciousness. They will thus come to realize that only by joining in class solidarity and independent class political action of all workers, Negro and white, will they enter upon the road toward the social, political and economic emancipation of all the oppressed.
The March on Washington movement can really become a mass movement if the Negro masses insist on making it their movement; if they demand of their leaders a MARCH ON WASHINGTON, and if they build a leadership which will carry out their demand.
ALL OUT TO MADISON SQUARE GARDEN, TUESDAY, JUNE 16!
 



The Negro people are justly proud of their demonstration at Madison Square Garden on June 16. Out of New York’s 330,000 Negroes, 20,000 attended.
The Negro who formed, the backbone of that rally was the “New Negro,” as many speakers noted. Sticking out his jaw instead of turning the other cheek, the “New Negro” is ready to fight for his democratic rights now. He wants social, political and economic equality everywhere.
From the militancy of the gathering, several things are unmistakably clear.
The Negro masses recognize that their main enemy rules in the Jim Crow Congress, in the administrative departments, and among the Southern bourbons. They are ready for action against this enemy. And they are seeking leadership to carry them into action through a concrete and immediate program to gain their democratic rights. Today, even more than in 1941, the Negroes are ready to march upon Washington.
Any speaker at the rally could have established himself as a real leader of the Negro masses by saying: “We’ve had enough! We’re ready to march NOW!” By saying that, he would have provided the kind of leadership demanded by the Negro masses. This is clear from the play staged at the rally which told the stark truth of the Negro masses’ feelings about the last war and this war.
 
Negro “Leaders” Trail Masses
However, most of the so-called “Negro leaders” are not leading the Negro masses but trailing behind them. They are making a minimum response to mass pressure instead of developing this mass pressure to its maximum strength.
One Negro “leader” after another sought by his lengthy eloquence to outdo the preceding speaker in repeating the multitude of grievances and bitter miseries which the Negro masses already know so well. Not one of these “leaders” proposed a concrete series of actions for the Negro masses to follow to realize the demands of the eight-point program advanced by the March on Washington Committee.
But orators the Negro people have always had. What they are looking for today is the “New Negro” among their leaders to match the “New Negro” who makes up the masses.
Of the galaxy of Negro speakers at the rally, only two – A.C. Powell, Jr., New York City Councilman and editor of the People’s Voice, and A. Philip Randolph, national director of the March on Washington Committee and president of the Brotherhood of Pullman Car Porters – appear to the Negroes as candidates to lead them in their struggle.
Powell’s appeal rests on his noisy and frank self-advertising and on the seemingly militant slogans which make up his speeches. However, an analysis of Powell’s speeches and of his editorials in the People’s Voice shows very clearly that Powell, like the Stalinists with whom he is closely associated, pleads for the breaking down of Jim Crow primarily on the basis that this is a factor which would help the United Nations to win the war.
Negroes Apathetic to the War
The Madison Square Garden rally clearly demonstrated that direct exhortations to support the imperialist “war for democracy” receive only a lukewarm response from the Negro masses who have never known “democracy” at home. For the most part, the Negro views the imperialist war as creating a domestic emergency which requires his Jim Crow oppressor to grant some concessions in the Negroes’ struggle for democratic rights at home. The capitalists need the support of the Negro masses in order that their imperialist objectives may be achieved. In the case of the Negroes, who have had nothing, they have had to grant a few concessions in order to gain even a minimum of support for the imperialist war.
Randolph recognizes this element of urgency and embarrassment in the Jim Crow administration of a country; which is presumably fighting for the “four freedoms” abroad. The Negro masses have found talk of the “four freedoms” in America a mockery and a fraud. Randolph, therefore, brands American democracy a “miserable failure.” Asking America to justify herself before the bar of world opinion, Randolph hopes to capitalize on the embarrassment of the American capitalist class to achieve substantial concessions for the Negro masses.
 
The Role Of A. Philip Randolph
Unlike Powell, who is mainly interested in “Winning the War for Democracy,” Randolph’s main interest appears to be in “Winning Democracy for the Negro.” It is this emphasis on Negro rights which constitutes Randolph’s main source of strength among the Negro masses. That is why many Negroes trust in Randolph’s political sagacity to gain them concessions through negotiations. But they stand ready to exert the necessary mass pressure to back up negotiations whenever they are given the opportunity.
Randolph, however, regards President Roosevelt as the “world’s greatest champion of democracy.” As he has said: “We believe we are upholding your [Roosevelt’s] hand when we fight for the ‘four freedoms’ for Negroes in our land.” It is Randolph’s confidence in Roosevelt which leads him to stress the value of negotiations in achieving the Negroes’ objectives, and also to support Roosevelt’s war for the “four freedoms” abroad.
What Randolph does not point out to the Negro masses is the fact that Roosevelt, whatever may be his personal humanitarian “sympathies” for the Negro people, depends for his political strength on the Jim Crow congressmen and the Jim Crow employers whom these congressmen serve.
The Negro masses cannot rely upon the hope of charity from their liberal and humanitarian “friends.” Whatever they achieve in the Way of substantial concessions will not be a gift of Roosevelt’s “democratic” spirit, but conquests wrested through their demonstrations of strength. Organized mass pressure through meetings like the Madison Square Garden rally and through a March on Washington must buttress any negotiations.
Randolph does not point out that Roosevelt and his government are part of a capitalist society which exploits all labor and especially colored labor.
A greater consciousness of this fact on the part of the Negro masses would start them on the road to making demands and proposing measures of a militant, class nature. A fear of such militant class action which can turn in a revolutionary direction largely explains Randolph’s continual putting off of the March on Washington, which he might not be able to control. Randolph prefers to use only the threat of such a march to wrest concessions.
 
The Brevity of Randolph’s Garden Speech
This fear of a mass action which he may not be able to curb may also partially explain the brevity of Randolph’s remarks at the Madison Square Garden rally. At the March on Washington Committee meeting a week before, Randolph said to a few hundred Negroes: “If they don’t break down the Jim Crow policy, we are going to march!” In a press release after the Tuesday night rally, Randolph again said:
“If the President does not issue a war proclamation to abolish Jim Crow in Washington, the District of Columbia and all government departments and the armed forces, Negroes are going to MARCH, and we don’t give a damn what happens!”
If Randolph had said these words to the 20,000 Negroes assembled in Madison Square Garden, the masses would have shown with a tremendous outburst of applause and enthusiasm their full agreement with this proposal. They would have left the Garden with full confidence and belief that Randolph and the March on Washington Committee intended to go ahead with all necessary militant means to achieve the eight-point program. By his failure to speak out clearly at the meeting, Randolph tended to dissipate the spirit of the Negro masses.
Randolph explained the brevity of his remarks at the rally by stating that the hour was late. However, at such a significant gathering, the leader of the Negro masses should have made sure that he would be able to make a full address. Randolph also explains his failure to address the meeting by stating that the “main objective” had been achieved with the “assembling of the Negro people. The whole objective was to corral the Negroes so that they might exemplify by their unity their desire to secure the eight points.”
In other words, Randolph believes that the measures taken thus far are all that are necessary at this stage of the Negroes’ struggle for their democratic rights.
 
A March on Washington Is Needed Now
Examination of the March on Washington movement, however, leads to the conclusion that the Madison Square Garden rally, a significant mass action, must be supplemented by the announcement of a date in the near future for a mass march on Washington. Mere threats of such a march, while not unimportant, can only obtain, as in 1941, executive orders, which do not abolish Jim Crow in the defense industries, in the civil service, or in the armed forces, as the Negroes well know. To gain any substantial portion of their legitimate objectives, the Negro masses must MARCH ON WASHINGTON NOW.
* * *
The March on Washington movement thus far has been an all-Negro movement. Randolph explains this fact thus:
“The March on Washington movement believes that the Negro must assume the major responsibility for the solution of his problems and must supply the money to pay the price, make the sacrifice and lead the fight. This doesn’t mean that it is anti-white, anti-Semitic, anti-Catholic, anti-Protestant, anti-Holy Roller or anti-interracial.”
 
The White “Friends” of the Negroes
Class conscious militants recognize that many of the leaders in a movement for Negro rights must for the most part be Negroes. What seems to be strange, then, is the reported invitation by the committee to such “liberal white friends” as Pearl Buck and Wendell Willkie to address the rally. The refusal of such people to lend sanction to this meeting is clearly an indication that they are only fair-weather friends of the Negro people. They are interested in winning the imperialist war and only profess interest in the Negro struggle for that purpose. Negroes who continue to depend upon such fair-weather friends and “liberals” will continue to be disappointed.
 
Workers Are the Real Allies of the Negroes
What many Negroes have yet to learn and what Randolph as a trade union leader should teach them is that, in the long run, the staunchest allies of the American Negroes (who are mainly workers) are all the workers, of whatever color, race or creed. Blindness and ignorance on the part of white workers and a few labor unions has in the past and in many cases still lead the white workers to play into the hands of the bosses, who wish to divide the working class.
But, as Frank Crosswaith pointed out at the Garden rally, the fate of the Negro working men and women rests With the fate of the working class. It is both unfortunate and erroneous, therefore, that the March on Washington Committee has not and does not call upon the organized working class movement (the unions, in particular) to participate in and support the objectives of the March on Washington movement. Some sections of the organized workers’ movement, certain CIO unions in particular, are beginning to realize that discrimination against any part of the working class weakens the entire working class. Organized support by the trade union movement of the March on Washington movement will be living proof of, and will develop, the solidarity of the entire working class against the industrialists who seek to divide them.
Organized mass action of the Negro masses against their oppressors is necessary. But mass action and militancy alone within the capitalist system cannot achieve for the Negroes the full economic, social and political equality for which they have waited so long. In the final analysis, it is only when the Negro masses take the socialist roads alongside of their fellow workers at home and abroad, that social emancipation can be achieved for themselves and at the same time for all the working masses.
To take this road, the Negro masses must develop from within their ranks the leaders who understand the class nature of the Jim Crow problem and the class solution which must be achieved.
 



The New York March on Washington Committee convened on Wednesday, June 24, to take stock with regard to the successful Madison Square Garden rally and its future perspectives in view of the militancy demonstrated by the Negro masses at the rally. At this meeting of the committee, the main question raised was: “Where do we go from here? The people in Madison Square Garden were waiting for a definite program of action and we have to give it to them.”
Although every speaker referred to the skit (which called for a march on Washington) as the high point of the rally, only one asserted that the leaders at the rally should have promised a March on Washington within ninety days if a substantial portion of the Negroes’ demands were not granted.
It is clear that the March on Washington Committee intends to keep the idea of an actual march on ice. Yet such a militant mass march is the one-Immediate action which would arouse all America to the grievances of the Negroes. To the Jim Crow employers and the government it would symbolize the rise of the new Negro who will not longer tolerate discrimination. And it would enlighten white workers as to their responsibilities in supporting a fight against the exploitation of the most oppressed group of workers in America.
The national March on Washington Committee has also held a mass demonstration in Chicago’s Coliseum and is planning a similar demonstration in Washington. In Washington, however, they have found the government unwilling even to grant them a meeting place. As President Ervin of the New York committee said: “We are going: down to Washington to fight everybody for a place to hold a meeting.” But why should only a few people go down to Washington? Negroes from all over the country should assemble in Washington to fight for this democratic right and all the other rights demanded by the eight-point program of the movement.
 
Democratic Rights Demanded
The eight-point program of the March on Washington movement demands that the government take the following steps:

End discriminatory laws now on the statute books.
 
Protect the lives of Negroes against lynching.
 
Eliminate poll-tax restrictions on voting.
 
End Jim Crow in the armed forces and in national defense.
 
End Jim Crow in jobs and in job training. Put teeth into the FEPC.
 
Stop feeding federal funds into Jim Crow federal agencies.
 
Give Negroes representation on administrative agencies.
 
Give Negroes representation at the peace conference.

Most of these demands ask for Negroes and other minority groups nothing more than their elementary democratic rights as guaranteed by the Constitution of the U.S. That Negroes now find it necessary to make these demands when America is presumably fighting a “war for democracy” abroad is sufficient proof that American “democracy” is, as A. Philip Randolph has said, “a miserable failure.”
 
Make Discrimination a Criminal Offense!
The eight-point program also proposes certain measures to enforce the demands for elementary democratic rights. In order to end discrimination in industry, it demands that teeth be put into the FEPC. To put teeth into the FEPC, why not make all discrimination in industry a criminal offense?
Fines for discrimination are not enough. The bosses’ pockets, bulging with war profits, can afford to pay fines. New York state has already passed a law making discrimination in industry a criminal offense. It remains to be seen whether this law will be enforced ... and there are still forty-seven other states in the Union.
The eight-point program also demands that Negroes be given representation on administrative bodies. It is comprehensible that Negroes, as a large minority group, could demand proportional representation as their democratic right. The Negroes naturally feel that only a Negro can really understand Jim Crow. They therefore expect men of their own race in the government to respond more quickly to their needs and demands as a race.
 
Negro Unionist Protests Half-Truths
However, Negroes must be wary of representation which is identified with them only in terms of color and not from the point of view of class interests. Especially is this caution necessary when such representation is achieved by appointment from above rather than through election by the Negroes themselves. All too often such appointments are made by the government only to pacify the resentment of the Negro masses by simply placing a colored face among the white faces which have been practicing Jim Crow.
For example, Dr. Robert C. Weaver’s position as Negro adviser in the Department of the Interior, the OPM, the WPB, the U.S. Housing Authority and most recently as director of a Negro division in the War Manpower Commission has been questioned by a Negro shop steward in the Colt Patent Firearms Co. of Hartford, Conn. This Negro unionist knows from personal experience that the Colt Co. not only continues to give its Negro employees the “hottest and dirtiest work” but also has refused pointblank to make the same provisions for training unskilled Negro workers as for white workers. Since Dr. Weaver has singled out the Colt company for applause, the shop steward correctly, concludes: “The good graces of Dr. Weaver’s office are being used to circulate half-truths and misinformation in order to turn the attention of the President’s FEPC and the public away from this area.” (Amsterdam Star-News, May 30)
 
Mass March Must Back Petition Campaign
One of the measures adopted by the March on Washington Committee to back up its demands is a petition campaign asking the President to use his war powers and issue a war proclamation incorporating the eight-point program. Everybody is to be asked to sign this petition, Jew and Gentile, white and black, leaders of labor, of education, of the church, of the government and of industry. The implied recognition that Jews and Gentiles, whites and blacks, can and will support the Negroes’ demands for democratic rights is significant. Even more desirable would be the March on Washington Committee’s calling upon the organizations of labor to support its campaign.
In calling upon the leaders of industry and of the government to sign this petition, however, the committee demonstrates that it is not fully conscious of the class origins of Jim Crow. It is not impossible that some industrialists and government spokesmen will sign this petition, for reasons of their own. Certainly, Eleanor Roosevelt can be expected to sign up. But will she not say, as she has said many times before, that the “national emergency” comes first and that the Negroes must wait until after the war to put pressure upon the government?
Protestations of sympathy from those who are part of the Jim Crow machinery of government are not enough; mere words and even signatures are cheap. The Jim Crow congressmen, the Southern bourbons and the employers who depend upon Jim Crow for their ability to continue exploitation need more than signatures and even monster petitions to frighten them into giving the Negro his democratic rights. Continued mass demonstrations culminating in a March on Washington must back up any petition campaign.
The plan of the New York March on Washington Committee is to maintain the organization by underwriting a headquarters for a year, establishing a four-page monthly paper and founding a forum next fall to discuss world events. These organizational plans of the MOWC, particularly the issuance of a regular publication and the establishment of a forum, are significant because they indicate that the movement is assuming a more permanent form.
 
Dissatisfaction with Leadership
There are signs, especially among the youth, of dissatisfaction, with certain undemocratic aspects of the leadership of the committee. One youth speaker protested against the censorship of the Madison Square Garden speeches by the program committee.
When Ervin, the chairman, announced that the next meeting would be July 29, more than a month away, so that the leaders could take vacations, there were murmurings of dissent in the crowd. A young man arose and said that July 29th was too long to wait, that he hadn’t had a vacation for years, and that JIM CROW NEVER TAKES A VACATION. He stated further that this was no time to hold back when the Negro people were waiting for a program of action. His remarks were greeted with applause and it was decided to have meetings regularly twice a month.
Another young man, a member of the speakers’ committee, arose at the end of the meeting and told how he had appointed himself special investigator of lily-white factories, demanding jobs for Negroes. His request for a committee to “march on these places and picket them” if they refused work to Negroes was accepted, not toy formal motion but by the signing up of many for this work. “If that is instigating,” he said, “I love instigating!”
The organizational plans of the March on Washington Committee and the militancy and eagerness for action among the youth, make this movement extremely significant. The leaders continue believing that pressure through petitions and periodic demonstrations will enlighten the government as to the demands of the Negro masses and bring about the required reforms. This pressure is necessary and must be maintained but it must be developed until it becomes a mass movement of militant Negroes marching upon Washington. However, in order to end Jim Crow and achieve their full democratic rights the Negro masses will have to take more fundamental measures which strike at the basic economic origins of race discrimination. They will have to understand first that Jim Crow discrimination arises from the efforts of the ruling capitalist class to maintain for itself a source of cheap labor.
They will have to understand that Washington is and will remain dominated by Jim Crow congressmen as long as the government serves the interests of this ruling class, which profits by exploiting labor and pitting one group of workers against another. They will then come to understand that their main allies against this ruling class are the workers of all colors and creeds who also must end the system of exploitation and competitive labor if they are to achieve security and happiness.
 



The New York division of the March on Washington Committee, at its meeting on July 8, made plans for a silent parade on Saturday, July 25, to protest the legal lynching of Odell Waller.
Twenty-five years ago, just a few months after America entered the First Imperialist World War, Negroes held such a silent parade in New York to protest the inhuman brutality directed against them in the East St. Louis pogrom when Negroes were killed in cold blood.
Today, during the Second Imperialist World War, the electrocution of a sharecropper has aroused in the Negro people an equally passionate desire to make a mass protest against a social order which denies to 13,000,000 people freedom from want and fear.
 
Get Royal Runaround
Waller was slated to die in the electric chair early Thursday morning July 1. On June 30, a delegation of prominent Negro, leaders, among them A. Philip Randolph, national director of the MOWC, went to Washington to request a reprieve, to ask President Roosevelt to issue a public appeal to Governor Darden of Virginia and set up a commission of inquiry. The runaround which these Negro leaders got was bald and bold in its insulting disregard of the fact that they represented the demands of millions of Negroes.
The behavior of Harold Young, the Texan executive secretary to Vice-President Wallace, is typical. While the delegation of Negro men and women sat in his office and made eloquent pleas for commutation of Waller’s sentence, Young sat with his feet on his desk and patronizingly waved a cane at them. Vice-President Wallace himself – who has been so highly praised by the Negro and white “liberal” press alike for his recent rhetorical speeches in behalf of the little people – cavalierly shoved the delegation aside when they ran after him on the steps of his office building. Brusquely he told them that he had no power in the matter.
Elmer Davis, director of the Office of War Information, summoned the delegation to his office only to warn them that “national unity” would be endangered if they carried out their proposal to picket the White House in a last-minute desperate effort.
Eleanor Roosevelt, tears in her voice, confessed she didn’t even know Waller was going to be electrocuted the next day. Having been informed, she went to the President three times and pleaded with him, finally giving up because she was afraid the President might become “annoyed” with her.
Roosevelt; himself, would not employ his powers as wartime President to intervene, accepting instead the decision of the notoriously reactionary Department of Justice officials that he had no power to act. Roosevelt, when asked, also refused to make public a letter which he had sent to the Governor of Virginia previously – on the grounds that the letter was a personal and not a public or official matter.
 
“National Unity” Plea Used
The last-minute action of the Negro leaders demonstrates their blind faith that those in the Administration who mouth beautiful phrases about democracy can or will back up their words with action. These Negro leaders rely for humanitarian reforms upon the so-called “new capitalists,” differentiating them from the “reactionary capitalists” who are recognizably and outspokenly anti-Negro and anti-labor. These leaders do not see that ALL CAPITALISTS must keep all workers, and the Negroes especially, in their place, if the ruling class is going to continue to live off the profits of the workers’ toil.
”National unity” is the catchword used today to discourage militant struggle by the oppressed. To get this “national unity” the ruling, class, by and large, does not make concessions but demands concessions!
In the name of “national unity,” the ruling class demands that the workers give up their right to strike. It demands that the colonials postpone their fight for national independence. It demands that Negroes should not march on Washington for their democratic rights. And it demanded on June 30 that Negroes should not picket the White House – because such an act might expose the contrast between Roosevelt’s fine abstract phrases about democracy and his actual refusal to act in the Waller case – a concrete case of a Negro sharecropper denied his democratic rights through the poll-tax system. Only when the workers, white and colored alike, have adamantly insisted and shown by militant actions that their own struggle comes first has the ruling class “appeased” the workers by granting some concessions to maintain “national unity.”
 
Answer False Call
Randolph’s own admission (in the Waller case) is that “the President and the government have failed us,” and (in general) that American democracy is a “miserable failure.” Nevertheless, the March on Washington. Committee, in a petition recently issued, still demands democratic rights for Negroes “in the interests of national unity and of effective defense,” and “of the victory of the United Nations over the Axis powers.” By motivating their petition in this way, the Negro leaders, like the Stalinists in this instance, obscure the fact that the demand of the Negroes are for rights which they need even for a modest degree of freedom from want and fear at all times.
The Negroes legitimately utilize the exigencies of the “national emergency” to obtain all possible concessions from their Jim Crow oppressors. But they cannot afford to subordinate their demands for simple justice and democratic rights to the needs of the war machine. For, if the Negroes in any way subordinate their own struggle at home to the imperialist struggle or to “national unity,” they will find this “national unity” boomeranging to enable the ruling class to exact rather than to give concessions.
THE NEGROES OF THE COUNTRY MUST TURN OUT IN FULL FORCE ON JULY 25. THE PROTEST OF 13,000,000 AGAINST THE LEGAL LYNCHING OF ONE OF THEM MUST RESULT IN A MIGHTY DEMONSTRATION OF MILITANCY.
 




CHICAGO – Norman Thomas and Maynard Krueger, addressing an audience of several hundred University of Chicago students recently, gave a spectacular demonstration of the impotence of the Socialist Party in the face of declared war. The topic of the discussion was Will the War Bring Socialism? The conclusion of these men, leaders of the Socialist Party, was completely hopeless. Dismayed by the fact of the declared war, they scurried for shelter into the imperialist war camp and renounced completely even their earlier feeble attempts to regard the war from a genuinely socialist point of view.
Maynard Krueger is a professor of economics at the University of Chicago. He spoke like one. What workers feel as the class struggle, he describes abstractly as the factor of “conflict” in society. But even he admits, as he must, that the factors of “conflict” in society are increasing while the “cooperative” factors, i.e., the ability of the bosses to make concessions, are decreasing. However, his remedy is an undue stress on the significance of the consumers cooperative movement.
Kreuger recognizes that the roots of the war are imperialist. But, hamstrung by the recent ambiguous statement of the Socialist Party, he is prohibited from asserting that the war remains imperialist in character. So Krueger remains tied to the apron strings of the weasel-spirited Socialist Party.
 
Krueger and Thomas
Maynard Krueger seems apathetic, without hope. Norman Thomas seems alive but has nothing to live for. The war? Well, Thomas is not ashamed that he fought “to keep America Out of War.” But now we are in the war, he says, and we must face the fact that a smashing Axis victory would ruin all chances for world democracy. Does that mean you are for the war, Mr Thomas? Well, I am not for a smashing victory over the Axis powers, either, answers Thomas, but I am for a just peace at the appropriate time. And who is to write this peace, Mr. Thomas? Well, I am not for another Versailles conference, he answers. You see, Thomas anticipates another conference table dominated by the present belligerent powers at which workers and so-called progressives can BEG for a peace more just than the last one. But the only really just peace, consummated by the workers themselves, is completely neglected by Thomas.
And what about the Third Camp – the workers and the colonial peoples, Mr. Thomas? He has nothing to say about the colonial peoples. He ignores the billion or more colonial workers and peasants who may determine the outcome of the war by their revolts against imperialist oppression.
And do the American workers have a stake in this imperialist war, Mr. Thomas? Should they strike for their rights in war time? Well, says Mr. Thomas, I think some strikes are justified but many should be avoided. “And besides there isn’t enough democracy in the trade unions.” Thus, Thomas puts his main stress on the weaknesses of trade unions and avoids discussing their essentially sound aspects.
Krueger’s hopelessness and Thomas’ superficiality are not accidental. Rather they are manifestations of a decadent party, professing socialist aims while abstaining from Marxism; vacillating between tender-hearted compassion for the working class and actual confidence in the ruling class.
 







The headlines shrieked the story April 12 about the mutiny of Chinese sailors against a British captain. A couple of days later, hidden on an inside page of the New York Times, there was a brief report of the claim by Chinese labor representatives that working conditions were at the root of the trouble. Through an exclusive interview, Labor Action is able to report what really lies behind the headlines.



*
The Chinese sailors working on the British ship were practically in a state of peonage, forced to work for wages lower than those on any other line. All the Chinese seamen received from the British line was $41 a month, including the four pounds war bonus, although wages on other lines run as high as $90 to $180 a month. Indeed, so low were the wages that British ships could not keep their seamen, and the story goes that captains are easier to get than seamen. It is also reliably reported that through political pressure the British are forcing the Dutch to keep seamen’s wages down in order that the British might be permitted to continue their exploitation of the men.
When the ship docked at New York last week, the seamen planned to agitate and perhaps strike for higher wages. With this in mind, they went to the captain, demanding their back pay, which in some cases was as high as $40 to $100 a person. The captain, fearing that the men would strike or go elsewhere if he paid them the money rightly due them, refused to give any man more than $10.
Who started the actual fighting is difficult to determine. The seamen claim that the captain drew his gun, pointing it at the sailor nearest him. The seaman thus threatened approached the captain to grapple with him. All the seamen realized that the captain would be ready to kill one of the men, probably the one nearest him, in order to intimidate the others.
 
Case Bashed Through
The captain claims that the men drew a spike and would have killed him had he not shot first. But the spike referred to is a small tool, used by sailors to tighten screws. It has a wooden handle and is not believed to be at all dangerous, except possibly in very close combat. The captain was not very close to the man he shot and killed. The seamen claim that he was almost ten feet away when he fired and that he was able to draw back two paces before he fired the actual shot.
For his killing of the Chinese seaman the captain was released and not indicted by the grand jury. The district attorney rushed through the case, producing no evidence to back up the testimony of the dead seaman’s companions, although such evidence could easily have been found.
The Chinese consulate in New York has attempted to use its power and prestige to prevent the complete whitewashing of the captain. So far, however, it has had no success. In fact, one Chinese official, moved to protest by the obviously prejudiced procedure, was threatened with legal retribution and forced to apologize.
Some may ask, why was this so, since the American government and the American press is continually pleading for us to “understand China and the Chinese people.” As a matter of fact, American officials were very much embarrassed, torn between their desire to antagonize neither the British nor the Chinese. But the class status of the British captain as compared with the class status of the common Chinese seaman proved decisive. The captain won, in other words, not merely because he was British or white, but because he represented the steamship company. And the Chinese seaman’s death goes unpunished because he was a mere worker.
 



The March on Washington Movement (MOW) is now more than a year and a half old. During this period, A. Phillip Randolph has been its acknowledged leader. The Negro masses have been told over and over again: “What we need is leadership. We must place all our faith in Randolph and follow him wherever he leads and whenever he calls. But we must leave it to him to signal us if and when he wants a march. We must not criticize him or disagree among ourselves but must present a unified front to the white population of the U.S.”
It is true that the Negro masses need leadership. For without leadership and organization; their natural militancy and desire for action against their oppressors can only result in sporadic and futile outbreaks.
But a mass movement must develop leaders who are responsible to the needs and demands of the ranks. It cannot simply depend on decrees or arbitrary decision from the top. It cannot leave all the planning to one man who, like Randolph, announces one week (in Los Angeles) that the movement never intended an actual march on Washington, and the next week (in St. Louis and New York) denies that a real March on Washington has been abandoned.
Whom does Randolph hope to fool or confuse by these vacillations and maneuvers – the Negro masses or the powers that be? Every time he “postpones” or renounces the March on Washington, he plays into the hands of the powers that be. The ruling class rejoices whenever the leadership shows itself to be sensitive to pressure from above rather than to the desire for action from the militant masses below. These vacillations and maneuvers weaken the mass movement and confuse the Negro masses; they don’t fool the ruling class.
 
Ranks Should Decide
Randolph said recently in answer to such criticisms, which are becoming increasingly numerous: “Naturally, all sorts of misinterpretations will be made on all that happens in connection with the March on Washington Movement, but this movement knows what it wants and where it is going and how it expects to get there.” But how are the ranks in the MOW to know where the movement is headed unless matters of policy are discussed in their membership meetings?
If these meetings are used only for rubber-stamping decisions handed down from the top and for entertainment and agitation, the MOW will not be a mass movement. The relation between leaders and members cannot be simply that of blind and uncritical acceptance. Such a relationship creates a false and arbitrary unity and does not lead to strength in organization, nor does it develop leadership among the Negroes themselves. The members of the MOW themselves want to and should discuss in their membership meetings all, questions of policy, especially the decisive question: “When shall we march on Washington?”
The MOW leaders are aware of discontent and rumblings in the ranks who suspect that they are being used or sold out by the leaders. That is why. Randolph has announced a national policy conference to be held at the end of September in Detroit. Randolph has stated that any member of the local divisions of the MOW can attend the national conference and have a voice and vote.
 
Masses Want March
The local divisions of the MOW, at special meetings called for this purpose, should see to it that a substantial delegation from the ranks is sent to the Detroit conference, since the central theme of the conference is to be the question of a march on Washington. Otherwise the only ones who will be able to attend the conference from various cities will be the middle-class and professional leaders – the only ones who can afford the time and expense of the trip on their own.
It is at such a decisive turn in the direction of this movement that the ranks of the MOW should have an opportunity to register by official vote the real sentiment of the masses at home – and that is that the MARCH ON WASHINGTON MOVEMENT SHOULD DECIDE TO MARCH ON WASHINGTON.
Randolph poses the central question thus: “Should Negroes march on Washington and when?” This ambiguous posing of the question is typical of Randolph’s attempt to face two ways. He implies, on the one hand, that a national march is unquestionably planned; while, on the other hand, he reserves to himself the privilege of withdrawing from sponsorship of such a march if the pressure from the Administration becomes too hot, or if the Administration grants him a conference.
Randolph appears interested in threatening a march on Washington only in order to obtain a conference with the President. Yet Randolph admitted that “the President and the government have failed us.” The Negro masses should reject Randolph’s intention to threaten a march only if another executive order from the President is not obtained.
Why does Randolph change his mind so often about a real mass March on Washington? Is it because he realizes that such a demonstration of Negro strength and determination to fight for democracy at home will make the Negro masses move toward a constant stream of militant actions in which the vacillating leadership of Randolph and the other MOW leaders today will be supplanted by more determined leaders?
The Negro masses have a healthy distrust of the imperialist war. Randolph knows this. But any leader, like Randolph, who supports the “war for democracy” abroad is forced, in one way or another, consciously or not, to sell out the struggle at home in the interests of “national unity.” Randolph does it today by “postponing” a MARCH ON WASHINGTON. Tomorrow, as the war | pressure grows stronger, he will sell out the Negro masses even more crassly.
 
Let’s Set the Date!
In the face of the determination of the Negro masses to march, Randolph has conceded and declared that IF a national March on Washington is decided upon, preparation for the national mobilization will take the form of a series of local marches on city halls. Good. That means that, first, the ranks at the Detroit conference should declare themselves unambiguously for a March on Washington, and then and there set the date.
Next, they should then and there make plans in preparation for the national march. These plans should include, not only local marches on city halls, but also a series of marches and picketing of Jim Crow plants in various cities. Such actions in St. Louis, Akron and Cleveland have had positive effects; organized on a national scale they will be powerful instruments, not only for organizing toward a national March on Washington, but for getting jobs for thousands of Negro Workers.
The MOW in various cities can easily and effectively register Negro workers who want jobs in industry. Mass action through a series of ultimatums and marches on Jim Crow plants will get jobs for a large number of these workers.
This is the kind of actions which the MOW must carry out if it is to be an effective mass movement. These are the kinds of actions which can be taken if the dominant elements within the MOW committees are Negro workers. For it is the Negro workers, unlike the Negro middle class and professional elements which dominate the MOW today, who know the desperate need of jobs in industry for the Negro masses.
 



There, are today 5,000,000 men in the armed forces. By next year, this number will be increased to eight million – a very substantial portion of the adult voting population of the United States
These men are presumably fighting for democracy. Yet the proposal to grant them the elementary democratic right of voting is being kicked around like a political football in Washington because the ruling class is opposed to suspending the poll-tax restriction for service men from the eight poll-tax states. (It has since been, approved by Senate-House conferees, and will probably pass. However, Southern congressmen have announced they will fight it to the last: ditch. – Editor)
It is significant that it is not only the reactionary Southern congressmen who have opposed such a waiver. Senator Barkley – Roosevelt’s majority leader in the upper house – led the Senate opposition to lifting the poll-tax restriction. And after Barkley’s opposition had failed to kill the measure, Vice-President Wallace, in appointing a committee of five Senate conferees to discuss the matter with the House, made sure that three of these conferees were active opponents of the waiver.
The entire ruling class trembles at the thought of suspending, the poll-tax: for military men from Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Mississippi, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia because it knows that such a gesture in the direction, of democracy “for the duration” may produce ramifications in the post-war period. Soldiers permitted to vote by a poll-tax waiver will not passively accept disfranchisement again when they have exchanged khaki for overalls. The fathers, mothers, sisters and brothers of these soldiers will also begin insisting on their right to vote and with this insistence may come a radical change in the whole iniquitous system of the South which has kept millions in degradation.
Anti-poll-tax agitation has been carried out mainly in the name of democratic rights for Negroes, but actually, more whites than Negroes are robbed of the right to vote by the poll-tax. The poll-tax hits at all who don’t have an extra dollar or two left over from rent, food and clothing to spare for the right to vote.
Through the technique of the poll-tax, ten million “have-nots” in the South are deprived of any say at all in the government, while a few thousand have an unfettered hand in exploiting them. In the Southern states this means that the Southern, rulers can keep at a minimum all educational appropriations, public works, social legislation and all measures; of a progressive; nature.
The South on the whole remains, therefore, deep and dark, almost like a vast colonial country where little, if anything, is done to extend the benefits of improved technology to the masses.
To the South come the Northern capitalists, to invest in the mines, mills and factories. Like the imperialists in Africa and Asia, these capitalists are assured by their Southern partners of a continual supply of “cheap labor,” ignorant and illiterate, backward and degraded.
 
Fear Labor Movement
However, the very industrialization of the South is creating a proletariat, which will no longer countenance the vested interests and machine rule of a few. The Southern oligarchy is aware that from this proletariat is developing a labor movement which will not only abolish the poll-tax but will make serious inroads on the whole economy of which the poll-tax is only a symptom. Alabama, particularly, with its mines and factories, is swiftly becoming organized and constitutes a fertile field for socialist education (as the New York Post recently pointed out.)
It is this rising militancy of the Southern workers, Negro and white, which causes the Southern bourbons to try more desperately to maintain their rule by lynch law, rabble-rousing race agitation and local repressive measures of a viciousness rivalled only by British imperialism in the colonies and German fascism in Europe.
In Alabama, Horace Wilkinson’s “League to Maintain White Supremacy” is but another aspect of his notorious anti-union and anti-labor activities: The “new Negro,” whom the Southern tories fear so much, is the Negro who, working alongside of his white fellow workers, has learned that together the workers must fight militantly and aggressively for their rights and for their class as a whole.
Meanwhile, in the North, the progress made by organized labor is continually menaced by the possibility and actuality of capital flowing to the South, where the restrictive legislation against labor by poll-tax politicians means that it is easier to set up scab shops. Moreover, nationally, the poll-tax congressmen continually endeavor to keep American “democracy” as a whole retarded to the political level of the Southern states. The Southern oligarchy, with its poll-tax, is so strongly entrenched in the South that it can demand and receive from the national government special appropriations, preferments and political favors, completely out of proportion to its actual voting strength.
Anti-lynch laws and national laws against discrimination remain virtual fantasies while the poll-tax congressmen can control national elections by a solid bloc.
One after another, the Southern poll tax representatives, for example, Howard Smith of Virginia and Senator Rankin of Mississippi, storm through the chambers of Congress yelling for anti-labor legislation and exploding with invectives against Negroes. And let it not be thought that these men are only isolated fanatics. For the poll-tax states elect 76 representatives to Congress – no inconsiderable number when it is realized that they form a solid anti-Negro and anti-labor bloc. Nor is it any accident that anti-labor and anti-Negro invectives flow with equal vehemence from the mouths of these men.
For the rotten Southern economy must make a desperate effort to, survive by keeping the growing labor movement in bounds. And this can best be done, from the point of view of the Southern ruling class, by keeping the Negro in his place and, dividing him from his white fellow workers by constantly nourished race hatred.
 
Anti-Poll-Tax Movement
Today, more and. more, as shown by the AFL and CIO anti-poll-tax resolutions, labor unions are beginning to realize the menace to labor in continued rule by poll-tax state and national “representatives.” It is largely the pressure of labor unions which has persuaded various congressmen to sign a petition to bring the Geyer anti-poll-tax resolution onto the floor of the House. Only a few more signatures are needed.
The “liberals” have always deplored the poll-tax because they were ashamed of its persistence to “free America.” The movement to end the poll-tax is now taking on. real strength because (as the Anti-Poll-Tax Committee reports) labor has waked up to the fact that the poll-tax guarantees political monopoly by those who seek to keep the working class movement devitalized through race antagonisms and restrictive legislation.
To make of this movement a real force, the unions must accompany their anti-poll-tax resolutions and lobbying with intensive organizational drives in the South. Only in this way will the Southern workers themselves develop the organizations and the leadership which will overthrow the poll-tax system and all its accompanying abuses.
 



In recent weeks there have been dramatic demonstrations almost daily of the race supremacy rule of the South which Negroes have for many decades experienced as part of the American capitalist way of life.
First, the legal murder of Odell Waller.
Then Willie Vinson, suspected of attacking a white woman, was lynched in Texas, because, as members of the lynch mob said:
“This town’s been needing a good lynching for a long time. Guilty or not, any n——r ought to be lynched for even looking at a white woman.”
Next, a Negro soldier was brutally beaten by military police in the Southern Pacific railroad station of Houston, Texas, because he dared to enter the white waiting room.
The same week, in Flagstad, Arizona, another Negro soldier was shot to death. The mob responsible for the murder had been summoned by the local sheriff, who said:
“We’ve got to work together to stop these n——rs from trying to drink and eat in our restaurants.”
All these atrocities are not “incidents” but part of the Hitlerite methods by which the ruling class in the South desperately seeks to perpetuate its “American way of life” – a way of life which depends upon the economic and social degradation of the Negro masses. Proof that the authorities not only sanction but encourage the perpetuation of this system is found in their own words.
Mayor Caldwell of Shreveport, La., recently refused a federal grant to build a much-needed public health project which required skilled Negro labor. His explanation:
“The white people of the South will never be bribed by grants or otherwise into accepting the Negro as an equal upon any basis, and before the city of Shreveport will be high-pressured into using Negro labor, we will reject the proffered grant of $67,500.”
Governor Dixon of Alabama has similarly rejected a war contract for Alabama cotton mills because the contract specifies no discrimination in the hiring of workers. Dixon described the non-discriminatory clause as a technique “to break down the principle of segregation of races, to force Negroes and white people to work together, intermingle with each other and even to bring about a situation where white employees will have to work under Negroes!”
Moreover; it is rumored that the much-protested Higgins shipyard cancellation was due to the fact that 50 per cent of the employees were Negroes doing the same work and receiving the same pay as white workers – an equality repulsive to the Southern Bourbons, even though the workers were segregated into units which competed against one another.
The intentions of the Dardens (governor of Virginia, where Waller was killed), the Dixons, the Caldwells, the Higginses, are all cut from the same cloth: Don’t yield an inch to the Negroes. Don’t let Negro workers get decent wages; don’t let them work alongside of whites, where they learn working class solidarity.
 
Promises and Realities
In the face of such outspokenly vicious and constant discrimination and oppression, is there any wonder that Negro workers in the South are attracted to other parts of the country which appear to offer greater opportunities? But do they fare any better elsewhere?
In California, workers were imported from the South, 98 per cent of them Negroes, for work on the Southern Pacific tracks. No decent housing was provided for the workers, and excessive meal and housing payments were deducted from their wage of only 40 cents an hour.
In the East, Negro track workers are transported daily from New York to New Jersey by ferry and then herded into box cars for rides of 20 miles or more to their places of work. They ride fifty to a car with no toilet facilities and only one small window. When sixty of the workers, unable to endure the “Black Calcutta” conditions of the box car, sought to ride in the passenger trains, the supervisor issued an order to all foremen saying:
“Anyone caught riding passenger trains, instead of the modoc (box car) will be dismissed from the service immediately. Get this across to these Negroes and make them understand they must stay off of passenger trains.”
To cities, where there is a shortage of domestic help, employers seek to lure Negro Southern women, promising them good homes, light work, and high wages. One Negro woman Worker who borrowed railroad fare for such a job in New York was put to work the same day she arrived, cooking, washing, cleaning and caring for two children from 6.00 a.m. to 10 p.m. She was not permitted even to leave the house, and was fired when she dared to do so, being paid off $2.50 for three days’ work (48 hours at five cents an hour!).
 
Given Worst Jobs
Today, to Northern rural areas, where there is a labor shortage-, landowners and farmers seek to lure Southern Negro workers, promising them wages of $8.00 to $10 a day, which obviously don’t materialize. An effort is apparently being made, through the U.S. Employment Services in the South and North alike to force Negro workers into migratory agricultural jobs. The method employed is denying them industrial jobs which are more stable and where they could learn the need of organization and working class solidarity much more quickly.
Throughout the country, North and South alike, the bosses continue to give the Negro workers the dirtiest and more insecure jobs. They try to keep them the most oppressed section of the working class, utilizing them to alleviate the shortage of domestic, unskilled and agricultural workers, regardless of their skills and previous training.
Unless all workers through their organizations make a determined effort to combat these methods of the ruling class by integrating Negro workers into the working class movement, they may find the same conditions of working class division confronting them after this war as after the last war.
At that time, Negro workers who had left the rural and urban districts of the South, hoping for decent industrial jobs elsewhere, found themselves confronted with Jim Crow conditions in the North as well (the dirtiest work, segregation into black ghettos, etc.). Is there any wonder, therefore, that there were race riots in 1919-21 as millions of demobilized soldiers came back from the war, competing even for these miserable jobs? Is there any wonder that employers found it possible to get Negro workers to act as strike-breakers against other workers who had made no effort to bring the Negroes into the labor movement on an equal basis?
 
Belong in Labor Movement
These are very real problems not only to Negro workers but to all workers, and the answer lies in the organized action of the labor movement and of all workers. The unions must undertake organization of the South so that all workers, Negro and white alike, can carry out militant action – supported by the organized workers of the whole country – against the Southern employers and officials who viciously refuse contracts rather than give the Negro workers skilled jobs.
Industrial workers of the North and South, through their unions, should act to force Jim Crow employers to let down the race barriers so that Negro workers can get industrial jobs. Negro industrial workers in their communities should join in and direct such movements as the March on Washington movement. This movement is engaged in fighting Jim Crow in industry but needs to be pressed to such militant actions as picketing the United States Employment Service offices and Jim Crow plants to force them to hire Negro industrial workers.
 
Organize Migratory Workers
Where Negro (and white) workers find themselves compelled to take insecure and transitory agricultural jobs, despite their preference for domestic work, the agricultural unions now in the field (UCAPAWA, STFU, etc.) should undertake responsibility to organize them immediately into unions on the job. By this means they will be able to provide the necessary wage standards and working conditions for these migratory workers. And they will prevent a lowering of the standards of the organized agricultural workers which would inevitably follow if the transitory workers remain unorganized.
The ability of the IWW in the days of the First World War to organize successfully the varieties of migratory labor, even for short periods, shows that this can be done. Also, the recent struggle of the sharecroppers in Southeast Missouri, who are likewise seasonal workers, demonstrate that great strides can be made by initiative, solidarity and determined methods.
 



Thirteen million Negroes in America have never known three of the “Four Freedoms” which America is supposedly spreading to the rest of the world. “Freedom from want” is a mockery to Negroes when they are last to be hired and first to be fired; when so many usually obtain only domestic work of short duration; when their wages are the lowest and their rents and food prices the highest. “Freedom from fear” is a myth to Negroes when they have no recourse against the “righteous” Southern citizenry who periodically find excuses to hold lynching parties; against the Northern citizenry who magnify every petty theft into a crime wave; or against those military police whose trigger fingers itch to soil a Negro soldier’s uniform with blood.
“Freedom of speech” is meaningless to millions of Negroes who are kept in enforced ignorance and illiteracy by the most meager educational facilities in the South and who are sent to the most crowded schools in the North, so that throughout the country, 2,700,000 Negroes (or more than twenty per cent of the total Negro population) have had no schooling beyond the fourth grade. “Freedom of religion” is the only one of the “four freedoms” for the Negro which the ruling class has encouraged. The latter has hoped to keep Negroes satisfied by sky-pilots, saturated with spirituals, shouting for peace and security in another world and therefore content with their misery in this world.
 
MOW – Democratic Rights Movement
The March on Washington (MOW) movement had its origins in 1941 when the production demands of “national defense” made it obvious to Negroes that Jim Crow discrimination was responsible for their failure to get jobs and training in “defense” industries. Starting out mainly as a “defense” jobs movement, the MOW, with the entrance of the United States into the “war for democracy” has taken on the character of a general fight for democratic rights for Negroes, and the jobs demand has become one among many other demands.
The MOW, like the Garveyite movement of the First World War, arises at a time when Negroes are conscious of the discrepancy between the professed aims of the ruling class to spread democracy abroad and the actual denial of democracy at home. But unlike the Garveyite movement, with its emphasis on black solidarity over the world, the MOW is an authentic native American movement, stemming from the American Negro masses and directed toward the goal of democratic rights for Negroes in America. At the same time, as was evident from the huge Madison Square Garden rally in New York on June 16, the Negro masses recognize their solidarity with the colonial masses – a solidarity not unrelated to the fact that the colonials are also predominantly colored. From this “color” solidarity, however, can develop a conscious realization that it is not color and race which decide the differences between oppressors and oppressed. As the war proceeds, the Negroes will discover more and more that Japanese imperialism has been, and is, as harsh and brutal in colored China, Korea and the Philippines as white imperialism has been, and is, in China, India, Africa and the West Indies. They will then begin to see the struggle of the Negro masses toward freedom from oppression in America as part of a world-wide struggle of all the oppressed peoples.
The MOW, unlike the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the National Urban League, is partly under working class leadership and professes to be a mass movement of Negroes. A. Phillip Randolph, national director and foremost leader of the movement, is president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters and has a long record in the organized labor movement. Thus, when the Negro masses hail Randolph as their leader, it is an expression, however unconscious, of their need for working class leadership. At the same time, of course, and with Randolph’s sanction, dozens of so-called Negro leaders have also climbed in the bandwagon of the MOW. “Reverends,” YMCA directors and men and women whom the Negroes look up to because they have achieved government posts – all these take note of the potential militancy of the Negro masses and seek to direct it into safe channels. These “leaders,” as was obvious from the Madison Square Garden rally, trail behind, rather than lead the Negro masses. These “leaders” continually reiterate: “This is a mass movement!” because without the masses they are nothing!
The leaders of the MOW, while calling upon the masses of Negroes to join in the movement and make it their own, fear that the masses may respond so overwhelmingly that they can no longer be held in bounds. This fear is shown by the unwillingness of the leaders to call for a real March on Washington, and their restriction of the demonstrations of Negro strength to local rallies. The leaders, reformist in outlook, continue to rely strongly upon petitions to the President and on negotiations with the Administration, which it is hoped will produce more effective executive orders proclaiming an end to discrimination.
 
Negro Masses Ready for Action
The Negro masses, on the other hand, experience daily the futility of executive orders. For one of these the MOW leaders already “postponed” a March on Washington in June 1941. Indeed, the limitations of Executive Order 8802 have been admitted by Mark Ethridge, a member of the Fair Employment Practices Committee created by the order. Said Ethridge! “I believe it is perfectly apparent that Executive Order 8802 is a war order, and not a social document ... Had I conceived it to be, I would not have accepted membership on the committee.” In other words, the Executive Order was calculated to serve only two purposes: one, to extort blood, sweat and toil from the Negro masses for the imperialist war; and, two, to pacify their resentment and obtain their support. It was in no sense a recognition of the justice of Negro demands.
The masses also saw their leaders given a first-class run-around in Washington when these leaders went there to negotiate in the Waller case. They cannot help but wonder, therefore, why mass actions of a more militant character are not called for by their leaders. They believe they have shown their leaders, e.g., at the Madison Square Garden rally and at the Chicago Coliseum rally, that they are ready to participate in a national March on Washington. They feel rightly that such a dramatic demonstration of their strength would be a direct action which would go far to upset the status quo.
Nevertheless, the reformist leaders of the MOW, instead of relying upon the masses in action, still rely upon the “new capitalists,” presumably congregated in the Roosevelt Administration, attempting to distinguish them from the “reactionary capitalists” and ignoring the fact that all capitalists are bound together by a class determination to keep all workers, Negro and white, at the bottom of the social ladder. Randolph has even gone so far as to renounce any intentions of an actual March on Washington, claiming that from its very inception the MOW used the idea of a march only as a threat, an empty threat which it apparently never intended to carry out. Under such circumstances, it is no wonder that questions arise not only in the minds of the expectant and hopeful Negro masses but also among the so-called right wing elements among the Negroes who saw no reason for the existence of the MOW from its start. The Pittsburgh Courier, for example, in an editorial on August 8, asks wherein a March on Washington Movement which does not intend a March on Washington differs from the NAACP and the National Urban League as lobbying pressure groups.
 
MOW Needs Active Base
Clearly, the MOW leaders will continue to regard the movement not as a movement for action but only as a propaganda pressure group. Wary of jeopardizing the friendliest of relations with the Administration, they are therefore sensitive to and helpless in the face of pressure from it. Whatever gains the MOW can achieve for the Negroes within the confines of capitalism will come only if the movement has a mass base and a leadership which is ready and willing to carry out the mandates of the masses for actions of a militant mass character. Since the present leadership of the MOW is not one which can be depended upon to give militant leadership, it is all the more necessary for the ranks in the local MOW committees, not only to take a more active part but to insist upon their democratic rights internally and their serious participation in the formulation of decisions on actions and policy. They must insist that membership meetings be not simply rallies for entertainment, for handing out information, for rubber-stamping decisions already made by the executive committees, or for referring new proposals. Serious discussion and recommendations by the ranks of policies and actions are entirely possible and need not await directives from above.
The Negro masses have the spirit and will to struggle, to march and to picket for their rights and demands. In St. Louis, organized by the local MOW Committee, Negro workers marched on the small arms plants to protest the firing of 150 Negro workers. In Cleveland, members of the Future Outlook League picketed several plants refusing to employ Negro labor. In Akron, members of the same league have picketed the Federal Employment Service office for jobs. Where such actions have taken place, it is obvious that working class Negroes, intent on jobs, are in the forefront of the movement for economic and democratic rights for Negroes.
It is the Negro proletariat which will prove and is proving to be the most dependable and militant fighters for Negro rights.
At present, however, most of the active members of the MOW committees in various cities are from the middle class and professionals in the Negro community. Not sufficient working class Negroes have as yet taken their place, nationally and locally, in the committees. Until they make their impression through active participation and direction of the MOW it will be easier for the reformist and vacillating leadership to restrain and curb this movement from more militant mass actions. Moreover, so long as the active membership of the MOW committee remains dominantly middle class it will lack the necessary strength which can come only from Negroes in the labor movement.
 
Negro’s Future with Organized Labor
The development of mass production industries in the United States and the entrance of hundreds of thousands of Negro workers into these industries has proceeded since the First World War. Incorporation of all these workers into the labor unions, regardless of race, color or creed, has been a matter of historical imperativeness if workers are to defend themselves against increasing exploitation. Especially with the development of the CIO, more workers in the mass production industries are learning that the economic class requirements of workers are achieved only through class solidarity of all workers, Negro and white. Today, according to available reports, there are half a million Negroes in the labor unions – CIO, AFL and railroad brotherhoods. The relation of the Negroes to the CIO was recently stated succinctly by Willard S. Townsend, president of the United Transport Service Employees of America (UTSEA-CIO) and first Negro member of the CIO’s executive council. Townsend declared: “Since the majority of Negroes in the world are workers, their only escape from economic bondage and social disfranchisement is through organized labor. The CIO has provided this specific avenue of escape.”
The St. Louis CIO Council’s support of the recent struggle of the Negro and white sharecroppers in Southeast Missouri is a classic example of organized labor actively following a policy of non-discrimination and equality to build working class solidarity and a militant union movement. The CIO unions, in their general policy of non-discrimination, are building a working class movement which stands as a symbol of the most fruitful methods whereby Jim Crow discrimination can be attacked. By bringing the Negro workers into the unions, specific grievances of the Negroes related to the basic problem of economic existence are better resolved and/or put more on the same basis as the problems of their fellow white workers and union brothers. Moreover, the basis is laid for attacking the problem of social and political discrimination through class action and working class leadership, not only within industry but also within the Negro community.
The Negro community has begun to shift its view regarding the importance of unionism, although prejudices still remain among Negroes because of their bitter experiences in the past, as well as today, with Jim Crow craft unions. Likewise, as is clear from instances such as the recent Detroit strike, where four white workers refused to work alongside Negro workers, it has not been possible to erase from the minds of white workers in a few years the poisonous prejudices indoctrinated by the capitalist class for so many generations.
Recognition of the fact that the Negro’s future lies with organized labor points the need for Negro labor committees (or similar bodies, whatever their form or name), not as mass movements, but as educational mediums supplementing the labor unions. Such committees would (1) carry out union and workers’ education among the Negro workers in and outside the unions and in the Negro community; (2) encourage Negro workers to join unions; (3) strive to break down Jim Crow prejudices of white workers in the shop and in the unions wherever it exists. Negro labor educational committees of this character will work more effectively and have a more consistent and militant stand when they include revolutionary workers who see the historical importance of the labor union movement; who realize clearly the class origins of Jim Crow; who will at no time sacrifice union and Negro rights to imperialist war demands; and who can develop Negro workers to a realization of the ultimate revolutionary action which must be carried out to smash Jim Crow in its entirety.
 
MOW Movement Needs Labor Base
The MOW movement, unlike the organized labor movement, does not have a class character. It is not oriented around the struggle of the Negro workers alone, but has its base in the Negro people as Negroes. It has arisen because the Negroes in America, while primarily workers, still have a special problem of fighting for their democratic rights as one of the largest oppressed minorities in the world. The movement is not interracial or non-racial in character but has been and is intentionally an all-Negro movement, excluding whites from participation and calling upon only a few whites for support. Considering the oppression of Negroes as Negroes, and considering also their desire to prove their independent strength, this restriction, while radically wrong, is at least understandable.
However, if the MOW is to develop, it will discover that white workers and their organizations are the staunchest allies of the Negro working masses and can provide the most solid and valuable assistance. Once white workers comprehend more fully the class necessity for combating Jim Crow, they will not forget the lesson, since their own existence and working class solidarity depend upon it.
White liberals, on the other hand, whom the MOW has called upon for support – have no real stake in the Negro struggle but their fickle humanitarian sympathies. Even more patently, the white bourgeois politicians, e.g., Willkie and Dewey, who have expressed themselves as deploring the Negro’s miserable lot, have only the stake of election day politics to make them “friends of the Negro people.” The Negro masses will do well to see that the MOW movement finds its allies, not among such fair weather white liberals and bourgeois politicians, but among the white working class elements. Here again, the active participation of the Negro proletariat in the movement would be an important factor. Recognizing the necessity of working class solidarity and experiencing daily its effectiveness in militant mass actions, they must point the need for widening the support of the MOW so as to include working class organizations.
 
MOW Struggle and “National Unity”
The MOW, unlike the Stalinist front National Negro Congress, which crassly subordinates the Negro struggle to the imperialist war, tends to have as its primary purpose the Negro’s fight for democratic rights. The Stalinists characterize the MOW as subversive and defeatist because it does not make support of the imperialist war its main objective. The MOW, through Randolph, has in turn, exposed a Negro “Victory” rally held by the Stalinists as a “typical Communist front movement” which “wants to make the Negro forget all his grievances.
Today the National Negro Congress, in its June, 1942, statement, urges, for example, that job discrimination be abolished in war industries only “to beat the Axis.” It urges the prosecution of lynchers only as “traitors to our war effort.” The statement also exposes as “selfish” those who put the just demands and long overdue rights of the Negroes before the Stalinist “victory” program of an American war offensive and a second front. After the Waller legal lynching, the National Negro Congress issued a statement in which it “calls upon its councils and friends to hold immediately win-the-war rallies to protest against the outrageous injustice of which Odell Waller was a victim.” These examples are illustrative of the depraved and cynical attitude which the Stalinists hold toward the struggle of the masses, Negro and white, when it affects Kremlin interests.
While the opposition of the MOW to the Stalinist front organizations is real and explicit, the political differences of the two become obscured by the fact that the leaders of the MOW also support the war. The slogan of the movement – “Winning Democracy for the Negro is Winning the War for Democracy” – is an attempt to straddle the war issue by the “Double V” conception of victory at home and victory abroad. But as the war pressure increases and “national unity” appears to be threatened by a struggle for Negro rights, the MOW leaders reiterate more vociferously and repeatedly their patriotism and loyalty. They increase their sales pressure on the skeptical Negro masses to accept the theory that the Allied powers are really fighting for democracy and that the future freedom of the oppressed Negro masses lies with the victory of the “democratic” imperialists rather than in independent mass actions. Even after the Roosevelt Administration had refused to intervene in the Waller case, and it was admitted by Randolph that “the President and the government have failed us,” the MOW issues its petition for democratic rights “in the interests of national unity” and of “victory of the United Nations.”
The Negro masses, on the other hand, by their fundamental distrust of the war, show, however inarticulately, that they distrust a social order which conducts a “war for democracy” abroad while denying democracy at home. To the extent that the MOW permits itself to be dissuaded by imperialist war and “national unity” considerations from emphasizing and carrying out struggles for the rights of the Negroes, it will lose the support of the Negro masses. On the other hand, if the MOW receives its impetus and direction from the Negro proletarian masses, who find themselves more frequently forced to carry out militant actions despite the exigencies of “national unity” and the imperialist war demands, it will be able to achieve more permanent and important gains for the Negroes.
 
MOW Movement – and Politics
The March on Washington movement also has a political character which is not usually recognized. That this should be the case is understandable, since a rising mass movement cannot avoid taking cognizance of the fact that the state or the governmental power is the force that oppresses it. The call for a March on Washington was implicitly a realization of the fact that the government is a concentration of the oppressive forces within the country. The way in which the call for a March on Washington captured the imagination of the Negro masses in 1941 is evidence that they feel this need for action against the political powers. That the reformist and middle class leaders of the MOW have time after time “postponed” such a march is also evidence that they fear the political consequences and implications of the March on Washington action. The government, suspecting the possible political developments, made desperate and successful efforts to circumvent a march in 1941.
 
“Good” and “Bad” Politicians
At the same time, as is shown by its refusal to intercede for Waller, the government is not yet ready to appease the Negro masses by granting certain demands which they make. When Odell Waller, tried and condemned by a poll-tax jury, walked to his death in the electric chair, the Negroes became even more bitterly disillusioned with American “democracy” and its war. But there are those in the ruling class, especially the Southern Bourbons, who feel that if you appease the masses in their struggles, they will not be content with one “concession” when so much cries out for change. That is why these men are willing to pay the price of disillusioning the Negro masses now, hoping that the rejection of their demands without any signs of yielding will also discourage the masses from further struggle. Governor Darden of Virginia, for example, was influenced in his refusal to commute Waller’s sentence by a fear that “perhaps the Negroes would celebrate the victory by crowding the streets”!
More obviously, the political slant of the MOW is seen in its efforts to get the Negroes out to vote in the November elections for those candidates who express themselves as on the side of the Negroes. Here again the Negroes are attempting to distinguish between “good” and “bad” bourgeois candidates, ignoring the fact that the difference between the two is mainly that one flatters the Negroes into the hope that he can do something for them in office, while, the other, more harsh and adamant, makes no claim to either interest or sympathy with Negroes.
The political “leadership” of the MOW today, and indeed the Negro masses in general tend to favor Negro candidates for legislative election and Negro appointees as their representatives in the Administration, irrespective of their political view or parties. It is understandable that the Negroes as a large minority should demand and attempt to achieve proportional representation as their democratic right. But the Negroes must be wary of regarding every man of their own race, especially those whom the ruling class favors by appointment, as having more than the most superficial color identity with them. A demand for mere color representation can and has resulted in the simple expedient of the Administration’s placing a colored face among the white faces who have been practicing Jim Crow. Such colored “representatives” are merely placed in administrative posts to allay the Negro’s rising resentment in one connection or another. Utilized for this purpose have been Judge Hastie, Negro adviser to the Secretary of War, and Dr. Robert C. Weaver, Negro adviser to the War Production Board and director of the Negro division of the War Manpower Board. When the Negro masses began to stir over the Fort Bragge “riots” of the fall of 1941, Judge Hastie was put on the air to reassure them. But the promises he made didn’t prevent the Alexandria “pogroms” of the winter of 1942, the Fort Dix killings and similar occurrences in Army camps all over the country. Similarly, Weaver has been accused by a Negro unionist of “using the good graces of his office” to turn the attention of the FEPC and the public away from the Colt Co. (Hartford, Conn.), known for its discriminatory policy toward Negro workers.
That the government knows the usefulness of Negro administrators to help it maintain its oppressive rule is implied by the recent proposal to set up a government bureau on all Negro affairs. It is patently ludicrous that such a bureau would be for policy-making in a Negro self-rule sense when Negroes are interwoven in and are an organic part of all phases of American society. Hence, this proposal for a catch-all bureau has rightly been characterized by the NAACP as a technique for making Negroes wards of the government in the same way that the Indians have been. That this bureau would presumably be staffed largely by Negroes does not change the intent or effect of the proposal one whit. Whether Negroes take their orders directly from the white Jim Crow ruling class or from the colored henchmen or colleagues of this class, the Negro’s lot will remain the same under the existing social order.
 
Democratic Rights Through Socialism
From the foregoing it is clear that there are two movements of unquestioned significance in the modern period to the Negro masses and therefore to all labor. One is the entry of thousands of Negroes into the labor unions, especially the 400,000 in the CIO unions. The other is the March on Washington which stems from and proceeds at present among the Negroes as a whole. The surer and more significant movement is that of the Negroes within the labor movement, a process not yet completed but taking its course as a necessary and normal development of American labor and economy. The MOW, on the other hand, obtains much of its strength from the fact that a “national emergency” exists in the United States, requiring special numbers of workers in war production. For this reason, the MOW may find such gains as it may make vitiated by the exigencies of the critical post-war situation. Nevertheless, despite this limitation and those indicated earlier – viz., its middle class composition, the vacillations of the leaders due to their political ideologies, its amorphous organization – the MOW can today and for the next period serve the interests of the Negro masses if it becomes a Negro workers’ movement. Infiltration of proletarian elements will strengthen and help to change the leadership and propel the movement into militant actions.
Whether the MOW movement proves transitory or develops into a broad and relatively permanent movement for Negro democratic and economic rights will depend upon whether it will develop a leadership which seeks its main support in the organized labor movement and whether the Negro masses in the labor movement are ready to enter into and actively support this general movement for Negro rights as a supplement to their economic and class activities within the unions themselves.
Negro working class leaders will be first to realize, and more courageous to state, that the Negro masses are right in their fundamental distrust of the imperialist war for democracy. Working alongside of their white fellow workers, they will see that the workers must all unite to fight for the rights of any section of their class. Also, in time, these “New Negroes” will be quickest to understand, act upon, and lead others to act upon, the basis of revolutionary principles.
When workers refuse to be divided they will be moving toward the overthrow of the whole system of social exploitation. And only when the system is overthrown will the Negroes, like the colonials with whom they have much in common, achieve even their democratic rights. To achieve their democratic rights, the Negroes, under revolutionary working class leadership of Negroes and whites, must achieve the socialist revolution.
 



Fifteen hundred trackmen on the Pennsylvania Railroad struck last week in the New York and New Jersey area.
The trackmen, 99 per cent of them Negroes, struck because they were sick of being freighted to work in cattle cars, 100 of them herded together in a space made to accommodate only forty; transported fifteen to twenty miles in a car with no toilet facilities and with only a small window and door for ventilation.
The trackmen struck because of the system whereby their working hours are computed and paid for only from the time they disembark from the box cars, so that each man is forced to donate about two hours daily to the railroad. They struck for a wage increase from fifty-five to seventy-five cents an hour; and finally they struck because two of their number, Rufus V. Gardner and Alexander Robinson, had been fired for leading a protest.
Shortly after the spontaneous action of the trackmen, the Utility Workers Organization Committee of the CIO stepped in to organize them and to request immediate mediation by the National Mediation Board. The latest report of the time of this writing is that the mediation has been granted and the men have returned to work.
The militancy of the Negro workers, the solidarity of those white workers who walked out with them, and the entrance of union organization into the picture make this case one of the more important recent events in the labor movement.
As J. Robert Smith, labor reporter of the Amsterdam Star-News said:
“If the Negro’s economic problem in regard to labor is to be solved, it will be done and done only by the rank and file worker. The $3.00 and $4.00-a-day man whose brow is begrimed by sweat from his toil has the key to our economic rehabilitation and, mere than that, is in a position to dictate the degree of progress the entire race will show ... These are the men the race has to depend upon. Though small in number, these workers with their united effort and purpose will make the great and mighty Pennsylvania Railroad either take cognizance of their demands or suffer the consequence.”
The Negro trackmen are not the only Negro workers in New York who have shown that they recognize the need for militant action and organization to defend their rights. Recently the Defense Workers Protective League was formed in Harlem to insist on improved transportation conditions for 1,000 workers, traveling daily on dilapidated buses to the Picatinny Arsenal in New Jersey. These buses often break down en route, costing the workers time and money while they wait long hours on the highway.
The workers pay the enormous sum of $5.00 for six round trips a week. Moreover, proportionate refunds are not made if all trips are not made; no refund at all is given if three trips are used up. Out of his weekly pay, a worker who works only three days pays $5.00 for the transportation alone.
Negro workers, confronted with the harshest and most inhuman working conditions, are finding union organization as the best instrument to better their conditions. The organizational strength and initiative of the labor unions, particularly, must be enlisted to organize these men into bona fide unions on an equal basis with other workers.
The CIO’s organization of the Pennsylvania’s trackmen stands as a symbol of what must be achieved on a far wider scale. For if the improvement of the lot of all the working class, Negro and white, is to be accomplished, there must be no division within the working class.
 



Five hundred miners went on strike the other day in Docena, Ala. Two hundred and fifty of them stopped work and as many more refused to enter the mines for the next shift when word came that one of their number had been killed by the bullet of a company man. No coal was dug, no cars were filled and no torches were lit as the men sought a (means to avenge their brother.
Docena, Ala., is a company town. The workers there draw their pay for sweating in the mines and factories of the Tennessee Coal & Iron Co. (TC&I). They buy their merchandise from the company store, rent their shacks from the company and after working for years are usually in debt to the company.
The TC&I maintains a baronial rule over the Dacena workers and their families by dividing the white workers from the colored workers, paying Negroes one-half as much as whites and separating the black side of Docena’s shanty town from the white. Still, at the entrance to the mines the company has put up a sign which reads: “This plant is a part of the arsenal of democracy.”
Into the Docena mines some time ago came Jack Bloodworth, a Negro shift leader who had been up around the West Virginia and Pennsylvania mines and who knew that workers didn’t always have to take any guff from the company. The bosses called Bloodworth “sassy” because, said they, he was setting a “bad example” to other Negro workers who might also get it into their heads to stand up for their rights. And so Company Paymaster Gray, for one, used to put Bloodworth “in his place” by little annoyances – for example, making him wait until the very last before getting his pay.
A couple of weeks ago Bloodworth made his last trip to the pay window before being inducted into the Army. This time Gray decided to annoy Bloodworth by deducting 50 cents from his pay for a work badge which Gray claimed Bloodworth had lost. Bloodworth called Gray a liar and, to avoid a fight, started off for home without his pay. But Gray was not content to let the matter rest there. He summoned another deputy and together, they overtook Bloodworth and tried to put him under arrest for disturbing the peace.
Today Bloodworth is dead, shot by Gray in the heart. The coroner in Docena, whose bread is buttered by the company in this company town, called the murder “justifiable homicide.” But Jack Bloodworth’s fellow workers in Docena didn’t agree. They knew the killing was boss murder and so they went on strike, demanding that the killer be discharged and brought to trial and that the white gun-toting deputies be ousted.
The men didn’t win their strike. They didn’t get organizational aid from their union leaders, and they had to go back to work to feed their families. But they haven’t forgotten how and why their brother was killed.
After Docena will come further developments in the class struggle between bosses who will go as far as murder to get rid of a militant worker, and workers who are ready to use their best weapon, the strike, to fight boss terrorism and protect their economic rights.
 

tone + Willie Gorman: Germany - Still the Key (May 1946)




Grace Lee Boggs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Ria Stone & Willie Gorman
Germany – Still the Key
A Pre-Convention Discussion Article
(May 1946)

From New International, Vol. XII No. 5, May 1946, pp. 154–157.
Ria Stone was a pseudonym used by Grace Lee Boggs.
Transcribed and marked up by Damon Maxwell.
Proofread by Einde O’ Callaghan (May 2013).

Germany is the heart of Europe. It is not only that it is the center of European economy. Until recently it was the centralizing and unifying force of the entire industrial and commercial system of that continent. Germany monopoly capitalism achieved a unified Europe by military conquest and counter-revolution. This was the inevitable result of the failure of the European proletariat to unify Europe by socialist revolution.
Today, no revolutionary situation exists in Germany. But those who think that thereby the German question can be dealt with episodically, only show their fundamental misconception of the stage of development reached by European capitalism. Germany is still the heart of Europe. It is the basis for rapacious imperialism on the continent. From this center, imperialist political and military intervention can be directed against the proletariat of any European nation. As long as Germany remains under the heel of foreign conquerors, it is a threat to the revolution in any European country. From their control of Germany, the imperialists control the economic development, in fact, the day-to-day existence of the individual European countries. Moreover, Germany contains the boundary at which the chief imperialist antagonists of today conflict with one another. The German working class must today oppose with all its strength both imperialist camps, just as yesterday the whole European proletariat had to oppose the Axis and Allied camps. The principled and practical struggle against all imperialism continues. Our task, in this pre-convention discussion and as a guide to clear perspectives in the coming period, is to evaluate the political positions of the past two years in the light of events and as a guide to a perspective for the coming period.
The effective mass insurgence of the German working class was the link missing in the revolutionary wave over Europe with the end of the war. Greece, Italy, France, Holland, Belgium, Poland – the armed working class of these countries in the critical stages of the war cooperated with their own bourgeoisie and the Allied imperialists, to whatever degree and for whatever length of time, on the grounds that oppressive Nazism had to be defeated. A working class upheaval in Germany would have torn through the fabric of this argument, already weakened by the distrust of the European proletariat in bourgeois democracy and its hatred for its own collaborationist and escapist bourgeoisie. It would have immensely sharpened the underlying class character of the national struggle in the occupied countries. It would have won the sympathy and support of the European masses for the German proletariat which, many of them recognized, was also under the heel of Fascism. The Allied imperialists strove with might and main to isolate the German proletariat from the European masses by denigrating the German proletariat, by linking the German workers with the German fascists and by linking the national struggle to the imperialist war camps. The political struggle for the European proletariat revolved around these two perspectives. Either the imperialist perspective for the isolation of the German proletariat from the European revolution, the perspective endorsed and stimulated by the Stalinists and the Social Democracy. Or the revolutionary perspective of the German revolution under the unifying formula of the Socialist United States of Europe. Thus the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe was brought closer and not further away from the tasks of the day by the revolutionary wave of the national resistance movements.
Today, how shall the German workers defeat the oppression and dismemberment by the four imperialist powers? The German workers will carry on their struggle in a Europe filled with social turmoil and consistently disturbed by a working class, more class-conscious, more socialist-conscious than ever before in its history. The struggle of the Italian and French workers against their own bourgeoisie must become fused with the struggle of the German workers against their imperialist oppressors precisely because the native bourgeoisie cannot defeat the revolutionary proletariat except with the aid of the imperialist conquerors. Germany is the geographic, the economic and the political link between the countries under the brutal Russian occupation and those countries which are in the orbit of Anglo-American imperialism. If yesterday, there was no way to save the German proletariat from imperialist occupation except the revolution on a European scale, today there is no way for the European proletariat to save itself from the counter-revolution except the struggle for the socialist United States of Europe with Germany as the center.
The political program for Germany must be based on the stable elements of the objective situation.

The defeat of German imperialism by Allied imperialism has not only smashed Germany physically but it has dealt the German bourgeoisie a mortal blow. This leaves the German proletariat, however disorganized, as the greatest social force in Germany today.
 
The proposed deindustrialization of Germany is not a settled question. The bourgeoisie itself balks before the consequences. France wants an industrial Ruhr. Britain increases steel production, Russia loots factories but at the same time initiates production. The political jockeying in preparation for World War III involves the industrialization of Germany. Such is the nature of modern war.

Russia has had to encourage the organization of the working class in the Communist Party. Britain has countered by sponsoring the Social-Democracy. Sidney Hillman arrived from the United States to strengthen German trade-unionism. The imperialists connive for the support of the proletariat because they know very well that there is no other class in Germany today with potential social power. There have been other indications. Food riots in Hamburg, the continuous crisis of the American military machine, the growing demand by German parties and leaders for national unification. This does not mean that the revolution will take place tomorrow. But any program for the national reunification of Germany which does not base itself on the stage of class relations between the German bourgeoisie and the German proletariat, and on th6 general revolutionary situation in Europe will in effect propose a defeatist perspective for the entire European. revolution. In that sense it will only be a continuation of the absence of a revolutionary perspective which, despite vacillations, characterized the position of the Workers Party majority during the war.
 
Tendencies in Fourth International
The errors of the Workers Party majority, unless consciously recognized and repudiated, form the premise for future disorientation.
The disputes in the Workers Party before the 1944 convention on the program and perspectives for Germany demonstrated the confused but nevertheless obviously negative position of the Workers Party majority on the relation of Germany to the European socialist revolution. Though Germany was objectively the key to the European revolution (as explained above), the Majority Resolution (New International, February 1943) failed to contain the semblance of a program or perspective for the tens of millions of German workers. Not even by a phrase were the German workers distinguished from the Nazi overlords.
Under pressure from the minority and the beginning of the Italian Revolution, an attempt was made to correct this revealing omission in a supplementary resolution (November 1943). After describing the “active intervention of the Italian masses in the political, scene” the Supplementary Resolution continues: “A similar intervention by the German masses may be expected ...” But then the German workers are merely advised to solidarize themselves with the workers from other countries struggling for their freedom from German imperialism. As if any revolution was ever made by the proletariat of an “oppressing country” on the slogan of national independence for the oppressed countries!
The majority thereafter continued to vacillate on the German question. “The victorious proletarian revolution will not, it is clear, directly replace the fallen Nazi regime.” (NI, August 1944) Here the perspective of mass revolutionary action is confused with the prospect of victorious revolution. But on the previous page, the same editorial declared (in regard to the conflict between Hitler and his generals):
“If the crisis endures, the rift at the top becomes a breach which widens down to the bottom. The masses, yesterday silent, docile, passive, depressed, impotent – at least apparently – change overnight, and pour through this breach with irresistible force. The regime crumbles. The people are masters of the street and the palace.
“With one change or another, this is the way the history of the coming German revolution will write itself.” (NI, Aug. 1944, p. 245)
The majority is the victim of its own contradictions. It attempts to maintain some semblance of revolutionary policy while repudiating in advance the inevitability of proletarian revolution and emphasizing instead the inevitability of counter-revolution. It is not only a question of expecting setbacks and retreats, an expectation which is inseparable from the process of development of a revolution. It is rather a timidity about proposing revolutionary policy because of a conviction that the proletariat is impotent without a revolutionary party and therefore is certain to be defeated.
The incapacity of the majority to pose the German question was merely an expression of its blindness to the developing revolutionary situation in Germany and a tacit acceptance of the concept of the German proletariat, later elaborated by the German retrogressionists.
Listen to the retrogressionists: “Germany received an especially unfavorable place in this [retrogressive] movement, which deprived it of any immediate revolutionary perspective and kept the masses in political paralysis.” (NI, Oct. 1945)
Now on the eve of a new convention the comrades of the Workers Party majority and the IKD triumphantly repeat: “There was no German revolution. This is conclusive proof that Johnson was wrong and that the majority policy was correct.” Which policy? The entire negative policy that the revolution would not come!
The Founding Conference Theses asserted that the Soviets would be organized before the Reichstag would be reconvened. This prediction has not yet been fulfilled. But those who consider this a triumph for their own political positions are playing with the very foundations and methods of Marxism. They are calling into question the very nature of the vanguard’s role in striving to utilize every crisis of bourgeois society for the advancement of the proletarian revolution.
Fascism could not be destroyed by parliamentary negotiations but by shock and violence. Such is the nature of our epoch. Military defeat for Germany offered an objectively revolutionary situation for the German masses. And it is obligatory for the revolutionary to propose revolutionary policy for an objectively revolutionary situation. The military blows shattered the German state, disorganized the economy, broke the masses from the Nazi ideology and hierarchy. It was the most genuine opportunity for revolutionary action which had arisen in Nazi Germany for twelve years.
Comrade Morrow shares the opinion of the Workers Party majority on this question. To both of them we recommend as our own position in this matter the following statement by the Secretariat of the Fourth International. It repeats from its 1945 resolution:
“‘Contrary to our optimistic prognosis – issued on the eve and at the beginning of the new imperialist carnage – relative to the latter’s probable duration which we deemed would be brief, and the reaction of the masses which we deemed would be far more rapid and far more efficacious, this war, despite the colossal havoc it caused and despite the unprecedented sufferings it inflicted upon the masses, lasted much longer than the war of 1914–18 and terminated in Europe only in the total military destruction of one of the belligerent camps ...
“‘Another important factor which has conditioned the development of the revolutionary crisis in Europe, its scope and its tempo, is the partial destruction of the material and human premises for the German revolution ...
“‘One cannot count on the revolutionary action of the German proletariat until material life is reorganized in Germany and until several million prisoners are able to find their place in the country’s economic life.’”
Commenting on this excerpt from the resolution, it goes on to say:
“Comrade Morrow is not satisfied with this self-criticism. He desires a precise condemnation of the errors committed in the ‘earlier documents,’ that is to say, the February 1944 theses of the European Conference and the January 1946 resolution of the EEC.
“It is difficult to understand exactly what ‘errors’ are referred to here. The elucidations provided by Comrade Morrow up to now are not sufficiently clear to us. On the other hand, his manner of conceiving the relationship between the objective and subjective premises of the revolution renders spurious, in our opinion, his criticism as a whole.”
What alternative policy to the policy of the Fourth International and the Workers Party minority could have been proposed for the period between the imminent collapse and the full consolidation of imperialist occupation? Passivity? Receptivity to the invaders? Struggle for democratic rights? Abstention? In reality there were only two alternatives. Self-reliance and revolutionary activity by the German proletariat or capitulation to the invading imperialists while waiting for a reconstruction of the labor movement and the re-foundation of the Trotskyist party.
Comrade Johnson repeatedly warned against the confusion between the revolutionary prognosis and perspective and the actual working out of events. In the 1943 resolution (p. 16), he wrote:
“Indispensable to the vanguard for an understanding of its own tasks, the analysis is in no way to be confused with prophecy. Some of the trends may overshoot their mark, some may stop short. The question is to recognize them and work consciously in the direction to which they point.”
Johnson only reiterated the remarks of Trotsky:
“A prognosis is not a promissory note which can be cashed on a given date. Prognosis outlines only the definite trends of a development ... All those who seek exact predictions of concrete events should consult the astrologists. Marxist prognosis aids only in orientation.”
Lenin was even more forceful.
“Revolutions such as Turati and Kautsky are ‘ready’ to recognize, i.e., revolutions for which the date and chances can be told in advance, never happen. The revolutionary situation in Europe is a fact. The extreme discontent, the unrest and anger of the masses are facts. It is on strengthening this torrent that Revolutionary Social Democrats must concentrate all their efforts.”
It is not only the question of a German revolution which failed to come. If that were all, the whole business might be forgotten. It is that the method to which the majority have been committed is thereby strengthened and carried over not only to Germany today but as we shall see, affects its policy in every field.
So much for yesterday, but what of tomorrow?
For the clearest expression of the majority analysis and perspectives for Germany, we must look at In the Land of the Political Vacuum, by Roger Judson. (NI, Oct. 1945) (And no article contradicting Judson’s has yet appeared.)
Judson employs the most superficial journalistic impressionism in order to reach the most profound political conclusions. Judson sternly warns (p. 217) that “the left-wing and democratic press” is overestimating the recuperative powers of the German workers.
“The German worker is a worker only in memory ... He is an atom, moving from one day to the next ... He is, in a word, just another German.”
This is a most astonishing statement. Do the university professors in Germany go into the coal mines or do the railway workers consort with the American officers of occupation?
But Judson is not through yet. There may be perhaps German workers who remember Liebknecht and Luxembourg, or the intermittent revolutionary battles between 1918 and 1933. Against them, Judson aims his heaviest blows. The German trade unions are “the first halting step in that lengthy process ... the hesitant step of a baby ... they will develop but at an extraordinarily slow speed.” “The German workers ... are beginning all over again, from scratch, to crawl up the road of democracy and independent action.”
The climax of Judson’s psychoanalysis of the German people is his insistence that the German worker “or what remains of him” is devoid of political ideas. “To live” (food, money and shelter) “that occupies exclusively the mind of the German worker.” How painful it is to have to correct such a departure not only from Marxism but from even bourgeois common sense. Is it not precisely in order to “to live” in the Germany of today, that the German masses will be forced to organize themselves and take political action? And isn’t it precisely because Germany is in the condition that it is today that the German workers from the very beginning of their resurgence are faced with the most fundamental questions?
Judson’s concentration on his subjective impressions of the German proletariat leads to a complete blindness as to the real situation in Germany today. In class terms the German proletariat is the leader of the German nation. That is where the Marxist has to begin. The Allied imperialists know that. The revolutionists, therefore, must base themselves upon this premise: that any serious struggle in Germany today or tomorrow or whenever it does come, for the most elementary democratic rights, for national independence, for food and clothing, must be led by the German proletariat. Therefore it is the first task of the Fourth International to make clear to the German proletariat that the future of Germany must be a proletarian future, i.e., no return whatever of the German bourgeoisie and the German capitalism which have so ruined Germany during the past forty years.
 
The Method
These comrades of the IKD and the Workers Party majority have consciously or unconsciously departed from the Marxist method which fundamentally asserted that the very decay of bourgeois society is what gives birth to social revolution. This is the class analysis of the law of motion of bourgeois society. Instead they base themselves on a new law of motion of social development, the ruination of all contending classes, the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. The crisis of bourgeois society is synonymous with the atomization of the proletariat. That is what Judson means when he says that the German worker is not a worker at all but “just another German.” In the prevailing misery and decay, he sees not the decisive impetus to proletarian action culminating in the proletarian revolution, but the paralysis of the class struggle. Judson never poses the relation of the German proletariat to the German bourgeoisie. It is outside of his consideration.
Once you lose the firm ideological basis of class relation and class struggle, your method degenerates inevitably into the methods of the pre-Marxian, i.e., the pre-scientific socialists. These methodological tendencies can best be understood and checked when seen in relation to their historical development.
Marx wrote of the Utopians:
“... they see in misery nothing but misery without seeing in it the revolutionary, subversive side, which will overthrow the old society.” (The Poverty of Philosophy)
Engels carried this further:
“The proletariat, which then for the first time evolved itself from these ‘have nothing’ masses as the nucleus of a new class, as yet quite incapable of independent political action, appeared a suffering order, to whom, in its incapacity to help itself, help could, at best, be brought in from without, or from above.” (Socialism, Scientific and Utopian)
The IKD and the Workers Party majority are not relying upon the bourgeoisie to “help” the proletariat. Therefore only one political alternative is open to them – “help (that) could, at best, be brought in from without.” To compensate for their depreciation of the revolutionary capacity of the masses, these comrades must exaggerate the role of consciousness, i.e., the party.
 
The Role of the Party
The comrades of the IKD, famous for the thoroughness of their errors, have persistently confused and interchanged the absence of a mass revolutionary party with (1) the non-existence of the labor movement and (2) the disintegration of the proletariat as a class. Comrade Morrow, while not guilty of this type of historical sweep, expresses accurately the opinions of the Workers Party majority when he asserts: “The absence of the revolutionary party transforms the conditions which otherwise would be revolutionary into conditions in which one must fight, so far as agitation is concerned, for the most elementary demands.” (FI, March 1946.) Morrow’s phrase, “as far as agitation is concerned,” can not save him from total confusion on the relation between objective and subjective factors. Our program, analysis, perspectives and demands, are now to be based not on the developing objective situation but on the size of the vanguard. More than that, there is a tendency to judge the temper of the masses by the size of the vanguard.
Trotsky, who recognized very well not only the Marxist method and revolutionary line but also the dangerous alternatives, warned well in advance:
“The orientation of the masses is determined first by the objective conditions of decaying capitalism and second, by the treacherous politics of the old workers’ organizations. Of these factors, the first, of course, is the decisive one. The laws of history are stronger than the bureaucratic apparatus.”
The Founding Conference Program stated definitively the relation of the proletariat to its leadership.
“The economy, the state, the politics of the bourgeoisie and its international relations are completely blighted by a social crisis characteristic of a pre-revolutionary state of society. The chief obstacle in the path of transforming the pre-revolutionary into a revolutionary state is the opportunist character of proletarian leadership, its petty-bourgeois cowardice before the big bourgeoisie and its perfidious connection with it even in its death agony.”
It is significant that it is precisely along these lines that the European Secretariat has replied to Morrow. (FI, March 1946)
They write:
“... it seems to us puerile to repeat that the Fourth International proposes to solve the crisis of mankind which coincides in our epoch with the crisis of the revolutionary leadership, precisely by building such a leadership ...”
Then, after quoting from the transitional program, they go on to say:
“Comrade Morrow will therefore not find it so secondary a matter that we, having understood once and for all that our principal task is to build revolutionary parties, seek to discern in the objective development of the situation factors favorable to the accomplishment of this task.”
The small vanguard party cannot push nor drag the whole working class into motion. Its point of departure is the revolutionary yearnings of the masses and the inevitability of socialist revolution which arises from the bankruptcy and perplexity of the bourgeoisie. The absence of a mass revolutionary party or the size of the party can only decide the nature of the actions which the party can lead in its own name. The primary task of the vanguard is to teach the proletariat the methods of revolutionary struggle for whatever demands are current and immediate and which will most speedily and effectively tear them away from their repressive labor leadership and set them onto the road of social revolution.
This is the role of the party in the present pre-revolutionary period which began after the First World War. The struggles of the working class go through various phases in this period, advances and retreats, explosions and stagnation, isolated struggles and unified actions. It may be more visible in certain countries than in others. The contention for supremacy by the opposing classes can continue for an indefinite length of time. But the pre-revolutionary period becomes non-revolutionary only by a definitive victory over the proletariat by the counter-revolution. The serious danger exists that the defeats of the past will become the premises for anticipation in advance of defeat in the future.
 
The German Question and the American Question
It is when we look at the position of the Workers Party majority in relation to the United States (see Bulletins of the Workers Party, VI, Nos. 5, 8, 9) that we see what is for us the most serious example of what has distinguished its analysis of Europe in general and Germany in particular.
Whereas the European workers have retrogressed from their advanced position, the American workers have never even advanced to political understanding. Just as a “democratic interlude” was discovered as an arena for the reorganization of the European labor movement, an independent Labor Party is needed as an arena for revolutionary propaganda. Rather than scientifically analyzing the objective development, the Workers Party majority seeks indices to the mentality of the American workers. The tremendous revolutionary potential of the Negro masses is deprecated because the Negroes are struggling consciously – not for socialism but only for racial equality; not in the trade unions but in their independent organizations. As a result, the struggle of the Negro masses is in effect ignored because they have unfortunately not yet achieved trade union consciousness. The revolutionary instincts, pressure and initiative of the trade union masses, both black and white, are deprecated because they have not yet built an independent Labor Party. When the Labor Party is built, the inference is open that this only demonstrates how deeply rooted are the reformist illusions of the masses. Every social phenomena, no matter how transitory, superficial or illusory, becomes a confirmation that the social revolution is not nearer but further away.
Trotsky, we are told, made a mistake in analyzing the situation in the U.S. as pre-revolutionary. The vanguard party must wait for the very eve of the revolutionary situation before it tells the masses that they are living in a pre-revolutionary situation. And if there is a pre-revolutionary situation, it exists elsewhere, not in the U.S.
The hesitations and vacillations of the Workers Party majority today on the question of putting forward revolutionary socialist propaganda to the militant American workers is thus rooted in the same false conceptions which governed its approach to the whole German question.
We can summarize the basis for a serious analysis of the American question as follows:

The blight upon all aspects of bourgeois society which renders the bourgeoisie incapable of solving all problems of present-day society, creates a pre-revolutionary situation.
 
The labor leadership does not represent the sentiments of the masses who are impelled toward a reconstruction of society.
 
The party can only build itself if it recognizes this objective situation and seeks to develop the instinctive revolutionary strivings of the masses against the imposition of bourgeois reformist ideas by the labor bureaucracy.
 
This demands that the party in the United States above all represent itself as a revolutionary socialist organization, using the day-to-day events as a basis for teaching “the truths of communism and the methods of social revolution.”
 
To recognize this is merely to recognize the principles of the Founding Conference of the Fourth International as applied to the American scene.

It is of the utmost importance to realize that those who oppose the minority position on the German and the European question must naturally find themselves in opposition to these ideas on the American question. That is why we have posed the German question in particular as an exemplification of the need today in the Workers Party for a strategic reorientation.
 

