


ON FRIDAY 21 February Llanelli GMC voted by 22 votes to 17 with
four abstentions, to expel “member of Militant” from the
Labour Party and prohibit the sale of the paper in Llanelli.
When NUR delegate, Wayne Saunders, asked what a “Militant
member” was no one was prepared to answer. Saunders went on:
“Last year I was sacked for fighting for my job, one of
the few workers to suffer this in a nationalised industry. That shows
my commitment to the Labour movement. I don’t expect to come to a
Labour Party meeting to be put on trial for selling and supporting a
socialist newspaper.”
 




WHILST COUNTING out tea bags for the food parcels, Isobel Knight,
wife of a striking miner in Cynheidre pit, described some of the
effects of the strike:
“It is now getting hard, the worst part is trying to
keep my family warm – we have only had one lot of coal since the
strike started. So every Saturday we spend most of the day scavenging
for wood. There isn’t one dead tree left in our area, we’ve had
the lot.
“The struggle has brought our family very close
together. The kids understand the need to economise in everything.
They don’t refuse to help with the scavenging and the older boys
are always ready to help their father doing support work.
“Christmas is not the same this year, but I managed to
save 50p a week for a turkey and presents for the younger children.
Dick (her husband, a winder) has said ‘no way will I wind for
scabs’. I fully support him, we will never give in now to the scabs
or the Coal Board.”
 




AT THE Welsh Region Women’s Conference on November 9, Militant
supporter Muriel Browning was re-elected onto the Regional Committee.
Conference adopted a Marxist resolution from Llanelli Women’s
Council, congratulating Liverpool City Council on their stand against
Tory cuts.
A miners’ wife invited to speak had a tremendous response when
she said that after the strike she intended joining the Labour Party.
This is also the intention of the majority of women in the
Penrhwcyber support group. A resolution supporting the miners was
carried overwhelmingly.
 
Influence
A resolution was carried which included: “As a step towards
increasing women’s influence in the Party, conference demands the
right to elect the Women’s Division of the National Executive
Committee.” Decisions arrived at by the outgoing Regional Committee
were put to conference and overwhelmingly accepted. These included:
one of the women’s seats on the NEC should be elected at National
Conference; the four women’s seats on the Labour Party Wales
Executive should be elected at the Welsh Women’s conference.
The acceptance of this change will give more authority to the
Women’s conference and marks a real step forward.
 







MURIEL BROWNING, a long standing Militant supporter
from Llanelli, recalls the first issues of the paper and contrasts
it with today:



The arrival of Militant made a great difference for
Marxists in the Labour Party and unions. It gave us a regular paper,
something to work from, to explain ideas in discussions, and to
understand ourselves what was happening in Britain and internationally.
Some people may not appreciate how difficult it is to act as a
Marxist without a regular paper. Before Militant there was
Socialist Fight – which when I first came across it was
duplicated and produced very intermittently.
Militant was well received by activists – I used to sell
about six each month at my work, British Motor Company. But for big
sales we had to rely on occasional mass public meetings.
In the Labour Party many people patronised us. I used to sell one
or two, but the ideas were dismissed as “utopian”. I was told
that “revolutionary ideas may be alright for Europeans, but it was
not for Britain”. The Welsh Labour Party was then totally dominated
by the right wing; councillors, MPs, party organisation. There was a
left-wing rump – not Marxist though; often they were teachers, who
left once they got their headships.
You can’t really compare the paper nowadays with then. At that
time the paper had to give all its space over to analysis and
explanation – almost every article seemed to end in the same way,
with the demand for the nationalisation of (the then) 350 monopolies
– it had to.
I think the paper has really come of age during the miners’
strike. It’s got lots of fresh news and articles by workers, it was
always a paper for workers – but I think it’s become a real
workers’ paper now.
 




In her article on night shifts for women [Militant,
No. 318] Chris Nicholls says she wants to “fight for better
conditions and amenities for all women workers.” I could not agree
with her more. This is why as a shop steward in the TGWU I oppose
nightshift working for women!
There is mention in the article of the hazards of night shift
working and the ruinous effects it has on health. According to
medical reports a women’s whole body cycle changes [also the same
for men incidentally]. We all know what happens when you try and
change machinery: there are inevitable break downs. The same thing
happens to the delicate machinery of our bodies.
Lack of sleep, consumption and loss of appetite, to name just a
few, can lead to a complete breakdowns resulting in a couple of days
or a week or two on the sick. Chris Nicholls would be a very
fortunate woman if she has worked permanent night work for three
years without it affecting her health at all.
I believe that it is a fallacy for women to believe that when they
work night shift they are also able to be with their children during
the day. The only way this is possible if the mother is severely
deprived of sleep during the day. What use is a tired irritable
mother to her children! This would certainly not be to the children’s
benefit. Not to mention the increased burden placed on the father who
would also have to do his 8 hour stint.
The Sex Discrimination Act has helped to create another fallacy:–
women should have the “freedom of choice”. The trade union
leadership, whilst paying lip service to opposing night shift working
for women, have made no serious attempt to prevent employers using
the loop holes in the new legislation.
It is left to each plant in each industry to conduct their own
fight against the introduction of night shift [... misprint ...]
Equal Pay Act it is only where there is a strong union organisation
can the women combat their further exploitation by the bosses.
A classic example of this was at the Ford plant in Dagenham. The
women, supported by the men, who led the fight for equal pay have
also resisted all attempts by the company to foist night working on
the women in exchange for equal pay.
There was no choice for Chris Nicholls either. She could only work
night shift.
I must agree that night shifts are necessary to the industrial
economy of this country. Under a capitalist economy it is essential
that the employers utilise plant and machinery to its maximum
capacity. These machines need operators who are also used to their
maximum capacity. This includes excessive overtime and night shift working.
Under the present system the working class have no “rights to
work the hours we choose or earn the kind of money we want to earn.”
Whilst we realise this and have sympathy with the women who are
forced to do it we cannot condone neither can we accept a worker
trying to justify night shift working.
 




MURIEL BROWNING, Marxist, trade unionist and Labour Party
member for almost half a century, died peacefully at home in Llanelli
on 14 July after a relatively short illness.
For a Marxist, the struggle against the Tories and their decaying
capitalist system comes almost as second nature. The battle against
Labour’s right-wing witch-hunters we take in our stride.
But to write an obituary about a comrade who was respected in the
labour movement, inspired all those fortunate enough to have met her
and was loved by many is an extremely daunting task.
Muriel’s record in the labour movement in Wales stands second to
none. A tireless fighter for the rights of the working people, she
was a TGWU shop steward in Morris Motors (later BL) for over 20 years.
She was a delegate to national and regional committees of the
union, Swansea Trades Council and Llanelli Labour Party general
management committee (GMC) where she held most positions, including
President when Denzil Davies MP was selected as candidate for the constituency.
However it was her contribution in the Labour women’s movement,
in which Muriel stood out as an uncompromising defender of Marxism,
which impressed supporters and drew the begrudging respect of opponents.
Many local campaigns were instigated by Llanelli Women’s
Council, of which she was the secretary for many years. During the
miners’ strike it came as no surprise to see Muriel elected chair
of the Cynheidre Miners’ Support Group. She raised thousands of
pounds and was always prominent on the picket lines at 5 o’clock on
those freezing mornings.
Despite her impressive record in the movement, steps were being
taken by Llanelli’s right-wing witch-hunters to expel Muriel
because of her links with Militant.
Some, with just a couple of years’ membership, were claiming
that Muriel was trying to infilitrate the party – after 40 years’ membership!
Right-wing careerists who use the movement for personal
advancement will never understand the power of the Marxist ideas
which inspire comrades like Muriel.
In her sixties she could still be seen every Saturday morning in
Llanelli town centre selling Militant. She participated
regularly on estate sales and was the first to encourage younger
comrades to go with her on an early-morning factory sale.
Even though Muriel spent the last 18 months of her life fighting
her expulsion threat, she had the satisfaction of knowing that those
who really counted had not forgotten the role she had played in the movement.
It was significant that workers who had been in struggle defended
Muriel. On the Llanelli GMC, NUM, NUR and TGWU delegates were the
most vociferous in their opposition to the attacks on her.
If she had been able to see it through to the end, Muriel was
confident that the witch-hunt would have been defeated. She remarked
at the time: “I’m certainly not demoralised. It makes me want to
fight all the more. This witch-hunt has strengthened my belief in
Marxist ideas.”
As a number of her opponents and even some Militant
supporters have experienced, a tongue-lashing from Muriel was the
verbal equivalent of a machine-gun assault. Class compromise was
dealt with particularly sharply. Sloppiness, cynicism and pessimism
had no part in Muriel’s vocabulary.
This hard exterior hid an extremely soft and caring centre.
Comrades visiting Muriel’s home never went away hungry, although
sometimes they came out drunk after a few glasses of her home-made
wine. She literally brought up some of the best Marxists in the South
Wales and British labour movement, organised, educated, fed and
clothed them.
For the thousands of Militant supporters at the South Wales
Summer Camp, Muriel was as much a permanent feature as Ted Grant. She
was always responsible for the catering and comrades remember camps
not always for the success of the speakers but more often by the
strength of Muriel’s curries.
She was the first to acknowledge that much of what she achieved
would have been impossible without the support of her family. Harry,
her husband, an active trade unionist in his own right, was an
invaluable ally along with the patience and understanding of her
daughters Cheryl and Dianne.
The life of a working-class women under capitalism is difficult
enough. For a wife, mother and grandmother to play any kind of role
in the labour movement would have been impossible without their support.
Muriel was fortunate that even after Harry was taken ill, she had
a family who understood her loyalty not only to her own family but
also to her class.
We send our condolences to Harry, Cheryl, Dianne and Muriel’s
grand-children and family. We thank them for allowing us a share in
her life.
When answering her right-wing critics 18 months ago, Muriel said:
“I’ll be in the Labour Party when these witch-hunters are long
forgotten”. Those political minnows are already forgotten, whereas
Muriel Browning’s chapter in working-class history is guaranteed.
We salute the passing of an outstanding Marxist. Farewell
Muriel-comrade, friend and class fighter. Forward to socialism!
 




The following is the text of a speech delivered at a
Conference on Women’s Rights which took place recently in
Cardiff. Muriel Browning is a TGWU shop steward at BLMC, Llanelli,
and political education officer of Llanelli CLP.



“WOMEN ARE BACKWARD! WOMEN ARE REACTIONARY! WOMEN AT
WORK ARE NOT PREPARED TO FIGHT FOR THEIR RIGHTS, WOMEN ARE PREPARED
TO PUT UP WITH ANYTHING.”
How many times have we heard these profound statements repeated by
both men and women? I don’t know how many of you saw Colin
Welland’s play on television on Thursday night. If it didn’t do
anything else, it at least helped to dispel the generalisation of
women into the categories of apathy, backwardness and reaction.
The magnificent struggle of the women in the clothing
manufacturing industry in Leeds in 1970 will surely go down in
contemporary history as a classic example of how women can fight when
they understand the issues.
Yet these women were still beaten by their own trade union – at
least that time – but they have learned from their experience, just
as the Ford women’s heroic struggle in 1968 set the pace for the
struggle for equal pay and resulted in a spate of strikes by women in
different industries.
I think it would be a good thing for us to consider and analyse my
first statement of apathy, backwardness and reaction. Firstly, all
these criticisms can be levelled at men also. But we must be honest
and admit that they do apply more towards women. Then we must analyse
the reasons and the causes, before we can hope to start to eliminate
these, and fully emancipate women.
If we look back 60 years to the struggles of the suffragettes in
Britain and elsewhere, we can see that there have been tremendous
changes, both in women’s attitudes towards themselves. These
changes have come about slowly. Until the last few years, the
question of the liberation of women and their equality with men, has
not really been taken seriously, either by politicians or by women themselves.
We are at this conference today discussing anti-discrimination
and equality. Let me state my position at the outset. I do not
believe that real equality for women is possible within the structure
of this society – nor do I believe that full emancipation either
for women or men is possible until this society is changed to a
socialist society.
If we look at women’s role in this capitalist society we will
understand why they are often backward and reactionary. Women, in the
isolation of their homes are cut off from both men and other women in
everyday working life, as well as from women in similar positions.
They tend to be backward, conservative and scared of any charge.
The grind of making ends meet, meeting the exhausting demands of
small children means that her chances of participating in social and
political life are kept down to a minimum.
Because of this, she very often sees a militant trade unionist
fighting for a pay increase as her enemy and as the cause of the
price rises in the shops, instead of seeing their mutual enemy as the
boss, who rules them both.
Whilst at home, women are bombarded with propaganda from both
radio and television. Have you listened to Jimmy Young and the other
disc jockeys patronisingly telling women what a grand job they are
doing? After all the brainwashing of advertising, not only to sell
their products, but at the same time to glorify the role of the
housewife and mother in order to show what a rewarding job it is,
plus the customs and traditions that have been handed down and
instilled in us from the cradle, it is small wonder that when women
do go back to work, they fell guilty, especially if it means leaving
small children.
Then there is the increased difficulty of working an 8 hour day
and continuing your other job of running a home. Those of us who are
doing this will agree that there is little time for a working woman
to play an active part in politics or in her trade union.
More often than not, when a women starts work, the second wage is
essential for survival, so she is ripe for gross exploitation,
particularly if it is in an industry where there is poor, or no,
trade union organisation.
Even worse, if it is piece-work or a bonus job, women are usually
determined to earn as much as possible in the time they are at their job.
This fact is usually grossly exploited. More and more, women at
work are realising the need to organise in the respective trade
unions, for example nurses, ancillary workers and even bunny girls!
The absolute importance of all women at work being members of a trade
union cannot be stressed enough. It is only by being organised that
we can combat the discrimination that take place in the workshops.
Also important to remember is that we will belong to the same our
organisations as the men in our respective industries. If there are
no men working at our place of work, we could still be part of the
same trade union as the men. Therefore we can play an active part in
demanding that the trade union leadership conduct a vigorous campaign.
We must enlist the help of all the men we can, to defeat the
bosses in their attempts at discrimination and dodging paying equal
pay for work of equal value. Then we will see how docile women are!
It must be patiently explained to men that our fight is their
fight. We must not isolate our case. There is a great inequality
between men and men, in jobs that are graded so that they are kidded
into believing that one job deserves a higher rate of pay.
Where there are women workers, their grades are usually consider
to be always part of the lower grades. This only means bigger
profits for the bosses.
 
Equal Pay
Now in industries – such as the car industry where I work – we
will be on equal pay next year. We will have the problem of men on
“unproductive” jobs being on lower rates of pay than the women
“productive” workers.
Believe it or not, there is a feeling of guilt by quite a good
percentage of the women! This shows how thoroughly we have been
indoctrinated as to our secondary role in society. Also, the veiled
threat that equal pay should include night shift working is being put
forward by some of the men. Only this week, our management have
issued a notice in one of our shops advertising for ten men for
permanent night shift on block assembly. These are jobs that have
always been done by women.
We have done these jobs on low pay over the years and we are not
prepared to give them up now when we are going to get equal pay. The
other danger we can see here is that as the young women leave the
jobs to have babies, (unless we can force our firm to give maternity
leave) they can be replaced by men who have already been trained
while on night shift.
As more men will then be taken on to night shift, the company will
eventually have enough operators to work a two-shift pattern, without
the problem of changing the work pattern of the rest of the women in
the plant who work only days.
Also, it is now going to be company policy not to employ women
under the age of 25. Women in our plant are on full rate at the age
of 18. Boys don’t get the full rate until the age of 20. So, as we
see it, the intention is to employ youths to work women’s jobs so
that they will be able to get 4 years cheap labour instead of only 2
years with the girls. This is where we can gain the support of the
men again.
The women shop stewards in our plant intend organising with the
other car plant in our town to resist Leyland’s attempt to reduce
the number of women’s jobs in our plant, thus forcing young women
in our area into badly paid small factories as the only
alternative.
 
Night Work
We see it as very important that we get the make workforce backing
us. We shall explain that shift work only benefits the bosses. It has
a ruinous effect on health and family life, and it would be even
worse for women who have the responsibility for running the home.
There are some places where night work is essential – in
hospitals for example – where night work meets the needs of people.
Patients sometimes die at night! Night work in factories only meets
the needs of profit, however. Machines won’t suffer any pangs if
turned off!
It must also be explained that there is nothing progressive about
insisting that yet another section of workers accept the male norms,
night work for example, that have been foisted on them over the
years. This will, I hope, then start the men in our plant discussing
the need to resist night shift also.
As much as we support all reforms and the struggle to achieve
them, we must also be aware that these reforms can be taken away
overnight, if those few who run this country in their own interests
decide to do so.
A classic example was the 3 day week, with night shift and 12 hour
working. In short this system is one where everything is subordinate
and sacrificial to private property and profiteering.
The liberation of women forms an integral part of the whole social
problem. The woman worker is a member of the exploited class, and,
because of that, in striving for her liberation, she must before
everything else fight for the liberation of her entire class, and in
doing so she can look forward to complete equality in a truly
classless society.
This would only be possible by the whole of the working class,
the men and women who make up the majority of this country, owning
and running things for themselves.
 

