


“Patients first” is about the last title most people would
choose for any proposals from this barbarous Tory government on the
National Health Service.
But this name is cynically given to the recent Tory proposals
on the restructuring of the NHS. The Tories’ real attitude is of
course, one of “working class patients last – first priority to
the rich and big business interests.”
Fighting to prevent closures, you can’t help noticing that the
NHS is being run on ever more strict ‘business’ lines. Small
cliques make the real decisions behind the scenes, and Health
Authority members are treated as rubber stamps.
Some Labour members on the health authorities have criticised the
cuts and some authorities, particularly when pressurised by local
campaigns have delayed some of the worst closures. Ultimately though,
the accountants get their way and trade unionists in the NHS and the
working class who use the services have no say.
The Tories have raised objections, though, even to the minimal
hold-ups caused by pressure from AHAs and Community Health Councils.
Patrick Jenkin told Conservative News that he believed one
potent source of delay and waste was the huge amount of consultation
required. He wants “normal day to day decisions” (such as closing
wards, maybe?) to be taken by “the people actually running the show.”
The Tory proposals are that the present multi-district Area Health
Authorities should disappear. In their place a larger number of
smaller District Health Authorities.
The proportion of councillors serving on authorities is to be
reduced. Other members are to be chosen for ‘personal qualities’,
and certainly not to be elected and accountable. These appointments
are to be made by the Regional Health Authorities, themselves
possibly in the future to be made up of ... District Authority nominees!
The management at District level is to be enlarged, and the
grading of hospital administrators is to be raised to reflect the
‘maximum delegation of responsibility’.
 
“Savings”
The Tories claim that ‘eventually’ the re-structuring will
lead to a saving of 10% on management costs (equivalent to about
£30m). This saving will not come from top managers. The new district
authorities will need even more of these. It can only be from the
area headquarters staff that any ‘savings’ will be made – thus
threatening thousands of jobs of clerical and ancillary staff.
One bad system is to be replaced by another. We must remember what
the Tories’ overall aims are for the NHS – to make it a vehicle
for exploitation by private interests, to reduce services and to
teach people to make less use of the NHS (as The Times
succinctly put it). They want cuts implemented and they don’t want
anyone interfering.
Trades Councils, health union branches, and Labour Parties will
now be considering the Tory proposals. The labour and trade union
movement should reject them.
We should demand that health service government bodies should:

Be 100% committed to defending the principles of the NHS
 
Be elected, accountable, and subject to recall
 
Contain a built-in majority from the trade unions
 
Contain representatives from the service and through the
health trade unions

Participation of Labour Councillors and trade union/Trade Council
nominees in any future local authorities, set up on the lines of the
Tory proposals, is a matter of tactics, as it is indeed with the
present structure.
Their role must clearly be to oppose all cuts. They should work
together, and with the local sections of the labour and trade union
movement, to expose the plans and publicly campaign against the cuts.
But there can be no argument for a lone voice in the wilderness.
In the absence of an organised and effective opposition, members
serving on such authorities will inevitably be tacitly supporting the
cuts. In these circumstances they should withdraw or be withdrawn.


No cuts in services!
 
No redundancies!
 
No closures!
 
For democratic workers’ management and control of the NHS!

 




Faced with a growing movement of opposition to their cuts
policies, the Tories have tried unsuccessfully, to put out minds at
rest about the future of the health service.
They have denied that they are cutting back on NHS spending.
True, they admit that last June’s VAT increase has cost the NHS £40
millions during 1979. They concede that inflation above the 8½%
level at which they started off in power has cost the NHS a further
£60 millions.
But they have promised that future spending levels will take
account of these increases. Managements have used this argument,
claiming the cuts are only of a temporary nature, and that spending
levels will be restored next April.
The Tories also claim that they are maintaining the levels of
health spending as planned by the last Labour government, that is of
a modest growth in real terms.
Publication of the Public expenditure White Paper, and the
statements of Patrick Jenkin, Secretary of State for Health and
Social Services, shatter these arguments. They show that behind the
fine words lie further cuts.
Governments accept that the NHS requires 1% to 2% growth per year
in spending, merely to stand still. This is nothing to do with
inflation. Costs are rising due to the changing population structure
and to the introduction of new drugs and new medical techniques.
The 3% ‘growth’ announced for the year 1980/81 merely covers
this expected increased requirement over the two year period since
1978/79.
Patrick Jenkin stated in Parliament, however, that 2½% of this 3%
would be to make up the losses imposed by cash limits on this year’s
NHS spending, leaving only ½% left for the inevitable 2% to 4%
actual increased costs. It is clear that already we are faced with a
continuation of this year’s drastic cuts.
Based on an expected 11½% inflation, rather than the 8½%
originally allowed for by Labour, the current year’s NHS cuts have
been estimated at £125 million, including £25 million towards the
costs of wage increases. As yet we don’t know how wage awards will
be funded next year. But already inflation is running over 17%, so
the cut this year will be even greater than so far officially acknowledged.
As shown above, this will effectively be carried forward next year
as a permanent cut.
Whichever way you look at it, it is going to be in the region of
£200 millions (and probably more) out of a total figure of
approximately £9,000 millions, this would be roughly the equivalent
of say, closing 100 medium size hospitals.
It would involve upwards of 40,000 jobs, and affect maybe 200,000
or 400,000 in-patients per year for whom no beds will be available.
It is not possible to work out the exact implications of
the Tories’ policies in terms of future cuts without the actual
cash limits figure, yet to be allocated, and the assumptions on which
it is based.
If the allocations underestimate the inflation rate, the situation
will be even worse, with health authorities attempting to make huge
panic ‘savings’. Yet already as the end of the current financial
year approaches many Districts and Areas will be overspent and hoping
for an easier time next year.
One final point should be borne in mind. What will be “restored”
by the government? It is only spending levels which can be restored,
and there is grave doubt about whether this will be done.
But there is no way in which health will be restored to those who
have had to forego treatment because of the cutbacks. No Tory magic
can restore life to those who died because of NHS cuts.
These effects of cutbacks are permanent. Waiting lists go up –
and they stay up.
 




The political ideas in the paper provide the logical connections
and extension to the trade union work in the hospital, particularly
when campaigning against the cuts. Some of the stewards who regularly
buy the paper have commented on the value of the report coming direct
from the factories about the disputes going on throughout industry.
Another steward finds invaluable the analyses of the state of the
economy with all the facts and figures, and also the ‘lessons from
labour history’ series which can arm the activist against falling
into the same traps again.
The only adverse comments came from the immigrant worker who felt
the paper was too orientated to Britain, and the engineer who
complained that the paper concentrated too much on international
events. You can’t win ’em all!
 




Health workers have shown in recent weeks their readiness to
defend the health service against the cuts carried through on behalf
of big business. They have brought to the attention of all workers
the seriousness of the situation. In the coming months they are going
to be faced with the problem of how to actually prevent hospitals
being closed down.
Up to now they have succeeded, by their actions, in winning a stay
of execution while the management consider alternatives, but very
soon now will come the first major closures. The health workers will
need all the support they can get from the labour movement. Within
the NHS itself, the developing campaign is forging new links between
the unions, and making many sections of workers in the health service
far more conscious as shop floor meetings are being held everywhere
to discuss how the cuts can be fought.
On the first day of strikes in London on the 23rd September a
meeting for all stewards in the East End was hastily arranged to
maintain the impetus and discuss further action. Calls were made for
open ended strike action to force the Area Health Authority to change
its plans.
Meetings of shop stewards have been continuing, with the aim of
thrashing out a joint policy on which to campaign. These meetings
have not been without disagreement, and it would be foolish to expect
otherwise, but this does mark the beginning of the breakdown of
barriers between the various unions, and the development of a health
workers organisation capable of challenging the rule of the managements.
There is confusion among the workers as to whom they are fighting.
The Area Health Authority gave the go-ahead for cuts. Local
management has to implement them. The Area Authority claims to be
bound by Regional Authority policies. Regional policies are largely
determined by financial restrictions and DHSS and government policy.
A serious financial crisis is looming in the health service as the
local managements are finding it impossible to implement the full
sweeping cuts necessary to avoid massive overspending. If nothing is
done, East London Areas will be several million in the red by next
April. New budgetary policies have been introduced this year to force
managements to remain within ‘cash limits’. In the past, due to
increasing costs, the authorities have been allowed to over-spend.
Now any money overspent at the end of the year will be taken from
next year’s allocation.
The main factors in reducing the allocations being made for health
spending are: (a) effects of national cuts in the Health Service
allocation; (b) re-allocation of funds between Regions to provide
more for deprived Regions; (c) re-distribution between the Areas
within Regions; (d) inflation; (e) and a policy of cuts in some
services to pay for the improvements in others.
The only way that spending in grossly deficient services can be
increased is by cutting down on others. The invention of ‘norms’
gives management the justification for the cuts. These norms are not
based on any assessment or measurement of actual health needs, or
existing utilisation of resources, but are more aimed at spreading
out the shortages and deficiencies more widely.
The big stick being waved is that if the books do not balance, if
the overspending is excessive, then the auditors will be sent in, as
they were at Clay Cross.
The reason that managements are finding it impossible to implement
the full cuts are firstly because they are so sweeping and cannot be
done without risk to the patients, and secondly because of the
growing resistance of the health workers. Thousands of jobs have
already been lost over the past year. As one management has put it,
“any ‘fat’ which has existed has, for the most part been taken up.”
The message is now getting through to the workers that the
un-filled jobs, the extra workloads, are now permanent. Overtime
working has been slashed, and this, together with other losses of
earnings followed ‘reviews’ of bonus schemes, added to continued
inflation of prices, fares, and rents, is severely reducing health
workers’ living standards.
The problems of the health service cannot be solved whilst the
government is pre-occupied with meeting the demands of the CBI for
more and more profits before companies will invest. Profits can only
be increased at the workers’ expense. The ‘social contract’ has
kept wages down whilst prices have soared. The cuts in public
spending represent a further erosion of living standards through
reduction of the social wage. The great National Health Service and
Welfare State, set up in response to the near revolutionary mood of
the working class, and to its demands for change at the end of the
war, cannot now be supported by the system.
The present policies of the government are doomed to failure. The
Tories, the CBI and international finance are clamouring for more
huge cuts. They will not be happy until our welfare state is
completely dismantled and we have returned to the days of pauperism.
On the question of the NHS, the Labour Party Conference has: 1.
demanded ‘the implementation of a massive building programme
particularly in view of the proposed closure of National Health
Service Hospitals in London. 2. demanded ‘a minimum wage for 35
hours (tied to the cost of living index) for all National Health
Service workers’ and ‘a halt in the systematic reduction of staff
who are vital to the service at all levels’. 3. called on the
government ‘to take urgent steps to totally abolish private
medicine in this country’. 4. concluded that ‘exploitation by
private industry of the sick in our society can only be ended by the
nationalisation of the pharmaceutical industry with compensation to
be paid on the basis of proven need...’ 5. demanded ‘an end to
undemocratic control of hospital boards, running the National Health
Service to be in the hands of elected boards comprising of Health
Service workers, trade unionists and the general public’.
This is the way forward.
 




Several weeks ago the Militant predicted that the health
workers’ struggle would reach a new pitch as cuts sank deeper
towards the end of the financial year.
Last Wednesday trouble flared at St Bartholomew’s, the City of
London’s famous teaching hospital, as management took on ancillary
staff in what union leaders see as an act of deliberate provocation,
testing union support before further cuts are tried.
 
Victimised
Porters in the casualty department have traditionally volunteered
to collect the notes of newly admitted patients when no clerical
staff were available to do the job. Recently, however, staff in all
departments have been run down as management have not replaced staff
who have retired or left. This is the policy known as “natural
wastage”, whereby management expect the same duties to be done by
lesser staff.
Eventually patients were being kept waiting for up to fifty
minutes while notes, which are sometimes hard to find, were
collected; and finally porters have refused to collect the notes. A
letter from management was issued “instructing” portering staff
to continue to undertake this extra duty, in defiance of agreements
previously made with unions. When this was refused three porters were
instantly suspended.
This was a direct challenge to the union as one of [the] three,
Maurice Kolander, is a NUPE branch secretary. This also broke an
elementary proviso against victimisation, in agreement with
management that a full-time official of the union must be present
whenever a member of staff who is an officer of the union is
disciplined.
Also simmering in the background of the dispute is a ploy by
management to improve new rotas on certain ancillary staffs, in order
to cut out overtime. This could cut the earnings of those involved by
£6–£12 per week.
 
Overworked
Portering staff themselves are, life other hospital workers,
overworked, not idle. In a typical night-shift last week the two men
on duty in Casualty not only had to deal with some sixteen
admissions, but were expected to deal with enquiries, act as
messengers carrying blood smaples, X-ray plates and deal with an
itinerant drunk who reappeared no less than four times throughout the night.
Drugs addicts, meths drinkers and every kind of “social
casualty” are just as likely to turn up, to be dealt with as
sympathetically as time, facilities and the other duties will allow.
At the same time porters must be on standby for ambulances in case of
an emergency!
A mass meeting voted unanimously for strike action without even
emergency cover, such was the mood of anger. The blame for any
suffering inflicted upon patients was placed squarely upon the
shoulders of the management, and the withdrawal of all ancillary
labour, together with the mounting of pickets to cut off supplies,
was seen as the best way to bring the dispute to a speedy end, and
management to its senses.
 
Support
Support from other workers was immediate. Staff at the Hackney and
Eastern hospitals and nearby St Marks walked out. Post Office workers
refused to cross picket lines as did drivers delivering oxygen from
BOC. The strike has been so solidly effective that management has
withdrawn the suspensions and are willing to discuss with the unions.
It seems likely that the cutting off of the supply of oxygen was
crucial. Medical staff approached management and warned them that
patients’ safety could not be guaranteed unless they stood down.
 




The East End of London faces vicious cuts in the National
Health Service; Health workers and patients are both threatened. By
all health and social indices the area is one of the worst off in the
country and already has a raw deal as far as the provision of health
facilities is concerned. Many of the hospitals, usually old
workhouses, really deserve tearing down but they do at least provide
something at the moment.
Already, over the past year we have been faced with the problem of
fighting the cuts, and a certain amount of consolidation has been
taking place in our union organisation.
 
Union Committees
One of the basic problems facing hospital workers is that there
are too many unions in the health service, and this does mean
difficulties in getting together a good joint union policy, essential
if the top management is not to be able to play one section off
against another. The best step is to set up a joint shop stewards
committee. There are many good reasons for such a committee to exist
anyway, but if necessary it should initially be formed as a joint
defence committee against cuts.
One of the first jobs of the committee should be to attempt to
compile all the available information on cuts so far made. The
management should be asked what they consider are the minimum
staffing establishments and vacancies, when these figures are not
known. All Health Authorities are now supposed to publish detailed plans.
Unions and stewards ought to be getting copies automatically, but
where this is not done, then the committee should demand copies.
Taken together all the obtainable information should present a fairly
clear picture of where cuts are planned.
But quite apart from any management figures, the shop stewards
should draw up and maintain a list of what they consider are the
staffing needs. We should not just fight the cuts, we should continue
the fight to improve our conditions and the services that we help provide.
A certain confusion exists among some health workers in their
attitude to the cuts.
It is wrong to accept the principle that cuts need to be made. The
truth is that the health service is sadly undermanned, desperately in
need of modern hospitals and funds to replace old equipment. The
health service needs expansion. It is important to resist cuts
completely at every level. If this is not done there will always be
arguments about which staff should go, and which should stay.
For example, a number of stewards at our hospital rightly pointed
out that the growth areas in staff appeared to them mainly in
Administration. Figures available bear this out. But it is wrong to
then argue that admin staff should therefore be cut in preference to
other sections. It is the ordinary clerks and such like that will suffer.
Almost 80% of costs in the health services are wages and salaries,
and jobs are the quickest ways of making savings. As an absolute
minimum, some inter-union committees have demanded that every
“saving” is negotiated, but it is better still that such
“savings” are rejected out of hand.
The way to build for militant action is by ensuring that all
members are fully informed about the cuts and plans. Bulletins should
be regularly distributed, and plenty of meetings held so that a full
discussion takes place on the shop floor.
 
Last resort
Health workers have always had a responsible attitude to the
patients when involved in industrial action. Only when they have
become desperate will they strike, as a last resort.
If Government policy requires cuts in health services then it is
they who are responsible for any harmful effects on the patients
resulting from the implementation of the cuts. The health workers are
not only acting in their own interest as far as jobs are concerned,
they are also acting for the working class as a whole.
The main point in the recent strikes in London was to bring the
facts before the workers who use the health services and thereby
appeal for their support in the campaign.
Health union branches must bring the facts before the Trades
Councils who should be mobilising the local unions in support and the
Labour Parties who should be bombarding the government with demands
for implementation of conference decisions on health and the
pharmaceutical industry.
The East London health workers have been linking up through area
wide shop stewards meetings. But the organisational difficulty of
bringing together stewards from about 25 different hospitals and
other sections of health services, and nine different unions, are not inconsiderable.
The stewards committees will be faced with problems of organising
local resistance to closures, and occupations have already been
seriously discussed in relation to the Elizabeth Garret Anderson
Hospital and also the Metropolitan Hospital in Hackney.
The main orientation of any such demonstrations must be to get
public support against the closures.
The way forward for the health workers is to campaign in all
sections of the labour movement against the present policies of the
government. A number of demands specific to the health service need
to be taken up, as part of explaining the effects of the cuts, and of
putting forward alternative policies which can be taken up in the movement.
Reverse the Cuts;
For full manning and equipping of all services;
Renovation of all old buildings, and
construction of new Hospitals;
Replacement before closures;
Democratic workers’ control and management of the NHS;
Living wage for 35 hour week;
100% trade unionism in NHS;
Towards a single Health Union;
Abolish private practice;
Abolish all health charges;
Nationalise the Pharmaceuticals;
Take over the commanding heights of the economy;
For a Socialist Planned Economy.
 




Dear Comrade
Such is the surplus of available labour the employing class are
returning to their old habits, especially where the Trade Unions are
weak or the labour force is poorly organised. In Gilbeys’ bottling
factory in Harlow, one clear example was shown. The Customs and
Excise men went through the lockers of the women workers.
In the locker of one well-established long-serving worker they
found a bottle of sherry. The woman concerned had brought it in so
that her workmates could have a birthday drink. The bottle was still
wrapped as it came from the Off-licence.
The woman was pulled into the office and went through an hour and
a half grilling. Where did it come from? Who had a drink from it? Did
she know who had a drink in the factory? Did she know anyone who
pinched a drink from the warehouse? And so on, until the woman was in
such a state she couldn’t work and had to go home early.
Many of you might say if you were treated in such a way, “two
fingers to your tin pot job,” or “get the union rep. in to return
the favour to the management.” But now the situation is, walking
out means no job to go to, and in the past the women workers have
been little inspired to build a strong union organisation in the
factory. All section of the class must make sure the organisations
that have been built up to protect the interests of the working class
are brought out of moth-balls and made to work in our interests.



 


Yours Fraternally
Ian Burge
(ASTMS)



 




Shop stewards in the Health Service are taking up the challenge of
Big Business which wants to see the Health Service reduced to a
skeleton to pay for the crisis in the economy. In the East End of
London, district wide joint shop stewards’ committees are being
formed for the first time and NUPE with the largest membership is
leading the campaign.
Under planning procedures laid down by the Department of Health
under the Labour Government, Health Authorities must now publish
their plans for consultation with Community Health Councils, Local
Advisory Committees, Local Authorities, Health Service Professional
groups and the Unions. It is this ‘opening of the books’ that is
in fact revealing for the first time to the workers the extent of the
cuts to come arising from past and present economies.
This is bad enough, but what of the further drastic cuts to come
and as yet unpublished by the Government? At present the management
are avoiding referring to redundancies, but this is certainly what is
in store for us.
The plans so far seen are the living evidence of Area Health
Authorities and District Management desperately trying to prune
services, close hospitals, sell off the land, in order to make ends
meet. The Tower Hamlets District, with a major teaching hospital of
700 beds and nine other hospitals from 20 to 400 beds in size, last
year overspent by £400,000.
The Health Service is just not getting enough funds to maintain
existing levels of service. This District is now unable to replace
worn out equipment. The only way the management see being able to
make ‘progress’ is through reduced staff costs. Already,
ancillary staff over retiring age are to be laid off. Already, 109
beds are closed off. Technical staff are being asked to reduce their
establishment so that people who leave are not replaced. If these
measures do not eliminate enough jobs, management will be looking at
more drastic measures. It looks as though about 200 jobs will have to
go just to make good the £400,000 rate of overspending.
The document we have seen also admits to the present total
inadequacy of the Community Services, where establishments are
already one third below DHSS norms and where even these
establishments are only half filled.
 
Workers’ management
A document of the City and Hackney District proposes two hospital
closures, the Eastern and the Metropolitan, together with a vast
reorganisation of other existing hospital services in an attempt to
absorb the workload of these two. A bulletin put out by the NUPE
district stewards points out that these closures will lead to the
loss of some 600 jobs and 520 beds (20% of Hackney hospital beds).
In order to explain to the workers the implications of these
so-called plans, joint union mass meetings are to be called across
the whole area in working hours and a day of action has been declared
provisionally for October 9th.
Many Health Service stewards recognise, however, that defensive
action against the cuts and closures is not enough on its own and
that Health Service workers will need to draw up alternative
policies, particularly in order to win the support of the Trade
Unions and the Labour Parties. Such policies will need to aim at
ending the private profiteering from the sick and also at
democratising the Health Service.
The City businessmen and other appointed ‘experts’ who sit
round boardroom tables deciding what sort of Health Service the
workers can have must be replaced by democratically elected bodies.
Militant’s proposals for management bodies in a nationalised
industries made up of a third elected from the workers in the
industry through their unions, a third elected from the TUC and a
third from the Government can be adopted as a practical
alternative to the present structure in the NHS.
The Health Service should be managed at all levels by, say a third
health workers’ elected representatives, a third Government
representatives to guard the interests of a centrally planned NHS and
a third local working class representatives from the Labour and Trade
Union Movement: Trades Councils, Tenants’ Committees, Consumers’
Committees, Patients Committees and so on.
Such demands can mobilise all sections of the working class in
defence of the Health Service and towards the construction of a true
Socialist Health Service.
 




The labour movement suffered a tragic loss on Sunday 18th May,
with the premature death of Ian Burge.
Regular readers of Militant would best remember Ian for his
excellent contributions on the National Health Service, in which he
worked and was an active trade unionist.
Ian’s powers of research were second to none and gave fresh
material and new ideas to the movement on the battle against cuts in
the Health Service.
Apart from many articles in the paper, Ian was the author of
several widely read Militant pamphlets: A Socialist
Programme to Save the NHS [1977], Should Nurses Go On Strike?
[1979], and recently the excellent Stop the Cuts: Defend the NHS!
[1979]. He also wrote a pamphlet putting the case for workers’
control and management in the NHS, Patients First – Or Cuts
First?, produced only a few weeks ago by Tower Hamlets Health
District JSS Committee.
In Ian’s own words, however “the fight against the cuts is not
enough. Bad health is endemic in the society we at present live in
and only the socialist transformation of society can provide the
conditions for the prevention of ill health.”
Not only a prolific writer for better healthcare and socialist
change, Ian was a tireless fighter both in the Labour Party and, as a
member of ASTMS, in the hospital unions. At the London Hospital,
where he worked, he was secretary of the Joint Shop Stewards’
Committee, a body he helped to form.
He gave unceasing leadership in the movement in the East End of
London to defend the Health Service from attacks and closures, and
played a prominent part in the battle to save Bethnal Green hospital
as a general hospital meeting the needs of the local population.
When called on, Ian also gave valuable advice on many occasions to
trade-union activists in the NHS in many other areas of the country.
As a member of the North West Essex Health Board, he unflinchingly
gave a lead in heading off the attacks on hospitals in the Harlow area.
Ian first settled in Harlow with his wife Barbara and twin
daughters in 1969, and rapidly involved himself in pioneering the
influence of Militant in the Harlow area and the Eastern
Region as a whole. His family, to which Ian was devoted, was added to
by the birth of another daughter, Nancy.
Ian quickly established himself in the Old Harlow Labour Party
branch, where he became chairman in the ’70s. His well informed
contributions to Harlow CLP’s General Committee meeting were always
listened to intently. When Ian was on his feet, the GMC knew that
important points and facts were being put forward.
Ian’s flair for new ideas and concepts were not restricted to
the health field. He pioneered the use of film slides in informative
talks, and made these, and his copious notes, available to any
section of the labour movement.
Meticulous attention to detail made him outstanding as an
organiser of paper sales. All sellers of Militant in Harlow
from the early ’70s had their minds focused on careful accounting
for papers. The testament to Ian’s work is that sales of Militant
in Harlow rate amongst the best in the country.
His death is a great loss to all who knew him as a comrade, and
especially to those who also knew him as a friend. He was friendly
and patient with people, often showing his sense of humour, very
rarely angry. Ian’s approach was always gentle and generous.
Ian’s political achievements will live on and we will be
building on them. Remember Ian’s own words: “Capitalism kills.
Fight for a socialist world!”
 
The Militant Editorial Board sends its sincere
condolences to his wife, friends and family.
 







Myrna, who modestly told us: “I was a political ‘nothing’
in all respects when I first met Ian,” is now Secretary Keep BGH
Hospital Campaign, Secretary JSSC at BGH, EC member City &
East London Area Health branch NALGO, Metropolitan District
Council NALGO, Minute Secretary and Co-ordinator Tower Hamlets
Health District Branch NUPE, Asst. Sec, Tower Hamlets Health
District JSSC.



*
I first met Ian in the corridors of Bethnal Green Hospital in 1977
when the Campaign to save the Hospital was just getting under way.
We had a fairly mild exchange of views on the role of a shop
steward which nevertheless left me strangely smarting and with a
renewed conviction that I had never liked men with red hair! However,
he had made me think, and a few minutes later I turned round and
followed him into a meeting which I had been intent on avoiding.
This encounter started an association which has only ended in the
bitter anguish I feel at his death.
But the incident was typical of him. If you only opened your mind
to Ian he continually made you think and no matter how many people he
was involved with, it always seemed like a one-to-one encounter of
your mind with his. While he would accept that you had been
brainwashed by the system we live under, he constantly made you
question that system, observe its contradictions and inspired you
with the will to fight for a socialist future.
Ian had an infinite patience and understanding with the
rank-and-file worker, but was completely implacable in opposition to
those he considered politically mature but who were attempting to
take the movement in the wrong direction.
In the early days it was Ian’s personal commitment to Militant
that won my admiration and respect. No effort was too great to make
for the paper and nothing was too good for it. What was the magic
formula he found in it? If I read it too, would I get to think as he did?
As I drew nearer and nearer to making my own personal commitment I
agreed to look over one of his articles on the Campaign for Bethnal
Green Hospital and to give him my comments. I did this and decided to
type the amended article in draft form on a superb electric
typewriter. Comrades, you should have seen the look of joy on his
face. Obviously I was coming nearer to his beliefs, I had ‘improved’
his article, and Militant was going to get beautifully typed copy!
No one would pay more attention to copy than Ian Burge. Each word,
each sentence was considered – once, twice, three times, then torn
up to be started at all over again. If it was an article for Militant
it would then be sent in, but if it was to be considered by a trade
union committee it was something else again.
It would have been too easy sometimes to get blind acceptance of a
letter or article for publication. But that wasn’t Ian’s way.
Everyone had to read, accept or argue the points put forward.
Laziness was not allowed. You had to know what you were doing or what
was the point of doing it? This was something that Management would
not believe or accept, but that was because they never knew Ian as we did.
Ian’s range of activities was enormous. Always with a bundle of
Militants under his arm, he organised and attended meeting
after meeting. Secretary of his own branch of ASTMS, he was also a
Divisional Council member. He was on the Tower Hamlets Trades Council
and the Health Sub-Committees. As Secretary of the London Hospital
Joint Shop Stewards’ Committee, his greatest achievement perhaps
was the transformation of the Tower Hamlets Health District Joint
Shop Stewards’ Committee, holding together by sheer hard work and
dogged determination nine separate unions in six different hospitals.
Such was the stature achieved by the DJSSC that he had the
unprecedented distinction as a trade unionist of being allowed to
speak from the Public Gallery to the City & East London Area
Health Authority, when they suspended standing orders to allow him to
do so. The result was that the Authority, although heavily weighted
by “Regional Appointees”, forced the Tower Hamlets District
Health Management Team into direct negotiations with the DJSSC on the
question of Bethnal Green Hospital. The quality of our literature
since then inspired a Labour Councillor on the AHA to ask why they
never consulted, unless forced to, “the people that really matter.”
A pattern was thus established at the time of the Campaign that we
kept up for three years. With some personal inconvenience Ian came
over almost every lunch-time usually with other health workers. A
lunch-fund was established that even after many deductions for paper,
postage, etc, now stands at over Â£50. We would have a bite to eat,
discuss the political news of the day and the health news in the hospitals.
How could we strengthen trade union membership? How could we best
fight the cuts? Other shop stewards would come for a quick chat,
members of staff would look in having adopted a catch-phrase “where’s
my shop-steward, I’m in trouble,” while many a hospital doctor
would audibly groan at the sight of our tiny, packed, kitchen –
“plotting again!”
If Ian didn’t come over on any particular day he would telephone
instead to ask if everything was all right, what’s been happening
to you, did you manage to read this or do that? In times of crisis
there was a virtual hot-line between BGH and The London, and many a
press-cutting went backwards or forwards on the hospital van to be
filed for future reference, always with an article for Militant
in mind.
Now he has gone, unfairly, unjustly, with so much he would have
been able to contribute. In odd moments of dejection he questioned
the effectiveness of his work. If only we told people while they were
alive how much we loved them and valued what they were doing! If only
he could see mature men and women, people who sometimes thought they
disagreed with him, crying their eyes out at his death.
Good-tempered usually, aggravating occasionally, obstinate to the
point of pig-headedness if a principle was at stake. Ian was also a
jazz musician, bacon-butty lover, cheese-on-toast expert, tutor,
comrade, friend.
What more can you say? What more can you do? Plenty! OK so he has
had to clock out early and the Foreman is prowling around.
Traditionally, we always close ranks, dodge around a bit and pretend
our mate has just popped out for a second and we cover the work that
needs to be done.
Always finish on a positive note, Ian would say. It’s very hard,
because it breaks my heart that he will not see socialism. But for
us, whether or not we all realised it, Ian was our glimpse of that
new society. In his own way he personified the new man – caring,
loving, generous to a fault with his time.
It’s up to us now – organise!
 




Despite Tory Chancellor Geoffrey Howe’s promise that health
spending levels would be maintained, the NHS is faced with massive
cuts even without any further reductions.
This is due to erosion of cash limits by inflation, new VAT
rates and wage awards. Millions of pounds are being wiped off Health
Authority spending. This means tens of thousands of jobs at risk,
together with the services they provide.
Area Health Authorities talk for the first time of redundancies
rather than ‘natural wastage’.
Redundancies! When there is already a huge shortage of staff in
the NHS, including 70,000 nurses. When we have a waiting list over
half a million!
The horrors of the situation came home at last to members of the
City and East London AHA(T) at their recent meeting. Before them was
the stark reality of at least £10m shortfall in funds; and proposals
drawn up to make savings. These have already been detailed in
Militant (June 1st).
Tory members on the Authority said ‘Be realistic – accept
there is no more money.’ Labour members, however, were beginning to
get the message from hospital unions and the local community.
One member nominated by the local authority proposed that more
money be demanded and that meantime the Authority maintains existing
levels of service and establishments.
All Labour members spoke in support. Their point was that they had
been party to enough cuts in the past, that there seemed to be no end
in sight, that promised improvements had not materialised, and now
was the time to take a stand.
The Chairman (Mr Cumberlege, tea broker) gave his usual lecture.
Allocations were decided by the democratically elected government. If
the Authority overspent it would only have to be paid next year, with
even more drastic cuts, etc.
An amendment was moved to completely water down the motion,
calling for yet another cap in hand delegation to the Regional Health
Authority. The amendment was passed with members from Labour local
authorities being outvoted.
One such member immediately resigned, stating he now had no
alternative to conducting opposition outside. Unfortunately this was
only a personal gesture. Other Labour members and the trade nominee
remained seated to continue the charade of democracy.
This performance demonstrates our weakness on these Authorities.
Members tend to ignore their Labour Parties and trade unions, feeling
they know best. A determined opposition, an ultimatum followed by a
‘mass’ resignation would have had tremendous effect.
The Tory rump would have been left to carry on, with Labour
completely disassociated from any further carve-up of the NHS. This
would have been tremendously encouraging to hospital staff and trade
unionists campaigning against cuts.
It would have restored some credibility to the Labour Party, and
made it easier to convince NHS trade unionists to take up the
political struggle inside the Labour Party.
Already the Tories had begun to show hesitancy. The chairman and
members were unwilling too hastily to rubber-stamp the proposals,
postponing decisions and asking management to produce alternatives.
Management expressed frustration, complaining that they were told
not to overspend, yet proposals for savings were not accepted.
But due to the uncertainty, staff will inevitably be tempted to
seek jobs elsewhere. In this way the run-down commences. The trade
unions need to adopt a much firmer position, one that will allay
fears of staff and give them confidence they can win.
Despite the shortcomings, these developments must be welcomed. The
changing attitudes of some Labour councillors on the Health
Authorities and the prevarication of top administrators reflect
pressure building up in the movement.
The leadership of our organisations must take note of this, and
begin to mobilise the ranks of the trade unions and Labour Parties.
If these leaders ignore the decisions and demands of our movement
they must be replaced by those prepared to take up the challenge.
Our movement’s enormous power once installed the NHS. It must
now be gathered to replace the Tory government by a Labour government
thoroughly committed to change in society ...
The only way to combat the poverty and conditions which cause
widespread bad health is by eradicating those conditions. This
requires a programme to provide jobs at decent wages for all, to
provide decent housing, schools, and decent, safe working and living
conditions.
Such a programme requires a complete change of course by the next
Labour government. It needs a programme for socialism.
 




Nearly eighteen months ago, our District Joint Shop Stewards
Committee held a number of meetings to discuss management’s plans
for cuts in Tower Hamlets. Inevitably at these meetings, workers
would get up to point out some of the more glaring examples of waste
and inefficiency caused by management.
For instance, the number of new administrative jobs created by
‘re-organisation’; the plush offices that were re-furnished and
decorated for one administrator and then re-done because his
successor didn’t like the colours; and lavish functions and white
elephants galore!
While porters and nurses are not being replaced on leaving,
management placed adverts in the press for secretaries whose main
qualification appeared to be ‘a sense of humour’!
But most irritation was caused by the large amount of maintenance
work done by private contractors. The Works dept., i.e. the fitters,
electricians, carpenters and painters were livid about it.
Numerous examples were given where the men knew they could have
done this work cheaper and better. Many times they had later been
sent in to patch up the contractors’ shoddy work.
There was even a feeling that someone was getting back-handers
from the contractors, it seemed the only explanation for their use,
but no solid evidence has yet been produced. Furthermore, tricks are
apparently used to ensure the ‘right’ firm gets the job.
Arising from the meetings in the Works Department it was resolved
that stewards from the three unions involved, together with myself
would investigate the scale and type of contract work, and the
reasons given for using it.
Our view was that with proper manpower levels, proper
organisation, and appropriate agreements for necessary weekend work,
(such as ‘jobs and finish’), most work put out to private
contractors could be handled by the department, giving higher quality
work at lower cost.
For various reasons, the stewards at that time failed to take this
issue up in a serious manner, but it is already cropping up again.
The latest available figures; for 1977/78, show that the
proportion of work going to private contractors has actually
increased over the previous year from 24% to 26% of the total works costs.
One of the Works Dept. Management alleged that it was cheaper to
put work out to private contractors. But this expense is in fact
explained by enormous management overheads which are all included in
the ‘costs’ for direct labour.
The solution lies with unions in the Works Department. The
stewards should:

Establish a trade union panel of stewards and deputies for
each union.
 
Black all work done by contractors which could have been
done by direct labour.
 
Demand opening of the books, and give the closest scrutiny
to contract work costs and bidding.
 
Vet management’s requests for contractors, and draw up alternatives.
 
Establish the right of veto on all contracts.
 
Insist on expansion of direct labour force to cope with all work.
 
Ask for training to be provided where specialist skills are needed.
 
Negotiate improved arrangements and flexibility for working
and covering unsociable hours.

 




The battle against public sector cuts has started in earnest.
With the summer holidays over, hospital workers are facing the grim
reality of the Tory onslaught.
The health authorities are now hell-bent on the destruction of the
NHS as we have known it.
The labour and trade union movement protested in horror when the
last Labour government, under pressure from big business, allowed the
NHS to go to the dogs.
But at least the labour leaders had to defend the principle of the
NHS, assuring us that once the economy was ‘put right’, NHS
spending would be restored.
But the Tories are ideologically opposed to the NHS and the
‘welfare state’. They would like to open up health to
exploitation by private interests, forcing workers to pay through
insurance, if they were young and fit and go without if old and infirm.
The TUC may have narrowly deferred leading an open, all-out
working class fight against the cuts, [see editorial page 2] but the
workers themselves are taking up the cudgels. The TUC will be forced
to follow.
In the East End of London, emergency services only will be
operating this Thursday afternoon as hundreds, if not thousands of
hospital workers clock off and converge on the Area Health Authority
in protest against the latest cuts and closures.
As yet, we may not see every union in every hospital involved. Not
every worker has yet appreciated the full implication of the cuts.
Our shop stewards organisation also needs further strengthening.
But indications are that this will be the biggest protest of its
kind in East London.
Gone is the disunity seen on former occasions, when some sections
of staff felt they were not affected by cuts and were hesitant at
taking action and losing money. All feel threatened now. An irate
radiographer recently came up to me in the canteen, complaining that
we were not allowing the non-ASTMS staff to join in the half-day
strike [not true, actually].
NUPE is already involved in lightning strike actions against
arbitrary management re-organisation of staff in the catering
section. New sections of ASTMS have been set up in laboratories faced
with cut-backs in on-call allowances.
Another important test will be how many of those clocking off do
actually attend the demonstration. It is a point that has been raised
by those who have been fully committed on past occasions. Better
leadership and organisation should ensure maximum participation.
The enormously increased prices and fares, together with
management attempts to push through staffing ‘economies’ without
consultation, are making their impression. But there is also a
feeling now of knowing who the enemy is – the Tory Government.
Trades Councils, Labour Parties and Labour controlled councils
have been dragging their feet up to now. We want to see them at the
head of the campaign against the cuts and the Tory Government, not
trailing behind.
Hospital workers are showing the way. Let the rest of our movement
take up the banner with us!
 




The cuts have hit yet another part of the National Health
Service. Eight staff from the vital Emergency Bed Services [EBS] in
London have been suspended.
Three are shop stewards, and two are branch officers. They have
been ‘disciplined’ for continuing to send patients to the
Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital for women which Health
Authorities are attempting to run down prior to complete closure.
The stand being taken by EBS staff in continuing to send patients
to threatened hospitals is crucial to the campaign to keep hospitals
open. So long as they have written confirmation from consultants that
services are being maintained, the EBS staff are willing to send
patients to these hospitals, despite contrary instructions from management.
The thirty EBS staff work from Guys Hospital, receiving requests
from GPs, mainly in the deprived areas and monitoring bed
availability in the London areas. Their service has become more and
more critical as staff shortages and closures reduce the number of
beds in all areas.
The stand they have taken in defence of the patients and of the
NHS, is to be applauded. EBS staff have been ready to step in with
real help when hospitals have been in need. Now is their time
of need.
 
Support this fight
With eight COHSE members already suspended, there is the danger of
the service being closed altogether. This shows once again the
lengths management are prepared to go to enforce hospital closures.
COHSE has already given official recognition to their members in
dispute. Theirs is only a small branch. We urge messages of
support and donations be rushed to:
Sandra Mead, Branch Secretary, EBS COHSE Branch, Fielden House, 28
London Bridge Street, S.E.1.
 




History was made at this month’s meeting of the City and East
London Area Health Authority. The Authority was forced to recognise
the Tower Hamlets shop stewards’ committee and start negotiating.
In the five years since the AHA was constituted participation in
the proceedings has been confined to members of the Authority and its
officers. The Chairman, Mr Cumberlege (of Messrs Thomas Cumberlege
and Inskipp, tea brokers) has always maintained that ‘members of
the public’ – and this, for him, includes health service workers
and their representatives – cannot participate.
At earlier discussion with the District Administrator it was made
clear to us that the management were not able to negotiate on Bethnal
Green Hospital because their hands were tied by the AHA. The reply
from one of his officers bleated about ‘numerous requests from a
large variety of representative groups’. He hoped we would
understand his ‘reluctance to add to the list which on the basis of
time alone could not be accommodated.’
Management have thus deliberately avoided hearing the views of the
staff and their trade unions. They have blindly attempted to press on
with their plans, regardless of the hospital workers and the local
trade union movement. Through the ‘blacking’ by the unions of
conversion work at Bethnal Green Hospital, a whole chain of
inter-dependent plans also affecting the adjacent Hackney Borough and
the start of a new hospital there, have been held up.
 
Mandarins
The management at Area level, those remote mandarins who act as
the executive for the AHA, had adopted a complete dog-in-the-manger
attitude. Here were the unions holding up numerous plans –
management were quite happy to just sit tight and let the services
run down.
Members of the Authority suddenly realised what was happening: the
plans could not be implemented without union co-operation, the
unions’ co-operation was dependent on meaningful negotiations and
they were willing to come to a compromise – yet management were
intransigent. Finance earmarked for their new hospital was under
increasing threat of being re-allocated elsewhere, due entirely to
the incompetence and rigidity of Area management.
In the meeting, AHA members demanded that the shop stewards
present in the public gallery be asked to negotiate. Swallowing his
pride, the chairman had to appeal to the stewards’ spokesman (Ian
Burge). But the terms were too narrow – the spokesman explained he
would need to consult with the committee. A recess was granted, and
the stewards retired to an ante-chamber to consider the offer.
We drew up a statement declaring our terms, and returned to read
it out. Confusion reigned. The chairman didn’t know what to do –
he threw up his hands declaring the whole matter open for debate.
To try and help resolve the matter, the stewards’ spokesman
referred to a proposal made by one member that the Tower Hamlets
management be given authority to negotiate with the JSSC, in effect
without their hands tied. Thus item 9 on the agenda, ‘to consider a
report on the present situation’ concerning Bethnal Green Hospital, closed.
 




Spending cuts are devastating the Health Service throughout the
country.
Shop stewards in Tower Hamlets, London, have launched a major
campaign against this brutal financial surgery. They are to mount a
propaganda campaign to inform and mobilise the thousands of hospital
and other health workers in the health district. Their indignation
and anger, stewards hope, will be directed into the labour movement
so that other workers will also join the campaign.
Because funds are short, beds are to be reduced. If this goes
through, 360 acute beds would go, and hundreds of jobs be lost.
Already wards have been closed temporarily due to a ‘shortage’ of
some 116 nurses. Further such closures are planned. Many of the beds
are to be reallocated to accommodate geriatric patients from
hospitals marked for closure.
Services are already stretched to the limit. Waiting lists are
getting longer, and more people are having to wait 18 months and
longer. More patients are admitted as emergency cases; ambulancemen
have to search round districts for empty beds. Because of the age and
condition of most hospital buildings, many are dilapidated and should
be replaced. No-one would deny the great need for better facilities
for the aged, for example.
The only new building going up in Tower Hamlets at the moment,
however, is the new wing at Whitechapel. This building is costing
£6 millions or more, will take 3½ years to complete, and it will
not have a single bed in it!
Hospital workers are demanding that new buildings should be
provided before there are any closures. They want new beds in the new
block, and also want an existing private wing for NHS patients.
Management say they haven’t the money to staff hospitals
adequately. But cash is still pouring into the coffers of the private
drug companies – consuming 43% of primary care costs, for example.
It is also lining the pockets of private contractors exploiting the NHS.
This is why a political struggle is necessary. This is why effort
in the campaign should be directed to involving the health workers
and local workers more actively in their trade unions and the Labour Party.
 
Close Ranks
Health workers must close ranks and put a stop to the
disintegration of the NHS. Every single job and every single bed must
now be defended. The “commando” operation at Hounslow Hospital
has shown the lengths to which management are prepared to go to
enforce their plans. Tower hamlets health workers have taken note!
Jane Doyle, a nurse shop steward who is also National Union of
Public Employees delegate to the Tower Hamlets Labour Party, reported
that a resolution on the NHS from the Labour Party Young Socialists
had received unanimous backing at the Party’s management committee.
It deplored the hospital closures, and expressed alarm at their
drastic effects in the borough, in terms of lost health facilities
and more hardship in an area already suffering 13% unemployment.
It demanded that the government returns to its Manifesto pledge,
not only to defend the NHS, but to expand it.
 




Last Wednesday, many hundreds of hospital workers and local
supporters marched on the District Management offices in Tower
Hamlets, in protest against the local health service cuts and the
threat to Bethnal Green Hospital. The mood, though good natured and
friendly, was overwhelmingly one of anger at the proposed cuts and
enthusiasm for a struggle of resistance.
 
Great demo
Hundreds of colourful banners flapped in the breeze as the
three-pronged march converged in the Whitechapel Road. Cheers went up
as contingents joined up from Bethnal Green, Mile End and Whitechapel
hospitals. The long column then marched along the main road in front
of the famous London Hospital, wound round the back, and passed the
private wing which echoed back the chants “Private Medicine Out! –
National Health Service In!”
The demonstration then assembled outside the management offices to
hear speeches from the Campaign and from the trade unions. Groups of
supporters from Hackney hospitals and from local industries such as
the Watney Mann brewery and the Post Office also joined in.
The magnificent turn-out was in response to the call from the Keep
Bethnal Green Hospital Open Campaign and the District Joint Shop
Stewards’ Committee for a two-hour stoppage and demonstration. A
previous demonstration called by the Campaign had not received much
support but this time the solid trade union support made a world of
difference. The Joint Shop Stewards’ Committee had asked for mass
meetings of all unions to be held to discuss the situation and
mobilise members. The results have demonstrated the correctness of
this approach.
The simmering anger in many departments has been brought to the
surface as the hospital workers realise what has been going on and
was in store for them. The demonstration has proved they are not
isolated and alone, that their stewards and unions are capable of
preparing and leading them into battle. The mood on the march and
rally showed that any caution on the part of some of the local
hospital union leaders is unfounded. The workers themselves have
shown they are ready to move into action to keep the hospitals open.
Given the right lead now from the stewards and branches, it will
be possible to reverse the situation and to force management to carry
out the demands of the health workers and the local population. The
tremendous reserves of militancy must be brought into play, before it
is too late. Hospital workers are seething at the way the NHS is
being mismanaged and allowed to be run down.
 
Back-pay
Apart from the threatened closures there are a hundred and one
other issues on the boil. There is the question of back pay owed to
ancillary and works staff under an agreement going back 14 years now,
with management stalling and dithering about, dragging the
negotiations on and on.
There is the whole question of contract labour, increasingly
brought in to do the work rightfully belonging to our own skilled
men: the electricians, the engineers, the painters, the plumbers and
the carpenters. It seems that the enormous overhead of management
costs prices our own men off the market. It is claimed that
contractors can do the jobs cheaper. Yet our own men often have to
patch up the shoddy workmanship left by these contractors. Many
workers believe that graft is the real reason for so much
contracting.
 
Stop!
Attempts have been made to ‘save’ on costs of standby duties,
such as with the radiographers, which means reducing manning and
payment reductions. There is the question of increasing
centralisation in stores, laundries, catering, with consequent cuts
in staff, loss of services at local level, and of course
opportunities for further mismanagement on a grand scale.
Shortages of nursing staff, following the freeze on jobs in 1975,
and cutbacks in training mean greater and unfair responsibility on
the shoulders of training nurses, and generally harder work for all.
“Enough is enough!” was the feeling on the demonstration:
“Let’s put a stop to all this!” Groups of workers are demanding
we really put the screws on management. It is now possible that a
serious struggle will develop to prevent closures. The JSSC must be
thoroughly prepared to mobilise and build on the existing enthusiasm.
The JSSC must be ready in a constructive way to lead the hospital
workers into action.
 




Ian Burge, Secretary, Joint Shop Stewards’ Committee, London
Hospital, Whitechapel, exposes the Area Health Authorities

It is well worth any health worker making a visit to a meeting
of their Area Health Authority – just to see for themselves how
these institutions work.
Members of the District Joint Shop Stewards’ Committee and of
the ‘Save Bethnal Green Campaign’ committee thought that by
lobbying the Authority members it might be possible to influence the
voting. At stake was the future of the 300 bed Bethnal Green hospital.
 
The City and East London Area Health Authority meets once a month
in a plush chamber within Addison House, a fairly new and
air-conditioned block for health administrators, situated comfortably
away from any of the ugly and decrepit ex-workhouses that pass for
hospitals in the area. These monthly gatherings are for the purpose
of making decisions on behalf of hundreds of thousands of health
service users, and thousands of health service workers.
Big business, strangely enough, seems to be well represented on
the Authority, with F.M. Cumberlege Esq., CBE, of Messrs Thomas
Cumberlege and Inskipp, a firm of tea brokers, as the chairman of the
Authority. Other prominent members include a J.M. Blyth Currie Esq.,
of Blyth Greene Jourdain & Co. Ltd., S.M. Gray Esq., of Messrs
Dixon Wilson and Co., K. McAlpine Esq., DL, of the famous building firm.
Titled persons, too, are represented, with Sir Robin Brook, KBE,
CMG, OBE, and the Viscount Knutsford, Lady Riches, and Lady Sherman
(Hackney Council). Thirteen members are appointed by the Regional
Health Authorities, nine by the Local Authorities, three by the
University of London, and the chairman is appointed by the Secretary
of State. The University appointees include the Deans of St Bart’s
and the London Hospital Medical colleges.
 
Public
The meetings are supposed to be open to the public, and since a
request from the shop stewards to meet the members had been rejected,
we decided to go along as ‘members of the public’. On arrival we
were informed that there was only room for ten, other public gallery
seats having already been taken up by District Management Team
‘advisors’ and the press.
Bethnal Green Hospital was the first main item on the agenda. The
chairman gave an outline of management’s plan and the reasons for
the changes, which briefly amounted to there being less money to go
around, and a reduction in bed allocation from 1,000 to 665 acute
beds. DHSS priorities required a shift of resources from acute care
to geriatrics and community services.
The chairman referred to comments received during the
‘consultation’ period. His interpretation of these was that there
appeared to be widespread support for management’s scheme. He made
no attempt to explain any other point of view, although he was fully
aware that a local campaign against the plans was receiving
considerable support. He knew that a public meeting of 700 had
rejected the plans, the health workers and their unions were
completely against the plans, and that the Tower Hamlets Council were
not at all happy with the plans. The large amount of opposition
included in the written comments was completely glossed over.
 
Glossed
Only three Authority members were willing to speak against the
plans, a Labour Councillor, a Trades Council nominee, and the
chairman of the City and Hackney Community Health Council. They made
a number of good points of principle, and also pointed out some
anomalies and deceits in Management’s arguments.
It appeared that in all the consultation ‘evidence’ presented
in management’s report, only one reply gave any support to the
plan; even that had conditions. The majority of replies expressed
opposition. Non-committal replies had been counted by management as
giving support. Included in the evidence was a petition signed by 70
community health staff objecting to the plan. Over 100 local GPs who
had also signed a letter of opposition had been ignored, as had
20,000 local residents who signed a petition of protest.
Now, before proceeding, it is necessary to explain the position of
two important bodies which have quite a large amount of power to
oppose the plans. These are the local council and the local Community
Health Council (CHC). Following a successful resolution submitted by
the LPYS, Tower Hamlets Labour Party is committed to oppose cuts. The
Tower Hamlets Labour-controlled council was the only body to attempt
to get all interested parties together in order to hear the various
arguments for and against. The Council then adopted the view that
there were sufficient differences of medical and other opinion to
justify holding back the plan until a proper inquiry had been held.
The Tower Hamlets CHC appeared to have acted hand in glove with
management, to the great annoyance and disgust of many local labour
movement activists and hospital workers.
The Authority chairman said Tower Hamlets Council had not put
forward any scheme that would save money. This was obviously his main
concern. He did, however, allow a motion based on the Council’s
policy, basically calling for a suspension of the plans pending an
inquiry (defeated: 9 against, 5 for, 7 abstentions).
Realising that a straight decision to immediately proceed with the
plan for Bethnal Green would be met by widespread opposition, the
chairman ‘invited’ a further motion which would allow until 30th
June for the Secretary of State, or Regional Health Authority, to
produce more funds: if not, the plan would go ahead. This was agreed
16 for, none against, five abstentions. District Management could
still proceed with changing the use of Bethnal Green, and take
economy measures – so long as they were not ‘irreversible’.
 
Luxury
This is the way that decisions are taken affecting thousands of
people, thousands who will need immediate treatment in the casualty
department which will be closed; decisions affecting hundreds of
hospital workers, some of whom will no longer be able to work at
Bethnal Green, others, already working under tremendous pressure, who
will have to carry the extra burden from the closed units, and many
in the community services who will be pushed to breakdown point as
the closure of acute beds places more work on staff only at half
strength anyway.
These decisions are being taken by a small number of people who
probably only briefly bother to think about the NHS just once a
month. These eminent people who have no commitment to the principles
embodied in the NHS and certainly no commitment to the labour and
trade union movement. They think the NHS is a “luxury” we cannot
really afford. They are not interested in the views either of those
who have to run the services, or those who need them.
Many of us knew what to expect when these bodies were set up under
the health service re-organisation in 1974. It certainly wasn’t the
intention to have a democratically run NHS, more like something run
on business lines.
From our point of view, the bodies which are to manage the health
services should at least:

Be dedicated to defending the principles of the NHS, to expansion
of the services to meet the full needs of the sick, and seek the
necessary resources to achieve this;
 
Seek to end the influence of elitism, self interest, mystique, and
so on as epitomised in the medical, nursing and other ‘professions’;
 
Be composed of people subject to the control of the labour movement;
 
Have a built-in majority, democratically elected, representing the
health workers themselves and the local population who use the services;
 
Not have to compete with other similar bodies for resources, but
through elected delegates be able to work together in formulating the
real health care needs of the population.

 




We are by now familiar with the type of disasters that can cause
massive pollution: the mix-up between two types of bag which led to
the wholesale slaughter of thousands of animals, and the possibility
of permanent damage through poisoning of all 9 million inhabitants of
Michigan; the explosion at a factory in Seveso, releasing poisonous
fall-out which caused horrible skin sores and as yet unmeasured
effects on the unborn; mercury poisoning of the sea from industrial
effluent leading to a hideous disease of the nervous system and many
deaths; massive oil pollution of the seas and coastlines following
incidents with oil takers ... and so on.
 
Dumping
There is, however, another type of hazard which has as much
disaster potential, but which has not received a great deal of
attention: toxic wastes disposal.
The dumping of toxic wastes has caused some deaths and injuries
already. These are known about, but there may well have been other
linked indirectly. It can only be a matter of time before a disaster occurs.
There are no official statistics specific to waste disposal and it
is difficult to get a picture of the true extent of the dangers, but
it has been estimated that between three and five million tonnes of
toxic wastes are produced annually by British industry. Dumping on
the land is the preferred technique for about 90% of UK toxic wastes,
mainly because it is considerably cheaper than either chemical
treatment or incineration.
Last year, the GLC produced a special report setting out details
of ten major schemes bought for £27.6 million on which some form of
industrial pollution had been found leading to the delay of housing
schemes. These included, for instance, land at Thamesmead,
contaminated with lead, copper, mercury salts, phenols, and sulphides
from a former explosives factory (Guardian, 16.9.77).
Cyanide was once considered the ultimate in poisons, the tiniest
amounts of which could cause instant death. Yet today it is commonly
to be found in large quantities being taken to dumps. Cyanide and a
host of other equally, if not more, toxic substances are the
by-products of industrial processes.
Arsenic wastes which had been buried in Minnesota thirty years
ago, recently contaminated water supplies, sending a number of people
to hospital. Even plutonium has been discovered on a municipal
landfill site in Germany. Re-use of a waste oil which happened to
contain a high concentration of dioxin, a million times more potent
than thalidomide, killed 60 horses, numerous other livestock, and
affected ten people in Missouri.
Apart from these examples, numerous other accidents have occurred
either on waste tips or during transit. One tanker arrived at a site
in Essex minus its load which had escaped through a faulty valve.
Several tankers have required the assistance of the fire brigade
following runaway pressure rises. Several major fires on waste
disposal sites have posed serious hazards to local residents, not
only from the atmospheric dispersion of combustion products, but also
from pyrolysis products, notably phenols, gaining access to public
water sources.
What has been done to safeguard the population from these dangers?
Not very much. A recent article in New Scientist (15.7.77) is
very critical of the inadequate laws and lack of controls. It
explains, too, that much of the information needed for an objective
assessment of the situation is unobtainable “mainly because of the
jealous way in which both government and industry guard their secrets
about the production and disposal of waste.” There seems more
concern to protect the manufacturers than to protect public health!
 
Cyanide
The Deposit of Poisonous Wastes Act was introduced in 1972
following publicity and public concern at the irresponsible dumping
of cyanide wastes in the early 1970s. The New Scientist points
out, however, that:
“The legislation, and the public feeling at the time,
produced major changes, not in the methods of disposal but rather in
the availability of disposal sites ... with the result that toxic
waste was channelled into a much smaller number of sites. For
example, the intake of toxic wastes to the Pitsea site in Essex
increased by a factor of eight in the three years following the 1972 act.”
The Health and Safety at Work and the Control of Pollution Acts
both appeared on the statute book in 1974. But, as the New
Scientist points out:
“... unfortunately, the grim financial climate in local
government at present mitigates against anything other than very
modest expenditures ... Hence in some counties, particularly more
rural ones that do not see themselves as having much of a toxic waste
problem, the control staff is minimal and policing of actual deposits
is non-existent. In these circumstances it requires no great flight
of fancy to imagine the likely reaction of an unscrupulous individual
or company with a tanker full of ‘something rather nasty’ to get
rid of.”
The article correctly concludes that the legislation, national and
European, does not provide sufficient protection.
“All these legislative innovations are examples of
remedies being sought at the wrong interface ... Legislation so far
has only an incidental effect on the volume and unpleasantness of the
waste itself. The legislature would be rewarded with more success if
it directed attention to the point of generation of waste.”
The experience of the workers trying to make use of the
legislation, whether it be Health and Safety at Work, Equal Pay, or
Employment Protection, is that employers always manage to find
loopholes, or prefer to ignore the law and risk fines, usually not
very great ones at that. Certainly, as far as health and safety
considerations go, and that includes waste disposal, any additional
expenditure on the part of the employer will cut into his profits.
Even the government’s own departments cannot implement health and
safety because of the cuts.
We must of course, as trade union representatives, make full use
of existing laws in our members’ interests to improve working
conditions, and the environment. We should also support any moves to
strengthen these laws to our advantage. But we need to go further
than this.
We should demand the tightest control and supervision of toxic
waste disposal. We should insist on the closest scrutiny by local
working class representatives, and by labour movement experts, of all
plans for new industry. No processes should be permitted unless
adequate safety is ensured and all waste products disposed of without
danger to the health of present or future generations.
 







Following hard on the heels of the government’s final
decision to convert Bethnal Green hospital into an exclusively
geriatric hospital comes a similar threat to St. Nicholas’s,
Plumstead. Staff at “St. Nicks” are preparing to save the
hospital.
Ian Burge, Secretary of the Joint Shop Stewards Committee,
the London Hospital, Whitechapel, reports after a visit to St.
Nicks.



*
St. Nicholas Hospital, Plumstead, South East London, was once
threatened with closure. Then following a vigorous campaign, David
Ennals (Minister of Health) granted a reprieve. He said, however,
that five other local hospitals might have to close instead. Now the
plans seem to have gone full circle, with a new threat hanging over
the hospital.
The new plan seems to be to reduce the 288-bed general hospital to
an 85-bed ‘community’ hospital. The inverted commas are necessary
because ‘community’ seems to have become a euphemism for
“stripped-down”.
The timetable for the run-down has now been speeded up. The
resignation of one of the two consultants with beds at the hospital
is being used as an excuse. There is to be a general reduction in
staff by about a third, with 95 to 105 less nurses required.
 
Blackmail
There are about 80 nursing jobs vacant in the Area, and nurses at
St Nicks are being blackmailed into applying for these before
September 30th or else they will be without jobs. The full
run-down is expected to be complete by next March.
Like all other areas, this one has long waiting lists. There is no
doubt that the beds at St Nicks are urgently needed. Yet management
are to close them down.
One reliable source has revealed a plan to convert the
accommodation into offices for Area Officials – at a cost of £3¾ million.
The service which will no doubt be mostly missed is the Accident
and Emergency Department. A large number of local workers depend on
this at the moment should there be any accidents at work, or
travelling to work.
Local industries include a large chemical works and a Ford
factory. These are the places where the hospital unions should be
seeking massive support. It is these workers who will really miss the
services. They are the ones who will suffer when they have to be
taken to the next available unit – at Greenwich General, about five
miles further away.
The Action Committee at the hospital are now organising a
conference for local stoppages to save the hospital. This is along
similar lines to the campaign presently being organised by Tower
Hamlets shop stewards, with respect to Bethnal Green Hospital and the
cuts in Tower Hamlets.
 
Campaign
The TU blacking of conversion work at Bethnal Green Hospital has
meant POEU members refusing to cut off the phones and the turning
away of deliveries of special geriatric beds and cement for building work.
These conferences are for TU delegates, convenors, shop stewards
etc. from the localities. They are to discuss arrangements to be made
for borough-wide stoppages in the two areas to save the health services.
 




Casualty is closed, theatres are closed, wards are closed. Only
140 of the 270 beds are now in use.
Hundreds of patients on the waiting lists for operation have now
been added to lists at other hospitals, probably with years more waiting.
So much for the ‘concern for patients’ we hear so much of from
the Ministers, their Health Authorities, and their Managements.
Many of the medical and nursing staff have now been transferred
elsewhere in the District. It is the ancillary staff, the porters,
domestics, and so on, together with a few clerical staff and one or
two nurses, who are left to carry on the fight. Volunteer pickets are
assisting stewards by keeping a check on movements in and out of the
hospital, and are occupying the empty casualty department.
No doubt we will soon be accused of holding up improvements for
the geriatric patients in the borough. Of course we are in favour of
expanding services for the elderly – but this is not what
management plans to do. Their plan is merely to take them out of one
hospital to put in Bethnal Green, losing 128 acute beds in the process.
If more geriatric beds are needed urgently, before new facilities
can be built, then room can be found in other ways. For example,
there is a 50-bed private wing at the London Hospital – this could
be turned over for exclusive NHS use.
Appeals, legal moves, petitions and demonstrations have run their
course with no real changes in the situation – except for attitudes
that is. More of the stewards and staff now realise that it is
unlikely that the hospital will be re-opened until a change of policy
has taken place on the part of the Labour government.
They feel their own union leaders could have been instrumental in
achieving such a change.
All eyes will now be on the extent of support local trade unions
are prepared to give. Up to now it has been largely a question of
goodwill, some cash, the odd resolution, and personal commitments
from a very few individuals. But this has got to change.
Local unions are to be asked, as a matter of some urgency, to
raise the matter of the NHS cuts, with a view to forcing the labour
government to reverse its policies and to get back to the business it
was elected for – to expand and improve the health services.
A borough-wide stoppage in all the local industries and services
would give a terrific boost to the campaign, and would soon be taken
up in all the areas affected by cuts.
The special conference called by the shop stewards’ committee
for TU delegates, convenors and shop stewards in the borough will
show whether the spark is there yet. Throughout the last few week,
campaign activists and LPYS members have been leafleting the major workplaces.
Stewards have addressed some local trade union branches, and have
received an enthusiastic response. If this response is forthcoming
from the shop floor also, there will be no holding back a new
movement for change!
 




All admissions have been stopped by management at the London
Hospital, and at Mile End and St Clements. Essential portering and
ancillary staff are in dispute with management over the payment of
money owed over a period of 13 years. They are operating an overtime
ban and work to rule. Their action has proved that the hospital
cannot function without staff working long hours and without their
great fund of goodwill and devotion.
The money is due to the workers who work overtime on a regular
basis, under an agreement signed in 1964. Representatives of the
ancillary workers recently discovered that management had never paid
these workers their full entitlement. Management have admitted this
and have agreed to give back pay, but only at the old rates, which
would be taxed at current rates!
The union is quite correctly demanding that the money owed is paid
at present rates of pay rather than the rates in operation for each
year. Inflation and tax increases have eroded the value of back pay
to which they are entitled.
Management have claimed that they cannot give back pay at current
rate because the Department of Health won’t allow it, yet many
hospitals up and down the country, and even one under the same Area
Health Authority, have already given the full payment demanded by the
NUPE members.
Negotiations have been dragging on for 18 months and management
have been trying to take advantage of an apparent lull in militancy.
This has had the reverse effect to that intended. Instead of dividing
the workers, management’s petty actions have welded the workers
together in a more determined mood. Although only NUPE is involved at
present, all unions are standing together in support.
 




From the General Household Survey interviews, men of working
age in the professional classes reported losing, on average, fewer
than four working days a year, whereas unskilled manual workers
reported losing more than eighteen days annually. If the whole of the
male working population had had a sickness absence rate equivalent to
that reported by the professional classes there would be an annual
saving of about 100 million working days.
Unskilled manual workers and their families suffer two or three
times more than senior professional and managerial families from
almost all the major causes of premature death, and the overall death
rate is now 50% higher in the bottom quarter of the population than
the top quarter. This means that the working class generally are
considerably more susceptible to early death than the middle and
upper classes.
These differences between the social classes is two or three times
as large now as it was during the 1930s and 1940s (see chart).
Although the illustration is based on the figures for males, working
class women suffer a worse health record than do middle class women.







Women aged 15 to 64 years whose husbands were in the professional
groups were subject to a death rate (adjusted for age) 35% below the
national average while women whose husbands were in unskilled
occupations had a mortality 66% above the professional figure. This
shows that disparities cannot be attributed to employment factors
alone. The working class mother is more than twice as likely to die
from complications during pregnancy and birth as her middle class counterpart.
One of the health measures most strongly reflecting the general
living standards is the infant mortality rates. Here again there are
tremendous differences to de found in different areas, for example
Bromley, a middle class southern suburb of London, has an infant
mortality rate of 12.4 in a thousand. Lambeth however, a few miles
away and working class, has a rate of 20.8.
Perinatal mortality, that is the number of deaths at birth or
during the first few days of life, per thousand deliveries, is 28.9
in Tameside, Manchester, and 13.2 in Oxfordshire. The national figure
is about 19, compared with Sweden’s 12.
The Court committee’s report on Child Health Care, published
last December, noted that “twice as many children of unskilled
workers die in the first month of life as children of professional
workers, and the gap between the social classes in this respect has
been widening steadily for 25 years.” Some causes of infant
death, such as gastroenteritis and pneumonia, are five times more
prevalent in the working class than in the higher social classes.
The working of the present Abortion Act leads to many anomalies.
In some areas it is easier than others to obtain an NHS abortion. But
there is no area where all abortions are done on the NHS. Relying on
private or charitable agencies discriminates against the working
class woman.
 
Thus we see that the working class suffers a relatively greater
need for the services, in terms of its propensity to illness, yet at
the same time is relatively under-provided, as revealed by the
following examples:

Lower spending in working class areas:
£18 per
head was spent on hospital services in the industrial Sheffield
Region, 1971-72, compared with £34 per head spent in the South West
Metropolitan Region. Statistical work in The Lancet showed
that community health expenditure was more where there was a higher
number of the professional and managerial groups, and less where
there was a higher number of unskilled and semi-skilled groups.
 
Doctors have bigger patient lists in working class
areas:
In towns such as Dudley, St Helens and Grimsby
General Practitioners have about 3,000 patients on their lists –
compared to Torquay or Herefordshire, which have only about 2,000 on
the lists. The national average is 2,460 (1973).
 
Fewer modern buildings:
An article in Modern
Care in 1965 showed that in predominantly working class areas,
80% of the doctors’ surgeries were built before 1900, only 5%
since 1945; in middle class areas less than 50% were built before
1900, 25% since 1945.
 
Quality of service:
A study on hospital care in
1965 showed that middle class area GPs had more access to contrast
media X-rays, nearly five times as many had access to physiotherapy,
nearly three times as many visited their patients when they were in
hospital under a specialist.
 

A comparison between the working class area of East London with
Essex gives you a clear picture of inequality. The infant mortality
rate is 50% higher in E. London than in Essex. In 1974 the
notification rate for TB in E. London was three times the national
average and over seven times the rate for Essex. And it is
getting worse. Between 1967 and 1974 respiratory TB increased in E.
London by 50% and no-respiratory TB doubled.
The poor health of the working class compared to the middle class
is a direct result of the living conditions imposed on us by
capitalism. Lack of money to buy sufficient food, fewer holidays, bad
working conditions and long working hours, fewer recreation
facilities combined with bad housing forced on us by profit-conscious
landlords makes a joke of “equality of life” in this class
society.
In 1971 overcrowding was 50% worse in E. London than the whole GLC
area. 4½ times more E. London households had no fixed bath than
those in Essex; three times more had an outside toilet only; and
three times more had no continuous hot water. Yet despite greater
need for health care, the percentage of GPs there working single
handed is almost twice the national average and the percentage of GPs
over the age of 60 is also nearly twice the national average. There
are only 12.7 health visitors per 100,000 population instead of the
23 recommended for such high risk areas.
A number of government publications have appeared during the last
year dealing with the problems of the NHS. A future article in
Militant will discuss these in more detail. Their main
proposal is that the inadequacies in the services are somehow to be
made good by redistributing funds from ‘rich’ areas. There are
no ‘rich’ areas. As a matter of fact, the City and East
London is designated as a comparatively ‘rich’ area! What the NHS
needs as a matter of great urgency is a massive injection of funds to
bring up all the services to a decent standard, as far as the working
class are concerned.

Reverse the cuts.
 
For full manning and equipment of services.
 
For an expansion of all parts of the NHS, especially in the
deprived working class areas, to end the inequality of health.
 
For a socialist health plan in a socialist economy.

 




Dear Comrades,
The technicians dispute was settled last week when divisional
delegates voted in London 90–1 for acceptance of the latest offer
from the management side. The increases average at 20%, over twice
the original offer, but still short of the 30% aimed for. However a
further 7½% increase has already been agreed as a cost of living
rise under Phase Three.
The distribution of the increase over the scales has been a
partial rationalisation towards a future amalgamation of all
technician grades. This can be seen as a move against past policy of
dividing the technicians into many separate negotiating groups, when
it was easier for management to play off one group against the other.
Radiographers depending on the pitiful and confusing campaign
being conducted by their “professional” society can learn a
lesson from the technicians. The backing of a Trade Union and strong
national and local organisation is essential in any fight on wages.
Although co-ordination between the unions (ASTMS, NALGO and NUPE)
left a lot to be desired at national level, the liaison at a local
level was excellent, with joint strike committee organising the
picket and emergency services were provided. Indispensable has been
the support of drivers refusing to cross the picket lines, and also
the enormous public support. Hardship has been alleviated by strike
pay from the unions and collections taken by sympathetic sections of
workers. Trade Union solidarity has helped shorten the strike,
reducing the effect on patients.



 


Yours fraternally
Ian Burge
ASTMS



 

