

Marching! Marching! By Clara Weatherwax. John Day Co. New York. $1.90.
It is, certainly, a desperate scramble for the hangers-on of the communist party to keep up with the impulsive party line these days. The unfortunate faithful can’t tell when they go to bed tonight what political principles they will believe tomorrow. They have to read the morning’s Daily Worker before they know how to greet the socialist next door and the minister down the block.
Clara Weatherwax, whose novel won the New Masses “prize contest for a novel on an American proletarian theme”, fortunately manages to get under the current wire. True enough, she must have been a little worried by the Seventh Congress—which took place, evidently, after her manuscript was finished. She has plenty of “united front” (though it is not at all clear just who is being united), but there is a sad lack of “People’s Front”. And she still clings to a deviation or two on the AF of L. You can almost gather from her book that there are several labor fakers left among the old-line bureaucrats. And she has, I am forced to report, some quite disrespectful things to say about churchmen which will doubtless keep Marching! Marching! off the American League’s preferred list.
But these are after all minor matters. An introductory notice is proudly able to announce:
“Clara Weatherwax stems from pre-Mayflower New England stock, which has pioneered across the American continent ... One of her outstanding forebears was Roger Williams. Fourteen of her direct ancestors fought in the first American revolution. Others fought in the War of 1812 and the Civil War, and many of her family were in the World War.”
This should certainly be able to qualify her—even for Stalinism, 1936 variety. It is one of her own worker-heroes who comes through on page 208 with the triumphant discovery: “‘They talk about radical foreign stuff! Say, Communism is Americanism! That’s what! Americanism!’” As Earl Browder might put it: “That’s just what we communists have been trying to tell you all along, and in particular since the question was so decisively analyzed by comrade Dimitroff.” And, no doubt, the claim will be amply proved as US imperialism moves forward into the new world war.
As for the novel itself, it is a travesty on literature and a libel against the working class. Its style is the dregs of the Joyce tradition, drained off through the worst of Wolfe and Faulkner, combined with school-essay “straightforward” writing. Its characters are wooden monstrosities, conceived with a kind of horrible masochistic delight in repulsive details and an infantile pleasure in trivial nobilities. The book is liberally interlarded with long speeches on war, strikes, trade unions, Fascism, apparently lifted from back copies of the Daily Worker.
What is tragic is to realize that even in a book so bad as this there are materials, lost in the morass, for genuine and even great literature. Not the least in the charges of the indictment against Stalinism must be the stultification of intelligence and sensibility to which it condemns its adherents.
J.W.
 



IT IS AN instructive and, in its own way, an entertaining political exercise to sit down for a few hours with a file of the Daily Worker and to compare recent issues with those of three or even two years ago. It is hard in any other way, even for those who follow events carefully day by day, to realize the breathtaking extent of the turn of the Communist International. To a man from a political Mars—let us say, a serious and interested observer from outside the labor movement—the contrast could appear only as a lawless and inexplicable fantasy. Can the horned social-Fascist sprout comradely wings almost overnight? Can a ponderous Federation of Labor change, chameleon-like, from a main agent of finance capital to the chief bulwark of the workers?
Can the church, the overpowering ideological tyrant of the masses, become at one breath the great ally against war? Can the dove of peace so gracefully settle over Geneva, that charnel house of imperialist bandits? Our eyes, scanning the past and present of the Daily Worker, bear the witness that these things can indeed be, that in fact they are. Moreover—it is the Daily Worker itself again which informs us—they can be without contradiction, representing all of them merely the consistent revolutionary Marxist-Leninist-Stalinist line of the Comintern, one and indivisible.
Now there is a certain truth in the contention of the Daily Worker that the line of the Communist International during the two periods is consistent, though the consistency is of course not one of avowed policy and approved tactic. It is consistent in the sense that the line in both periods, in the face of differing international conditions, represents the interests of the reactionary bureaucracy now in control of the Soviet Union. There is a historical lawfulness underlying the chaotic surface, which clarifies and gives meaning to that surface. Marxists do not explain political events in terms of the psychological aberrations and peculiarities of individuals, even when these individuals are Stalins or Mussolinis. The new line of the Comintern is neither the result of Stalin’s suddenly “coming to his senses after the adventurism of the Third Period”, nor of his unexpectedly slipping from revolutionary grace after years of Leninist intransigence. The new line is the necessary consequence of the whole course of Stalinism as it works out in the period following the defeat in Germany and the intensification of the war crisis.
However, what I am here concerned with are certain features of the new line itself, certain new problems to which it gives rise, and in particular the problem of “organic unity” which is posed as a result of the application of the new line on an international scale.
It must, first of all, be understood that the new line of the Communist International was not “created” by the Seventh Congress. The turn began—at first somewhat erratically and on local fronts—a few months after Hitler came to power. It had already gained powerful international momentum by last summer. The Seventh Congress formulated a confused, hypocritical and deceptive account of what had already, in considerable part, taken place. The Seventh Congress, however, also speeded up the application of the new turn, drew out its implications more fully and whipped the few falterers into harness.
If we examine the political meaning of the resolutions and speeches of the Seventh Congress, we naturally enough find it resting firmly on the doctrine of socialism in one country, the heart and lungs of Stalinism. That is to say, it rests on the denial of revolutionary internationalism, on the bureaucratic conception of Utopia in one’s own pasture and the devil take the neighbor’s. This doctrine was firmly embedded in the Sixth Congress, and in the program of the CI, which was its product. Its immediate consequence, indeed its concomitant, was the bureaucratisation of the party: in other words, the denial of one primary principle of Marxism was achieved only by the denial of another—of the principle of democratic centralism in the structure of the party.
But it was of course impossible for Stalinism to stop at this point. And in the records of the Seventh Congress we find that the gangrene, spreading inevitably from its original source throughout the organism, has poisoned in turn the other fundamental principles of revolutionary Marxism. This is above all clear in the case of two decisive questions: the theory of the state, and the principles of the struggle against imperialist war. The Seventh Congress bases itself on Kautsky’s conception of the state, and on social-patriotism.
The adoption of the revisionist theory of the state—the abandonment of the uncompromising conception of the state as the executive committee of the class enemy—is shown in every crucial position adopted by the Seventh Congress. The possibility of coalition governments—governments in collaboration with bourgeois parties (so long as these are “anti-Fascist”)—was not merely recognized but advocated. In the place of the Marxian policy of defense of the democratic rights of the workers and exploited masses, the resolutions of the Congress advocate defense of bourgeois democracy: that is, defense of one form of the class rule of the bourgeoisie. The revolutionary struggle for workers’ power gives way, in the speech of Dimitroff, to the purely negative and defensive conception of a coalition government of the “anti-Fascist People’s Front” which by a mysterious process of dialectic will pass into “the democratic dictatorship of the workers and peasants” and hence into socialism.
Thoroughgoing social-patriotism is erected into basic dogma. Support of the governments of any country allied with the Soviet Union in a war crisis is made obligatory. The Geneva League of Imperialists becomes the stronghold of world peace. All communists are called upon to support League (i.e., imperialist) sanctions against “aggressors”—in other words, to support their imperialist governments when these governments chance to fit into the momentary plans of Stalin. The wars of “democratic” nations against Fascist nations (France against Germany, the United States against Japan) are no longer imperialist but “just” and “progressive” wars.
The results of the cumulating abandonment of Marxian principles by the Comintern, both before and since the Seventh Congress, are showing themselves in every field of practical activity. Throughout the world, the dual “red” trade unions have been rapidly thrown overboard, and their members ordered back into the main body of the trade union movement. But far from representing a correction of the sectarian isolationism of the “Third Period”, the movement back into the mass trade unions has been carried out in the form of a capitulation to the old-line reformist trade union bureaucrats. The Comintern has even gone so far as to announce willingness to dissolve the party fractions in the unions, or in other words to abandon every form of revolutionary activity in the basic organizations of the working class. Beginning with France, the slogans for a People’s Front of capitulation to a middle class program have been mechanically extended to all countries. In England, the communist party has formally applied for admission to the Labour party. In France, the communist party, through the People’s Front, has steadfastly supported the Laval-Herriot government and has become the most ardent defender of “the (bourgeois) republic” against its opponents from the right—and from the left. In Czechoslovakia, the communist electors voted for Benes in the recent election. In Great Britain, the communist party put forward only three independent candidates in the General Elections. In all countries, including the United States, the communist parties are supporting in elections socialists, “labor” candidates, and even various types of “fusion” and liberal tickets. In Wisconsin, the communist party has entered into the strange melange of the LaFollettes, Hoan, farm coöperatives, milk producers, etc., which will probably support Roosevelt in the Fall elections. The “anti-war” meetings and demonstrations are turned over almost exclusively to ministers, generals, rabbis, Negro fakers, lazy liberals, and “sympathetic” Congressmen and politicians out for a few votes. The Stalinists have become the great expounders of “the French approach”, “the American approach”, “the Spanish approach” ... in a most confused and reactionary form. Communists now “love their country” and “their country’s flag” (see the Daily Worker, Dec. 20).
In all of these concrete day-by-day developments, one general fact is of central importance in the present connection: on each issue the communist parties in their new turn approach the practises and methods of social democracy. Consequently, in the concrete question of the relations to social democracy we find this same trend. The united front with the socialist comrades has become a central slogan. And a united front at all costs, on any terms. The Stalinists declare themselves willing to achieve the united front at any sacrifice of program, principle, or organizational prestige. They will turn over full profits on a debate with the same “conciliatory” spirit that they let socialists write the program and make the key speeches.
But, naturally, this presupposes what has likewise been accomplished during the last year and a half, and given theoretical formulation at the Seventh Congress: namely, the abandonment, in its entirety, of the theory of social-Fascism. One remembers with at least a touch of irony how even two years ago any attack on this theory was greeted by howls of “Trotskyism”. No spokesman for the CI has bothered to clarify what was wrong with the theory or why it was abandoned. It was just quietly, in the dark of political night, dumped overboard. And the social-Fascist, objective twin (not antipodes) of Fascism, has become the closest comrade.
When we search to the political roots, there is of course nothing surprising in the rapproachement with social democracy. The truth of the matter is this: the present program of the CI, in the key questions of principle, is itself a social democratic program. Consider the great polemics which Lenin directed against social democracy. They were directed precisely against those ideas which form the foundation arches of the current CI program: against the abandonment of revolutionary internationalism, against the revisionist theory of the state, against social-patriotism. And the present social democratization of the CI program leaves it not less, but on the whole more to the Right than classic social democracy. It is the dregs of social democracy, in their most vicious form, which the CI, in political fundamentals, has taken over. Consequently, proceeding from reactionary social democratic principles, the CI is necessarily led to reactionary social democratic practise. And, with the same necessity, it is led to the rapproachement with the organization which holds first title to these principles and practises: to the parties of the Second International.  
II. On their side, the parties of the Second International have not stood still during the past two and a half years. It is incorrect to say—as has sometimes been said—that the CI did not react from the catastrophe in Germany, the Austrian and Spanish events, and the sharpening of the war crisis. The new line of the CI represents just this reaction. The new line is the frantic, mechanical and disastrous response of the opportunist and reactionary bureaucracy of the Soviet Union to the recent international developments. Because of the rigidly bureaucratized structure of the communist parties, this response has been translated directly and entirely throughout the sections of the CI. The new line does not in any sense represent a deepening of the experience of the masses in general or of the membership of the communist parties. It has been imposed arbitrarily from above, and serves only to disorient further the rank and file members, and non-party workers under Stalinist influence. It is the further extension of a disease, not a step on the road back to health. And, thanks to the monolithism of the CI, the new line is carried out immediately and uniformly on an international scale. This does not mean that it does not meet with a certain resistance from the genuinely proletarian elements in the Stalinist ranks. But such resistance is prevented from developing in a normal fashion; it is suffocated almost at birth. Critics are simply tossed aside as “Trotskyists”, and the bureaucracy goes along at its own pace.
On the other hand, the response to the events of the past two and a half years within world social democracy has been thoroughly different in character. Partly this follows from the differing structural form of the Second International from that of the Third International. The international organization of the parties of the Second International is far looser; uniformity is not demanded from the affiliated national organizations; and a very considerable variety of principle and practice is possible. Variety of opinion of course revolves on the whole within certain more or less definite limits; but at the present time, largely because of the impact of world events, these limits are wider than normal. As a consequence we find that the response to the present crisis by world social democracy is openly expressed not merely by the reaction of the international and national bureaucracies—as in the case of the CI and its sections—but by ferment and turmoil from within the parties, deeper down into the ranks of the members. These represent, usually in distorted and confused forms, more genuine efforts to learn from historical experience and to draw more appropriate conclusions than is possible to hardened bureaucracies.
The ferment partly takes the form of the factional struggles now being waged within the social democracy, one phase of which has recently come to a head in this country. We are confronted by a maze of conflicting currents. There are the politically ossified reformists who resist every clamor of history—such as the “Old Guard” group in this country or the trade union officials of the British Labour party. There are the Right-Centrists, of whom the Austro-Marxists are the most outstanding, who, without undergoing any genuinely progressive development, nevertheless have found it necessary to alter their phraseology in order to provide sufficient red coloration to hold the allegiance of their Leftward moving following. The old formula of “peaceful evolution toward socialism” no longer serves; and they now include phrases about armed defense by the workers “if the counter-revolution resorts to force”. Social-patriotism of the 1914 defense-of-the-fatherland variety gives way to new forms involving defense of the Soviet Union and of democracy against Hitler and Fascism. Blum, as well as Bauer, Dan and the rest, is probably to be included in this tendency. A certain distance further to the Left are to be found such forces as the Socialist League in England and the Thomas group in this country, in the case of which outright social-patriotism is replaced by a kind of Left pacifism. Further to the Left are the Centrists of the type of the Militants in this country, who can issue programs close to Marxism on many of the key questions.
Now, the crucial point is that all of these (and other) varieties of Centrism which are appearing openly within the social democratic parties reflect much deeper movements to the Left on the part of the rank and file membership of the parties. These movements are the response of the membership to the triumph of Hitler, the Austrian and Spanish events, the war crisis and the general deepening of the capitalist contradictions. They are reflected at various stages of their development by the factional groupings and re-groupings in the leadership, and by new programs, resolutions and policies which more or less accurately express them. In certain cases, the leadership and programs—as, for example, in the case of the Right Centrists—represents objectively an effort to prevent, to turn aside and barricade the Leftward movement from below from finding its full historical expression in the revolutionary Marxian position. In others the factional programs and ideas are in a sense steps on the road to clarification. However, with the exception of certain sections of the French socialist youth and smaller sections of the French adult party, almost no open and organized expression of the completion of the Leftward movement within the ranks of the social democracy is yet to be found. Such expression—i.e., a Marxian program and Marxian tactics—presupposes the active intervention of Marxists; the Leftward movement can be consummated only by becoming fully conscious, by its union with Marxism. That this should have been accomplished, if only so far to a minor extent, in France is due to two factors: the advance in France of the class struggle toward a revolutionary crisis; and, second, the direct intervention of the Bolshevik-Leninists in the internal development of the French Socialist party.
From even so brief a survey of the social democracy, a conclusion of primary importance emerges: Understood concretely, in terms of historical actuality, that is of change, movement, and development, the parties of the Second International stand today to the Left of the parties of the Third International. Even the programs of the Left Centrist groupings are far to the Left of the current program and strategy of the CI, as the positions on war so strikingly reveal. But more than this is involved. The fundamental point is that now (it is about now that we are speaking), in terms of the dynamics of development, the parties of the Second International contain within them far greater progressive potentialities than the Stalinist parties.  
III. A review of the present positions of the parties of the Second and Third Internationals provides the requisite background for a correct understanding of the problem of “organic unity” as it now presents itself to the labor movement.
Abstractly considered, in the full literal sense, “organic unity” refers to the actual fusion of the parties of the two Internationals, and of the two Internationals themselves. But this would be the completion of a process, and cannot be treated merely in the abstract. Actual organic unity has not of course been accomplished, nor indeed is it to be anticipated in the immediate future. But the process, the completion of which may be actual fusion, has already made an extensive beginning.
Let us review certain facts, some of which have been mentioned above, in another connection: The theory of social-Fascism has been entirely abandoned. In all countries the communist parties have either achieved, or are conducting mighty campaigns for, the united front in all fields with the respective parties of the Second International. In Germany and even more in Austria, local united fronts of the underground organizations are apparently widespread. In Great Britain the application for admission of the communist party to the Labour party has been formally made on a thoroughly capitulationist basis. In France the united front was established some time ago, and has been merged into the amorphous and reactionary People’s Front. In election campaigns the communist parties put forward increasingly fewer independent candidates, and support “labor” or non-working class candidates. The “red unions” have been almost wholly liquidated into the mass Federations which, in most countries, are under social democratic leadership. For the first time in a decade, last autumn, a meeting of the Second International heard spokesmen of the CI; and a majority of the parties represented declared for a united agreement, though action was postponed at the insistence of the dissenting minority. In all “democratic” countries, on the Ethiopian question, the communist parties have lined up with the Right wing of the social democracy.
The process is clearly illustrated in this country. Here the red unions are all back in the fold. Every day the campaigns in the Daily Worker for the united front, with sly hints about future “unity”, wax louder. Browder and Thomas are debating each other from New York to Chicago. The National Student League and the Student League for Industrial Democracy have been dissolved into the American Student Union. The Unemployment Councils are preparing to liquidate into the socialist-controlled Workers Alliance of America, and have already done so in many localities. The Young Communist. League, following the recent Congress of the Young Communist International and in line with its international orientation, has publicly proposed the actual fusion of the Young Communist League with the Young People’s Socialist League, and the merging of both into a broad “anti-Fascist” youth movement. In the labor defense field, the International Labor Defense, after so many desert years, is entering into united fronts with the socialist defense committee (e.g., on the Herndon and Scottsboro cases), and is bringing forward slogans of fusion of the defense organizations. Official socialist party observers were present at the third Congress of the American League against War and Fascism; and the communist party has expressed its willingness to dissolve the League into a united front grouping which will include the socialist party. Communist party members are being sent wholesale into the branches of the socialist party and the YPSL. In the November elections the communist party supported socialist party candidates in many instances throughout the country.
Whoever imagines that “organic unity” is a problem for the future which we can merely sit back and contemplate for the time being simply does not understand what organic unity means. Organic unity, not as an abstraction, but as a slogan and a process, is already operating, is already a powerful force in the international labor movement.  
IV. How far, then, will this process of “organic unity” go? Will it be carried to formal completion in the actual merging of the two Internationals and their national sections ?
There can be no doubt that, as a slogan and a process, organic unity will go much further than it has up to the present—though even this is a good distance. Of course, from the point of view of the Communist International, organic unity is only part of the total process, one important step on the present road. The Comintern aims not merely to swallow the parties of the Second International, but the “People’s Front”, and all that goes with it. In desperate fright, the Comintern strives to prepare, in time, a mass following in the democratic countries through which pressure can be put on the home governments to line up with the Soviet Union in the coming war, and to recruit solders to be sent into the imperialist armies against the states openly fighting against the Soviet Union—which the Soviet Union expects to be Japan and Germany. For this purpose, which is the key to the Comintern’s present policy, the organic unity development is not enough, but is an essential prerequisite.
The forces impelling the drive toward organic unity are, at first sight, irresistible. Above all, it must be understood that the full political basis for organic unity has already been laid. The Seventh Congress records the fact that no essential difference of principle now divides the two Internationals. It is an axiom of Marxism that organizational conclusions tend imperiously to follow from political premises. Today principled political considerations no longer block, but on the contrary, push together the two Internationals.
Secondly, as already indicated, the development of the war crisis, at least in its present direction, dictates organic unity. Stalin needs organic unity, above all in France, Great Britain, Czechoslovakia and the United States, as a step toward the People’s Front for defense of the Soviet Union through defense of the imperialist fatherland. Here, too, the perspective of Stalinism coincides with the perspective of social democracy and the major sections of the socialist parties in France, Czechoslovakia and Great Britain, and with the social-patriots within the divided Socialist party of the United States.
Thirdly, there is an unquestionable pressure of the masses of the workers both within and outside of the political parties toward unity in general and thus toward organic unity as a step apparently nearer the goal. The workers are wearied with the long years of division in the labor movement. They sense the imperative need for unity against the onslaught of reaction and war, but they do so in a confused manner, without understanding clearly the issues involved in the problem of unity; and thus they provide both fertile ground for the treacherous slogans of Stalinism and a pressure from below supplementing these slogans.
These three considerations might seem to make organic unity close to inevitable. Nevertheless, the process, upon further examination, is seen to run up against a contradiction, and it is not yet clear which side of the contradiction will carry the day.
It is true that, at the present moment, the political basis for organic unity is laid. But, though organizational conclusions ordinarily follow from political premises, they do not always do so in a uniform or rapid manner. There are bureaucratic obstacles which hinder completion. Thus, the social democratic bureaucracy naturally hesitates to give up its intrenched positions within “its own” organization. And, in the present instance, there are further obstacles.
Though there is now a temporary political coincidence in essential matters between the social democracy and Stalinism, the crucial fact remains that social democracy and Stalinism reach this position from different directions. Social democracy and Stalinism have been and remain the expression of different class forces and interests. The social democratic bureaucracy, in a crisis (war, insurrection), functions as the agent of finance capital within the ranks of the working class. The Stalinist bureaucracy, on the other hand, functions as the agent of the corrupt, parasitic and reactionary ruling strata of the Soviet Union—that is, of the workers’ state—within the ranks of the working class. For the moment, the interests of the two bureaucracies coincide, but because of the differing social roots, there can be no guarantee in advance that they will continue indefinitely in the future to coincide.
Stalinism must attempt to keep a free hand, to be in a position to make another sudden and sharp turn. For example, if the Franco-Soviet Pact should be repudiated, and a rapproachement between France and Germany take place, the entire Stalinist policy in France, and the war position of the CI as a whole would have to be profoundly altered. This would spike organic unity developments, since Blum and his companions of the SFIO leadership would in that event, though changing phrases, no doubt still remain basically devoted to the bourgeois fatherland.
For this reason, from the point of view of Stalinism, organic unity is immensely useful as a slogan and in most of its initial phases, but would have grave dangers if carried all the way through. Stalin may find himself in such a tight spot as to have to go through with it, or may find his hold on the rank and file becoming too overwhelming to oppose; but it would unquestionably serve the purposes of Stalinism better to allow organic unity to operate, extensively indeed, but short of consummation in the actual fusion of the two Internationals.
There is another obstacle, of a very different kind, to the completion of the Stalinist capitulatory conception of organic unity. This is the opposition which it meets and will meet from the Left. Such opposition is not yet articulate within the communist parties, and, because of their monolithic structure and the systematic mis-education of the membership, has a discouraging prospect in any attempt to come to the surface. Nevertheless it is hard to believe that it will not slowly take form among the proletarian sections still under Stalinist influence, and finally break out, perhaps in a major upheaval. But it is at present and in the immediate future within the Leftward moving sections of the socialist parties that we find and shall find opposition to the organic unity movement from the Left. It is already present, though still for the most part in a confused form.
Opposition from the Right wing of social democracy, of course, still continues, appealing largely to memories of the “Third Period” and doubts as to the “sincerity” of the Stalinists. Such opposition, however, is a comparatively minor matter. The Stalinists are “sincere” enough, in all conscience, and the “Third Period” is already a hazy antique. The line of the CI on the key questions is the line of Right wing social democracy. No opposition from the Right, therefore, can stand up indefinitely against the inroads of Stalinism. Only opposition from the Left can be meaningful and effective.
There are, in the socialist parties, growing numbers of Leftward moving members who are coming to realize doubts about Stalinist organic unity which are not at all based on memories of the “Third Period” or worries over sincerity. Rather are they arising from the spectacle of Stalinist capitulation, above all from Stalinist social-patriotism. They begin to wonder whether “one inclusive united party” will be so beneficial to the working class, if it is to be an anti-revolutionary party, a party of social-patriotism to serve as recruiting agent in the coming war. It is in the development of such conceptions that the agitation and activities of the revolutionists become of crucial and decisive importance. Against the treachery of Stalinism only the revolutionary Marxian position can stand. And likewise, only the Marxian program and the conscious intervention of the Marxists can bring the Leftward moving socialists to a full understanding of the meaning of their partly formed opposition to Stalinism, and the revolutionary implications of their development.  
V. The imperative, the absolutely necessary requirement of the present epoch is the re-groupment of the revolutionists, the unity of the revolutionary forces on the basis of a revolutionary program in the re-creation of the party of Marx and of Lenin—that is, in the Fourth International. To this task, all other tasks are secondary. Success in this task alone can defeat Fascism, can alone utilize the coming imperialist war for the overthrow of finance-capital and the triumph of the workers. Unity? Yes! But revolutionary, Marxian unity. This alone will answer.
The Stalinist organic unity party, like the entire organic unity process, would be not the party of the proletarian vanguard, of revolutionary internationalism, but the party of capitulation, of social-patriotic betrayal. Of this there can be no doubt. The Stalinist drive for organic unity is, in the present concrete circumstances (and, once again, it is about these that we are talking), not in any sense a leading of the masses forward along the revolutionary path, but, precisely, a conspiracy to prevent, to shut off and turn aside the growingly conscious workers from development toward a revolutionary position; to disorient and confuse the workers; to swing their eyes toward a blind and hopeless alley; and, finally, to betray the masses to the war. Cynically, brutally, Stalinism exploits and manipulates the genuine, legitimate and altogether healthy desire of the masses for unity, for its own ends—the interests of the treacherous bureaucracy of the Soviet Union.
Unity, yes. But what kind of unity? With what kind of content? For the political party these two questions are all important. In the mass organizations they are less paramount—in their case, unity at any, or almost any, cost, though of course the best possible kind under the circumstances, and a chance for the revolutionists to work within them. But politically, nothing can be more deceptive than the conception of unity in the abstract. What is needed is not abstract unity, but concrete unity of the revolutionary forces. What, after all, is the great type of political unity in modern times? It is national unity, the “sacred union” of all classes in the bourgeois state. And the Stalinist version of “organic unity”, especially carried through to the stage of “People’s Front unity”, is nothing else than a second-hand edition of national unity. The same suppression of potential social conflicts, the same demagogic program, the same blurring of class lines.
We are asked, “Are the Marxists against unity? Will they stand in the way, to sabotage and disrupt?” Certainly not. The Marxists are for unity, for the only unity which can have any possibility of advancing the cause of the proletariat. But the Marxists are against reformism, against Centrism, against Stalinism, against these and every other form of betrayal of the workers. For unity, yes: for revolutionary unity.
But the road to revolutionary unity is neither simple nor direct. Its course cannot be wholly plotted in advance. Perhaps—and this is not yet clear—it may lie through such a party of organic unity as would be created through the merging of the Second and Third Internationals. This may not be true—for one obvious reason, because the merger may never take place. Again, it may be forestalled, and the basis for revolutionary unification may be laid, with the help of a strong and Leninist application of the united front as a means both to weld together the masses, and to isolate the Stalinists and reformists alike. The latter possibility depends decisively upon the course of the development of the Left socialists. But even if the road lies through a party of organic unity, the basic and essential task remains the same. Union of the Second and Third Internationals and their programs—that is, the combination of the errors and betrayals of social democracy and Stalinism—can in no degree solve the problem of revolutionary unity. Within such a party, as now when that party is still a slogan, a process and a perspective, the solution would be and could only be: the break with reformism, Stalinism and Centrism, the regroupment of the revolutionists under the program of Leninism. Then, as now, the solution of the problem of revolutionary unity is nothing else than the building of the Fourth International.
John WEST

  Certain recent developments in the foreign policy of the Roosevelt Administration have been receiving less than the attention they deserve. I refer specifically to a new stage openly announced by Roosevelt in his Annual Message to Congress. In that address, Roosevelt lavished a considerable oratorical effort in painting contrasting pictures of dark, war-laden, tyranny-ridden Europe, on the one hand, and the enlightened, happy and peace-enshrined Americas on the other. The possible inaccuracy of the picture is not important. No doubt, to an imperialist spokesman, such minor disturbances as the Chaco War (the peace treaty has not yet been signed), revolutions in Cuba, violent strikes, insurrections and dictatorial coups in Venezuela, Brazil, Chile, etc., are entirely compatible with peace as imperialism understands peace. But Roosevelt was of course speaking for more than the sake of rhetorical effect.  An “American League of Nations”? The remarks in the Annual Message are being rapidly followed up. Feelers have gone out, looking toward a general conference of the Pan-American nations. The Administration publicity has been vague and inconclusive in stating the purpose of this conference. One report has it that an “American League of Nations” will be proposed. Another states merely that it will attempt to coordinate the various treaties between the American nations in order to provide for a general treaty system guaranteeing peace on these two continents. A third suggests a revision of the Monroe Doctrine from its present status as a “unilateral” policy of the U.S. alone to a “multilateral” declaration of policy on the part of all the American nations. The particular character and possible results of this proposed conference are not decisive. What must be understood is that American imperialism at this time sees it fit and proper to restate publicly to the world its traditional contention that the exploitation of the American continents is the privileged and special function of the bourgeoisie of the U.S.; and that in the “New World” all others must come a bad second. The time is indeed propitious. Europe is occupied with grave internal crisis. England, besides being directly involved in the immediate European crisis, faces widespread disturbances throughout her colonial empire. Japan is going steadily forward in her announced policy of reducing, the Far East to her province, and at the present moment neither England nor the U.S. is yet ready to challenge Japan openly. What, then, could be more appropriate than a reminder to the rest of the world from the U.S. that in the struggle for the re-division of the world – now entering the stage of armed conflict – the nations of the Americas are a closed sphere? And, when the reminder is accompanied by the greatest military and naval budget in the peacetime history of any country, it gains much more than abstract significance.  World Interests of the U.S. It must not be imagined that by announcing proprietorship in the Americas, the U.S. is giving up interests in the rest of the world. The ravenous needs of U.S. finance-capital are not so easily satisfied. The U.S. requires also its outlets elsewhere, especially in the Far East. Japan cannot be allowed to march indefinitely without opposition – either through guns or some more “friendly” diplomatic arrangement. But the present stake in the East is not yet so high as that in the Americas; and the U.S. is not at present required to take action. Leading influence in the Americas, however, is a constant, enduring, and minimum requirement for U.S. imperialism. The pale liberals, who like us to believe that the U.S. is not an imperialist nation in the full sense of the word, are fond of pointing to its lack of colonies – in contrast, for example, to Great Britain – to its respect for small nations, its rejection of “territorial ambitions” in noble opposition to the greedy tyrants of the Old World. Such a view is extremely useful to the war-makers, who know that they can enlist the masses in support only of such high-sounding and idealistic purposes as the defense of democracy, freedom, the rights of the weak. And such a view is as false and treacherous as all the other phases of the betrayers.  Colonies of U.S. Imperialism We must not be deceived by forms. A colony is not a colony, in the basic economic meaning, merely because it is called so. Many names are used: dominion, mandate, “free state,” sphere of influence, “union,” even kingdom and empire, are all, for example, names which England employs. A colony means in the economic sense a territory relatively undeveloped industrially which is under the economic domination of some powerful nation, which is exploited primarily by the bourgeoisie of that nation. Such economic domination carries with it inevitably a greater or lesser degree of political domination. When the government of the dominant nation controls the basic direction of the policies of the subject territory, particularly in the sphere of “foreign relations,” that territory is a colony in political as well as economic fact, no matter what name may be used, no matter what the “legal” standing, In the basic sense, Mexico, the nations of Central America, many of the Caribbean islands (e.g„ Cuba, Porto Rico, Santo Domingo) and to a lesser degree many of the South American countries (especially Venezuela, Peru, Colombia, Bolivia), and even Canada, are part of the colonial system of U.S. imperialism. This is a fact well known to U.S. capitalists and to the U.S. government. It is obviously revealed, in one direction, by the heavy government subsidies to the U.S. ships [1] operating within this system, and by the extension of Pan-American Airways with the help of much greater subsidies than those given to any other air line. The War Department analyses of the relative strength of the great powers in material resources necessary to carry on the next war treat these territories as colonies of the U.S. in exactly the same sense that the various dominions are treated as colonies of England.  American Capital In these nations the basic industries are almost all carried on by U.S. capital. United Fruit handles most of Central America – not only the orchards (the chief industry), but railroads, communications, etc. Standard Fruit exploits the orchards of Mexico. The oil fields of Mexico, Venezuela, Bolivia, are chiefly in U.S. hands. The silver, copper, and gold mines of Peru and Mexico are owned and run by Cerroda Pasca and the Hearst interests. General Motors, Ford and Chrysler provide the automobiles and trucks and build factories in Canada and assembly plants in the other countries. The sugar industry of Cuba is owned through the great New York banks. The U.S. Utilities and Communications companies operate the power, light, and communications systems. Roads and government works have been built in the period since the war primarily through the huge exportation of U.S. capital – passed on to the U.S. investors in bonds now mostly in default or fantastically depreciated. Every interstice of the economic structure of these nations is plugged with U.S. capital. In addition, quite naturally, the basic political policies of these nations is [sic!] controlled by Washington. The gloved and friendly hand of “the good neighbor” is supplemented whenever necessary by the iron of battleships and marines.  Growth of U.S. Influence The present relationship between the U.S. and these nations has, of course, been developed over along period of time, indeed for more than a century. Its first grandiose prophecy was the announcement of the Monroe Doctrine itself, in 1823, This, however, was much more than the young nation could have swallowed by itself in that period. It was made possible only because at that time it fitted into the plans of England, then jockeying in the European arena against the Holy Alliance of Prussia, Austria and Russia. Since then the hegemony of the U.S. has been steadily built up, developed not by the words of diplomatic notes and public speeches, but by the actual relationship of forces among the contending powers. England has always remained the principal contender, and her superb drill and tradition in such matters, added to her dominant position during the 19th century, gave her often the advantage – particularly in such longer term projects as the building of railroads (Argentine, Chile) and in getting the chief trade in “hardware” for English manufacturers. Before the war, Germany came rapidly forward, and threatened both England and the U.S. in South America. But defeat in the War sent Germany a long way back. England remained and continues, and now Japan emerges more and more clearly, aggressively thrusting her cheap textiles and miscellaneous manufactures into the South American market.  Looking Forward to War The U.S., the most vigorous and powerful nation of the rotting capitalist world, looks to the future. U.S. imperialism sees the war approaching. And already it aims to utilize the war crisis to strengthen its stranglehold on the Americas, to reinforce its own colonial system. From this as a basis, its eyes go out to the potentialities of the war itself: to the chance of remaining aloof, in splendid isolation, until the warring powers approach mutual exhaustion, and then stepping in to decide the issue, and to hold the whip hand on a world scale. U.S. Marxists must follow with increasing care the course of the U.S. “Pan-American” policy, and the events within the Central and South American countries. Above all, relations between the revolutionists of these nations and those of the U.S. must be greatly and rapidly strengthened. In the majority of these nations, as even a brief survey proves, the revolutionary struggle is identical with ours: in the most direct sense it is precisely the struggle against U.S. imperialism. Their victories, consequently, are our victories, and we are defeated in their defeats.  Note by ETOL 1. Inthe printed version “shops”. 
  COLD and sober analysis is necessary in order to estimate at their true value the results of the French elections. Demagogues, liberals, and reformists are at liberty to spin out dreams and illusions; it is the business of Marxists to base their theoretical and practical conclusions on an understanding of reality. If we were to accept the Stalinist account of the French elections, we would now believe that the danger of Fascism in France has passed, that the crisis in France is in a position to be solved rapidly and tranquilly under the benign aegis of the People’s Front majority. Unfortunately, we remember other Stalinist accounts of other events: We remember how, in the autumn of 1932, the decline in the Nazi vote in Germany proved to the satisfaction of the Comintern analysts that the power of Hitler was broken and would soon disappear; and how, in March 1933, it was so stirringly prophecied by these same brave augurs that Hitler could not remain in power longer than a bare six months. A glance at the bourgeois press during the past few days might alone be enough to cause a doubt or two to begin with. The Wall Street Journal records itself as well satisfied with the outcome. The Times notes that little difficulty is to be expected from sudden changes in French foreign policy, since all of the French political parties have based their programs on solid proposals for strong national defense. The New York Evening Post, in a long editorial, notes that the elections were a great blow both at fascism “and at communism.” Ludwig Lore, in his Post column, in the midst of his song of victory, pauses parenthetically to observe that the program of the People’s Front is no more radical than Roosevelt’s New Deal. In France itself, the “repudiated” premier, Sarraut, was so overwhelmed – as not to find it necessary even to resign. What has changed in France? What is the significance of these elections? Without doubt, the elections record the movement further to the left of large sections of the French proletariat and the lower peasantry. This is marked sufficiently by the spectacular increase in the Communist vote, and the substantial increase in the Socialist vote, making the representation of the latter party the largest in the new Chamber. This, in turn, is a symbol of the deeper process which has been unfolding in France during the past three years: the gradual cleavage of the French population into the two mighty divisions of the basically opposing class forces. But, first and last in commenting upon these elections, it must be observed that the increase in the votes of the working-class parties occurred at the expense not of the Right but of the Center – of the Radical Socialist and the lesser petty-bourgeois parties. The parties of the Right, far from losing strength, actually gained more than twenty seats in the new Chamber. Thus, even on the electoral field, we find on examination that the “mighty blow to reaction” turns out to be the hallucination of bureaucratic minds: the Right emerges from the elections not weaker but stronger. The increase in the votes of the working-class parties, as well as the increase on the Right was, then, accomplished at the expense of the parties of the Center, above all of the Radical Socialists. The Radical Socialist Party, for many years the largest parliamentary party in France, will enter the new Chamber with approximately twenty fewer representatives than the Socialist Party. Thus these elections demonstrate incontestably the truth of the Marxist prediction that under the impact of the process of basic class differentiation the petty-bourgeois parties of the Center must necessarily disintegrate, their following sifting out into one class division or the other. The relations in the Chamber do not, however, indicate by any means the full extent of the disintegration of the Radical Socialists. Further evidence is provided by the fact that many of the most popular traditional leaders of the Radical Socialists – including Herriot himself – failed to secure election in the first day of voting, and were returned on the second ballot only with the support of the Communists and Socialists; and in a number of cases lost out altogether. The disintegration of the Radical Socialists is both symbol and proof of the fact that the crisis in France is too deep to permit of solution along the customary lines of modern French politics. For decades the French bourgeoisie has maintained its social and economic dictatorship through the utilization of the Radical Socialists as its chief governmental agents. The Radical Socialist leaders, in turn, maintained the support of their mass petty-bourgeois following for French imperialism. But today the results of the profound and continuing economic depression and the approach of the new war demand a sterner answer. The alternative is posed to France: Fascism or Socialism; and the alternative is inescapable. Thus the voice of the Radical Socialist preachers of “the middle way” is lost in the rising social tumult. And their following slips out of their hands, to the right and to the left. If is in the light of this process of differentiation that the strategy of the People’s Front policy must be judged. And, so judged, it is seen to be precisely the betrayal of the revolutionary struggle which the realities of French society places on the order of the day. Nothing could make this clearer than the recent elections. The Radical Socialist Party, its policies and its leadership, stand discredited before the French masses. Its policies have led to nothing but disaster; its leaders have been openly shown to be shot through with every form of corruption and venality. And, at just the time when this is becoming apparent to the consciousness of the masses, the working class parties form a bloc with the Radical Socialists – which puts forward as its program exactly the program of the Radical Socialists; which accepts as its outstanding leaders, both in and out of Parliament, these same repudiated Radical Socialist chiefs; and which in the elections throws the working-class vote over to the Radical Socialist candidates. When every demand of history and every teaching of Marxism called for an open and intransigent revolutionary proletarian policy, for the hastening of the dissolution of the Radical Socialist party by resolutely drawing the lower strata of its following behind the proletarian ranks under the banner of a revolutionary program, the Stalinists and Socialists of France have, through the People’s Front, been engaged in exhausting the energies of the proletariat for the sake of – slowing down the dissolution of the Radical Socialists, bolstering up their credit and prestige with the masses, salvaging their bankrupt program, and aiding them in their loyal task of preventing the preparations for revolutionary struggle. The disillusionment of the petty-bourgeois masses with Radical Socialism will not be permanently altered by changing the name of Radical Socialism to the People’s Front. Why should they pick up again what they have discarded merely for the sake of a pretty new label? Already, the elections show, they are in large numbers turning not to the left but to the right, where at least there are confident leaders to speak out boldly for a new road and a new solution. The continuation of the People’s Front policy means that this trend of the petty bourgeoisie will necessarily continue and increase. When the blows of history strip off the new clothes of the People’s Front to show more obviously the Radical Socialist skeleton beneath, it will lose what attractive power it now has for the petty bourgeoisie, and they will drift faster toward the fascist camp. The proletariat can win and hold the petty bourgeois masses only by drawing them in under its own revolutionary banner, never by creeping in under the tattered petty-bourgeois tent. What has been changed in France by these elections, hailed by the swarm of liberals, reformists, and social-patriots as the dawn of France’s salvation? Essentially, nothing. Even in the Chamber of Deputies, in spite of the electoral shift, the basic relations are unaltered. The Communist and Socialist parties together have only about 35% of the votes in the Chamber. Thus they can control legislation and governmental policy only with the assistance of the Radical Socialists, who have about 20%. But this means that all measures actually taken will have to be Radical Socialist measures, and that any type or variation of a People’s Front government could be in practice only another Radical Socialist government. The Radical Socialists keep the same relative position which they held in the last Chamber. In many important respects, the nominal majority of the People’s Front taken together with the minority position of the working-class parties is an added danger rather than an improvement. For example, it enables the French bourgeoisie to carry through any social and economic measures which they see fit, from wage reductions to devaluation to war, and at the same time to slough off all responsibility for such measures on to the People’s Front In this way, the bourgeoisie can convincingly maintain before the French masses that the continuing and increasing ills from which they suffer are actually due to the People’s Front and its inspirers, the working-class parties. Thug the basis is laid for unanswerable propaganda to weaken the mass standing and authority of Socialism and Communism, and to draw the petty bourgeoisie and even many layers of the working class to the only other road – to Fascism. It will be observed that it is the policy of the People’s Front which has placed the working class parties in this equivocal and possibly fatal position. To date, in drawing up the balance sheet of the People’s Front, the Socialist and Communist parties have paid out: revolutionary theory, revolutionary policies, revolutionary strategy; and have received: a paper majority for the People’s Front – which is either no majority at all, or a majority for the Radical Socialists, since the majority can be maintained only at the whim and pleasure of the Radical Socialists. But Such a majority, far from representing an asset, is only an additional liability, burdening the working class parties with all the heavy debts and crimes of Radical Socialism. The election results do not alter by a hair’s breadth the underlying causes of the French crisis. Unemployment, low wages, high costs, the increasing misery of the lower strata of the peasantry, high taxes, the threat of devaluation, the approach of war: these remain now as they were a month ago. And every year of modern history, especially every year since the last War, proves that the reformist schemes of the People’s Front cannot change materially for the better a single one of them. Every lesson of our times teaches that they demand as the single possible answer: the workers’ revolution and socialism. And the French Fascists? Defeated by the parliamentary warriors of the People’s Front? Buried beneath the clouds of ballots? The very conception is sufficiently ludicrous. The Fascists participated only to a small degree in the elections. For the most part, they swung their votes to the traditional Right parties, many of the leaders of which are more openly moving toward a Fascist position in recent months. Meanwhile, the ranks of the Fascists are intact. Their knives and revolvers and machine guns and armored cars and tanks and airplanes are safe and growing in number. Their influence in the army is mounting. They prepare systematically, in their own fashion, for the struggle ahead. And French finance-capital directs their progress, holding them temporarily in check from too precipitous action before it is needed. Finance-capital makes it its business to learn from history: and the lessons of Italy, Germany and Austria were not taught it in vain. It knows that crucial political issues are not settled by ballots. The proletariat of France will do well to follow such an example. Its basic struggle must be transferred from parliament to the streets and the countryside. The subordination of the proletariat to the program and tactics of the petty bourgeoisie through the People’s Front must be resolutely broken. The People’s Front itself must be smashed through, and in its place, to secure concerted and coordinated action, must be built the fighting united front of the workers, which will draw behind it the lower ranks of the petty bourgeoisie. The revolutionary slogans must be brought before the masses, and made concrete in action; and to meet the armed bands of the Fascists, the workers’ defense must be armed and organized. The answer to the crisis of France must he given boldly: the workers’ revolution. But each of these tasks, without the accomplishment of which the workers of France are doomed to the fate of their German comrades, demands as its first and decisive precondition the reassembling of the revolutionary forces of the French proletariat, the forging of the revolutionary party, which can alone achieve the victory. 
  The Donkey and the Elephant are now getting their preliminary rub-downs in preparation for their formal entry into the world’s greatest puppet show, the last act of which is scheduled for the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November. The Nominating Conventions will he held in June, and for the next six months the well paid publicists will use their energy and money in trying to persuade the citizens of this country that their lives, liberties, and general happiness depend on marking the cross on the appropriate side of the ballot. The Election Campaign started this year earlier than usual. Its first big gun was fired by Roosevelt in the form of his Annual Message to Congress, a procedure which the Republicans felt was a distinctly unprincipled abuse of the privileges of his office. The Republicans managed, however, to follow up during the next six weeks with a barrage of grotesquely ghost-written speeches by Hoover, a studiously meaningless statement by Landon, Talmadge’s ill-fated Grass Roots gathering, and a heavy offensive thru-out, their press. Neatly padded statistics were issued weekly to show that the people were ready to throw New Deal policies on the garbage pile.  Point, Counter-Point Things quieted down, to be revived on both sides during the past months. The Republicans surprise themselves by announcing a brand new Brain Trust all their own – naturally non-partisan in character, whose public-spirited function it will be merely to demonstrate in the most objective scientific manner conceivable how Roosevelt is leading the country to destruction. They continue to observe that Marx reigns as the guardian deity of New Deal Washington. The Democrats have more substantial weapons at hand for the counter-attack: they utilize the investigations of the Congressional Committees to secure frontpage agitation against the Tories, and to show the public that the Republicans plan to turn the government over openly to Morgan and DuPont. Roosevelt mounted his white horse again at Baltimore to ride at the head of the nation’s youth, and to promise once more security for all. It is, of course, a foregone conclusion that Roosevelt will be renominated on the first ballot at the Democratic Convention. There will be a few squabbles over the wording of the platform, but in the end it will be worked out according to the Roosevelt pattern. The Annual Message and the Baltimore address make clear what this will be: Roosevelt will lean back on the New Deal slogans of his first campaign, and will appeal to the voters on the basis of the “left” promises which he is so gracious in formulating. The old melody needs little tuning up: denunciation of the Tories, of the selfish few, of those who would rob the people of their liberties; concern for the common man; the great aims of social security and neighborliness; protection and aid for agriculture; against the corruptions of the mighty; for a true peoples’ government. An admirable program, in short, for a genuine People’s Front. The Democrats are abandoning hope of toning down the attacks in the Republican press, since they find that every publicly avowed protestation of friendship for big business only spurs the Republicans to new heights. They are falling back, there ore, into a purer form of demagogy.  The Republican Scramble The Republicans have a somewhat more difficult, and less rewarding task. They are confronted with a most undignified scramble for the Presidential nomination. Landon, Borah, Knox, and Hoover are now in the lead, with Landon out in front at the moment. Landon, however, is suffering from the too ardent kiss of Hearst, and none of these four seem to have sufficient support to secure nomination on an early ballot. The old-line politicians maintain tight control of the Convention through the device of having “uninstructed delegates” elected from most of the states; and it is not improbable that they will engineer the nomination of a compromise dark horse – perhaps Vandenberg of Michigan, or Stelwer of Oregon, the latter of whom has been selected as the Keynoter for the Convention. The Republicans will have somewhat more trouble than the Democrats over the wording of their platform, particularly because of the strategic position in which Borah may find himself. As a concession to Borah, they will no doubt take care to point out that the Republican Party is the genuinely liberal party in terms of the true American tradition, and that the great task before us is to prevent the tyranny of the state over the individual, to guard our cherished liberties from socialistic regimentation, and to oust the soviet from the White House. They will then go on to show that this means a sound monetary system, balancing of the federal budget, ending of corruption and extravagance, and a cessation of interference with legitimate business.  Aim of the G.O.P. Struggle It can hardly be thought, however, that the Republicans seriously believe that they have a chance in November. Every indication is for a decisive victory for Roosevelt. The struggle for Republican nomination, therefore, is largely a struggle for control of the Republican Party’ machinery and what this can bring apart from actual possession of the Federal Administration And, apart from this, the Republican campaign will be run not so much to try to secure election as to put continuous pressure on Roosevelt to prevent him from getting too far out of line with the aims of the industrialists and financiers back of the Republican Party; an object which is not so difficult when it is remembered that these aims correspond in all important respects with the aims of the industrialists and financiers back of the Democratic Party. It is hardly necessary to point out that, words and slogans aside, in their concrete significance programs and activities, there is at the present time no important difference between the two parties. They both represent, from top to bottom, the fundamental social interests of the big bourgeoisie, of finance-capital. The axis of the aims of each is simply to keep capitalism going, with the largest possible percentage of its fruits going to the bourgeoisie. On the central question confronting the United States (and every other) government – the war question – there is no dispute even in words between the two parties. Both see the next war approaching rapidly and inevitably, and plan to have the United States in a position to enter it in its later stages to reap the largest reward from the re-division of the world. Roosevelt has successfully carried through the largest peace-time armament budget in the history’ of this or any other country; and no Republican cry for economy has ever mentioned the armament expenditures. Even the D.A.R. and Hearst have recently praised Roosevelt in public for his devotion to the “national defense”, and on this subject there are no stricter judges.  Differences Superficial Doubtless the two parties differ to some degree in the details of their schemes for managing the political aspect of the great bourgeois business of exploiting the masses. For example, there is more sentiment for direct relief as opposed to work relief in the Republican than in the Democratic Party. Nevertheless, the difference here also is largely on the surface. Both are agreed that relief should be kept as low as is compatible with the prevention of too much mass resentment. The Republicans talk more about a “balanced budget”, but they, like Roosevelt, are not willing to levy sufficient new taxation to attain it; and there are as many inflationists among the Republicans as among the Democrats. The differences in general tariff policy between the two parties have disappeared; and there remains only individual deals on tariffs involving individual backers of the respective parties. The Democrats have, it is true, a more aggressive farm policy; but this is largely an ideological difference – one of the differences in the means by which the two try to maintain their mass bases, rather than any fundamental cleavage. There was once a day when these two parties faced each other with lines sharply drawn, when they presented themselves to the country as the political representatives of two mortally opposed classes together with their subordinate allies. Through them the slaveholders of the South fought it out against the industrialists and merchants of the East. But this issue required a Civil War, not merely an election, to settle. And as a necessary part of that mighty struggle for state power, the Republican Party was led to wipe out utterly the class which opposed it, first in part by arms, and then by uprooting the social basis upon which it was constituted. In the succeeding years the bourgeoisie consolidated its victory, and finance-capital replaced the industrialists and merchants.  The Only Major Struggle Henceforth the only major social struggle is between imperialist finance-capital and the proletariat. This struggle is not yet, however, reflected to any important extent in the parliamentary domain, and cannot be directly expressed in any possible contest between the Republican and Democratic parties. Consequently, the masses, in choosing between them, have only the question – as Marx expressed it – of which group of brigands they shall elect to take the lead for four years in exploiting them. Nevertheless, even the electoral contest between these two parties is not without social significance. For one thing, the business of government has become the biggest of all businesses, and there is a genuine rivalry in determining who shall have the right to its profits. But much more important than this, the elections are a major means for spreading illusions among the masses, for preventing the masses from understanding what the true issues of modern society actually are. Exaggerating the appearance of differences between the two parties aids the bourgeoisie in sustaining the belief on the part of the masses that it is a vital question for them whether the next Administration is Republican or Democratic. Thus the masses are hindered from learning that the only political struggle of real importance for them is the struggle not against one or another of the parties, but against the bourgeois state itself in its entirety, is the struggle for the overthrow of the state. But it is doubtful that this illusion can be sustained much longer by the quadrennial electoral contest between Republicans and Democrats. The puppet show is becoming too unconvincing. Consequently. the bourgeoisie will have to turn to a new device to stave off the mass growth of revolutionary pol itical struggle against the state. Two devices are possible: a mass Fascist movement – though the time for that has not yet come, and probably will not for some years; or a reformist party – a People’s or Labor or Farmer-Labor or Progressive Party – whereby the beginnings of deep revolt can be channelized into safe directions. Preparations for the latter alternative are already under way. Indeed, Roosevelt himself has transformed the Democratic Party a considerable distance along the path, and, with the active help of the trade union bureaucracy, is making it into the “Labor Party of 1936”. Labor’s Non-Partisan League, supporting Roosevelt this year, is jockeying into a position where later it can gather up the leftward movement of the masses into an avowed Labor Party, under firm anti-revolutionary control. Only one strategy can defeat this perspective: revolutionary strategy, revolutionary agitation and organization. The reformist distinctions between “friends” and “enemies” among the bourgeoisie, between the Liberty League and Farley, between the Supreme Court and Congress, between Hearst and The Times or Scripps-Howard, merely plays the game of Roosevelt this year, and the subtler game of the Third Party advocates in the years to come. Our attack must be against capitalism; our struggle must be for socialism. And for this attack and this struggle there is one, and only one, political weapon: the revolutionary party. Our task is to forge this weapon. There is no other that will serve.   


In the recent New York State Primaries, both in New York City and
 upstate, the Militant Socialists won a substantial and decisive
 majority over the Old Guard. This result is particularly important in
 its prophecy of an equally progressive outcome to next month’s
 national convention of the Socialist Party. Prom every
 forward-looking point of view, this repudiation of the Old Guard
 represents a genuine step in advance not merely for the Socialist
 Party itself, but for the developing labor movement in this country
 as a whole.
The extent of the victory of the Militants exceeded most
 predictions, even those of the Militants themselves. It is important
 and necessary to understand what accounts for the result.
Basically – as we have on numerous occasions pointed out –
 the factional struggle within the Socialist Party reflects new
 processes of ferment and differentiation which have been taking place
 within the advanced sections of the working class as a result of the
 Spanish, German, and Austrian events, the intensification of the war
 crisis, and the character of the post-1929 economic crisis. The
 ferment and differentiation are not, of course, confined to this
 country, but are reproduced in an analogous manner on an
 international scale. The central lesson drawn from the world events,
 with varying degrees of clarity, by increasing sections of workers
 within the orbit of the Second International has been: traditional
 social-democratic reformism is bankrupt, and serves only to lead the
 working class to disaster, and to sacrifice the working class to
 finance-capital in every crisis – to fascism as readily as to
 imperialist war.
This is, it will be observed, the negative half of the lesson
 which must be drawn if the full positive potentialities of these
 developments are to be achieved. It is necessary not merely to
 understand that social-democratic reformism is bankrupt ; but,
 positively, to break sharply from Social-democracy; and this sharp
 break can be decisively accomplished only by embracing and adhering
 firmly to the principles of revolutionary Marxism. Half-way measures
 and ambiguities can provide a partial and temporary solution, can
 make possible even certain victories on the road; but anything less
 than the full conclusion will in the end cut short the progressive
 development, will route the advancing workers back to reformism,
 aside into the death-house of Stalinism, or down into futile
 isolation.
At each stage of the development, the basic underlying process
 appears only to a limited and to some degree distorted extent on the
 surface. The political differentiation takes on in the struggle an
 organizational form; and for a while it is the organizational contest
 which appears as paramount over the political issues – though
 it is the latter which in the long run determine the organizational
 expressions. The opposing slogans hide as often as they reveal the
 basic questions. Nevertheless, the process and the movement continue,
 and gradually re-shape the slogans. 
Two Decisive Factors
The New York Primaries fight, itself a stage in the larger
 struggle, is highly instructive as an aid to our understanding of the
 process as a whole, if we examine the specific and immediate factors
 which account for the sweeping victory of the Militants, the
 following two seem to have been decisive:

The Old Guard openly and consistently conducted its fight on
	the basis of conservative social-democratic reformism. Their
	campaign was a campaign of furious Red-baiting, in which the New
	Leader accused the Militants every week of being dyed-in-the-wool
	Communists, reds, Trotskyists, and revolutionists. But the majority
	of the dues-paying party members and the non-party enrolled
	Socialist voters have already absorbed the negative half of the
	lesson of the past three years; they have become convinced that
	hardened reformism is useless and worse than useless. Thus, this
	campaign of the Old Guard, though consistent and on the whole ably
	conducted, lost rather than gained support, recommended the
	Militants to the members rather than frightened the members away.
	The case of the Old Guard against the Militants was, in the
	eyes of the majority of the membership the best case that could be
	made for the Militants. In this sense, it might be said that
	the New Leader was the most effective agitational organ of
	the Militants; politically speaking, more effective than their own
	Socialist Call. 

Ranks Activized

A different kind of factor played almost an equally important
	role in this Primary struggle. For the first time in years, under
	the leadership of the Militants in the past few months, the
	Socialist Party of New York State showed real signs of activity. The
	Militants sent organizers up-state, renewed branches, made speaking
	tours, sent out communications, increased their participation in
	strikes and demonstrations. They conducted debates with the
	Stalinists – and out-debated them. The party felt some new
	blood in its veins. The Old Guard had completely neglected the rank
	and file of the party. And. indeed, the Old Guard is not greatly
	interested in the rank and file. It rests on institutions like the
	Forward, on the trade union bureaucracy, on fat retainers from the
	unions for Old Guard lawyers, on appointments by LaGuardia. In many
	ways, a rank and file is an inconvenience to the Old Guard. The
	membership was undoubtedly strongly impressed by this difference
	between the Old Guard and the Militant leadership. They responded to
	the Militant appeal for “an active, effective Socialist
	Party.” They linked this slogan for “a democratic,
	inclusive party,” and saw that together they meant a resolve
	to bring the Socialist Party out of the backwater in which it had
	been sleeping for a decade into the broader stream of the mass
	movement. Many members doubtless cast their votes for the Militants
	on this basis rather than from the more complex theoretic
	consideration – though the two are not, of course, unrelated.

The character of the struggle of the Old Guard is very strikingly
 shown by the issue of the New Leader (dated April 11) which
 followed the Primaries. Indeed, this issue sums up in brief the whole
 nature of the Old Guard. Significantly, we find a repeated insistence
 that their fight is a fight “for principle”; and repeated
 references to themselves as “Social Democrats” and to
 their principles as the principles of “Social Democracy.”
 Their fight, they make clear, is absolutely uncompromising and
 intransigent. 
“Voice of Social Democracy”
“The voice of Social Democracy,” they threaten, “will
 be heard in Cleveland” (at the national convention). “The
 Social Democrats in the party,” they warn, “know no
 surrender. They have just begun to fight.” In an editorial
 headed Our Eight for Principles they herald the approaching
 end of the present struggle – “The long struggle of the
 New Leader for fundamental principles and policies is drawing
 to a close ...”
The feature article on the New Leader’s Anniversary
 Banquet quotes from the speech of Louis Waldman:
“Ours was not a fight, as some tried to make people
 believe, for the continuance in power of our side of the Socialist
 Party but for the fundamental program of Social Democracy. From that
 program we shall not recede, no matter who is in control of the
 Socialist Party.”
This issue of the New Leader, furthermore, makes entirely
 clear what the Old Guard understands the fundamental program of
 Social Democracy to be. No opportunity is overlooked to crack down on
 “dictatorship” and to uphold “democracy”:
 that is, to attack the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat, and
 to announce the adhesion of the Old Guard to the bourgeois-democratic
 state, whose agents in the working class the Old Guard prides itself
 on being, and aims to continue to be. 
Bill Green Toasted
The biggest display of the entire issue is given to the speech of
 William Green, the guest of honor at the Anniversary Banquet –
 Green, whose long record of thorough-going reaction and treachery in
 the trade union movement has been climaxed during the past year by
 his firm resistance to every progressive development, by his bitter
 fight against the industrial unionists, by his dictatorial brutality
 in connection with the automobile workers, the rubber workers, the
 teachers, and the radio workers, by his pitiful cringing before the
 government on every possible occasion. Vladeck, at the banquet, paid
 fulsome “tribute to Mr. Green for his constructive leadership
 of the American labor movement and for his conduct as the champion of
 the oppressed.”
The other featured trade-unionist among the speakers at the
 banquet was Matthew Woll, partner of Ralph Easley for years in the
 National Civic Federation, Hearst’s chief red-baiting rival.
 Another leading article, proudly displayed in a box on the front
 page, is by Abraham Lefkowitz, co-leader of the Teachers’
 Guild, splitter of the Teachers’ Union, and active dualist to
 the A.F. of L. The Old Guard, of course, is a great denunciator of
 “dual unionism” – except, naturally, when more
 “basic” issues are involved.
The strategic aim of the Old Guard is also given:
“Confident,” said Waldman at the banquet, “in
 the conviction that we represent on the political field the same
 program, the same principles, the same loyalty to labor exemplified
 in the British Labour Party, we are equally confident that with our
 allies of the labor movement the future belongs to our type of
 socialism.”
Abe Cahan looked forward to “the rapid development of
 fraternal relationship between the Socialist and labor movements in
 this country similar to that existing between the British Trades
 Union Congress and the Labor Party.” The visit of Herbert
 Morrison of the British Labour Party to this country is hailed and
 advertised. And well might the Old Guard greet its British brothers:
 has not the British Labour Party set them grandiose examples in the
 technique of representing the interests of finance-capital within the
 working class? Was it not through the British L.P. that national
 unity was achieved in the last war? that the General Strike was
 broken? that the budget is balanced at the expense of the British
 workers? that British imperial policy is now being put across to the
 masses in the present war crisis?
Yes, the Old Guard knows where it stands. It stands for the tried
 and sure methods for bringing defeat and disaster to the working
 class; for the policies that assembled the workers for imperialism in
 1914; the policies that defeated the revolution in Germany; the
 policies that greased the ways for Hitler, that shed the despairing
 blood of the workers in Austria and Spain. These policies it
 inscribes on its banner, and displays proudly and openly to the
 world. 
Safety-Valve Labor Party
Nor is it to be imagined that these policies are defeated by the
 victory of the Militants in the Primaries, or by their probable
 victory at the national convention. The Old Guard looks ahead. It
 realizes that a broad rank and file is not vital to its plans. It
 sees the “model of the British Labour Party”. And it
 aims, together with the trade union bureaucrats, to head off the
 development of the revolutionary party in this country, during the
 years after 1936, by harnessing the leftward movement of the workers
 into a reformist Labor Party controlled by it and the bureaucrats,
 together no doubt with various of the “progressives” and
 liberals. And it is confident that this is the kind of Labor Party
 which could alone be built on a mass basis in this country. And it
 understands that, under present conditions, the Labor Party agitation
 can be utilized as by far the most effective weapon against the
 progress of revolutionary ideas among the masses and the
 strengthening of revolutionary organization.
The Old Guard, then, is fighting a principled and uncompromising
 tight. On the whole, it has been a well-fought fight. The occasional
 slanders and exaggerations are perhaps the inevitable concomitants of
 such political struggles. The trouble with their fight has been not
 the lack of principled character, but that their principles were
 wrong. And, in this case, not merely wrong from the point of view of
 the historical interests of the working class, but also out of line
 with the wishes and opinions of the majority of Socialist Party
 members and enrolled voters. 
Lessons for the Militants
But, in spite of the fact that the Militants won in the Primary
 contest, there are lessons for the Militants to learn from the
 general character of the fight which the Old Guard conducted. The
 campaign of the Socialist Call compares in many respects
 unfavorably with the campaign of the New Leader. During the
 months preceding the Primaries there was only one substantial article
 published in the Call making a principled political attack on
 the Old Guard. In the time intervening before the national
 convention, the Call has a chance to remedy this defect by
 setting itself the task of clarifying political issues, of stating
 and exposing before the party membership the precise political
 character of the Old Guard and its policies, of lifting the struggle
 determinedly from a merely personal and organizational plane. Only in
 this way will the factional struggle be in the fuller sense
 educational and invigorating, instead of petty and disintegrating,
 for the party as a whole. And only in this way will the Militants lay
 the firm basis for broader and deeper leftward developments in the
 days ahead.
For this reason, there is occasion to be concerned over references
 to possibilities of “conciliation with the Old Guard’’
 which have been made since the Primaries. Naturally, individual
 workers who hold reformist positions are and should be eligible for
 Party membership, if – from whatever motive – they are
 prepared to work loyally within the framework of the Party. But here
 it is a question of the Old Guard as such. The Old Guard, it is true,
 makes clear that the only possible “conciliation” from
 its point of view would be triumph for itself and its ideas; and
 consequently there is little probability that any kind of actual
 organizational conciliation could be arrived at under any formula.
 But the real danger in talk of “conciliation” is not an
 organizational question. 
Danger of Conciliation
The real danger is that behind such talk there can readily creep a
 tendency to conciliate with Old Guard ideas and policies, a tendency
 to retreat from the leftward front so far won, and march back along
 the road of disaster. What has been won can be held only by boldness,
 not by timidity; social forces are in continual motion, and positions
 can be maintained only by further advance and attack, never by
 resting in the trenches. The Old Guard has suffered a severe setback
 organizationally; now is exactly the time to follow the blow up with
 others still stronger, and to add to the organizational the more
 powerful and more lasting political weapons.
 



IN AN article written last summer for The New International, I remarked that Roosevelt would be re-elected in November, 1936, unless the business upturn were greatly broadened and deepened. This remark aroused many queries and a number of protests. How, it was argued, would this follow? Why would a big increase of prosperity hurt Roosevelt? Just the opposite would seem more logical. If Roosevelt brings back good times, then a grateful people should be anxious to reward and keep him. And, certainly, this would seem more fair and just. Indeed, Roosevelt supporters such as the liberal New York Evening Post are indignant these days at the ingratitude of bankers and industrialists. As the Post points out in bewilderment, the higher the profits mount, the more viciously does finance-capital rail against its benefactor in the White House.
Politics, however, proceeds according to political and not according to moral laws.
During these first months of this election year, the attack against Roosevelt has reached new and almost lyric heights. The sins of mankind—so Hearst and the Liberty League, Hoover and Sloan and Chester and Smith and Mills inform us—are now concentrated in Washington. Chaos and disaster poise to alight on the day of Roosevelt’s re-election. “Public relations counsels” find a rich market for their most extravagant adjectives. The Literary Digest and skillfully weighted statistical polls show us in detail that the policies of the New Deal are repudiated by three-fourths of the population, and by all honest men. The balloons of the candidates for Republican nomination bob one another into the political sky.
What are we to make of all this? How do things really stand with Roosevelt?
It must be kept in mind that Marxists analyze political problems from the point of view of the dynamics of class relationships, not by meaningless statistics and questions asked of country editors. The Marxian method of analysis applies no less adequately to the present than to every other major political problem.  
II. Let us consider to begin with the situation in the United States during the winter of 1932-33, the period of Roosevelt’s election campaign, his election and inauguration. This was the low point of the worst cyclical depression so far experienced by capitalism. The crisis was international in scope, and specially characterized as a movement in the decline of capitalism as a whole—that is, as part of the now permanent general crisis of capitalism—rather than a temporary recession in the advance of capitalism as a whole. In this country, unemployment had reached the undreamed of figures of nearly 18 millions. Profits had all but disappeared—in fact, industry as a whole was probably operating at a loss. Wages were drastically down. Prices of all commodities were tremendously deflated. Competition for the narrowed market had reached a stage of unbridled anarchy, which was further exaggerating the deflationary process. Bankruptcies were widespread and increasing. The whole banking system had reached a condition of nervous instability, and was in fact on the edge of total collapse. The enormous weight of capital debt, expanded in the boom times, was hanging over the market, in part artificially maintained against liquidation by the RFC loans; and the federal and state debts were rapidly mounting.
These material conditions, naturally, provoked their response in the consciousness of the citizens. Fear was widespread. Roosevelt, with his usual sensitiveness to popular moods, summed this up aptly in his inaugural address: “The only thing we have to fear,” he said, “is fear itself.” There was a general feeling of disorientation and helplessness. As usual, to all except Marxists, the natural functioning of the capitalist economy in crisis appeared to all classes of the people as the blind working of unalterable law, against which the plans of men are helpless. Unrest was slowly growing.
The attitude of the various sections of the population can be more specifically defined:
(1) The bourgeoisie proper was genuinely frightened. Many of them feared the breakdown of the system which sustained them. For several years, after 1929, they had kept up their courage by the whistlings of their agents in the Hoover Administration: they had told each other that bad times would soon be over, that the corner would be soon reached, that nothing unusual had happened. But after nearly four years, the indices were still hurtling downward, and the whistlings no longer sounded convincing. They and their spokesmen had no solution to offer to bring back the lost profits, and knew they had none. Thus they were ready to grasp at any that came along.
(2) The farmers were discouraged, and also resentful. It is interesting to remember that the first important outbreaks of “direct action” involved farmers (in Northwestern New York, Wisconsin, Iowa, etc.) and not workers—though, of course, these were sporadic and soon slipped out of sight when industrial strikes began. The farmers saw the solution to their problems in the raising of prices of commodities, the lowering of taxes and mortgage burdens, and in direct subsidies.
(3) Among the middle classes generally, fear was everywhere. They were completely confused and disoriented. Before them were the ghosts of proletarianization and unemployment taking on flesh and blood. Their formerly “privileged” position—as compared with the workers—was being rudely undermined. Unlike certain sections of the farmers, however, the middle classes generally were not so much resentful as merely bewildered. When the middle classes are not only afraid and disoriented, but also resentful, the ground has become ripe for Fascism. But the time for this has not yet come.
Above all it is important to understand that in 1932-33 the middle classes had lost confidence in their former leaders—the finance capitalists and their avowed spokesmen. And this they had done not merely because times were so bad for the middle classes, but in large part because the finance capitalists had temporarily lost confidence in themselves. The middle classes, being unable to formulate an independent program of their own, or to furnish independent leadership, must always follow another as leader. And they will not follow unless the leader is himself assured and confident, and looks like a winner.
(4) The unemployed were largely defeatist in their attitude, and in some measure resentful. They asked primarily for a small pittance of relief, and to a lesser extent for jobs.
(5) The proletariat was completely disoriented, both because of the absence of revolutionary leadership and because of the active presence of a corrupt and reactionary leadership. The workers were beginning to stir and mutter, and the turmoil of mass struggle lay ahead. They saw no political solution to their problems; but they were turning toward direct action as a means for gaining their most immediate needs.
Roosevelt was the Lochinvar sent as the answer to these conditions and these attitudes. He swung triumphantly into office with the fundamental program of tiding capitalism over the depths of the crisis, of using the state on a scale unprecedented in this country to supplement the “natural forces” of the economic cycle working for the upturn. Thus, on the economic scene, he quickly formulated his answers to the crucial difficulties. The deflationary trend was reversed by inflationary measures: cessation of the free gold market, silver manipulation, lowering of the gold content of the dollar. The banking structure was revived by the Bank Holiday, the liquidation of the weakest banks, the Federal Deposite Insurance Corporation, and government loans. The NRA gave industry a breathing space from the excessive price-cutting and too anarchic competition. Government loans, and spending, relief and public works, “primed the pump”.
However, the economic measures were not enough to tide capitalism over. There was also a political and ideological task to perform. The problems raised by the consciousness and attitudes of the various sections of the population had to be met. This is the peculiar business of politicians, and not so clearly understood by the bourgeoisie proper.
Roosevelt’s pre-election speeches, the form and wording of his program were designed to answer just these problems. And, drawing heavily from the United States Populist tradition, from liberalism and social-democracy, they did so remarkably well. It is worth while noticing how the form of his program affected the various sections:
 Roosevelt appeared on the surface as the champion of “the people” and the sworn enemy of the big bourgeoisie. He lashed out (verbally) at the Tories and the money-changers. In ringing words he sounded the clarion. In spite of this, at the beginning there was little consistent opposition to Roosevelt from the bourgeoisie. For one thing, they were too worried, and felt they had to take a chance. Besides, they knew that they could control the basic direction of his regime, and they therefore concentrated their efforts (successfully) on getting their own desires written into the new “business legislation”. Certain groups of the bourgeoisie, particularly those in already unionized industries, were actively in favor of the Administration. The farmers were delighted with the fine old Jeffersonian phrases with which Roosevelt’s speeches were well larded. And they were more substantially delighted with the actual economic benefits to themselves which Roosevelt engineered: higher prices for their crops, mortgage relief, and direct subsidies. The middle classes were on the heights. In Roosevelt they saw themselves reflected—not their actual confused and frightened selves, but their hopes and dreams. Confidence sprung up again. Here were just the kind of hazy, grandiose generalities to warm the cockles of a middle-class heart. Here was indeed a new leader, sure, firm, smiling and friendly. And here was a New Life to be had just for the asking. They jumped gayly onto the bandwagon. The unemployed, too, got for a time at least new hope to replace their defeatism. This sounded like good stuff, these promises for the Forgotten Man, And relief conditions were in fact improved. CWA, PWA, and CCC were at any rate better than Hoover. The proletariat was tied to the White House through the trade union bureaucracy. The ambiguous Section 7A, while left vague enough to fulfill the requirements of Roosevelt’s basic economic program, also met the ideological need of permitting Roosevelt to appear as labor’s President.  Thus, for a while, the magician Roosevelt did appear as all things to all men.
It is necessary to say a word about the relation of Roosevelt to Fascism. In 1933 the Daily Worker assured us that Roosevelt was a Fascist—though now it is the opposition to Roosevelt (the Supreme Court and Hearst and the Liberty League) which the Daily Worker recognizes as the “true” Fascists. Of course, Roosevelt was not and is not fascist. He and his program are a kind of distorted amalgam of liberalism, Populism, and social-democracy in theory, and even, in part, in practise. Where possible, Roosevelt uses the methods of class collaboration, not of direct class tyranny.
Nevertheless, during the decline of capitalism, the capitalist attempt to solve a deep crisis tends necessarily along fascist lines. In this case, the crisis was not deep and long enough, either economically on the one hand, or socially and politically on the other, to require Fascism itself. But because of this tendency in the decline of capitalism, the Roosevelt program and methods were a kind of pale foreshadowing of Fascism, a faint metaphor of what is to come.
Fascism, like the Roosevelt program, has a muddled middle-class appeal, building its ideology out of the dreams and despairs of the middle classes. And many Fascists are quite as “sincere” as Roosevelt. Under Roosevelt, especially in the first two years, there occurred an unprecedented concentration of power in the Executive branch of the government and a correlative weakening of the legislative—again, on a large scale, characteristic of Fascism. The code authorities of the NRA, with their attempt to sustain prices through the intervention of the state, are also analogous to the methods of Fascism. So, too, with the extension of state influence in and operation of “business”—investments in banking, railroads, industry. Likewise, in the various labor boards, the automobile code, etc., there is a foreshadowing of compulsory arbitration.
It must always be remembered that Fascism is veiled, not open reaction. It begins as a mass movement, not as an open offensive of finance-capital, and is only later taken over by finance-capital. In this Roosevelt and his program are instructive for the future.  
III. During the last eighteen months the political meaning of the Roosevelt regime has greatly altered, because of the fact that basic economic and social conditions have greatly altered. The central development is, naturally, the upturn in the business cycle, which, after two minor spurts in 1933 and 1934, is now in a major swing. The upturn is marked above all by the return of profits—some of them remarkably enough to the highest level in history, and many to the 1930 level. The stock market has soared. Prices, after a sharp recovery in 1933-34, have for the most part continued up, though more slowly, and have been approximately level during the past year. (Wages, after a considerable rise in 1933-34 (though only a slight rise in real wages) are remaining about stationary, with a slight increase in hours since the invalidation of the NRA Unemployment has decreased about 5 millions since Roosevelt took office, but has changed little during the past year.
The forces for the upturn were substantially in operation by the beginning of 1935. Consequently, at that time Roosevelt had to alter his course. Instead of appearing as the stirring leader of the 74th Congress (as he had been of the 73rd), he had to act as brake; and, by his pseudo-Social-Security Act and the WPA, he forestalled any serious effort at more genuine social security, public works or large-scale relief. Nevertheless, at the end of the first session of the 74th Congress, he reconsolidated his formal “left” position by championing the Utilities Bill, the Neutrality Act, and the “Soak the Rich” Tax Bill. This he did in order to cut the ground from under the feet of the opposition to the bourgeois and reformist left, and thus to prevent the growth of a major third party movement.
In the autumn of 1936 he announced “the breathing spell” for business, to mark his recognition of the end of the New Deal in fact—that is, the end of the emergency measures to save capitalism in the given crisis—and to make a bid to retain some of his slipping big bourgeois support. The Supreme Court, by invalidating the NRA, AAA, Railroad Pensions Act, etc., was assigned the task of publicly burying the emergency measures. With the upturn of the business cycle, they have finished their purpose.
If we turn to the relation of Roosevelt to his opponents, we find that to his opponents on his right he has given the substance of their demands: that is, he has done his part in recovering profits. On this basis he, quite “reasonably”, asks for their votes. But they, ungrateful, get more and more abusive, invigorated by the blood of profits. They want a more direct instrument than Roosevelt.
To his left he has given lavishly of the words and phrases it looks for. He keeps the slogans and the demagogy, as in his annual message in January—now pure demagogy, since they were designed for the depths of the crisis, not for the upturn. By this means he has made a serious third party in 1936 impossible: it could not be sufficiently differentiated from Roosevelt. During 1935 the third party movement collapsed; and its impossibility was definitively sealed by the UMWA’s endorsement of Roosevelt.
If we look at the election year lineup in terms of the attitude of the social groups, we find:
 The bourgeoisie are again confident. Profits are miraculously returned. They are again impatient of state restraint: the ropes which helped them out of the hole have become shackles. It seems to them that the country is headed back to the good old days. They wish to run along in the uncurbed race for profits. They feel now able to handle labor alone, and toss aside the possible ultimate social consequences. Thus, on the whole, the bourgeoisie is anti-Roosevelt. Some, with special interests, still stick with him. And much of the bourgeois opposition is no doubt largely bluff. They find in “intransigent” and loud opposition the easiest way to put the screws on Roosevelt when he kicks a bit. And Roosevelt, in the face of the opposition, naturally “concedes” still more. In any case, it must be kept in mind that Roosevelt through the state fundamentally represents them since he upholds and maintains the basic interests and the social structure on which they rest; and, more particularly, he prepares carefully and ably for the war which they expect to open up mighty new markets. This the intelligent among the bourgeoisie clearly understand, and no doubt some even of the “opponents’” votes will go to Roosevelt in the secrecy of the ballot box. Large sections of the farmers (with the decided exceptions of the share-croppers and the poorest tenants) are considerably better off than in 1933. The reasons for this are various, including the drought and the dust storms, for which Roosevelt cannot plausibly take credit; but in part they are undoubtedly the Roosevelt farm measures. The majority of the farmers may be expected to stay with Roosevelt. Many are affected by the anti-Roosevelt agitation; but the Republicans offer no farm program at all. The middle classes generally (exclusive of the farmers) are not so much better off than in 1933, though their condition has to some extent improved. But the crucial point with reference to the middle classes is that their faith in their old leaders—in finance-capital—has been revived. It has revived in large part because the faith of the old leaders in themselves has revived, because they are once again confident. As usual, the middle classes go toward what looks to them like the leader. It is entirely false that to win the middle classes a “middle-class appeal” must be made, on the basis of a “middle-class program”. The middle classes answer to the voice of a master who sounds like a master. Roosevelt, mirroring in his phrases a middle-class mind, loses his appeal precisely because he makes, now, so many apologies and “concessions”. The old note rings hollow. The Liberty League is less compromising. It says in effect to the middle classes: tag along with me if you know what is good for you, because I really run things, and I intend to run them my way. (It would be well if working class politicians could learn this lesson in the ways of the middle classes.) In November, therefore, the majority of the middle classes will probably vote against Roosevelt; and still more “prosperity” will only increase the adverse majority, since it will increase the strength and confidence of the bourgeoisie. The unemployed know from experience the fakery of Roosevelt’s relief program. For this reason, some of the unemployed are turning against Roosevelt. But most (when they are not disfranchised) will vote for Roosevelt on the lesser evil principle, since the Republicans offer even less. The proletariat is on the whole better off than in 1933, though not much better off. But in spite of the revelation of the Roosevelt program in practise as thoroughly anti-working class, the treachery of the trade union bureaucracy, the fatal policy of the communist party and the vacillating policy of the socialist party during this period, ensure that a substantial majority of the working class will go to Roosevelt. This could not have been shown more decisively than by the unanimous endorsement of Roosevelt by the UMWA Convention. However paradoxical it may seem, the solidest support for Roosevelt will be drawn from the proletariat.  On the basis of the above survey, I conclude that Roosevelt will be re-elected in November, by a majority probably less than in 1932, but still considerable.  
IV. What, then, should be the broad strategy of Marxists for this election year?
Many tendencies in the labor movement, led by the communist party, hold that this is the year for a mighty Labor or Farmer-Labor party campaign. Some of them believe, or pretend to believe, that a national Farmer-Labor ticket in 1936 is realistically possible; others—many socialists, for example, that it is not possible in 1936, but that nevertheless the Farmer-Labor campaign should be carried on for its educational value and to prepare for the future.
Both conceptions are entirely incorrect. We have already seen that a genuine Labor or Farmer-Labor party, including the bulk of the organized labor movement, in 1936 is impossible; it is blocked by Roosevelt’s political strategy. A fake Labor party is still, indeed, possible, cooked up by bureaucratic and opportunistic maneuvers: and it should be noticed that any kind of Labor party campaign, even one of the most “genuine” sort, plays into the hands of those who would like a fake Labor party, either this year or in the future.
It is not my intention to enter into the general “theory” of the Labor party. The main considerations are well enough known by Marxists: that a Labor party is hopelessly reformist, and thus unable to defend the interests of the working class, we know; that in actuality it offers no protection whatever against either war or Fascism, we know; we know that, in the decline of capitalism, a Labor party cannot win even any important temporary concessions from the bourgeoisie; and we know also that the whole ideology of the Labor party blurs the central and decisive question: what class holds state power? We know also that in this country the Labor party movement connects up with the traditional Populist and Progressive tradition, and thus loses even its nominal class base.
The present question, however, is not one of general theory, but of the concrete meaning of the Labor party campaign in 1936. And, concretely, we must conclude that the Labor party campaign this year plays directly into the hands of Roosevelt—that is, into the hands of finance-capital. The Labor and Farmer-Labor campaign, particularly in its Stalinist version, utilizes the very same ideology as Roosevelt. Nothing could have made this clearer than Roosevelt’s Annual Message to Congress. Ninety percent of this message might have appeared unchanged in the Daily Worker—even the same rhetorical devices. Roosevelt declared himself “unequivocally” for strong neutrality measures; against Fascist tyrannies; against war; against the Tories; against unscrupulous financiers; against Wall Street; against invasion of the people’s rights by the courts; for the common man; for—a “people’s government” (in just those words). On what possible grounds could Roosevelt be kept out of the People’s Front?
The Farmer-Labor advocates, especially the Stalinists, now join with the Administration spokesmen in attacking the Liberty League as “Fascist” (as I have pointed out, for the communist party it was once Roosevelt who was Fascist). This is entirely false and extremely dangerous. The Liberty League is simply old-fashioned reactionary. Naturally, the present backers of the Liberty League will some day be supporting a Fascist movement in this country. But they will be hidden, not on the front pages, as they now are in stories about the Liberty League. Fascism simply does not work this way. And Fascism is built out of crisis and depression; not out of an upturn, when the middle classes are on the whole pleased with the Tories. Actually, Roosevelt is closer to Fascism than the Liberty League, though we have seen that he is not Fascist. It is he who, like Fascism, represents “veiled” reaction. Making purely reformist distinctions between “friendly” and “unfriendly” sections of the ruling class (backers of Roosevelt and backers of the Liberty League), and friendly and unfriendly organs of the capitalist state (Congress, the people’s representative, and the Supreme Court, representative of Wall Street) plays directly into the hands of the future Fascist developments.
Because, then, of the incidence of their political ideology, we shall see that many of the “boldest” supporters of the Farmer-Labor campaign now, in November will line up the votes for Roosevelt. It is not excluded that the communist party itself—especially if the Far Eastern crisis deepens—will declare for Roosevelt.
No. In 1936 it is the business of Marxists to understand that this election year is an opportune time to build—not reformist—but revolutionary ideas, to strengthen vastly the revolutionary movement in this country. It is a year for Marxists to redouble their participation in independent working-class actions. In this, good beginnings have already been made in 1936. And direct struggle is the most educational of all schools for the masses of the workers. Perhaps in November they will still vote for Roosevelt; but if they have participated in direct struggles, properly led, they will be far along politically.
And this election year is a splendid year for a mighty educational campaign: not against the Liberty League or Wall Street or the Supreme Court or Roosevelt, but against the capitalist state; and not for a reformist party to take governmental office as a handmaiden of capitalism, but for a party to overthrow the state. It is a splendid year, that is to say, for a campaign for the revolutionary party, for utilizing the ferment of the election year and the war crisis and the labor struggles for the forging of the revolutionary leadership of the American working class.
John WEST



(This is a chapter from the pamphlet War and the Workers by John West)
In the face of the developing war crisis, the forces for the betrayal of the workers in the struggle against war are maturing rapidly. From all sides, in all countries, the liberals, the pacifists, the reformists, the social patriots, under the cover of what look like anti-war and pro-peace campaigns, are in actuality preparing for sell out to the war-makers, are making ready to turn over the masses to the imperialists.
Again, as before the last war, we find the old ways and methods and slogans of betrayal. But the old methods are not enough. New appearances must be added: the masses cannot be deceived again in precisely the old ways. It therefore becomes of crucial importance to analyse the new and special forms of betrayal ,which are appearing in the present crisis.
 
1. “Good” and “Bad” Capitalist Powers
The most fatally dangerous doctrine, a doctrine which has been systematically propagated during recent years by liberals and by both the Socialist and Communist parties throughout the world, is the theory that a basic distinction must be drawn between the comparatively “good” capitalist nations, the “peace-loving” nations – Great Britain, France, and the United States, on the one hand; and, on the other, the altogether“wicked” capitalist nations – Italy and especially Germany.
This theory reasons as follows: Fascism, especially Hitlerism, means war. Therefore, the fight against war is the fight against Fascism, and especially against Hitlerism, the worst form of Fascism. The success of Fascism means the destruction of all democratic rights. The destruction of democratic rights means the crushing of the organizations of the working class, and thus defeat for the revolutionary movement. But Fascism, especially Hitlerism, can succeed only by war, and, since Fascism means war, will inevitably undertake war.
What then follows? What follows is the betrayal of the working class of France. England and the United Slates. For, on the basis of the above chain of reasoning, to support the democratic nations in a war against Hitler is to defend democratic rights against Fascism; and thereby the revolution. The wheel completes its circle. Defense of the national state – that is, defense of the imperialist bourgeoisie of England, France and the United States – becomes, through this theory, a revolutionary duty!
The mortal fallacy in this position is easy enough to understand when once examined from the point of view of Marxism. The statement, “Fascism means war” is incomplete. It is not Fascism that means war. Rather is it the continued existence of capitalism that means both Fascism and war. Fascism means war only in the sense that it marks outwardly a great intensification of the inner conflicts of capitalism, and is thus an indication of the more rapid drive of the whole capitalist system toward the highest expression of these conflicts – imperialist war. But in the linked chain of causes that make war an inevitable concomitant of the continued existence of capitalism, the democratic nations have as integral a part as the Fascist nations. From the point of view of the working class, there can be no “good,” no “peace-loving” capitalist states. Every capitalist state, democratic as well as Fascist, represents one or another form of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie over the working class,and is thus the implacable enemy of the working class. To defend the democratic rights of the working class is one thing. But this has nothing in common with the defense of the “democratic” capitalist state. The former is a primary duty of every working class party; the latter is the occupation of traitors. The latter will be put forward as the only way to protect the working class against war and Fascism: in practice, it will give the working class both war and Fascism, for the bourgeoisie of the democratic countries will not overcome the necessity for a resort to Fascism during the decline of capitalism merely by success in the next war. Indeed, the outbreak of war will in all probability be the signal for setting up Fascist governments in the “democratic” countries.
The business of the working class within any country is never under any circumstances to defend “the government” – that is, the political executive of the class enemy – but always to fight for its overthrow. To Fascism as to war there is only one answer: the workers’ revolution.
 
2. Defense of the Soviet Union
A closely similar preparation for betrayal has gone on under cover of the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union!”
As has already been indicated, the defense of the Soviet Union is one of the primary tasks of the working class in the coming war. But, to a Marxist, what does defense of the Soviet Union mean? The essence can be summed up quickly. It means: “Extend the October revolution.” It means to strengthen the economic and political organizations of the world proletariat, to carry the class struggle on a world basis to ever higher levels, to drive toward workers’ power. It means to put all faith in the working class. It means to achieve victory in the capitalist nations. And it means these things quite openly and realistically. For these are the only possible defense of the Soviet Union.
To Stalinism, however, and to the cynical Austro-Marxists, defense of the Soviet Union means: support the program of national Bolshevism; no word of criticism of Stalin and his bureaucratic associates; put all faith in diplomatic deals with bourgeois powers, in military alliances with France and Czechoslovakia, in maneuvering in the League of Nations; reduce the working class parties to branches of the foreign office of the Soviet state. And it means: do not carry on genuinely revolutionary activities within your own country, because this would upset “peace”; permit the working class of Germany and Austria to be crushed under Fascism rather than risk one ounce of cement at Dnieprostroy or one tractor at Stalingrad. And, lastly, it means: support the war policy of your democratic government, and offer the working class to the coming imperialist war in all nations where the bourgeoisie finds its imperialist aims best served by a temporary alliance with the Soviet bureaucracy.
Naturally, Marxists do not maintain that the Soviet Union should not, whenever possible, utilize the antagonisms and contradictions among the imperialist powers to its own advantage. This was the tactic of Lenin. But this tactic can only be understood as subordinate to the strategy of the world revolution, and this strategy can base itself only on the international working class. Stalin’s “maneuverings” with imperialist powers are the direct contrary of Lenin’s. For Stalin “maneuvers” in such a way as to subordinate the working class to the capitalist powers, not to advance its interests. The Franco-Soviet pact is the most striking example of such subordination – whereby the French working class is turned over hand and foot to the French bourgeoisie, so long as the Pact formally endures – but this is only one aspect of the consistent and continuous policy of Stalinism. Lenin, to prevent the capitalist powers from attacking the Soviet Union, placed his full reliance on the only possible force which could in actuality defend the Soviet Union: on the working class of the various capitalist powers. If the working class and its party were sufficiently strengthened in a given country, Lenin reasoned, the government of that country would not dare to attack the Soviet Union, since it would realize that such an attack would only pave the way for its own overthrow. Stalin, with his eyes focussed on national Russian socialism, asks only for“peace” elsewhere, to let him build at home. He places his reliance, thus, not on the international working class, but on the “friendly” capitalist governments, on any agreements or treaties or pacts he can come to with them. But to secure such friendship, he must direct the Communist parties in the various nations not toward revolutionary struggle against their governments at home (which would endanger the government’s “friendship” for Stalin), but toward putting pressure on the home governments to line up with the Soviet Union; and, then, to essential support of the home government so long as it stays or pretends to stay lined up. This necessarily weakens and destroys the revolutionary struggle, which is always against the home government; and thus, in the end, disrupts the only possible defense of the Soviet Union itself, which must be a defense against and an attack on the international bourgeoisie and all their political instruments – the capitalist governments, never a collaboration with them.
We shall see the workers of France, England and the United States rallied to the flag by the leaders of the Communist Party. “Defend the Soviet Union! Enlist in the army, and – fight against war and Hitlerism! Defend the Soviet Union!”
This policy of betrayal has also been systematically developed over a period of many years. The recent Congress of the Communist International made it official for the sections of the C.I.: and the Dan-Zyromski-Bauer resolution on war advances it within world social democracy. Unlike the situation at the beginning of the last war, the betrayers this time wish to be fully ready beforehand.
 
3. Sanctions
A special and profoundly important feature of betrayal in the present war crisis revolves around the question of “sanctions.” The Covenant of the League of Nations provides that when a nation has been declared an aggressor against a member state, certain financial, economic, and even military measures shall be – following an elaborate procedure – invoked by the other League member states against the aggressor nation. These measures are called “sanctions,” and the term “sanctions” is being extended to include measures which might be taken by nations on their own initiative (e.g., closing of the Suez Canal by Great Britain) as well as measures taken collectively by the League members.
This extension of the use of the word “sanctions” is significant. It indicates a new and ingenious method for turning opposition to war into support of war. All that is necessary is to call the war an “application of sanctions.” Then it becomes the duty of all “friends of peace” to support it.
This, indeed, is the real meaning of the doctrine of sanctions. League sanctions are, of course, nothing else than sanctions undertaken by the leading member states of the League. The League, as we have seen, is only the instrument of its dominant members. Support of League sanctions, therefore, is exactly the same as support of sanctions applied by individual nations – e.g., by Great Britain or France.
But sanctions are war measures. They include withdrawal of financial credit, embargoes on trade, various forms of boycott. To enforce them genuinely would require a blockade of the country against whom the sanctions were invoked. The probable, the almost certain outcome of such a blockade, as history has so often proved, is war – since the blockaded nation cannot accept such a measure peacefully without surrendering political sovereignty.
Thus it follows that sanctions must be either ineffectual – a kind of large-scale bluff – or they must lead to war.
If they are ineffectual, support of them is certainly no aid to peace (or to Ethiopia). If they lead to war, support of them – no matter with what verbal reservations – means nothing else than support of war undertaken by the imperialist government applying the sanctions. In both cases, support of sanctions to be applied by capitalist governments (whether or not these are League members) is in effect support of these governments themselves. This means that such support necessarily leads to a betrayal of the revolutionary struggle against war, and the revolutionary defense of Ethiopia, which is always a struggle against the capitalist governments and the bourgeoisie whose governments they are.
It does no good to say, as the social democrats and the Stalinists say that we should support League and governmental sanctions, but at the same time “point out that the League and British and French imperialism are acting only in their own imperialist interests in applying them”; we are temporarily able to “use” the French and British governments to serve the interests of the working class, because their interests momentarily, though from “diametrically opposite causes,” coincide. This is the reasoning of a Stalin or a Blum, but not of a Marxist. The Marxist knows that we can never “use” capitalist governments for the interests of the working class, because what these governments are is instruments to be “used” for the interests of the bourgeoisie. On the contrary, we must always fight inexorably against the governments, and their acts. The Marxist knows that advocacy of governmental sanctions in any form necessarily binds the working class to the state and the class enemy, necessarily weakens the class position of the workers and thus the workers’ struggle for power, and necessarily prepares for turning the workers over to the sanction-applying government when the sanctions find their natural outcome in war. If we support sanctions, and the sanctions lead to war, then we have already by supporting the sanctions supported the war. It takes more than verbal reservations to crawl out of the inescapable logic of cause and effect.
The disastrous consequences of support of sanctions are already apparent. In Great Britain a year ago, the masses were turning rapidly away from the National Government. Then the British Labor Party and the British Communist Party came out strongly for sanctions: that is, came out for the policy of British finance-capital and the National Government. This has, naturally, fatally obscured the class issue. No longer is there any clear line between the working class parties and the Conservatives on the war crisis. The Labor Party and the Communist Party have done for Baldwin what he could not do for himself: they have brought about “national unity” on the war issue. Baldwin of course understands this; and consequently has called for the new elections to Parliament, confident of a substantial majority for the government. In France, the same result: The People’s Front, advocating sanctions, becomes the main support of the “Republic” – that is, of French imperialism; Laval could reasonably apply for admission;national unity on the war issue mortally weakens the ripening class struggle in France, which poses on the order of the day the revolutionary struggle for workers’ power and the overthrow of every form of capitalist government at the same time that the workers’ leaders lend all their efforts to upholding and defending the capitalist government.
Marxists, then, reject and expose as betrayal any and all advocacy of League or governmental “sanctions.” Naturally, however, this does not mean that they take a passive, hands-off position in the present crisis or in any other. Marxists are not neutral in the dispute between Italy and Ethiopia. They are for the defeat of Fascist Italy and the blow to imperialism which such a defeat would be; and they are therefore for the victory of Ethiopia. But they propose to aid in such defeat and such victory not by appealing to capitalist governments and the imperialist League for their assistance and sanctions; but to the working class to apply its proletarian “sanctions.” Only sanctions which are results of the independent and autonomous actions of the working class are of any value in the revolutionary struggle against war – since only these separate the class from the state and the class enemy, and only these build the fighting strength of the workers, which is alone the road to workers’ power and thus to the defeat of war. Mass demonstrations, strikes, labor boycotts, defense funds for material aid to Ethiopia, refusal to load munitions for Italy, revolutionary agitation for Marxism as it applies to the war crisis, these are such sanctions as the working class must make use of. But these will be ineffectual in the immediate crisis? They are romantic and utopian? If so, then the revolutionary struggle is itself ineffectual, romantic and utopian. Perhaps such sanctions will not “solve” the present crisis. But they, and they alone, will help steel the class, materially and ideologically, for the struggle to come – the struggle for workers’ power, which is, in the end, the only solution.
 
4. Neutrality
Careful notice should be given to a form of betrayal closely related to betrayal on the question of sanctions. This is a particular danger in the United States. In the United States, which is not a League member, the betrayers call, not for sanctions – which are formally irrelevant to League outsiders – but for “neutrality legislation.” In the present crisis, this demand is only an American form of the demand for sanctions, combined with the worst type of ordinary pacifism.
In the United States all the rotten reformist organizations, from World Peaceways and the League against War and Fascism to the Socialist and Communist parties, are joining in this call for “mandatory” neutrality legislation to be passed by the next Congress, and are “demanding” a “strong neutrality policy” on the part of the U.S. government. What does this mean in the concrete? It means, in the first place, to spread among the people of the United States all the fatal pacifist illusions about U.S. isolation. As we have seen, the United States is necessarily linked up economically, socially and politically with the rest of the world. Its pretended isolation is a complete myth. As we have also seen, the U.S. will inevitably be involved in the coming war, will in fact play a leading and decisive part in the coming war. Not to point this out honestly and straightforwardly, and instead to pretend that some form of neutrality legislation will succeed or even aid in isolating the U.S. in the world struggle is to deceive and disorient the masses, to disarm them ideologically, to turn them aside from the genuine struggle against war, and to teach them to put reliance in exactly those forces which are preparing war – namely, the imperialist government of the United States and U.S. finance-capital, which that government represents.
Thus, as always, pacifism in the form of demands for neutrality legislation in actuality aids the war makers. It strengthens the hand of the U.S. government, strengthens its hold over the people. Since the policy of the government, like that of every imperialist government, is and must be a war policy, these demands are in reality doing their part in carrying out the war policy. The capitalists and the government officials are not slow to take advantage of the opportunity. Hearst and Roosevelt alike point out – just as does Baldwin in England – that to preserve a “strong neutrality and peace policy” the U.S. must build up its“national defense.” That is to say, they use the agitation for neutrality legislation as a basis for expanding the armed forces of U.S. imperialism, to build new and more powerful battleships and airplanes, and to mechanize still further the already highly “modernized” U.S. army.
But even more than this is involved in the so-called “neutrality legislation.” The substance of such legislation, if actually put into effect, can only be sanctions as the U.S. can apply them – various forms of financial and economic restrictions, boycotts, etc. As in the case of sanctions proper, therefore, the neutrality acts would be in effect war acts, and the same conclusions must be drawn with respect to them as we have already come to in analyzing sanctions. Realizing this is enough to expose the pseudo-Marxists in the U.S. who so bravely denounce the policy of sanctions in other countries (Great Britain, France) ; and then in the next breath advocate them (under the title of “neutrality legislation”) for this country.
Here, as in any other phase of the struggle against imperialist war, the fight for U.S. “neutrality” must be a working class fight, using the methods and means of the working class. It is only the working class, operating as an independent force, which can be counted on – certainly we cannot expect imperialism itself to put an end to imperialism, which is what we do when we call on an imperialist government to avoid imperialist war. The fight must be not for a “government policy of neutrality,” but always a fight against the government.



The recent decision of the Supreme Court, invalidating the AAA, when taken against the background of the Schechter Case decision last Spring and the probability of further decisions against the New Deal in the near future, brings into sharp focus many basic problems concerning the meaning and nature of the complex institutional structure of the American state. It is wholly impossible to understand these problems except in the illusion-dispelling light of Marxian theory. Any other approach condemns us to wander in the fog and mists of legal “fictions” – as the English political philosopher, Jeremy Bentham, so accurately called them – and to spend our time, like Don Quixote, arguing about dreams and fighting against windmills.
The need for the light of uncompromising Marxian theory could not be more urgently shown than by a study of the press of the Communist party and the Socialist party during the week following the AAA decision. The first editorial of the Daily Worker demanded to know whether Americans were going to continue to allow nine old men to overthrow “the decisions of the people’s representatives.” During succeeding issues, the Daily Worker has carried to ever-increasing heights its campaign against the “autocratic oligarchy” of the Supreme Court. “The King of England,” the editor says in bold-faced type, “cannot nullify acts of Parliament, but the Supreme Court can invalidate acts of Congress. It is not only a monarch, but an UNLIMITED monarch to boot.” And “the astonishing part of it” – and the indignation of the Daily Worker is here exceeded only by its surprise – “is that this power ... is absolutely UNCONSTITUTIONAL!” The Daily Worker should really retain the American Liberty League to bring suit against this outrage: it too is a stalwart defender of the Constitution.
 
Daily Worker Finds the Issue
The big issue before the American people, then, according to the Daily Worker, is given in a front page box:
“Unite for action to demand that Congress and the President: 1. Repudiate the right of the Supreme Court to declare laws unconstitutional. 2. Impeach judges who usurp the democratic rights of the people. 3. Amend the Constitution to prohibit the Supreme Court from declaring laws unconstitutional.”
We are reminded that, in France, the Communist party not dissimilarly demands that Laval and the Chamber of Deputies disarm the Fascist Leagues and oust the Fascist officers from the army. And the C.P. of France is similarly “astonished” that the “representatives of the people” continue to allow such subversive activities against the Republic.
The Socialist Call, if in less gross form, takes what is essentially the same point of view. Norman Thomas writes:
“Now six old men on the Supreme Court of the U.S. against 3 of their colleagues hand down a decision which practically destroys the constructive program which has been set up ... You have a complete picture of judicial oligarchy ... I join with my comrades in demanding immediate and drastic action to end this judicial oligarchy ... Real change depends upon an end of this judicial oligarchy, this government by the dead hand of a Constitution, which is given living power by the particular political and economic doctrines of the old men on the Supreme Court bench ... It becomes the most important single immediate task of the Party and the entire labor movement to push the Workers’ Rights Amendment.”
 
Better in N.Y. Post
Such analyses and such proposals have, of course, nothing in common with Marxism. They are reformist, not Marxist, in character. This is sufficiently indicated by the fact that the liberal New York Evening Post, the shrill New Deal defender, has taken exactly this same approach to the Supreme Court in its editorials following the AAA decision, except that its words have been more challenging and more vigorously written; and it has proposed the same reform measures.
What, then, is wrong with this approach? Where does it differ from Marxism?
What is wrong, with it is that, instead of clarifying, it obscures and glosses over the fundamental class issues which are the source and root of historical development, and, instead of exposing, it veils and softens the role of the state.
 
Marxism and the State
Marxism is primarily distinguished by analyzing every social and political problem from a class point of view. In contemporary imperialist society, this means that Marxism always explains and interprets events only in the light of the fundamental conflict whose course determines the direction of historical development: the conflict between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. In terms of this conflict, Marxism interprets the role of the state as the political executive of the bourgeoisie, whose historical function is to maintain the social power of the bourgeoisie and to uphold the system of property relations upon which that social power is based.
The state, however, is not an “abstraction.” It is actualized in a whole involved maze of concrete historical forms. In the United States these include the Federal executive (the President and his subordinates and administrative departments), the Federal legislature (Congress and the departments and commissions it creates), the Federal judiciary (from the Supreme Court down), the Federal army, navy, prisons; together with all the branches (executive, legislative, judicial, military, police) of the state, county, and municipal governments. These are all in a great variety of ways, part of the state apparatus. Their central and primary historical function is to assure the maintenance of capitalist property relations: that is, to uphold the class rule of the bourgeoisie.
It is only from an understanding of this basic function that a correct analysis can be made of the various actions and activities of the different subdivisions of the state apparatus.
 
The Reformist Approach
The approach of the Daily Worker and the Socialist Call, however, instead of proceeding from the basic analysis of the class struggle and the class role of the state, and thence going on to a detailed analysis of the particular acts in question (here the AAA decision), does just the opposite. They take the conflict between two subdivisions of the state apparatus (the Supreme Court on the one side, Roosevelt and Congress on the other) as primary; and consequently they totally obscure the basic class role which these two subdivisions share in common, and thus also obscure the fundamental class conflict of modern society.
In terms of their approach, the Supreme Court is the representative of “Wall Street,” of the “financial oligarchy,” the “Tories.” Congress, in conflict with the Supreme Court, is “the people’s representative” (this is the Daily Worker’s own phrase). We are, then, called on to support Congress against the Supreme Court, in order to make our will felt and to secure our “rights.”
 
Denial of the Class Struggle
What follows? What follows is the denial of the revolutionary class struggle for workers’ power,which is and must be the struggle not to win “control” over the existing state machinery, but a struggle against the existing state, a struggle to smash the present state – which is the instrument of bourgeois rule – and to erect in its place the revolutionary workers’ state. What follows is social-democratic parliamentarism, gradualism, Kautskyism, all over again. In this manner does history take its revenge on the corruption of theory. The approach of the Communist party and the Socialist party to this problem – which is naturally not an isolated example – is part of the propagation of an anti-revolutionary ideology. In the case of the Communist party it must be understood as one item in the preparation for the possibility of supporting Roosevelt in November – a possibility which will be realized if the Far Eastern crisis sufficiently deepens. Indeed, the current analyses and phrases of the C.P. Can hardly be distinguished from those of the President.
Now Marxists do not believe that Congress is “the people’s representative.” They believe that Congress, like the Supreme Court, is part of the apparatus of bourgeois state rule. They do not deny that genuine and bitter conflict can arise between Congress and the Supreme Court, or between any other subdivisions of the state apparatus, nor do they deny the necessity for interpreting and analyzing these conflicts, and attempting to use them where possible to [the advantage of] the workers. But such conflicts, they point out, are never struggles between representatives of the working class or of “the people” on the one side, and representatives of the bourgeoisie on the other. There are always conflicts between different sections or groups within the bourgeoisie, sections which on the given issue have opposing needs and opposing ideas of how best to advance the basic bourgeois interests. In all cases, therefore, such conflicts are subordinate to the underlying class conflict, which cannot express itself directly within the bourgeois state apparatus.
 
How the “Founders” Reasoned
It was in this way that the “founders of our country,” who reasoned more clearly about these matters than our present Stalinists, reformists and centrists, understood the complicated governmental forms which they established under the Constitution – that magically powerful document which they designed to legalize the power of property. The intricate “checks and balances” between the three branches of the Federal government and between the Federal government and the States, with the probability of frequent conflict which these contained, were meant by them not at all to “guarantee” democracy, but to make sure that what democracy there was would not get out of bounds.
“Every institution,” wrote Hamilton, “calculated to restrain the excess of law-making and to keep things in the same state in which they happen to be at any given period was more likely to do good than harm.”
Nor have the masters of American destiny ever been too much disturbed over legal fictions. They have understood that the central question is the question of class power, not institutional form, and they have consistently approached the Constitution, the Supreme Court, and the other branches of government in the light of that understanding. During the administrations of Washington and John Adams, for example, the Supreme Court played a minor role. The question of its “right” to invalidate acts of Congress or of States as unconstitutional, left ambiguous in the Constitution itself, was not openly raised. The Federalist party, representing the commercial, banking and industrial interests – that is, the progressive class at that historical stage – held control over the executive and legislative branches, and could keep the courts in the background.
 
The Jeffersonian Reaction
But the Jeffersonian reaction, swept on by the agrarian and planting interests, ousted the Federalists from the Presidency and Congress. The Federalists, consequently, defeated on one front, kept their grip on the Judiciary, and used the Supreme Court to continue the advance of their basic program. Through their Chief Justice, Marshall, they immediately proclaimed the power of the Supreme Court to pass on the constitutionality of laws (the case of Marbury vs. Madison). In a long series of brilliant decisions, Marshall maintained their position. But, it should be noticed, the Federalists used the Supreme Court not to restrict the power of the Federal government, but to extend it, to enlarge its sphere of operation, and to establish its clear sovereignty over the States. The aims of the bourgeoisie could not be served without a strong national government.
But deaths on the Supreme Court bench and the Jacksonian movement altered the relationship of forces. By 1857 the Democrats, now openly and almost exclusively the party of the slaveholders, were in control of the Supreme Court, with Taney at its head. So, in the Dred Scott decision, the Supreme Court reversed the tradition of Marshall, and declared for “states’ rights” against the Federal government. In actuality, of course, the decision was not for the legal fiction, “states’ rights,” but for the slaveholders: by its terms, the Court declared that Congress had no power to legislate concerning slavery. The Philistines of those days thought that then the battle was over, and that the Northern industrialists had lost. Or, at most, they inveighed against the autocratic usurpation by the Supreme Court.
 
Judiciary and Class War
But the bourgeois was not going to let legal fictions block its historic road. Organized, in temporary alliance with the free Western farmers, into the new Republican party, it accepted the challenge: and fought out the issue of control of the state not in the judicial chambers, but on the field of battle. Neither the acts of Congress nor the decisions of the Court, but the Northern armies decided the basic class question – the question of which class, the bourgeoisie or the plantation owners, was to hold power. And this is the manner in which every class which means historic business settles the basic question.
The struggle which the working class faces at the present time, the struggle for power and for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie and its state, is not expressed in any direct way in the conflict between the New Deal (upheld by the President and Congress) and the Supreme Court. The struggle of the working class, in its political aspect, is a struggle against every branch and division of the state. The conflict between the Supreme Court and Congress represents in part a conflict between different sections of the bourgeoisie, in part a bureaucratic contest for control of the immense and highly lucrative governmental apparatus. The AAA decision is perhaps chiefly important for re-emphasizing the fact that the New Deal was merely a series of temporary devices to tide capitalism over a dangerous spot; and that, with profits now mounting, it has outlived its usefulness. The Supreme Court, by a reasonable division of labor, is given the job of undertaker. For Roosevelt, the New Deal remains now as pure demagogy – as a series of agitational phrases wholly divorced from social reality, with the help of which he hopes to retain enough of middle-class and labor sentiment to enable him to secure re-election.
 
Playing Reaction’s Game
To build up and emphasize, as the Communist party and the Socialist party are doing, a large-scale campaign to curb the Supreme Court plays into the hands of reaction. It is not that the demand to curb the court is in itself wrong. Indeed, it would be on the whole a gain if it were accomplished. The Court is an additional barrier against even partial immediate demands of the masses – as the Schechter and AAA decisions in their “restrictive” interpretations of the “interstate commerce” and “general welfare” clauses, interpretations which can be applied directly against any social security or public works acts – serve to bring out.
Nevertheless, such a parliamentary demand as the curbing of the Supreme Court should have only a minor and secondary place in the agitation and practical program of a revolutionary working-class party. Otherwise it serves to disorient and deceive the masses, and to turn them aside from more important tasks. It is the business of the revolutionary party not to foster but to smash parliamentary illusions; not to suggest the possibility of reforming the bourgeois state, but to make clear, in the living experience of the masses, the necessity for destroying that state and of setting up in its place a new state, the workers’ state. The prime reason why a revolutionary party enters into parliamentary campaigns is to bring its own full revolutionary program openly before the masses. Its parliamentary representatives sit not to win “victories” for the workers in Congress or the Courts – which, even on the smallest scale, is increasingly illusory in the decline of capitalism – but to expose the inner workings of the bourgeois state machinery before the eyes of the masses. Revolutionists utilize bourgeois parliamentarism as one means for destroying bourgeois parliamentarism.
 
Parliamentary Activity Supplementary
Parliamentary activity of all kinds must remain only supplementary to the basic work of promoting and strengthening the basic organizations of the masses. The poor farmers must look first not to Congress and the Supreme Court but to their unions, cooperatives, leagues, and demonstrations, for benefits and relief. The workers will have the “right” to organize when they take that right through the independent strength of their trade unions, and cease expecting it to be handed down from on high by “favorable decisions.” The one effective “curb” of the Supreme Court is, precisely, – the organized strength of the masses.
The real business of the revolutionary party is the organization of the working class and its allies for the conquest of power. Every immediate demand, every particular campaign, is correct, is justified,only so far as, in its historical implications, it aids in this central task; and is on every occasion to be condemned insofar as it turns the class aside from the road to power.



A striking indication of the depth of the war crisis is the fact that, during these first weeks of the present session of Congress, the hearings and debate over “neutrality legislation” have received more newspaper space and headlines than any other Congressional news – more even than the potently vote-coralling Bonus. Senator Nye is becoming a name for housewives and ward-heelers to conjure with. Every day brings a juicy scandal from the files of the State Department or Morgan & Co. Carter Glass plays his favorite role of ancient Roman Senator denouncing the desecrators of the temple, and defends the honor of his wartime leader – who was besides, sir, a Southern gentleman – against Nye’s infamous accusations. The resigning monarch of the House of Morgan smokes his big pipe, smiles jovially at reporters, and poses with his inquisitors for the cameramen.
“Neutrality” is hardly a new problem. Particularly in the United States have the conceptions of “neutrality,” “neutrality policy” and “neutrality rights” had a long and checkered career. Around these conceptions have revolved the leading ideas of American foreign policy as a whole. They deserve careful analysis.
 
“Neutrality” Part of War Policy
The first and essential prerequisite to an understanding of the concept of “neutrality” and any specific neutrality proposals or legislation is to realize that such a concept or such proposals and legislation are a fundamental part of the war policy of the United States (or of any other capitalist state which makes use of them). This basic fact is no doubt obscured by the attitude toward neutrality and neutrality legislation taken by Roosevelt, Nye, the liberals, the Nation, the New Republic, the Daily Worker, the New Leader, and the Socialist Call. But it none the less remains a fact for all that; and it could not be otherwise.
The business of the state is to serve the interests of capital. These interests, from time to time, reach a point of such tremendous conflict that a temporary solution can be reached only through war. Modern war is a gigantic and involved undertaking, and must be systematically prepared for over a long period of years. The most obvious part of the preparation is the building of armaments. But there is more to it than this. Speeches, laws and declarations about neutrality are one vastly important part of the preparation.
How else could they be understood? Undoubtedly, on any account, they have something to do with the problem of war. But, we are told, they are efforts to maintain and secure peace – not at all part of the preparation for war. This, however, could be true only if peace were possible under capitalism. We know that it is not. We know that capitalism leads inevitably to war. We know that the program of every capitalist state is necessarily a war program. For the capitalist state to abandon a war program would be simply for it abdicate, since only through war can it endure. Consequently, neutrality measures can be understood only as part of the war program of the capitalist state.
 
Who Believes Neutrality Means Peace?
Who is it that doubts this? Who believes that neutrality measures are part of a peace program? It is not Roosevelt. On Friday in his annual message he states that adequate neutrality legislation is the major task of the present session. On Monday he follows with his annual budget providing an increase of $200 millions in the appropriation of the regular budget for military preparation – with no telling how much more will flow from relief funds. As Roosevelt knows, these are simply two sides of the same program. There is no contradiction whatever between them. It is not Hearst. He is a major champion of neutrality (in the form of “isolation.”) And he also, quite naturally, is a major champion of big navies – in order, as he explains, to defend neutrality. It is not the American Liberty League, which, with all its howling for economy, never says a word about military expenditure and thoroughly concurs in the plan to have a “strong” neutrality program. It is not General Smedley Butler. In his speech to the American League at Cleveland he showed the delegates clearly enough – if they had wanted to listen – how neutrality and a modern mechanized army and navy go hand in hand together. It is not Morgan. He and the Nye Committee collaborate harmoniously in the mutual effort to work out a satisfactory neutrality program for this country.
The New York Times, authentic voice of finance-capital, sums the matter up succinctly, Jan. 19th, in an article by Harold B. Hinton: “Neutrality, in the last analysis, must always present itself to this country as a problem in trade relations.” Nor is the problem peculiarly American. Augur, the brilliant director of the Times’ foreign service, somewhat grimly applies the lesson to England: “Britain will arm to the teeth not for war but for the defense of peace.”
These are serious men, who know what they are talking about.
 
Chloroform for the Masses
No, it is not these who doubt that the neutrality policy of a capitalist state is part of its war program, who delude themselves With the myth that it is a “means for ensuring peace.” It is, unfortunately, the masses – too trusting and too desperately eager to grasp at any straw labeled “peace” – who cherish such illusions. And the masses do so, above all, because they are deceived and confused by the horde of false “friends of peace” whose efforts spread the lies and distortions. From within and outside the working class, the pacifists and social-patriots carry forward betrayal. It is they who advise the masses: Support strong neutrality legislation, and strike a blow for peace, which, translated, means: Support the war program of the imperialist state, and prepare for sacrifice in the coming war.
The neutrality proposals prominent at present can be divided into three major types:
 
“Freedom of the Seas”
(1) The traditional neutrality policy of the United States since its foundation has been the doctrine of “the freedom of the seas.” The theory of this doctrine is that the U.S. wants peace; it wishes to avoid all “foreign entanglements”; it demands only that its nationals shall be left free to carry on trade over the high seas with any customers they may choose.
A year ago Secretary of State Hull made statements in part apparently abandoning this traditional doctrine. And there is no doubt that the publicity given its consequences in 1914–17 has made it fall into a certain public disfavor. Nevertheless it remains a cornerstone of U.S. policy. The Administration Neutrality Bill, when introduced, contained it in a modified form in the clause permitting, (i.e., demanding) “normal trade” with belligerents in all but actual war munitions. Great leeway is allowed for the definition of “normal trade,” and no provision is made to shut off indirect shipment to belligerents through neutrals. It should also be remembered that increased trade with future belligerents begins in advance of actual hostilities, during the period of the rapid accumulation of war reserves – so that almost any amount of trade could in fact be defined as “normal.” Even this, however, was not enough. Under the pressure of Borah and other “traditional” Senators, an amending clause has been inserted to guarantee continued full upholding of the freedom of the seas doctrine.
 
Profits, Trade and War
This doctrine is consistent and realistic. It is entirely false to believe that American capitalists want war. Like other capitalists, they want profits. They strongly prefer to gain profits peacefully, by “trade.” They know that war is an expensive, hazardous undertaking, and besides they have moral scruples against it. So they ask, in all sincerity, only to carry on their trade in peace. Those nations can do the fighting, and the U.S. capitalists will stick to their profits. The comparative geographical isolation of the U.S. and its immense material resources give a semblance of plausibility to this idea, since the U.S. is not so immediately involved in international political disputes as are European nations.
But – such are the perversities of capitalist society – the laudable aim of the U.S. capitalists runs into a jam. Other nations, struggling for their political lives, cannot permit “freedom of the seas” without destroying themselves. They must have the “freedom,” so far as possible, apply only to themselves, and not to their enemies. Nations fight wars in order to win them. Thus the warring nations are forced to infringe the – entirely “reasonable” – rights of the honest neutral Uncle Sam. who asks only peace and freedom. This is naturally a severe moral – and, incidentally, financial – shock to U.S. capitalists. They can put up with it for a time, and to a certain point. But, after all,the honor of a great nation, and the profits and potential profits of its capitalists, can endure only so much. After all, economics is not everything. When honor is at stake, more vulgar considerations must go by the board.
So, with infinite regret, and a call on all classes for truly patriotic sacrifice, the war to defend the rights of the neutral and peace-loving United States is declared.
 
The Doctrine of “Isolation”
(2) The second neutrality policy now current, which has also a long history, is the program of “isolation.” This is a favorite of liberals, the avowed theory of Senator Nye and, in a somewhat different form, of Hearst. This doctrine says that “freedom of the seas” must be abandoned, since it got us into the last war and would get us into the next. The U.S. will have to isolate itself rigidly from any war situation, will have to remain in strict financial and economic quarantine,sacrificing the “war profits.”
The neutrality bills now before Congress are on the whole a hybrid of this second type and the first.
The doctrine of “isolation” is a vicious and fatal myth. In terms of historical actuality, isolation for the U.S. is simply a direct impossibility. What could it possibly mean? Even if – which is also impossible – foreign commerce to warring nations could be cut off entirely, it is necessary to remember that U.S. economic enterprise is not at all confined at any time to the geographical boundaries of the nation. American capital owns or is invested in industries of all kinds throughout the world – automobile and airplane plants, oil wells and refineries, transportation and communication systems, mines, plantations, public utilities, railroads, to mention only a few. What would happen to these under the rule of “isolation”? Would U.S. capitalists sit back quietly and allow the warring nations to take them over? Would such industries also (and how?) be“forbidden” to trade with the belligerents?
 
Life-Blood of Imperialism
But what an absurdity to suppose that even commerce could be shut down. In an imperialist nation, foreign investment and trade (however small a percentage of total turnover they may represent) are essential to the functioning of capitalist economy. Without it, imperialism collapses. No class can allow the system which supports its social position to collapse without a struggle. Uncontrollable forces would wedge through any conceivable isolationist scheme. Anyone who doubts this need only glance over recent monthly foreign trade reports during the period of operation of the temporary isolationist neutrality legislation adopted last summer.
What then is the function of isolationist neutrality propaganda? It too has a basic part to play in the war program of U.S. imperialism. The U.S. does not need to enter the coming war at the outset. The probable strategy will be to wait until the opponents are to some extent exhausted, and then to step in holding the decisive position (though a “preventive” war against Japan is not excluded).
Consequently, the rulers of the U.S. can afford the luxury of a more indirect long term preparation for the war than is possible to the hard-pressed European nations. Preparation for war means not merely building armaments, collecting reserves of material, and organizing industry. It also means, especially in the present era, the psychological and moral preparation of the masses for war. The masses must be led to see the war as “just.” To accomplish this, they must be systematically deceived as to the true nature and cause of war. In such deception in this country, the doctrine of isolation plays a great part, creating the grossest pacifist illusions. By its falsification of the real position of the U.S., it hinders the development of the genuine fight against war, and directs the energy of those seeking peace into the harmless chase after a will-o’-the-wisp.
(3) The third current doctrine of neutrality is the American counterpart of the theory of “sanctions”. Secretary Hull has flirted with this from time to time, but its foremost supporter in this country is the Communist party together with the organizations under its influence. This is the doctrine of Litvinov, applied by the C.I. Sections within capitalist nations in the same way that Litvinov applies it as spokesman for the Soviet State.
The basic prerequisites of neutrality legislation according to this theory, as given by the Daily Worker, Jan. 2, are:
“(1) Recognition of world collective action to maintain peace; (2) branding of an aggressor; (3) lifting of arms embargo against the victim of aggression, tightening it against an AGGRESSOR; (4) arms embargoes to be extended not only to financial aid to an aggressor, but to include the MOST VITAL war materials of today – oil, cotton, copper, iron, and such other raw materials in which American supplies are decisive.”
 
The “Aggressor” and Status Quo
This type of neutrality legislation is the most openly of all an integral part of a war program. Since the question of who is the “aggressor” is purely juridical and moral in character – all capitalist nations being equally involved in the international system which inevitably breeds wars – such a doctrine is merely a formulation of one possible way in which nations to whom on the whole, maintenance of the status quo is desirable, can plan to secure such maintenance. This applies above all to the Stalinist bureaucracy. The status quo is also, on the whole, desired by British and French imperialism, but they find acceptance of the extreme theory of sanctions too risky. They advocate it therefore in a diluted form.
The U.S. also wants for the time being, the status quo. But the U.S. does not so imperiously need to take dangerous steps to gain this end, nor does the. U.S. isolationist tradition make a “sanctions” doctrine easy to come out with openly. However, even the present proposed neutrality legislation, nominally applying equally to all belligerents, contains something of the “sanctions against an aggressor” idea: in effect it works out to aid one or the other side, just as “freedom of the seas” in the last war acted in part as sanctions against Germany. Later on the need of U.S. imperialism to smooth the way for the declaration of war may require more openly sanctionist legislation or declarations. Roosevelt’s annual message, with its attack on autocratic war-making dictatorships foreshadowed such a possibility, which would make it easy for a moral mobilization of the nation in a war against the “aggressor”, against fascism, tyranny and militarism.
* * *
An examination in the concrete of proposed forms of neutrality legislation only serves to establish more unquestionably what is clear enough in general to begin with: Neutrality legislation of any sort whatever on the part of a capitalist state is and can be nothing else than one aspect of its war program. Different types of neutrality legislation are only different theories of what best serves the long-run interests of the basic war program.
What, then, are we to conclude? We can and must conclude that advocacy and support of neutrality legislation is necessarily advocacy and support of the war program of the imperialist state. Such advocacy and support within the working class, therefore, is a form of betrayal on the question of war. It must be exposed, fought against and eliminated.
There is only one struggle against war: the revolutionary struggle against the system that breeds war, the struggle for world socialism. Let us put an end to the deadly myth that the war makers – the capitalist states – are going to be the ones to do away with that through which alone they endure. The struggle against war is nothing other than the class struggle for workers’ power.

  One of the crucial issues of the present war crisis has been the problem of so-called “sanctions.” Sanctions, moreover, are not merely a question for theoretical analysis. Sanctions are being tested also by experience: during nearly five months they have been in operation against an “aggressor.” In the light of the experience of these five months, therefore, I wish to test the analysis we have made of the problem of sanctions, and the position which we hold with respect to them. The first point to make clear is that the sanctions which I am discussing – namely, the real sanctions which have really been in operation during these months – are in actuality certain economic, financial and commercial measures carried out by certain national states: Great Britain, France, the Soviet Union, and various of their satellites. This point may seem either so trivial or so obvious as to be hardly worth making. In fact, however, it is crucial. The reason why it must be understood is that these measures are usually referred to not as they really are but as “League of Nations sanctions.” From this it is concluded that they differ fundamentally from measures carried out by national states, that they are collective acts of collective body which aims to uphold world stability and world peace. The truth is that the idea of “League sanctions” is a mere legal fiction. The League of Nations is not a sovereign political unit nor an economic unit. It has no citizens nor army nor navy nor industries nor trade nor finance (other than the unimportant Bank for International Settlements, which to some extent it controls). Consequently there are no sanctions which the League could put into effect, no matter how desirous it might be of doing so. Sanctions, as defined in the League Covenant, can be put into effect only by sovereign political states. The only reality they can even conceivably have is as acts of sovereign political states. It is this basic fact which determines the attitude of the various tendencies within the working class toward sanctions. Revolutionary Marxists are opposed to sanctions, because they are on all occasions opposed to bourgeois national states; the strategy of Marxists aims always toward the overthrow of bourgeois states. The social-patriots, on the other hand, favor sanctions, because at bottom the social-patriots rest on bourgeois national states, and rely on collaboration with them. The social-patriots of the standard social variety, here as in every other crucial issue, function as the agents of the bourgeois bureaucracy within the working class. The new-style Stalinist social-patriots function within the working class as agents of the class enemy through an indirect route. These latter, committed to the building of socialism in one country, are consequently led to aid in maintenance of the status quo internationally – to enable socialism to be built “without interruption” – and thus must collaborate with and rely on the bourgeois states to whose immediate interest such maintenance is or seems to Stalin to be. In both cases, social-patriotism in general, and support of sanctions in particular, means nothing other than alliance with the class enemy. Let us examine briefly what has happened in the case of sanctions, since their invocation in November: Most of the nations belonging to the League have put into effect certain measures relating to their trade with Italy. These measures have included prohibitions on the export to Italy of a number of materials and products related to the carrying on of war (implements of war, horses, trucks, etc.); and also certain restrictions on granting loans and credits to Italy. The United States, also, though not a member of the League, has carried out certain sanctions: the prohibition of the export of certain implements of war, as provided in the Neutrality Act; and restrictions on loans and credit, through the Johnson Act. It is to be remarked that all these nations, including the Soviet Union, have been very zealous in sticking to the letter of the law on sanctions. They have been careful not to step over the bounds of “collective action” by extending sanctions to anything not specifically agreed upon – to, for example, oil. Italy, on her side, however, has gone a little further, and has expanded the reign of sanctions by instituting what she has called “counter-sanctions”: restriction of imports, prohibition of the sale of certain products from sanctionist nations, freezing of credits and other financial restrictions to prevent payment to these nations, etc. What has been the effect of these measures? First, it will require no argument to prove that their effect on the conduct of the Italian military campaign in Ethiopia has been zero. There is no indication that they have affected the campaign in the slightest. From a military point of view, Ethiopia has fared neither better nor worse than if sanctions had never been thought of. As means of stopping the war or of saving ravaged Ethiopia, sanctions have accomplished nothing. Sanctions seem to have had some effect in adding to Italy’s economic and financial burdens internally, in cutting down supplies of certain goods and in raising prices. How great a percentage of such dislocation can be traced to sanctions, however, and how much to what would have occurred in any case under the given circumstances, without sanctions, it is difficult to estimate. Certain economic and financial difficulties have also followed with the sanctions-invoking countries. Indeed, it is probable that sanctions have been as burdensome to Great Britain and France as to Italy. This, then, is the sum of the effects of sanctions as pretended instruments for stopping war and maintaining peace. This does not, however, complete the story of the effect of sanctions.  National Unity The outstanding effect of the policy of sanctions has been: to aid in bringing to a new high point national unity within both the sanctions-invoking nations and Italy. The united support of sanctions by the dominant sections of the bourgeoisie together with the leadership of the dominant working class parties and organizations has meant in practice a coalition between the bourgeoisie and the working class. The crucial result of sanctions, thus, from the point of view of the working class, has been the weakening of the position of the working class, a shift in the relationship of forces in favor of the bourgeoisie, a setback to the revolutionary struggle. In Italy, the policy of sanctions has played neatly into the hands of Mussolini. He has been able to direct the resentment of the masses away from the enemy at home,away from himself, the Fascist state and Italian finance-capital, to the “enemy abroad” – to the sanctionist nations and particularly to Great Britain. Thus the process of conscious class differentiation in Italy, which might well have gone on at a rapid rate during this period, has had substituted for it a merging into patriotic support of the nation – that is, support of the class enemy. Of even more importance, in the long run, is the degree to which sanctions have aided in accomplishing national unity within France and Great Britain (the same process has of course occurred within the lesser nations). In Great Britain, support of sanctions by the Labour Party and the Communist Party identified these parties with the Conservative Party on the war question, which has been, of course, the decisive question. It was this which made possible the sweeping victory of Baldwin in the November General Elections – since, with the same policy on the crucial question, the Labour Party could not furnish effective opposition. It is this, moreover, which is enabling Baldwin to carry through his armament program with hardly a voice raised loudly, and none convincingly. against it. The same developments have occurred in France. Laval, Sarraut, the Peoples Front, all united for the League and for sanctions – and, of course, with suitable “modifications.” And the effect has been to reunite France to a degree which would have seemed unimaginable a year ago. At that time, France was making rapidly ready, through a division into the two great class armies, for the struggle for power. The internal crisis in France has not of course been solved in favor of the bourgeoisie by the unification achieved with the help of the pro-sanctionst policy of the People’s Front. But the process of class differentiation has during these five months been setback heavily. The temporary weakening of the Croix de Feu and the Fascists generally, pointed to with such smug complacency by the Stalinists as proof of the great “victories” of the People’s Front, in actuality demonstrates just the opposite. The Fascists have retired a little precisely because the policy of the People’s Front has so weakened the position of the working class that it does not so imminently threaten the foundations of bourgeois rule. Consequently, in France, the attempt at a Fascist coup can be further postponed. Finance-capital does not call in the Fascists until it has to; if it can maintain itself securely with the add of the working class parties,so much the better and less troublesome. Likewise, as in England, the pro-sanctions policy in France has made meaningless any opposition to the increased armament measures and speeded militarization. And it has played a great part in making the masses ready to defend, with full patriotic fervour, French finance-capital against Hitler. Humanité and Populaire outdo Flandin in their denunciation of the re-militarization of the Rhineland. And, quite naturally, they fail to notice that Flandin represents the class enemy at home – since their policy and Flandin’s are fundamentally identical.  Independent Action Secondly, the pro-sanctions policy has sabotaged any effective independent working-class actions against the war. With their customary hypocrisy and cynicism, the Stalinist spokesmen inform us that they are for both governmental and working-class “sanctions”; and that the latter are more “basic.” The C.I. “criticized” at length the British Labour Party because it advocated only governmental sanctions and neglected working-class actions. But this is only rhetoric, only phrases to temper the social-patriotic wind. Governmental sanctions and independent working-class “sanctions” do not supplement each other, as the Stalinists pretend, but contradict each other. The reason is easy to understand. Supporting governmental sanctions is supporting the government; independent working-class actions are necessarily directed against the government (the representative of the opposing class) and its policies. You cannot simultaneously fight with and against the government. You can pretend to do so, in words, as the Stalinists do; but the logic of facts, not phrases, governs your actions. And, as the last five months proves, the logic of facts prevented those who stood for governmental sanctions from organizing any significant working-class actions. The contradiction is somewhat obscured in the Italy-Ethiopian conflict, where the working class is on the side of one of the contestants and against the other. It would be glaringly obvious in the more important case of a conflict between two or more imperialist nations (e.g., France and Germany), where correct working-class actions would have to be directed equally against all the contesting states, including the home government, but where any governmental sanctions would be directed against only one side. To carry out working-class actions would have meant a consistent policy against the government, against the national state. Such a policy, though under the given conditions it too would doubtless have been unable to bring about peace and stop Italy’s campaign, on the other hand would have acted in a manner just the opposite of the pro-sanctions policy in its influence on the relationship of class forces: however unsuccessful it might have been “practically,” it would have promoted the class differentiation, strengthened the independent struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie, and hindered the building up of national unity. It would have provided the basis for agitation to dispel and not to consolidate illusions. In short, it would have been the foundation for revolutionary, and not for social-patriotic strategy.  Weapon of Peace? “What went wrong with sanctions?” the confused but sincere believer in sanctions asks himself, after reviewing the results of the pro-sanctions policy. “Why didn’t they work better?” If we begin reasoning from the belief that sanctions are a “weapon of peace,” a “means for enforcing peace,” then there is only one way to answer these questions. We must conclude that sanctions went wrong, that they didn’t work, because they weren’t strong enough, because the policy of sanctions was not sufficiently vigorously and extensively enforced. This is in fact the conclusion which the pro-sanctionists reach in trying to explain why sanctions have not worked in the Italian affair. Let us suppose, for a moment, that this is correct, and let us imagine that sanctions had been enforced to the limit by the League nations. What would have followed from this? To be thoroughly “effective,” sanctions would have had to include embargoes on virtually every import to and export from Italy. But such embargoes would have had to apply to goods to and from non-sanctions applying nations in order to accomplish their purpose. Thus, they could have been enforced only by a military and naval blockade (what diplomats have been calling “military sanctions”). But a military and naval blockade is an act of war, and must necessarily have led to armed retaliation by Italy, since the life of Italy as a nation would have been at stake, as well as retaliation by the non-sanctionist nations, whose sovereignty would be threatened by the blockade. We see, therefore, that a “fully effective” sanctions policy would – in this case as in any other – mean nothing else than war. The “peace policy” of sanctions turns out to be a war policy. The belief that sanctions are a means for enforcing peace thus puts us into a flat contradiction: peace can be genuinely enforced only by war. The reason for this is, of course, that the original belief – that any belief which leads to a contradiction – is false. Sanctions are not a means for enforcing peace. The only case in which this contradiction could be avoided would be if the interests of all nations in the world except the so-called “aggressor” (here Italy) were in harmony. Then it might be possible to organize an unbroken front of embargoes against the “aggressor”; and the “aggressor,” alone against the entire world, might well have to accede to world pressure without a fight. But this is not and cannot be true of the capitalist world, in which the interests of various nations and groups of nations are continuously in conflict. This might be the case in a World Federation of Socialist Republics; and “sanctions” might indeed be a means for enforcing peace if by chance threatened by a member of such a Federation. That, however,is a question not for the present but for the future. To believe that sanctions are a means for enforcing peace leads,then, to a contradiction. It makes it impossible for us to understand sanctions in their true role, to interpret what actually has happened during the past five months, to explain the realities of world politics. It leaves it inexplicable why sanctions of a sort were applied in the case of Italy, but not in the case of Bolivia-Paraguay or of Japan in Manchuria, in both of which at least as good “legal” grounds existed for applying them. It leaves unintelligible the anti-sanctionist position of Great Britain now in the Rhineland dispute. With respect to “peace,” Great Britain has had the same outlook during all four of these occurrences – and yet only in one did she advocate sanctions.  The Real Meaning To explain the role of sanctions intelligibly, we must first understand what they are. And if we understand this, we know that they are not means for enforcing peace, but simply instruments of the policies of the national governments which invoked them, or consider invoking them. We judge and explain them, therefore, in the light of the whole policies of the given governments. For Great Britain and France, for example, they are part of the imperialist policies of two imperialist governments – that is, part of two war policies. For the Soviet Union, they are part of the world policy of Stalinism – of socialism in one country, preservation of the international status quo, and preparation for defense of the Soviet Union by alliance with capitalist states. To understand sanctions in this manner – that is, as they are, not as pacifists and social-patriots dream of them – makes explicable what has actually happened, and the contacts that have arisen. In the Chaco War, the policies of France and Great Britain did not require any flirtation with sanctions. Indeed, Great Britain preferred that the Chaco War should continue, since Royal-Dutch-Shell had an important stake in the victory of Paraguay. Sanctions were therefore never mentioned. Likewise in the case of the Japanese invasion of Manchuria. Here was a perfect legal instance for the application of sanctions. But France, and particularly Great Britain, saw nothing to be gained from the use of such a risky weapon. Their imperialist interests were not immediately and directly affected to a sufficient degree. They consequently decided that the best “means for enforcing peace” at that time was to do nothing openly, to carry on diplomatic negotiations and financial transactions behind the scenes, and to strengthen the fortifications at Hongkong and Singapore. They left it to the United States Secretary of State, Stimson, to express “world indignation against the aggressor” by his blundering and meaningless “non-recognition policy.” But the Italian preparations for the conquest of Ethiopia placed both France and Great Britain in dilemmas. If Italy, acting alone, won undisputed sway over Ethiopia, she would threaten the British Empire lines of communication, the headwaters of the Nile and Egypt. On the other hand, if Ethiopia defeated the Italian legions or even resisted too strongly, there would be repercussions adverse to the British rulers among the native populations of the British colonies. Consequently, what Great Britain wanted in the Ethiopian matter was “neither peace nor war.” The needed a deal – a deal which would have given Italy what Italy could not do without, but would not involve too much fighting, and would leave Ethiopia not unrestrictedly under Italian rule, but in part at least under a more “international” control – that is, a control which would not put the British lines of communication and the Nile too easily at Italy’s mercy. Naturally, Great Britain was not concerned over the fate of the Ethiopians. Great Britain, for the past year, has consistently aimed toward such an end. Through the League, an offer along these lines was made to Italy last summer – but this offer could not satisfy Mussolini’s internal requirements. He needed a war. A half-way and muddled sanctions policy was adopted after the fighting started, in order to keep the dispute within an international framework. Then the Hoare-Laval proposal revived the summer plan; its announcement was premature, but it paved the way. Now, reports indicate that the Rhineland crisis will be utilized to clean up sanctions, and fix the whole Ethiopian question up in a Franco-British-Italian compromise. France’s dilemma was equally puzzling. She was quite willing for Mussolini to go ahead, since her own interests were not affected, and had told him so in the early part of 1935. But France also wished to keep the friendship of Great Britain and the League procedure, as useful instruments against the eventualities of Hitler’s policy. France was forced, therefore, to go along part way with Great Britain in the Ethiopian question. But her influence was exerted chiefly to aid the projected deal, and to keep the application of sanctions from getting too extensive or serious. Flandin now is jumping the gun, and in his March 20 speech to the Chamber has hailed the early cancelling of sanctions. The Soviet Union pursued the only “consistent” sanctions policy. Frantically striving to maintain the status quo as long as possible, and to prepare for war with Hitler, it put its money on the League, and on friendship . with France and Great Britain. Thus, for public purposes, it spoke most loudly of all, for the League, and in favor of peace and international security; and meanwhile played in actuality the sanctions game as the compromise between France and Great Britain decided. During the past two months, the Stalinist press has conveniently allowed the question of sanctions to slip out of sight, in deference to France’s wishes, and in order to get through the ratification of the Franco-Soviet Pact. Litvinov is now in a position to allow the whole matter, with a suitable rhetorical flourish, to be dropped. After all, what are 11,000,000 savages compared to a military alliance with French imperialism? We cannot allow utopian ideals to stand in the way of realistic defense of the Workers’ Fatherland. Meanwhile, as Selden, The Times London correspondent, remarked a few days ago, Ethiopia, in the face of the new complications, like Moses in the bullrushes. has been forgotten by all but God. In this manner has the policy of sanctions served the cause of peace and the defense of the oppressed. Imperialism has made its sacrifices, but has not gone unrewarded. Great Britain would have preferred no trouble at all. However, since trouble could not be altogether avoided, Great Britain has been able to keep strings on Italy, and has laid the basis for a settlement within an international framework which will not be too threatening to imperial interests. Meanwhile British troops have cleared up awkward resulting situations in India and Egypt (Litvinov somehow forgot to suggest sanctions against Great Britain for its treatment of the Egyptian students and the border tribes in India). France, by throwing first oil and then political monkey wrenches into the sanctions machinery, has managed to keep friendly with Italy while at the same time not breaking with Great Britain. If she has been having certain difficulties in Syria, we must observe that she has the mission of preserving peace within her own dominions as well as in Ethiopia. Litvinov has kept in the good graces of his imperialist colleagues, built up sentiment against Germany, and secured the ratification of the Franco-Soviet Pact. If, in the affair, Soviet diplomacy has acted almost exclusively as the pawn first of British and then of French imperialism, we must remember that it is only Trotskyites and such-like counter-revolutionists who believe that the dictatorship should put its reliance on the international proletariat and the extension of the October revolution. The realists of the Kremlin know that the choice now is not between socialism and capitalism but between democratic imperialism and fascist imperialism – and that we had better take the former and like it, even if it leads next month to the latter. Imperialism has found the policy of sanctions useful enough for one stage of its deepening game. And in that stage, the policy of sanctions has served imperialism sufficiently well. It is, after all, only the position of the international working class that the policy of sanctions has injured. And this would hardly be of central concern to the imperialists themselves or to their social-patriotic agents,who must more rapidly make ready to turn the workers over to the war machine. But the stage in which sanctions have been useful is dropping behind. The re-militarization of the Rhineland calls for new answers to new problems. The naked bones of the entire League structure stand more rudely revealed by the gesture of the Nazi troops. France complains over England’s treachery in refusing sanctions now when she forced France into them against Italy. Litvinov indignantly protests the violation of the sanctity of treaties (alas, the morals of imperialism!). And Great Britain desperately maneuvers to maintain the precarious balance a little longer, before the clouds burst wide open. 
  There is – and naturally enough – a widespread confusion about the nature and meaning of “social-patriotism”. Indeed, if it were not for this confusion, social-patriotism would not he capable of producing the powerful effects which it does in fact produce; and, consequently, would not represent the mortal danger to the working class which it does in fact represent. The confusion can be illustrated by a reply frequently heard from Stalinists, whether party members or sympathizers, to the accusation that the policy of the Comintern is social-patriotic. “This accusation,” they protest, “is libellous slander. Why, look at such and such an article and this or that resolution. You can see for yourself, the C.I. theorist puts forward the great Leninist slogan, ‘Turn the imperialist war into a civil war’. Here are the paragraphs which state that war can finally be eliminated only under socialism, that capitalism inevitably in the end leads to war, etc. etc. How, then, can you continue to call the C.I. social-patriotic in the face of such evidence?” To many honest people, not fully clear about the nature of politics, such a reply is convincing. To Marxists, however, it is entirely meaningless. We have here an example of a technique of betrayers familiar since the beginnings of the revolutionary movement, and typical of demagogy in every form. It is the same argument that is used in general by supporters of reformism and social-democracy. Do not the social democrats declare in favor of socialism and against capitalism? How, then, can you say that they are an obstacle to the working class, that they actually serve to uphold the continued rule of capital and to foster the basic interests of the bourgeoisie within the working class? Unfortunately, the effects of the actions of men are not measured or determined either by their hopes and wishes or by the abstract slogans which they from time to time formulate.  A Perfumed Poison Above all is this true in the case of social-patriotism. The truth of the matter is that if a social-patriotic policy were openly and explicitly stated as such, it would make no headway among the masses, and would be of minor importance. It would be merely repudiated. Social-patriotism gains its influence precisely because it is disguised, because it is clothed outwardly in the noble raiment of proletarian and revolutionary phraseology. Only thus can social-patriotism gain access to the consciousness of the masses. The deadly poison of social-patriotism must on all occasions be heavily perfumed. It is the critical insight of Marxism alone that can penetrate to the poisonous core. And Marxism is able to do so because it judges programs – any program – not on the basis of ideals and wishes, nor of abstract phrases and distant goals, but on the specific answers to specific questions, the concrete policies on concrete issues, and on the actions which follow from such answers and such concrete policies.  Social Patriotism in 1914 In 1914, the European social-democratic parties carried through a social-patriotic betrayal of the working class to the war, turned their following over to the guns of imperialism. But, of course, this was done entirely – for the sake of socialism. Not for one moment did the leaders of the social-democracy abandon the ideal of a socialist society. None of them made declarations for the support of the class enemy. Many of them – Kautsky included – continued even to advocate “the proletarian dictatorship”. But, in spite of all this unexceptionable conduct, they supported the imperialist war; they recruited the workers into the army; they voted for the war credits; they took their places in the war machines. It is for this, and not for their phrases and ideals and words that we characterize their policies as social- patriotic How could these concrete acts be reconciled with the abstract ideals? The social-democratic leaders were skilled and ingenious men. They found little difficulty. It was necessary, in Germany, for the social-democracy to defend the gains and achievements of the German working class against the tyranny and despotism of Russian Czarism, the most reactionary government in the entire world, which, if victorious, would have destroyed those gains and achievements. This was a very plausible argument, and could be defended by most convincing “socialist” reasoning. Its plausibility is decreased, however, when it is compared with the equally convincing socialist reasoning which was employed by the social-democrats of France and England. The latter pointed out, of course, that it was necessary to defend democracy and freedom (and the possibility for the advance to socialism which democracy and freedom allowed) against German militarism, which would, if victorious, have destroyed democracy in France and England, and thus turned back the struggle for socialism. In each case, the concrete content of the policies of the social democrats meant simply: support of one’s own government – that is, support of the class enemy through its representative, the state. In other words, it means, and could only mean, the betrayal of the workers’ struggle for socialism, which is necessarily the struggle against the class enemy and the state; and thus it meant also the abandonment of the struggle against war, which is inseparable from the class struggle for socialism. The basic characteristic of social-patriotism remains the same: support, within the working class, of the capitalist state and through it of the bourgeoisie in the war. The specific forms of social-patriotism, however, necessarily change, since these must be adjusted to the concrete circumstance of the given war crisis. It is by these specific forms – not by the general and abstract phrases – that we must always judge any “anti-war” policy. In the present war crisis, therefore, it is irrelevant to argue over the appearance of phrases about “civil war”, the “dictatorship of the proletariat”, or “the struggle for socialism”. These are, on the proper occasion, important. But they do not at all determine the meaning of the “anti-war” policy, do not at all murk it as on the one hand, revolutionary, or on the other, social-patriotic.  Four Forms of Social Patriotism We must examine the specific and peculiar issues of the present crisis, since it is with respect to these that the differentiation between revolutionists and social-patriots takes place. In the present war crisis, the specific and peculiar issues have been four: (1) Defense of the Soviet Union; (2) Wars of democratic nations against fascist nations; (3) Neutrality Legislation; (4) League and governmental sanctions. This does not mean that other issues are not present. All the old issues remain, and take on new meanings in the new crisis. But these four appear in a special manner at present, offering problems not wholly solved in previous crises, and around which new and basic re-groupments consequently take place. On these four issues the dividing line between Marxists and social-patriots is sharp and unmistakable. It is indeed characteristic of a war crisis that it tends more and more clearly to reduce all the complex divisions within the labor movement to the basic two: revolutionary Marxism and social-patriotism. The divergence here can be summed up as follows:  (1) Defense of the Soviet Union The Marxists stand for the defense of the Soviet Union by the extension of the October revolution to the capitalist nations, by the overthrow of the bourgeois state by the revolutionary working class. The Marxists maintain that this policy holds equally in “peace” and in war, and is the only way in which the international proletariat can defend the Workers’ State. The social- patriots stand for the defense of the Soviet Union by the defense of the nations (i.e., the bourgeois states) which may be (for whatever reason) in military alliance with the Soviet Union in the war. Within any capitalist country, they stand for support of the war, if the country in question is allied with the Soviet Union. (2) Wars of democratic nations against fascist nations The Marxists make no distinction between democratic and fascist nations with reference to the policy on war, since they regard both as merely two different forms of capitalist class rule, and recognize that democracy necessarily leads to fascism in the decline of capitalism, unless capitalism itself is overthrown. Within both democratic and fascist states, Marxists call for struggle against the war, against the state; they insist that the chief enemy is at home – the class enemy. The social-patriots call for the support of democratic nations in a war against fascist nations. (3) Neutrality Legislation (This is a problem chiefly for the United States). The Marxists are against all forms and types of Neutrality Legislation, and for an independent revolutionary working class policy against the imperialist war. The social-patriots are for various kinds of Neutrality Legislation, differing among themselves on the most “desirable” kind. (It should be remarked that advocacy of Neutrality Legislation is not always social-patriotism in the strict sense of the term. In the “isolationist” form, it is rather a variety of pacifism, which is not here under discussion. Pacifism, however, tends always to pass over into social-patriotism though it does not necessarily do so. In any case, the revolutionary struggle against war must always include the struggle against every variety of pacifism.) (4) League and Governmental Sanctions The Marxists are against all forms of League and governmental sanctions, and for independent working class “sanctions”. The social-patriots are for League and governmental sanctions against so-called “aggressors”. The social-patriots will of course, say that such a bald outline grossly “misrepresents” their position, that the questions are “not so simple as all that”, etc. And it is certainly true that in the writings and speeches of the social-patriots the questions are not so simply put. They are covered over a cloud of modifications, provisos, additions, justifications, exceptions, and “but” clauses. The social-patriots inform us that they are for not merely governmental sanctions, but also for working-class sanctions – and “the latter are basically the more important.” They assure us that when fighting in the armies of France or the United States against Germany or Japan, they will not “really” be fighting in support of the governments of France and of the United States, but against Nazi Germany and despotic Japan, and for the Soviet Union; and as soon as the threat against the Soviet Union and the menace of Fascism is put out of the way, they will turn their arms against the bourgeois governments of France and the United States. (Similarly, in 1914, the social democrats fought not to support the Kaiser and the Junkers and industrialists, but against the Czar; and not for the English bankers, but against the Kaiser.) They will quickly grant that Neutrality Legislation “cannot permanently ensure peace, which can only be done by the victory of the working class, but we must utilize every means at our disposal.” No “Buts” in Anti-War Struggle But this is all merely evasion, equivocation and deception. At heart, the questions are really as direct and simple as here stated. Yes and No answers are the only two possible. There are no “buts” in the revolutionary struggle against war. All the modifications in a 20,000 word thesis serve only to hide and In no way to alter the social-patriotic betrayal. It is for this very reason that the issue of war provides so unerring a touchstone whereby to distinguish the tendencies and developments within the labor movement. These four specific forms which social-patriotism has taken during the present war crisis are not, of course, unrelated. The Marxist position on each of the four issues follows not accidentally nor arbitrarily, but from one fundamental underlying set of principles, in terms of which the concrete answers are given. Marxists hold that the struggle against war is inseparable from the class struggle in general; that the class struggle means in the present era the struggle of the proletariat (in alliance with colonial and subject peoples and sections of the middle classes) against the bourgeoisie, and its representatives, the bourgeois states. No compromise in this struggle is permissible. Nor can it be suspended because of “exceptional” situations – such as, for example, war. Rather must it be intensified and brought to culmination in “exceptional” situations. Consequently, the Marxists must always reject any policy which involves a subordination to, compromise with, collaboration with, the class enemy and the state. Collaboration with Class Enemy But the policy of the social-patriots is exactly a policy of subordination to, compromise with, the class enemy and the state. The social-patriots propose to conduct the struggle against war in collaboration with the bourgeois state: to defend the Soviet Union along with bourgeois states allied with the Soviet state; to defeat Fascism in collaboration with the bourgeois- democratic states: to stop war for the United States by collaboration with the imperialist U.S. government in enacting and enforcing Neutrality Legislation; to punish “aggressors” by relying on the “sanctions” of imperialist states and the imperialist League against the “aggressor.” The Marxists point out that a struggle against war cannot conceivably be conducted in collaboration with those who make war; that “collaboration” with the class enemy and the bourgeois state can only mean for the working class subordination to the class enemy and the bourgeois state; that, in general, the struggle against war cannot be formulated within the framework of capitalism, since capitalism inevitably breeds war, but must always be the struggle against capitalism, for workers’ power and for socialism. Consequently, they pose the problem of the struggle against war – in whatever manner it appears – sanctions, Neutrality Legislation, defense of the Soviet Union, attitude toward Fascist states – as always the struggle against the bourgeoisie and the bourgeois state. The programs of all the parties, organizations and groups of the working class can be rigidly tested by reference to the four special issues of the present crisis. By making this test, we discover at once the fact of major importance: that, on all four, the most vigorous, relentless and unceasing advocate of the social-patriotic positions is Stalinism – the Communist International and its national sections throughout the world. The Communist parties have become the material embodiment of social-patriotism in the thorough and fatal form it can take in the present crisis. The primary historical function remaining for Stalinism to fulfill is to act as the chief functionary for imperialism within the working class in the coming war. “Defense of the Soviet Union” The same test, secondly demonstrates with equally crystal clarity that the leaders of the Second International, together with the leaders of the chief parties affiliated to the Second International, continue unchanged the social-patriotic tradition of 1914. On all four of these basic concrete issues they have given exactly the same answer as Stalinism: the social-patriotic answer. The four answers are embodied, for example, in the Dan-Zyromski-Bauer Thesis, as well as in the positions of Blum and his associates. This is particularly revealing in the case of “defense of the Soviet Union.” It should hardly be necessary to comment on the record of these gentlemen with reference to the Soviet Union. They were at the beginning, and have remained consistently, the bitter enemies of the October Revolution. Nevertheless, in the face of the war crisis, they are able to formulate a policy with regard to the defense of the Soviet Union which is indistinguishable from the policy of Stalinism. The reason for this is not far to seek. Stalinism, too, has now ranged itself on the side of the enemies of the October Revolution. Stalinism translates “defense of the Soviet Union” in “defense of bourgeois states” – and this naturally coincides with the aims of Messrs. Blum and Bauer. Blum and Bauer are not afraid of words: If the slogan “Defense of the Soviet Union” can aid them in making the social-patriotic pill palatable to the working class, they are perfectly willing to borrow it from Stalin. They go thus a step beyond the leaders of the British Labour Party and of the Old Guard Socialists in this country. These stick mainly to the three other issues for their social-patriotic platform giving to them exactly the same answers as the Stalins and the Bauers), but still balk at the first. They will doubtless learn, however. And, if it is needed in order to speed up recruiting for the army, we shall find that Waldman, Oneal, and the chiefs of the British Labour Party have overnight become among the loudest of the defenders of the Workers’ State. These four issues thus provide us further with a decisive test for the nature of the two Internationals. They prove beyond any possible doubt that the Internationals are on the side of the war, that they will function for the war during this final period of preparation as well as during the actual conflict. From this it follows necessarily that, as one integral part of the struggle against the war, the revolutionists must proclaim the Fourth International; and that the struggle against the war is inseparable from the struggle against the old Internationals and for the new. This conclusion and this task cannot be hidden: we know in advance what the task must be, and to fail to declare it openly is betrayal in the struggle against the war. In addition, these four issues provide major criteria by means of which to measure the new differentiations within the labor movement. The approach toward a revolutionary position is signalled by clarification on these issues. For example, we discover by such an examination that the Militant Socialists in this country have given – though not without certain vitiating “modifications” – the revolutionary as opposed to the social-patriotic answers to three of these four questions posed by the present crisis. They retain a blend of pacifism and potential social-patriotism in their answer to the fourth – Neutrality Legislation – which is of particular importance for a party in the United States, since this is almost exclusively a U.S. question (our revolutionary policy, one might say, must begin at home). The Y.P.S.L.’s have taken a revolutionary position even on this fourth, and have fairly consistently opposed all forms of Neutrality Legislation. It would be an error to conclude from this that the Y.P.S.L.’s – and, consequently, still less the Militants – have reached the full clarification of a Marxist program, in general, or specifically on the war question. This is not yet by any means the case. In spite of their on the whole correct stand with respect to these four crucial present questions, they retain, on the issue of war, other confusions carried over from their earlier heritage: confusions, for example. with reference to pacifism and particularly concerning the proper concrete attitude of Marxists toward pacifist organizations; they have romantic ideas about such matters as “the general strike against war”; and they have so far failed entirely to draw conclusions from their war position with respect to the international question. Nevertheless, the answers they have given on these four questions establish, for the time being at least, the direction in which they are moving. Whether this movement will be completed in adherence to the full and uncompromising program of revolutionary Marxism is of decisive importance for the building of the revolutionary party in this country. Of these four issues featuring the present war crisis, the question of sanctions, though not the most important, is yet the most controversial and raises the largest number of new and consequently hitherto unanswered questions. Furthermore, sanctions are not merely theory, but have already had their test in practice. 


COMRADE Tyler, in the conclusion to his article, states that he has tried merely “to outline the approach of revolutionary Marxism” to the problem of the Labor party. This is as it should be: until the approach is clear and understood, there is small likelihood of answering correctly the practical and secondary questions. I shall, therefore, also confine my discussion to the approach; and there is the more reason for this in the fact that Comrade Tyler’s approach is consistently and thoroughly wrong.
How do revolutionary Marxists solve such a problem as that of the Labor party – or, for that matter any other important problem? The solution is twofold: we must, first, start with and clarify the fundamental issues of political theory which are involved – theory itself being conceived of by Marxists as simply the generalized experience of the revolutionary movement. Following this, we must apply our theory to the concrete, specific circumstances which confront us.
Tyler employs another method. It is sufficiently clear from his article that he has started, not with basic theory and principle, but from certain immediate “experiences” in the unions; from a wish to find a magic shortcut to the revolutionary party; and especially from a fear that socialists in the unions will be “isolated” and left behind unless they jump on the Labor party band-wagon. This is evidenced by such sentences as the following: “... if we openly oppose a Labor party, our orientation cannot be to work with or within it once it is formed. Our hostile attitude in the period when it is being formed will close all doors to us.” His “theory,” as a result, is nothing more than the loose rationalization of his fears and wishes. How else can we understand the absurd analogy. “It (the Labor party) bears the same relationship to the revolutionary party on the electoral field as do the trade unions on the industrial field”; or the fantastic picture of his ideal Labor party, free from class collaboration and Peoples’ Frontism, immune from “bribery with a few reforms,” and imbued with “the basic philosophy ... of the class struggle”? No such Labor party ever did, does, or could exist. Tyler is dreaming of the leopard changing its spots.
 
Tyler Ignores Existing Labor Parties
This first aspect of Tyler’s method of approaching the problem is a mark of opportunism – which always takes what looks like the easier and winning way, and proceeds to justify it by rationalization into a respectable theory. But, in Tyler’s case, this is combined with what would at first glance seem to be its opposite: a complete removal from concrete reality. Not once, not a single time, in the article does Tyler make any reference whatever to concrete fact. He does not mention real Labor parties which have existed or do exist – for him the British Labour Party is evidently in another world. He does not refer to the present historical stage of capitalism – the stage of its decline as a whole, of wars and mass unemployment and fascism and revolutions: this can hardly be thought irrelevant to political theory and strategy. He does not review the experience in this country with Labor parties and near or would-be Labor parties, nor the present position of the Socialist party itself. He sees no reason to estimate the concrete perspectives for American capitalism in the coming period, the relationship of forces in this country, and its place in the world system of decadent capitalism. What amazing, and revealing omissions! And omissions of this kind constitute a divorce from reality, which lead to the wish-world of either Utopianism, on the one hand, or sectarianism on the other. However right his theory in the abstract – and it is far from right – it would remain uselessly in his head, with actuality so vigorously left out of reckoning.
 
Basic Considerations
Let us begin, then, at the beginning:
From the point of view of fundamental theory, there are two basic considerations which must guide us in approaching the problem of the Labor party: first, the nature of the state; and, second, the role and function of the revolutionary party. Marxism teaches that the state, its apparatus as a whole, is the executive committee of the dominant class in society, the task of which is to maintain existing social relations, and thereby to ensure the rule of the class whose state it is. This applies to the bourgeois state, whose task is to maintain capitalism and the rule of the bourgeoisie; and equally to the workers’ state, whose task is to enforce the domination of the proletariat, eliminate the bourgeoisie as a class, and guide the transition to a socialist, classless society. The political aim of the revolutionary movement, consequently, is not to “reform” capitalism, not to “take over” the capitalist state – whether by parliamentary means or by force – but to smash the bourgeois state and to build in its place a workers’ state. In this process, the role of the revolutionary party itself is to act as the conscious, independent, autonomous leader and vanguard of the working class in accomplishing the conquest of power, the overthrow of the bourgeois state, the establishment of the new workers' state, and the transition to socialism.
Does Tyler dispute this? I do not think so. If he does, there is little use discussing with him the problem of a Labor party; we should first have to come to clear and full agreement on these two points – the nature of the state and the role of the revolutionary party – before we could even argue profitably over the Labor party. The answer one gives to the problem of the Labor party depends on and follows from the answer to these two fundamental issues.
These two issues are, in fact, the decisive dividing line between revolutionary Marxism and reformism. All reformist parties – no matter how grandiose their verbal allegiance to “socialism” and socialist ideals – conceive of their political aims as lying within the framework of the capitalist state: as winning reforms from capitalism, winning a majority in the capitalist government, or even as “transforming” the capitalist government into a “socialist government” (i.e., requesting the capitalist state to commit suicide). And, conversely, all political parties which conceive of their political aims as lying within the framework of the capitalist state are (when not directly bourgeois parties) reformist.
 
Labor Party Necessarily Reformist
Applying this test, we can readily enough conclude that a Labor party – any Labor party – is a reformist party. This, also, I imagine, Tyler will not dispute – though, significantly, it is not mentioned in his article. This – reformism – is the basic, determining, decisive characteristic of a Labor party: its political genus, we might say. But, as Tyler remarks, “a Labor party is a particular type of party.” True enough, it is a reformist party which is based on the organized trade union movement, includes the bulk of the trade unions in its membership, and is dominated in direction by the trade-union leadership: this is its particular species in the general genus of reformist parties.
Now, the fundamental position of Marxists toward a Labor party is determined in the light of its basic, defining nature – by the fact that it is a reformist party. The specific tactics of Marxists toward the Labor party, however, take into account also its special characteristics – namely, that it comprises the bulk of the trade unions. Tyler wants a “bona-fide” Labor party, by which he seems to mean one with a “good” “class struggle” program and fighting trade-union candidates. From this follows, in practise, the sectarianism to which his position leads: he will not be “satisfied” with existing Labor parties or those which will come into existence, since they all have and will have “bad,” class collaborationist programs, and bureaucratic rascals as candidates. Marxists, on the contrary, base their interest in Labor parties on the presence of organized labor within them, and are not particularly worried over the exact shade of reformism which their programs represent. From this follows the far greater flexibility of the Marxist tactics with respect to any actual Labor party, which permit critical support, affiliation, or head-on opposition, depending on the concrete circumstances and the given relationship of forces.
 
Reformist Parties Protect Capitalism
A Labor party is, then, a reformist party. What does this mean in practise? The lessons of theory and history teach us. It means that it, like all reformist parties – Labor or not – acts in all crucial situations as an agent of the bourgeoisie within the working class. This is indeed what reformism, in its social roots, is: an agency of the bourgeoisie within the working class. In war-time, reformist parties support imperialism. Does Tyler deny this to be the case? And is it not equally true of the British Labour Party and the German Social-Democracy? In revolutionary situations, reformist parties do not merely fail to aid but actively suppress the revolution. Did not the German Social-Democracy smash the German revolution, and hand back Germany to the bourgeoisie (and thus to Hitler) through the Weimar Constitution? Did not the British Labour Party break the British General Strike? Has it not today declared its devotion to the defense of the British Empire? Or perhaps Tyler does not think the British Labour Party a “bona-fide” Labor party?
A reformist party is powerless to defeat either war or fascism. Does Tyler deny this? I do not think so. The reason is sufficiently obvious: a reformist party will not overthrow capitalism, since it functions within the framework of capitalism; and consequently it cannot stop war or fascism, both of which follow necessarily from the continuance of capitalism.
And since these things are so, we must say them – in the trade unions as elsewhere. Not for any mere devotion to truth in the abstract, but because if we do not, the workers will in time find out for themselves – from that bitter and inescapable teacher, experience – and will not believe us so readily on the next point.
 
Labor Party in Period of Capitalist Decline
The sole positive argument that has been, with some show of truth, advanced in favor of a Labor party is that such a party can win certain “immediate demands” for the workers. On this question, two considerations will suffice: In the past, during the advance of capitalism, this was undoubtedly so, and is possibly so to a slight extent today. But Tyler correctly characterizes such reforms as “bribes”; they are granted by the bourgeoisie to the Labor party in return for the Labor party’s service in concentrating the eyes of the masses on “reforms” and turning them aside from revolutionary struggle for the overthrow of capitalism. They are a small price to pay for such a service. But, second, capitalist society has now reached on an international scale the stage of its decline. Capitalism can endure only by a continual and increasing relative sabotage of the productive forces, only by mass unemployment, hunger, lowering of real wages, war, and fascist tyranny. Now, in the decline of capitalism, reforms of any dimensions, immediate demands, can be won if at all only as the “by-products of revolutionary struggle,” (to use Lenin’s phrase), only by the sharpest collision against the forces of the class enemy. The incontrovertible facts of capitalist decay remove the last remaining prop in the theoretic underpinnings of reformism.
To sum up: A Labor party, then, like any other reformist party, is not merely non-revolutionary, but anti-revolutionary. It is a device for preserving capitalism, not a means for its overthrow. It is a mighty obstacle in the path of the revolutionary movement, not a boost forward. Under such circumstances, to ask whether it is a “rival” to the revolutionary party, whether revolutionists should “oppose” it, is childish. Of course it is a rival; of course revolutionists must oppose it. But it is, naturally, a different kind of rival from say bourgeois parties proper, and requires different tactics of opposition.
 
Purpose of Labor Party
These considerations are unusually obvious in this country. For what possible reasons will a Labor party be started here? The history to date of Labor’s Non-Partisan League and the American Labor party tells us the answer. It will be – or, rather, it has been – started precisely to stave off the growth of revolutionary class consciousness, to keep the allegiance of the masses for capitalism when the two old party machines are wearing out their facility in doing so. Is this not true of the American Labor Party, launched by the trade union bureaucrats in collaboration with Waldman, and blessed by Browder, to make up for the loss of prestige of the Democratic Party before the masses? And who else but these same persons, combined no doubt with Olson and Populists of the LaFollette variety, can launch a Labor party in this country, whether or not the American Labor Party itself (as it very probably will) evolves into a full-fledged Labor party? And its purpose, both in the minds of its leaders and in its objective social effects, cannot be anything else than to try to stave off the development of revolutionary class consciousness. If a “bona-fide” Labor party must include and be led by the trade unions, together with certain farm and other middle-class organizations, then clearly it must include and be led by the reformist bureaucrats whom these unions and organizations follow. Or will the Labor party be an electoral “united front from below”?
There can be no question of the basic attitude of Marxists toward a Labor party. Doubts can flow only from a misunderstanding or abandonment of fundamental principles; or from a resolute avoidance of historical reality.
 
Socialists Not to Work for Labor Party
From the basic attitude, the answers to more specific questions follow. For example, it is argued, should socialists initiate or aid in initiating a Labor party where one does not exist? In the first place, it should be noticed that this is a hopelessly abstract question when applied to the United States. The Socialist Party is not within many hundreds of percent of being a powerful enough force – especially in the unions – to even pretend to “initiate” a Labor party. The CIO perhaps can; we obviously cannot, nor even play a significant part in its initiation. But – if arguments in the abstract are useful – suppose the Socialist Party were a powerful mass force capable of initiating a “bona-fide” Labor party. What a fantastic proposal that would be! To initiate or aid in initiating an organization which would drill the masses in reformism, when we would be in a position to win them on a mass scale directly to revolutionary socialism; to give them deliberately a disease in order to prove what good doctors we were in curing it. The dilemma is complete: in neither alternative is it the business of socialists to initiate or take the lead in advocating a Labor party. While there is as yet no fully developed Labor party, it is the task of socialists to build and strengthen the Socialist Party if possible to such a point that it can head off and prevent the growth of a Labor party – that is, of one more obstacle in the revolutionary path.
 
Our Attitude to Existing Labor Parties
But where there is a Labor party already in existence, or one clearly in the process of formation on a genuine mass scale? In such cases, tactics cannot be decided beforehand in the abstract. They must be adjusted to the concrete circumstances. They will depend on many factors: for example, on the cohesiveness and size of the revolutionary Socialist party. If the Socialist party is not sufficiently cohesive, it will be swallowed up in the Labor party, as the Socialist Party in Minnesota was formerly swallowed up in the Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party. This year, however, with a still small but a growing, strong, militant and revolutionary membership, the Socialist Party in Minnesota can correctly give “critical support” to the Farmer-Labor Party candidates, with no risk of losses and many prospects of gain from such a tactic. However, if the revolutionary party is sufficiently cohesive and also sufficiently large, it would not need to give any kind of support to the Labor party, but could combat it openly and directly in the organizational as well as the political plane.
But, to take another example: in England, revolutionists clearly should not merely support but be in the British Labour Party – not because the British Labour party is any “better” in ideology or function than other reformist labor parties, but because the overwhelming majority of the British working class is within it. Naturally, however, revolutionists in the BLP will not be there to work for the program of Citrine; but to work against that program, and to show the workers by participating directly in their own living experience that Citrine’s program is fatally wrong, that they must accept and fight for a revolutionary program, and must be part of a revolutionary organization embodying that program.
Or again: In the elections this year in this country, circumstances dictate imperiously a direct open revolutionary campaign through the organization and for the candidates of the Socialist Party, in spite of the fact that the American Labor Party has entered the field. But the reason for this is not at all that the American Labor Party is not a “bona-fide” Labor party – which in New York at any rate it certainly is. It is simply that, under the given conditions – the undeveloped stage of the Labor party, the lack of preparation of the Socialist Party itself for complex and dangerous maneuvers, the opportunity to expose the methods of reformism by showing how (in this case openly) it works for the preservation of capitalism, etc. – under these conditions the SP stands to gain more, and risks losing less (not, of course, in votes, but in the extension of its ideas and the winning of workers to socialism) by a direct independent campaign. The case may well be different in 1940 or 1938; but the tactics for those years will be worked out when the time comes. The basic strategy – strengthening and building a revolutionary Socialist party – remains the same.
 
Basis for Participation in Labor Party
The reason why, in the case of a Labor party, tactics such as “critical support” or even affiliation are not excluded and sometimes necessary, is not that a Labor party is “a great step forward” or a “good” kind of party, or an auxiliary rather than a rival to the revolutionary party. It is simply because a genuine Labor party comprises the bulk of the organized workers, and marks a stage through which the working class in many countries tends – though not at all inevitably – to go. Under certain circumstances, it is necessary for revolutionists to go through this experience along with the workers, in order to aid them in having done with it, to speed the process of breaking down (not by any means to reinforce) the reformist ideology to which the Labor party gives expression, to keep away from a sterile isolation, to gain the confidence of the masses in action. But this means that the revolutionists participate in a Labor party not to “support” it and its ideas – which are both anti-revolutionary – but to build through it, when it is part of the historical reality which is given, the revolutionary party.
Comrade Tyler is afraid that such an approach (which he wholly fails to understand in the first place) must bring isolation, must “make us hated by our allies ... and impotent before our enemies.” He does not see how we can have anything to do with a Labor party unless we are “for it”; and since he wants – justifiably – to have something to do with it, he goes to the length of corrupting Marxist principles, inventing fantastic theories, and obscuring the nature and role of the revolutionary party and its relation to reformist parties, in order to satisfy his conscience.
 
Marxist Approach to Labor Party
But in this approach which I have outlined there is nothing unique or unusual. It is the constant approach of Marxists to many problems, distinguishing Marxists on the one hand from sectarians, on the other from opportunists. Marxists work, for example, in craft unions. They do so loyally, not to destroy but to build working-class strength. Within these unions, however, they do not hide their trade-union policy: they work to give conscious and progressive direction to the unions, which in the end means to change them entirely. Or take the case of an ill-timed strike. Marxists explain openly why the strike is incorrect under the circumstances. They do not flatter the prejudices and feelings of the workers. But, once the strike starts, they stand with the workers as a whole, and are in the forefront of the strike struggle. It fails, let us say, in spite of all efforts for its success. Are the Marxists then isolated and discredited? Quite the contrary: their leadership and prestige are doubly reinforced, because they have shown the workers in action both that their estimate of the situation is correct and also that they stand with the working class whether or not that estimate is heeded. Or again: in July, 1917, the Bolsheviks warned the workers of Petrograd that a demonstration would lead to a serious defeat. They repeated their warning even after the demonstration had begun. But the workers persisted. In the face of this, the Bolsheviks neither changed their opinion nor retired like Achilles to their tents. They took their places in the leadership of the demonstration. The demonstration was defeated. But because of the attitude of the Bolsheviks that very defeat marked the turning point in the revolution: from then on the tide swung ever more strongly to the side of the Bolsheviks and the victory of October.
In an analogous way, in the case of a Labor party, we say to the workers: “A Labor party is a reformist party. It will not answer your class needs. It will not stop war or unemployment or fascism. It will lead you into false paths. Your problems can be solved only by overthrowing capitalism and setting up your own state. You can do this only through a revolutionary party.” But we may also have to add: “You do not agree. You still insist that what you need is a Labor party. Very well. We will go through this experiment with you, and you will learn from your own harsh experience that our view is correct.” What else can revolutionists say? How else can they gain or deserve, in the end and in the decisive hours, the confidence of the workers? If revolutionists begin by hiding the role of the Labor party, by fostering illusions with respect to it, they will themselves share in the inevitable betrayal which every reformist party carries out in every crisis; and the masses will understand this and draw the conclusions. Thus, far from overcoming isolation, isolation at the crucial time will only be guaranteed.
 
Socialist Program for Labor Party
Tyler and others who agree with him make much of the danger of isolation. They complain that if we do not “take the lead in the formation of a Labor party” – which is impossible to begin with – we won’t have the kind of Labor party that “we want.” But none of them has ever clarified to himself or to any of the rest of us what this can possibly mean – what kind of Labor party we can possibly “want”; and of course they never ask whether we could get it even if we knew what we wanted. Tyler is not satisfied with a Labor party merely because it comprises and is chiefly influenced by the bulk of organized labor (which is the only actual test of a “genuine” Labor party). He must, then, refer to its program. But there is only one program toward which revolutionary socialists have any allegiance whatever: the program of revolutionary socialism. A program three-quarter revolutionary is not at all necessarily better than one which is one-half revolutionary: the former may well be more difficult to expose, may look much more like the real thing and therefore constitute a greater obstacle to revolutionary development. If by chance socialists were participating in a programmatic convention of a Labor party, their only duty would be to put forward the full program of revolutionary socialism; and if this were rejected, their task so far as program went would be over.
But, Tyler argues, there is no reason to be “fright-fully worried” because “we shall have to take responsibility for an organization with whose policies we do not agree” – and he points to the case of support of the AF of L as precedent. The precedent is badly chosen. We do not take “responsibility” for the AF of L; and under no circumstances could we take responsibility for policies with which we disagree. We work in the AF of L to give it, so far as possible, class-struggle direction, and to make revolutionists from its members. We support its actions and its specific demands when these correspond with the needs of the working class; but we fight against all of its policies which are counter to these needs and in opposition to the policies of revolutionary socialism. Similarly, if we are in the future put in the position of supporting electorally a Labor party and its candidates, we shall not in the least “take responsibility” for its policies, but rather utilize the campaign to undermine its policies, to spread the ideas of revolutionary socialism, and to win individual Labor party members as revolutionists – which tasks are, in any case, the reasons why revolutionists participate in election campaigns. Tyler would like us to believe that a Labor party can be the “electioneering machine” of the revolutionary party. What extraordinary nonsense! It is the electioneering machine of a reformist party and a reformist program, i.e., an anti-revolutionary electioneering machine. When revolutionists utilize it they do so not because it is the machine of a revolutionary party, but because it gives them under certain circumstances the best working-class forum for pro-revolutionary and anti-reformist agitation.
 
Revolutionists Cannot Be Isolated
The whole argument from isolation – the motivating force of almost all left-wing pro-Labor party sentiment – is a perversion. Revolutionists can avoid isolation only through their real strength, the depth of the influence of their ideas, their actual penetration of the mass organizations. There is no magic formula for gaining this strength and influence and penetration. They can result only from the uncompromising clarity of ideas and principles, and the militant direct participation in the class struggle. To the extent that they have been gained, no device of any bureaucrat can bring about isolation; to the extent that they are lacking, all shortcuts are mere illusion. It is toward this end, and this end alone – the deepening of the influence of the idea of revolutionary socialism and the building of its party – that the energies of every Marxist must be intransigently directed.
 

 West: War and the Workers (Part 2)



Burnham Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

War and the Workers

John West
War and the Workers

II. The Struggle Against War
Even such a brief study of the nature and causes of modern war is sufficient to prove that war is an essential part of capitalism. The inner conflicts of capitalism lead and must lead to war. All Marxists, and in fact many pseudo-Marxists or even liberals, accept (or pretend to accept) this conclusion.
Nevertheless, widespread and disastrous misconceptions are held in following out the consequences of this conclusion so far as they apply to the struggle against war.
The most common mistake made in the attempted it struggle against war comes from the belief that this exists somehow “independent” of the class struggle in general, that a broad union of all sorts of persons from every social class and group can be formed around the issue of fighting war, since – so the reasoning goes – these persons may be all equally opposed to war whatever their differences on other points. In this way, war is lifted from its social base, considered apart from its causes and conditions, as if it were a mystic abstraction instead of a concrete historical institution. Acting on this belief, attempts are made to build up all kinds of permanent Peace Societies, Anti-War Organizations, Leagues Against War, etc.
This kind of attitude is about as effective as it for doctors to treat the high fever in acute appendicitis by putting the patient in an ice-box. The only way actually get rid of the high fever is to remove the cause of the fever – that is, to take out the diseased appendix. The thing is true for war: the only way to get rid of war is to remove the cause of war.
War is not the cause of the troubles of society. The opposite is true. War is a symptom and result of the irreconcilable troubles and conflicts of the present form of society, that is to say, of capitalism. The only way to fight against war is to fight against the causes of war. Since the causes of war are part of the inner nature of capitalism, it follows that the only way to fight against war is to fight against capitalism.
But the only true fight against capitalism is the revolutionary struggle for workers’ power. It therefore follows that the only possible struggle against war is the struggle for the workers’ revolution.
Marxists must be absolutely clear on this point. There is no “separate” or “special” struggle against war. The struggle against war cannot be divorced from the day-to-day struggles of the workers so far as, in their historical implications, these lead toward workers’ power. No one can uphold capitalism – whether directly, as an open adherent of the capitalists, or indirectly, from any shade of liberal or reformist position – and fight against war, because capitalism means war. Only a revolutionist can fight against war, because only a revolutionist takes the road to the over- throw of capitalism.
To suppose, therefore, that revolutionists can work out a common “program against war” with non-revolutionists is a fatal illusion. Any organization based upon such a program is not merely powerless to prevent war; in practice it acts to promote war, both because it serves in its own way to uphold the system t at breeds war, and because it diverts the attention of its members from the real fight against war. There is only one program against war: the program for revolution – the program of the revolutionary party of the workers.
The workers’ revolution can and will eliminate war be-cause, by overthrowing capitalist economy and supplanting capitalism with a socialist economy, it will remove the causes of war. Under socialism there will no longer exist the basic contradictions that lead to war. Artificial economic barriers based on national boundaries will be removed. The expansion of the means of production, under the owner-ship and control of society as a whole, will proceed in accordance with a rational plan adjusted to the needs of the members of society. Socialism will remove the limits on consumption, and hence permit the scientific and controlled development of production. Thus, under socialism, war will disappear because the causes of war will be done away with.
Since the victory of socialism, and this alone, will defeat war, every step on the path to socialism is a blow at war. In the struggle against war, properly understood, every militant workers’ demonstration, every broad mass labor defense fight, every well-led strike, and in general every advance of the workers toward power, is worth a thousand “Peace Leagues”.
Meanwhile, in carrying on the daily struggle, it is the duty of the Marxists to prepare for the war crisis. To this end, they must constantly expose the war plans of the imperialist powers; they must resist the militarization of the masses; they must make clear to the working class each step in the progress toward war; they must combat the patriotic war propaganda; they must help strengthen, ideologically and materially, the organizations of the workers, so that these will not be crushed at the outbreak of the war. And they must everywhere and at all times expose the misleaders and the betrayers in the fight against war, from whatever camp – those who make ready, by a thousand and one devices, to turn over the workers to the war-makers.
But in the war crisis itself, the Marxists do not suspend their struggle. On the contrary, the struggle becomes immensely sharper, the duties infinitely heavier. On the war question, Marxists are not “neutral”; they do not withdraw into a shell until the war disappears into the past.
One of the great aims of the revolutionary movement is the elimination of war forever from the world. But, as we have seen, this can be accomplished only by the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism – that is, by the victory of the working class in the class war. This requirement is due not to the wishes of Marxists, but to the actual realities of history. Thus, in struggling against every war undertaken by any capitalist power, Marxists cannot take a merely negative pacifist position of being against “war in general”. They are actively for the victory of the working class in the class war, since only through such victory can war in general be done away with.
Therefore it is the business of Marxists not to stand aside, but to support actively, in every possible manner, any armed struggle that is aimed against, and capable of weakening, capitalism: for example, the revolts of colonies against their imperialist oppressors, and the uprisings of all oppressed and exploited races and nations – just as Marxists support strikes or any other manifestations directed against the capitalist class or its governments.
And, similarly,. Marxists are not “neutral” in an imperialist war. Their duty is to lead the working class in delaying the outbreak of the imperialist war as long as this is historically possible, since imperialist war, besides murdering millions of the finest of the workers and the youth generally, makes incomparably more difficult the organization of revolutionary struggle. But when the imperialist war nevertheless, in the end (as it must), breaks out, the task of the Marxists is to work to turn the imperialist war, which ranges the peoples of one group of nations on the battlefields against the peoples of another group, into a class war, a war of the masses under the leadership of the working class and its party for the overthrow of the capital-ist state and the establishment of the rule of the working class. The Marxists fight, but within each country they fight not for the victory but for the defeat of their own government – not for its defeat by the opposing capitalist powers, but for its defeat by its own working class. The true enemy is at home: the class enemy and its political representative, the state. This is the enemy to be defeated, in every country. And this is the aim of the Marxists in the coming war – in every country, the overthrow of the class enemy, the setting up of the workers’ state, the joining together with the working class of the entire world for the defeat of finance-capital on an international scale, and the international victory of the working masses.
This struggle – the only true struggle against war – requires at every stage the utmost clarity and realism. Any illusion whatever weakens it mortally. Above all, the working masses of every country must understand who their enemy is. They must understand that the enemy is not the people of Germany, or France, or Italy, or Japan, or of any other nation against whom the home government may wage war, but that the real enemy of the masses of every country is the enemy at home – the bourgeoisie and the government of “their own country”. They must understand that any war which “their” country undertakes will be a war to serve the interests of finance-capital, no matter what noble talk about “democracy” or “peace” or “defense” or “collective security” is used to justify it. And therefore they must resist to the utmost any and every conception of patriotism, class peace, national unity, or support of the government for the conduct of the war. To such conceptions must be, at all times, opposed – struggle against the war, struggle to turn the war into a civil war for the defeat of the government and the bourgeoisie, and the achievement of workers’ power.
This is the only struggle against the coming imperialist war: the struggle on an international scale for the victory of the workers, for a world socialist society.
 
Part 3


 West: War and the Workers (Part 7)



Burnham Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

War and the Workers

John West
War and the Workers

VII. Marxists in the Present Crisis
The position of the Marxists in the present war crisis has been made clear by the analysis of the nature of war, of the struggle against it, and of the forms of betrayal in the struggle against war. The Marxist position can best be summarized by quoting in full the Statement on the War-Situation adopted by the Workers Party of the United States at the outbreak of the hostilities in Africa:

1. The armies of Italian Fascism, after months of deliberate preparation, have now launched their attack upon the Ethiopian peoples. Driven by the intolerable strains of internal social and economic contradictions, Mussolini and the Italian bourgeoisie seek a solution in open imperialist aggression against the last of the independent nations of Africa.
2. The outbreak of war in Africa demonstrates that the conflicts of world imperialism have reached the stage of armed struggle for a re-making of boundaries, and a re-division of territories and colonial possessions. Though the Italian campaign in Ethiopia may not lead immediately and directly to a world struggle of the imperialist powers, this delay can prove no more than temporary. The war in Ethiopia must be understood as the prelude to the new imperialist world war.
3. In the preparation for the Italian seizure of Ethiopia, the League of Nations has once more demonstrated beyond any possible doubt its true role. The League is not in any sense whatever “the defender of peace”. It is the legal and hypocritical cover for the maneuvering of the dominant imperialist powers. Since Ethiopia first invoked League assistance on December, 1934, the negotiations have served to permit uninterrupted preparations for the war by Italy, and to deter defensive preparations by Ethiopia. The League has been utilized above all to serve the ends of British imperialism. Behind its cover, the agents of Great Britain, France and Italy have haggled over the price in terms of treaties, guarantees, protection, and territories, which each was willing to pay to preserve its own interests. The threat of League sanctions has been made not to save Ethiopia – which the League report itself offered to sacrifice – but to safeguard British colonial possessions and lines of communication, and to try to close the opening for Germany in Central Europe. The League of Nations is the agency, not of peace, but of imperialist aggression.
The struggle against imperialist war demands the unremitting exposure of the role of the League of Nations.
4. No less than the European powers is US imperialism bound by the iron chain of cause and effect to the events in Africa and to the new world conflict which they herald. The sentimental dream of US isolation, Roosevelt’s promises that the US will remain “free and untangled,” have no more force than the unctuous phrases of Wilson in 1916. The US will, on the contrary, play the dominant and decisive role in the new imperialist struggle. Behind its pacifist covering, the Roosevelt government is pouring more funds into its war machine than any other nation in the world. Both navy and army are constructed on a purely offensive strategic basis. The US bourgeoisie, waiting and preparing, expects to intervene in the later stages of the world struggle, when the other powers are mutually exhausted, to achieve the world domination of US finance-capital.
The struggle against imperialist war is above all the struggle against US imperialism.
5. The USSR cannot avoid implication in the world conflict. The very life of the workers’ state is threatened by the approach of war. A central task of the struggle against war is the defense of the USSR. But, in the last analysis, this defense can be based only upon the revolutionary advance of the international proletariat. Stalinist diplomacy, on the contrary, to an ever increasing degree, serves solely to disorient the international proletariat, break up the struggle against imperialist war, and thus undermine the real defense of the USSR. Basing itself not upon the international working class, but upon military pacts, with bourgeois states, upon diplomatic deals, appeals to pacifist and liberal anti-war sentiment, and the maneuvers of the League, Soviet foreign policy promotes the most disastrous illusions in the minds of the workers, and acts in effect to further the interests of the French and British imperialism.
The struggle against imperialist war requires the constant exposure of the foreign policy of Stalinism.
6. One of the most dangerous illusions fostered by the diplomacy of the Soviet Union, in company with demoralized liberals, reformists, and pacifists of all shades, is the notion that the world is now divided between “peace-loving democratic” nations and “war-loving fascist” nations. This notion is part of the preparation for support of the “peace-loving nations” in the coming war. Marxism rejects and dispels this illusion or any form of it. The idea that there are peace-loving as opposed to war-loving capitalist nations, like the idea that one or another nation is “guilty” in an imperialist war, is at best formalistic ethical sentimentality, not political realism. The causes of war are to be found in all nations. The national state of every capitalist nation, without exception, is the political instrument of the class enemy, the first and implacable enemy of that nation’s proletariat. The revolutionary party can make no distinction between “good” and “bad” capitalist states. It is the enemy of every capitalist state, to the death.
7. At the outbreak of the last imperialist war, the Second International revealed its internal degeneration by betraying the working class to the class enemy, by espousing the cause of national defense and patriotism, by a truce with the bourgeoisie in the interests of “national unity”, by going over to social-patriotism and social-chauvinism. Already, before the outbreak of the new war, the leaders of the Socialist and Labour International have announced a repetition of the betrayal, are already preparing to turn over their following to the war-makers. In England, the British Labour Party, by calling for government applied sanctions and the closing of the Suez Canal, once again takes the position of national unity – that is, solidarity with the class enemy – before the war danger, and of fully developed social-patriotism. In France, the leaders of the SFIO have taken the same position – to defend the interests of the bourgeoisie against “Hitler aggression”, and now to “implement the League Covenant” by government sanctions. In August, the Executive Committee of the Socialist and Labour International adopted a program of full-blooded social-patriotism.
The struggle against imperialist war means the struggle against the Second International.
8. During the past year, the Communist International has passed from a policy which weakened and disorientated the revolutionary struggle against war to an active espousal of the policies of class truce and social-patriotism. By the Franco-Soviet Pact, the Stalin-Laval communiqué, the conduct of the Soviet Union in the League during the development of the Ethiopian crisis, and above all by the Seventh Congress of the CI, the Communist International stands unmasked as the heir of the social-democracy’s betrayal on the issue of war, announcing itself as ready to do the hangman’s job of turning over the proletariat of England, France and the US to their national bourgeoisie in the coming war, in return for paper promises of protection for the borders of the Soviet Union. In England, the Communist party applauds the position of the Labour Party; in France, the Communist party supports enthusiastically the worst betrayals of Blum and Herriot; and throughout the world the Communist International prepares the sacrifice of the working class on the altar of imperialism.
The struggle against imperialist war means everywhere the relentless struggle against Stalinism.
9. Throughout the world the only organized forces conducting and advocating the revolutionary struggle against imperialist war are the parties and groupings of the Fourth Internationalists. The Workers Party of the US carries on this struggle in the closest solidarity with its comrades in all countries.
Against the betrayers, the Workers Party rejects every form of social-patriotism and social-chauvinism; it rejects every conception of national unity and national defense; it rejects all ideas of truce with the bourgeois state, democratic or fascist; it exposes the role of the League of Nations as the pawn of the imperialist member states; it rejects the sentimental illusions of pacifists and petty bourgeois liberals; above all it directs its attacks against the enemy at home, against US imperialism.
The Workers Party places no reliance on the “peaceful” intentions of bourgeois-democratic nations, nor upon spineless “united fronts” of liberals, ministers, bourgeois women’s clubs and “anti-war” professionals.
The Workers Party calls for the defense of the Ethiopian peoples against Italian aggression, for the defense of the USSR, for unremitting struggle against the coming imperialist war. But for this defense and this struggle, the Workers Party calls at the same time for the sole means by which they can be, in fact, conducted: for the independent and autonomous action of the working class. It is the international working class, especially the Italian working class, together with the oppressed colonial peoples, who are the true allies of the Ethiopian peoples – not “peace-loving” Britain, nor the League of Nations, nor Stalin-Laval, nor Roosevelt, nor their own Christian Emperor and semi-feudal chieftains. It is the independent sanctions of the working class, its own boycotts, strikes, defense funds, mass demonstrations that can aid the battles of the Ethiopian peoples, not the sanctions of finance-capital and its puppet states. And likewise for the defense of the USSR and the struggle against the approaching world war, it is only the independent action of the working class together with its allies under its leadership which gives hope to the working and exploited masses – a struggle not in collaboration with the bourgeoisie through the national state, but in ever sharper attack against the bourgeoisie and the national state.
The struggle against war is not and cannot be conceived as an “independent” struggle, having a special status above class conflicts. It is an integral part of the revolutionary struggle for workers’ power. The struggle against imperialist war means the day by day building of working-class strength, means – not suspension of the class conflict until the war crisis passes – but the intensification of class conflict and the preparation to turn the imperialist war into a civil war for the overthrow of the bourgeois state and the victory of the workers.
More clearly than any other phase of revolutionary activity does the struggle against war attest the international character of the revolutionary movement. It is an international struggle and must be conducted in terms of an international strategy, through an integrated international organization. Thus the struggle against war poses, in the most intense form, the central task of the present period: the building of the Fourth International, the dynamic generator to drive forward the revolutionary advance of the working class. Threatening as is the oncoming of the new war, relatively weak numerically as are the forces now ranged against it, there is no reason to despair. Out of the last world war came the first great step of the world revolution. Yet, in 1914, the internationalists were an organized force in only one nation, and the betrayal of social-democracy came to the great mass of the workers as a shock that was unexpected and not prepared for. Today, organized groups of revolutionary internationalists exist in nearly every nation, and are actively forging the parties of the Fourth International; today the Second and Third Internationals have announced their betrayal beforehand, and we will thus not be trapped by surprise; and today we have the rich experience and lessons of the past generation to draw from.
The struggle against imperialist war is the struggle for socialism; the struggle for socialism is the struggle for the Fourth International, for the world revolution.
 

 West: War and the Workers (Part 6)



Burnham Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

War and the Workers

John West
War and the Workers

VI. The Agents of Betrayal
The fight against betrayal on the war issue is not, of course, a mere battle of ideas. Our ideas must be clear on the question of war, but that is never enough. The ideas must be translated into action. Betrayal does not descend from the skies. It is carried out in practice by men, by powerful individuals and great organizations. The fight against betrayal is therefore necessarily – the struggle against the betrayers. There must be no illusions on this score. We must not be confused by pseudo-“moral” notions about the “sincerity” and “good intentions” of “opponents of war”. The effect of the actions of the betrayers, if they are successful, is literally to lead the working class to capitulation to the enemy and to slaughter. The struggle against the betrayers must be bitter, intransigent, unceasing. Our aim must be to smash utterly the influence of the betrayers and the organizations whose positions constitute betrayal. Nothing short of this is enough.
As to the outright pacifists – the Leagues for Peace and Freedom, the World Peaceways, the Councils of Churches for Peace, the broken down liberals – the problem is clear enough. We must aim to isolate them, to prevent their ideas from gaining any hold among the working class and its allies, and we must destroy the influence which these ideas have gained.
But it has already been made clear that the most dangerous of the betrayers are those within the working class itself. It is against these that the great struggle must be waged, for so long as they hold the allegiance of the working class, betrayal will succeed.
 
2. The Second International
The parties of the Second International engineered the great betrayal in 1914. Nothing fundamental has altered in their position since that time. They remain, as they were, ready to hand over the workers to the imperialist governments when the war starts. Their whole course of action, not only on the war question but on every other, is to weaken the revolutionary struggle of the workers, which in turn is the only genuine struggle against war. The keynote of their policy everywhere: compromise with – that is, capitulation to – the state; which means, capitulation to the chief instrument of the class enemy. Since this is the constant guide to their day-by-day activities, they could scarcely be expected to cease compromise in the greatest crisis of all: the war crisis.
Throughout the world, social-democrats of all shades support the rottenest types of pacifist organizations. Only recently they have swung behind the ridiculous and illusion-breeding plan of the International Women’s League for Peace and Freedom to secure 50,000,000 signatures “against war”, and have praised this campaign as a great blow to war. Prominent Socialists in every country are conspicuous members of every pacifist organization.
During the development of the present crisis, the Socialists everywhere have supported the League of Nations, as the instrument to solve the present crisis. They have been vigorous advocates of League and governmental sanctions. The meeting of the Executive Committee of the Second International held in August officially endorsed this policy, going so far as to call on the British government to close the Suez Canal.
In England, the British Labour Party, affiliated to the Second International, has throughout played into the hands of British finance-capital by supporting government sanctions, and now finds itself with no policy for the coming elections fundamentally differentiating it from the Conservatives. It is significant that almost the only criticism of this course from within the Labour Party comes from a purely negative, pacifist, do-nothing direction. In France the Socialist party has held the same position, and has become the staunchest defender of the capitalist “republican” regime.
The recent Dan-Zyromski-Bauer resolution on war, presented for “discussion” to the parties of the Second International, completely upholds the policy of governmental and League sanctions, endorses the League as an instrument for peace, and justifies support of “democratic” governments in a war against Fascist governments.
In some countries, notably the United States, “left” Socialists are objecting to the position on war which is being officially taken by the parties and leaders of the Second International. The “Militants” in this country have criticized the advocacy of sanctions, the Dan-Zyromski-Bauer resolution, etc., from what looks on the surface as a position close to Marxism. How far from Marxism it is in actuality is revealed by noticing the positions which the same Militants take on particular issues: They enthusiastically praise the A.F. of L. Convention resolutions which hailed the League and demanded “sanctions” by the US government. They praise and push the “50,000,000 signatures against war” campaign. They hail the Socialist NEC resolution on war (October, 1935) which, while rejecting sanctions and a “reformed” League of Nations. They praise to the skies Norman Thomas’ new book on War, which fails to meet a single one of the central issues in the revolutionary struggle against war. They speak lightly of a possible “general strike” at the outbreak of war, without pointing out that such a strike would be a revolutionary act, presupposing a revolutionary situation and a revolutionary party prepared to take power – all of which are extremely unlikely at the beginning of a war, when the capitalist state is normally at its most powerful and its most desperate. And, finally, the Militants nowhere draw the necessary conclusion that the revolutionary struggle against the Second International and its parties and its leaders, whose official position of betrayal on a world scale has been clearly unfolded.
On the question of war, a position which is correct or approximately correct in the abstract, on the surface, is never enough. It must be correct in the concrete, on particular issues, before it amounts to anything more than juggling with words. This is a disastrous weakness of many of the leaders of the left Socialists in this country. What are we to say when they come out with Marxist-sounding phrases, and then support actively the “united front” Student Mobilization for Peace (November 8, 1935), a united front that was actually a patriotic rally, having as its chief speakers throughout the country not merely social-patriots, but open chauvinists like President Robinson of City College, New York? It should be obvious that Marxists can never form “united fronts for peace” with betrayers and agents of the war-makers. Their duty on all occasions is to expose and attack the betrayers. What are we to say when these Militants are not merely silent about the illusions of pacifism, but actively propagate pacifist ideas and, especially, build up pacifist organizations? When they not merely accept but even formulate proposed government neutrality legislation? When they take no steps to purge the ranks of their own party of the hard and brazen social-patriots in its Right wing? We can only conclude that their “Marxism” is no more than a red veil, hiding beneath it weakness, equivocation, or outright capitulation to the war-makers.
There is only one conclusion to be drawn about the Second International and its parties. They are rotted to the core. They prepare – they already announce their preparation – only for a repetition of the betrayal of 1914. The struggle against war is inconceivable apart from the struggle against the Second International.
 
3. The Third International
The Seventh Congress of the Communist International, held during the summer of 1935, during the course of the development of the present war crisis, stamped officially the repudiation of Marxism by Stalinism, and above all announced the betrayal by Stalinism on the war question. The Seventh Congress signed, sealed, and delivered the workers under Stalinist influence to the war-makers.
This is not a development of the moment. Once started on the course of sacrificing the interests of the world proletariat to the bureaucratic dream of building a socialist Utopia within the national boundaries of the Soviet Union, Stalinism could not end short of capitulation to imperialism. In the place of the Marxist struggle for the extension of the revolution, Stalinism substituted diplomatic maneuvers to preserve “peace” by preserving the status quo. And to carry out this policy successfully meant the complete subordination of the sections of the Communist parties became propaganda agents and border patrols of the Soviet Union, not the revolutionary vanguard of the working class within their respective countries. Their chief occupation became not the struggle for power but the singing of the praises of their master. The Franco-Soviet Pact and its accompanying memoranda showed to the world that the duty of French Communists was no longer to fight the French bourgeoisie, but to uphold the French bourgeoisie if only it would give a paper promise to preserve the Soviet boundaries. When the imperialist League of Nations was tottering from the withdrawals of Japan and Germany, Stalin, instead of helping to drive the last nail in its coffin, entered the League, bolstered its waning authority with the prestige of the workers’ state, and prolonged the League’s fatal ability to disorient and weaken the masses and the revolutionary struggle against war.
Throughout the development of the present crisis, the Communist International and its sections everywhere have been persistently pro-League and pro-sanctions, thereby doing their part to serve the ends of British and French imperialism. Stalinism is the great source of the distinctions between “good, peace-loving, democratic” capitalist nations and “bad, war-loving, fascist” nations, and has drawn the appropriate conclusion – to support war undertaken by the former – “if only they are on the side of the Soviet Union”.
Stalinism has gone far beyond even the social-democrats in lining up with the most degraded types of pacifists – from Father Divine to officers of the DAR to cousins of the Pope – if only they will shout “Peace!” and say no word of criticism against “the peace policy of the Soviet Union”. The Communist parties have built up throughout the world the pacifist, anti-revolutionary Leagues Against War and Fascism.
In France, the Communist party in the People’s Front has blocked the workers’ struggle for power, and has taken the road of defense of the French state both externally (against Hitler) and internally (against the pro-German wing of the French bourgeoisie, and likewise against the revolutionary assault of the Marxists) in return for Laval’s promises to Stalin. In England, the Communist party has taken its place alongside the Labour Party in support of the international policy of the British imperialists. In this country, the Communist party demands more strongly than the Socialist party the passing of US government neutrality-sanctions.
The Communist party has already made clear that it proposes to act as the agent of finance-capital in enlisting the working class in the coming imperialist war within any nation that may be, or may pretend to be, “friendly” to the Soviet Union. The Communist International offers such services as a juicy bribe to aid Stalin in making alliances. The CI prepares, that is to say, to turn the working class in countries allied to the Soviet Union over to the imperialists.
The conclusion, as in the case of the Second International, is inevitable: the revolutionary struggle against war poses as a fundamental task the struggle against the Communist International and its national sections, demands the destruction of Stalinism.
 
Part 7


 West: War and the Workers (Part 1)



Burnham Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

War and the Workers

John West
War and the Workers

I. The Nature and Causes of Modern War
To many persons, war seems to come as if it were a law, of Fate. In former days it used to be thought that war was a punishment send by God to punish men for their sins. Others believe that wars are due to the ambition or “lust for power” on the part of certain rulers or warriors. Still others think that wars result from what they call “racial or cultural antagonisms.” To many of these people it seems that war is a special and peculiar and frightful event that happens every so often, no matter what we try to do about it. Some of them, on the other hand, conclude that we could get rid of war if only we could get enough people to want to get rid of it, if we could develop a “will to peace” among Men.
All views of this kind are absolutely useless in helping us to understand what war is; and are therefore equally useless in the struggle against war – since we cannot struggle effectively against war unless we understand the true nature of war.
The first, the very first thing we must know clearly about 'war is that war is not something “special”, not something that “just happens”. War is, on the contrary, an essential and necessary part of the society we live in, that is, of imperialist-capitalist society. War is just as much a part of capitalism as wage labor, or big corporations, or lending money at interest.
There are in the modern world six great capitalist powers: Great Britain, the United States, France, Germany, Italy, Japan. These six nations control the world, with the exception of the Soviet Union. All other nations and peoples are subject to them, either directly as colonies, mandates, and dominions; or indirectly, through treaties, alliances, financial control, or some similar device. The real rulers of these six nations are, of course, those who own and control their productive plants – namely, their respective finance-capitalists. In one degree or another, the finance-capitalists of each of these nations face a similar problem:
The finance-capitalists control enormous amounts of capital. This capital must be put to use, that is, must be set to work making a profit. A profit cannot be made, however, unless a market can be found in which commodities can be absorbed at a price sufficient to cover “costs of production” plus a profit. But in none of these six nations is the internal or “home” market adequate to provide an outlet for the available capital. In part the finance-capitalists strive to overcome this deficiency by lowering their productive costs, and thus squeezing more out of the home market. To accomplish this, besides “internal” means such as reducing wages and building better machines (which as a matter of fact only exaggerate the difficulty), they must seek ever cheaper sources of the raw materials which enter into production – oil, coal, iron, copper, cotton, etc. In part, they are forced to try to sell their commodities in other, “foreign” markets. Above all, at the present time they seek new outlets for capital investment itself, new fields outside of their own national territory where capital can be poured in and an additional market created. It is this last feature particularly, the drive for external capital investment, for what is called “the export of capital”, which is the distinguishing mark of imperialism on a world scale.
Thus the finance-capitalists of each of the six great powers are faced with the same set of necessities, which they must strive for if capitalist production is to be kept going. These necessities depend not on their “wills” or “desires”, but upon the very nature of capitalist production. The choice of each group of finance-capitalists is: these things or ruin. (1) Each must strive to gain control over the great sources of basic raw materials. (2) Each must fight for commodity outlets in “foreign markets” – must attempt to build up export trade. (3) Each must find new outlets in extra-national territory for capital investment, in order to employ profitably the idle capital funds for which there is no use at home. In addition: (4) Each group of finance-capitalists must struggle to monopolize the home market, by means of tariffs, import and exchange restrictions, etc.; and (5) each must contend for control of incidental sources of profit, such as shipping, insurance, tourist trade, etc.
If we glance even for a moment at the history of the United States since the War, we can see these inescapable tendencies everywhere manifesting themselves:
International Telephone & Telegraph Co. builds and operates systems in Spain, Latin America, South America, and the Near East. General Electric buys heavily into the electrical industries not only of “backward” countries but of Germany, France and England. New York banks and investment houses exploit the copper mines of Africa and the silver mines of Peru. The Standard Fruit Co. owns and operates the great orchards of Mexico; United Fruit, the orchards of Central America. Standard Oil of New Jersey sends its geologists into Mexico, South America, the Near East, China. Firestone and United States Rubber build up plantations in Africa and Pacific islands. The automobile companies ship cars and trucks to every country of the world. The Aluminum Corporation corners the world supply of aluminium. Carefully controlled tariffs prevent foreign competition in the home market. The merchant marine is heavily subsidized by the government. The American Sugar Refining Co. expands its refineries in Cuba. Standard Oil and Texas Co. build oil refineries and operate filling stations all through the Far East, as well as in Bolivia, Venezuela, and Mexico. The automobile companies build plants in Canada and even in England and Germany.
But exactly the same tendencies drive on the capitalists of England, Germany, France, Italy, and Japan.
The world, however, is limited in extent. The areas available for new forms of capital expansion and exploitation are growingly restricted. Conflict is therefore inevitable.
The truth of the matter is this: In the stage of imperialism, capitalist society is continuously at war. This is of the essence of imperialism. It is not a question of one war starting, then stopping, to be followed in a decade or two by a new war. It is war all the time, changing only in the form it takes, in the degree of violence.
Conflict at the “economic level” continues without interruption: economic struggles for sources of raw material, for new markets, for new fields of exploitation; tariff and exchange battles; competition for shipping and loans; exploration to discover new mines, oil wells, land for rubber and coffee and cotton plantations; and all the rest.
But the conflict can never remain at the purely economic level. The stakes are too high – failure at the economic level means the destruction of the defeated economic group. Therefore, the finance-capitalists must utilize constantly their political servants – the governments of their respective countries. And the governments are not slow to answer. They build up their military and naval armaments to almost unbelievable heights. They are ever ready to unseat a Central American government, threaten a native prince, wipe out “red bandits”, stop or start a revolution, send a flotilla of warships or a regiment of marines, resent an “insult to the flag”, if necessary set two countries – Bolivia and Paraguay, for example – flying at each other’s throats to settle the dispute of Standard Oil and Shell over rights to an oil field. At the beck and call of finance-capital, the government, with the guns and cruisers and airplanes, snaps quickly to attention. That, indeed, is what the governments are for.
The economic conflicts and “minor wars” of capital expansion, of tariff and exchange and armament and competitive exploitation, reach a point where the attempt is made to find a political solution of the economic and social contradictions through war, open and undisguised: imperialist-inspired wars between subject nations; wars of subjugation by imperialist nations against subject peoples; and, finally, the world-wide war of the imperialist nations among themselves, fighting for the re-division of the world. But, though producing a temporary “boom” by loosening the bonds on capital expansion, by the destruction of existing capital values and by credit expansion, the open wars, far from solving the conflicts, only express their depth, and prepare for still more bitter conflict to come.
The full story does not end even here. For throughout the bloody imperialist chaos, and expressing the deepest of all the conflicts, there is being fought constantly the basic and decisive war of our age: the revolutionary war of the working class against its exploiters. This war, which, after generations of preparation, began on a world scale with the October Revolution in Russia, continues within every country in a thousand varying forms, from strikes to armed uprisings to preparations for intervention in the Soviet Union, and will continue until the final issue is decided.
The war between the working class and the bourgeoisie is utterly irreconcilable, in a far more profound sense even than the titanic struggles between the imperialist powers themselves. It can never stop short of complete victory. And this will serve to demonstrate how vain is the belief that the Soviet Union can stand aside, even for a short while, from the imperialist struggles, in a pseudo-socialist “isolation”. In spite of its traitorous leadership, the Soviet Union still remains a working class state. The basic conflict between the Soviet Union and the imperialist powers, therefore, is deeper than that between any of the imperialist powers themselves. The fate of the Soviet Union is bound up inextricably with the fate of the whole world. The coming open imperialist war will involve in its roots the life or death of the Soviet Union.
The moral, religious, racial and ideological disguises that war wears must not be allowed to hide the fundamental conflicts which are the true sources of modern war. The general conclusion is inescapable: Modern war is neither accidental nor due to the evil of human nature nor decreed by God. War is of the very essence of imperialist-capitalism, as much a part of capitalism as wage labor. To speak of capitalism without war is like speaking of a human being without lungs. The fate of one is inextricably bound to the fate of the other.
 
Part 2


 West: War and the Workers (Part 4)



Burnham Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

War and the Workers

John West
War and the Workers

IV. Development of the Present War Crisis
The present Italian campaign, narrowly considered, is the external expression of the violence of the internal economic and political conflicts of contemporary Italy. It must be remembered that in the Versailles Treaty, Great Britain and France repudiated most of the secret promises of territory and colonies by which they had induced Italy to enter the war on the side of the Allies. It must also be remembered that Italy is exceptionally poor in many of the basic raw materials (e.g., oil, iron, coal, cotton). Such factors as these combined with the social and political character of the Fascist regime to precipitate economic crisis in Italy before most other nations, and to ensure that the world economic crisis would have more terribly damaging effects Italy than in perhaps any other nation.
No possible internal measures have been able to alleviate the Italian crisis. The lowering of the standard of living and real wages of the Italian masses to almost unbelievable depths has only exaggerated the conflicts, and further narrowed the possibilities of the internal market. The economic and social conflicts, in spite of the severest repressions, have shaken the political stability of the Fascist regime. Italian finance-capital must acquire sources of raw materials, new markets, and new fields for the investment of capital funds for which there is no employment at home. Mussolini must seek a re-unification of the Italian masses around the Fascist regime by directing their attention away from Italy and toward foreign conquest.
Thus both the basic economic and political factors require an “external solution” – require a war of aggression.
For a variety of reasons, the eyes of the rulers of Italy turned toward Ethiopia. Here was the last of the independent nations of Africa, not yet officially claimed by any of the imperialist powers. Control of Ethiopia would fit in nicely with other Italian colonies in Africa. Ethiopia possesses certain, if unknown, amounts of raw materials; and, more important, the exploitation of Ethiopia would open up vast outlets for Italian capital, and would create a new market.
Italy began preparations carefully. Italian Eritrea and Somaliland were strengthened. During 1934, “border incidents” were systematically cultivated, culminating in the famous Ualual incident, as a sequence to which, in December 1934, Ethiopia appealed to the League of Nations. From then on, Italy began large scale war preparations, and put a great army into the field in Africa. In these preparations, the League served Italy well, for Ethiopia, forced to rely on the League and consequently to avoid any charge of provocation, was thereby prevented from making any defensive military preparations.
But the Ethiopian campaign naturally could not remain a “purely Italian affair”. Italian control of Ethiopia directly threatened Great Britain’s control over Egypt, and exposed the British Empire’s line of communication through the Suez Canal and the Red Sea. Furthermore, Great Britain, and to a lesser extent other powers (notably the United States) were also interested in sharing in the exploitation of Ethiopia. But much more than this is involved. The matter cannot end with Ethiopia. War in Ethiopia can be only the start of the new armed struggle to re-divide the world. Italy will have to go on to other campaigns. Germany only waits for the most advantageous moment to begin her struggle to regain her pre-war colonies, to strike out to the East in Europe, and to destroy French hegemony on the Continent. Japan has already begun her conquest of China, and her moves toward the Soviet Union in the Far East. Great Britain, who has the most to lose, sees her vast empire everywhere menaced by the hungry powers. Likewise, Great Britain fears the repercussions of colonial struggle in arousing the oppressed masses in her own colonies and dominions.
In this light, the heroic efforts of Great Britain to preserve peace and to uphold the sanctity of collective agreements and the League become intelligible. British finance-capital uses the slogans of peace and support of the League to defend her empire and to try to line up as much as possible of the rest of the world on her side before the world imperialist struggle begins. In this effort, her problem with France is particularly thorny. For France is not immediately concerned in the Ethiopian affair to any considerable degree. And France is not sure whether Britain’s side or Italy’s side at the present moment will prove in the long run more advantageous for France. But France must have protection on the Continent against possible German aggression. At present, in the light of the Franco-Soviet Pact and the defeat – for the time being – of the French interests wanting agreement with Hitler, such protection can come best through the League. France therefore faces the contradiction of wishing to sabotage the League (i.e., Great Britain) in the Ethiopian affair, while still allowing for future strong League action in the event of German aggression. To solve this, France attempts to secure a pledge from Great Britain for future action on the Continent, in return for supporting Britain in the League now. But Britain does not want to give an unequivocal pledge for the future which would involve a final break with Germany.
This – together with British use of the crisis to hold a new election with the assurance of a Conservative victory – is in brief the background of the daily ebb and flow of the Ethiopian affair. In its light, the actual fighting in Ethiopia sinks to minor importance. Four points need special emphasis:
(1) The Ethiopian campaign can in no sense be regarded as a local matter. It cannot be understood except as the prelude to the new imperialist world war. A temporary “solution”, satisfactory to Italy, Great Britain and France, may very probably be worked out; but this can only prove to be a short postponement. Italy’s aggression is the demonstration that the conflicts of world imperialism have gone beyond the stage of economic competition, “police” measures, trade wars, to the stage of armed struggle for the re-division of the world. Since the conflicts of imperialism, as we have seen, operate internationally, it follows that the approaching war will be international in scope, involving all great nations – and, indirectly at least, the entire world.
(2) The League of Nations, throughout the development of this crisis as in every other, has acted as the tool of the dominant member states. In no sense has it been an agency for peace. The League has been a convenient maneuvering ground for the diplomats. Above all, the League has been serving as the instrument of British imperialism. Support of the League in any manner is in the present crisis nothing else than support of British imperialism; or, in another sense, of the future plans of French imperialism.
(3) The approaching world war must necessarily involve the Soviet Union in a decisive manner, must indeed decide the fate of the Soviet Union as a workers’ state. The idea that the Soviet Union by some magic can remain aloof is in complete disregard of historical actuality. In the development of the present crisis, the traitorous government of the Soviet Union has throughout played the game of the League of Nations. This means necessarily that it has throughout played the game of British imperialism and the future requirements of French imperialism. Litvinov acted at Geneva as the stooge of Hoare and Laval.
(4) The United States is not involved directly and immediately in the Ethiopian crisis to the extent of Great Britain, France, and Italy. It is, of course, to some extent involved even immediately – as the tremendous increase in exports to Italy during the last year and the Rickett concession affair show. But the United States above all is involved in the world imperialist crisis. In the approaching world struggle, the United States will make its bid for domination in world imperialism. This in fact is the determining and decisive feature of the approaching struggle. Because of her geographical and economic situation, the US will not enter at once into the armed struggle. But, in the later stages, when the other powers are to some degree exhausted, she will necessarily launch out for world hegemony.
 
Part 5


 West: War and the Workers (Introduction)



Burnham Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

War and the Workers

John West
War and the Workers

War is no longer something in the vague future, something to be prophesied and argued about. War has begun. The airplanes and machine guns of Italian Fascism are blasting their corpse-strewn road into Ethiopia. Once again the columns of the newspapers are filled with stories of attacks and counter-attacks, of cities destroyed, of plains laid waste, of the dead and wounded and dying. But far more ominous than the stories of the actual campaign now being fought in Africa are the reports in the neighboring columns: of the concentration of the British Fleet in the Mediterranean; of the new moves of the Japanese in the campaign against China; of the war games of the United States Fleet in the Pacific; of the behind-the-scenes deals in the League of Nations; of twenty-four hour operation in all the munitions plants of the world; of the new German submarines and airplanes and gases; of the new French forts along the German border; of daily changing alliances and counter-alliances.
The war begun by the campaign against Ethiopia – the deliberate, cold-blooded, unprovoked rape of the last of the independent nations of Africa-will not, cannot end is Ethiopia. This is the first great, terrible truth which we must learn and which we must teach. The war in Ethiopia is the introduction, the prelude to the new imperialist world war. It may be that England, France, and Italy will find some “solution” that will prevent the new war from spreading immediately and directly to include the rest of the world. But a solution of this kind can be at the best a short, temporary postponement. Italy has made the first open move in what can only be the new world war, the new armed struggle between the imperialist powers to re-divide the world.
In this struggle the fate of human society will be decided. Remembering the last war with its more than 40,000,000 dead and wounded, and knowing the thousand-fold advances in military technique since the last war, no man can predict adequately the horror of the coming war. Mankind stands now at the crossroads: On the one hand, the continued domination of finance capital will mean that in the approaching series of imperialist struggles civilization will be literally wiped out and human society will be thrown back again into the most frightful form of barbarism. There is only one other path: the utilization of the imperialist crisis for the overthrow of finance-capital, and the construction of a new order of society which, while releasing the productive forces to serve the needs of men, will wipe war and the threat of war from the face of the earth. But the overthrow of finance-capital and the construction of the new society can be achieved only by the action of the international working class under the leadership of the revolutionary party.
Thus the problem of war is above all the problem of the working class and its party. The problem of war is, indeed, the supreme test for the working class and the party of the working class. This test now faces us. It is for us to meet it.
 
Part 1


 West: War and the Workers (Part 3)



Burnham Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

War and the Workers

John West
War and the Workers

III. Betrayal in the Struggle
Most people believe that they are opposed to war. Modern war is so terrible in its methods and results that only a small number of perverts or professional soldiers or completely ruthless financiers can support it in their minds. They must at least pretend to themselves that they are against war. But we have seen that wars do not result from what people wish and believe; and that being against war in the mind does not prevent people from acting in a way that helps bring war about.
The truth is that the most dangerous enemies in the struggle against war are not those who openly support war or are obviously in a position to benefit from war. The masses usually do not listen to, and are not deceived by, such persons. The really dangerous enemies are those who seem to be against war, who seem to be friends of peace. And of these, the most dangerous of all are the false opponents of war within the working class itself. These last are the betrayers in the full sense – they are the traitors.
It is necessary, therefore, to review first in a general way how the false struggle against war serves to betray the true struggle against war – the revolutionary struggle.
 
1. The League of Nations
The League of Nations was founded after the last imperialist war. The statesmen of the victorious Allies advertised it as the institution which would take the place of war henceforward in the world. It was to be “the collective guarantee” of peace. From then on disputes between nations were going to e settled in Geneva, not on the battlefield.
At once liberals, pacifists, and reformists took up the song. The League was hailed as the greatest stride forward toward peace in the history of the world. Everyone was told to support and aid the League, and to rely on it. Even when the reformists said that perhaps the League was not entirely satisfactory, nevertheless they announced that it was a step in the right direction, and should be supported and strengthened.
The attitude of the liberals and the reformists – including the reformists of the Socialist and Communist parties – remains the same up to the present day. In the Ethiopian crisis, we are once again told by them to look to the League.
Now, as at its foundation, only one force has ever told the truth about the League: the Marxists. What is this truth? Is the League, in any sense at all, an agency for peace?
The League was established by the Allies, after their victory over the Central Powers, as an integral part of the “Versailles system” – -that is, as an agency to enforce the peace terms dictated by Great Britain and France, with the consent of the United States. Thus, its real purposes were: (1) To enforce the Versailles Treaty, and ensure the hegemony of France on the European continent; (2) To protect the colonial empire of Great Britain, and to prevent any attempt by Germany to regain its colonies; (3) To make a temporary imperialist “united front” against the post-war threat of international proletarian revolution; and (4) to provide a legal and moral coloration for the next war which the dominant imperialist member states might undertake.
These were the real purposes of the League. How could it have been otherwise? The imperialist powers could not change their spots by joining a Society of Nations. The League did nothing, and could do nothing, to eliminate the conflicts of modern society – the causes of war. It was not, and could not be, an instrument of peace. It was, and remains, on the contrary, an expression of the intra-imperialist conflicts, not an agency to get rid of them. It is, in fact, part of the preparation for war, a stamping ground where the great powers can jockey for the most advantageous position for the start of open conflict. If at times it seems to settle a war situation “peacefully”, that is only because the interests of the dominant powers is against an immediate outbreak. Postponement serves only to assure a greater conflagration when the time comes. Like the Kellogg Pact, Naval Treaties, Disarmament Conferences, the League serves, in point of fact, as an additional means whereby the great powers can carry out their imperialist aims.
Every lesson of history since the foundation of the League serves to confirm this analysis. Whenever an international conflict rises above diplomatic maneuvering, it immediately and automatically goes outside the League framework – as in the case of the Chaco War, the Manchurian invasion, or German rearmament. The only alteration has been that the League is becoming an outworn instrument even to serve its original purposes. One great task for it, however, remains: to help provide a legal and moral coloration for the approaching imperialist war. This task it is carrying out in the present war crisis: as we shall see more at length later, under cover of the League, of the defense of “peace” and “collective security”, Great Britain is lining up her own working class and as much of the rest of the peoples of the world as she can, to serve her own imperialist purposes.
But what follows from this analysis of the role and function of the League? It follows that the struggle against imperialist war requires the most scathing exposure of the role of the League. Far from giving any support whatever to the League, far from creating any hopes in what it can do to preserve peace, the League must be shown before the masses as an instrument of imperialism, of the war-makers. Its “moral authority” must be, not bolstered, but smashed. Only thus can it be removed as an obstacle to the struggle against war.
What then must we say of those who promote these illusions about the League in the eyes of the masses? These brave liberals and false socialists and pious ministers – these Litvinovs and Blums and Browders? We must brand them, for this, as what they are – as betrayers. By binding the masses to the League, they bind them thereby to the controlling member states – they join them to the class enemy, and prepare, through the instrumentality of the League, to hand the masses over to the war-makers when the war, after suitable anointing by the League, begins.
 
2. Pacifism
When we speak of “pacifists”, we mean all those who believe that the struggle against war can be carried on “independently” of the class struggle in general, those who take a negative and defensive position – against war “in general” – and think that a union of all persons “honestly” for peace can be built up and can stop war. Pacifism has a great following, from the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom to the Amsterdam-Pleyel Committee to World Peaceways, Inc. to the World League Against War and Fascism.
We have already seen the complete fallacy of the pacifist position as a means of preventing war. But it is necessary to go further. Not merely is pacifism powerless to prevent war. In the modern world it is, in effect, a means of preparing for war.
Harsh as this conclusion may seem to pacifists themselves, many of whom are personally sincere in their convictions, it can be proved by both theory and history.
Pacifism in any form aids the preparation for war because:
(1) It spreads illusions about the nature of war and of the fight against war (advocating disarmament, conscientious objection, naval treaties, the League, etc., as solutions), and thus prevents a real struggle against war, which can be based only on a true understanding of the nature and causes of war.
(2) Pacifism turns aside the working class from its struggle for power, the only genuine way to fight war. In this way it redirects the revolutionary struggle against war into “safe” channels – that is, channels safe for imperialism.
(3) Pacifism subordinates the working class – the only class which can lead the fight against war – to middle class ideas and middle class individuals (preachers, fake liberals, professional “anti-war agitators”), and thus weakens the class strength of the workers.
(4) Most dangerous of all, in the case of pacifism, is the fact that, by exploiting the desire of the masses for peace and yet completely deluding the masses about the character of the struggle against war, pacifism leaves the masses helpless when war actually comes. At that time, the middle-class and pseudo-liberal leaders of the pacifist movement and organizations for the most part go over at once to the side of the war-makers. They continue to shout that they are against war “in general”, but they find that this particular war is justified because it is “to make the world safe for democracy”, “to defeat militarism”, “to end fascism”, “to uphold the League of Nations”, or for some other noble purpose. Thus the masses who have listened to these leaders are bewildered; having had confidence in the pacifist leaders’ support of peace, they are confused into believing their justification of the actual war. The pacifist organizations, overnight, change from “anti-war” groups into fertile propaganda and recruiting grounds for the war. The experience of the last war in all countries proves this to be the same logic applies in the coming war to such organizations as the pacifist American League Against War and Fascism, with its front of pious liberals, ministers, women’s club presidents, and YMCA secretaries.
The problem of pacifism is particularly acute for the United States, because, among other reasons, a pretended pacifism – under slogans of “neutrality”, “splendid isolation”, “freedom from foreign entanglements” – is not only wide-spread among all groups of the population, but is more or less the “official” policy of the government. What meaning these slogans have was well shown in 1916, when Wilson was re-elected on the pacifist banner, “He kept us out of war” during the very time when the preparations for drawing the US into the war were being completed. The situation has not changed. Ironically enough, Roosevelt’s pacifist neutrality speech in California (August, 1935) was given the day before he reviewed the greatest naval demonstration in US history. The true US war policy is shown not by the phrases of the officials, but by their deeds. For example, the US spends more on armament than any other country in the world, and the strategic basis for the army and navy is throughout designed for a purely offensive war.
The struggle against war in the US must at all times resolutely expose the “neutrality policy” of the government, and must further demonstrate how this policy is actually used to cover up the preparation for the coming war. The myth of US isolation must be exploded. The causes of war are international, not confined to one nation or group of nations. The US can no more avoid being drawn into the imperialist struggle than her finance-capitalists can avoid the effects on their operations of the world market.
 
3. Social-Patriotism
The word “social-patriotism” became current during the last war. It is used to describe the betrayal of the revolutionary struggle against war by those within the working class movement itself. At the outbreak of the last war, the social democratic leaders in the warring nations went immediately over to the side of the war. This action they “justified” by saying that war was an “exceptional” event; that the working class must defend the “fatherland” (Germany) or “democracy” (England) for the period of the war, or, if it did not, all the achievements of the working class in building toward socialism (including the trade unions and the Socialist parties) would be crushed to pieces by the war machine, and the coming of socialism would be set back indefinitely.
Thus the social-democratic leaders declared “class peace”, and built up “national unity” to defend “their” country. And they became, literally, the recruiting sergeants of the war-makers within the working class. The workers, who would not have answered the call of the bourgeoisie, enlisted at the prompting of “their own” leaders.
This is the greatest of the betrayals. The complete falsity of the social-patriots’ justification of their position is sufficiently evident from the analysis of the principles of the revolutionary struggle against war. Social patriotism – whatever form it takes – is a means of binding the working class to the state and thus through the state to the bourgeoisie; its actual effect is to hand the working class over to the class enemy, the true enemy. The social-patriots are, in actuality, the agents of the class enemy within the working class. The most elementary duty of Marxists in the revolutionary struggle against war is to fight to the end against the social-patriots.
 
4. General Character of Betrayal
Betrayal in the struggle against war takes a thousand forms, depending upon the concrete circumstances of the threatened or actual war situation. It can never be treated in the “abstract”. A verbally correct position on war may be carried out in concrete issues as betrayal. In Section V, we shall see certain prominent forms which betrayal is taking in the present war crisis.
However, a few major principles underlie most forms of betrayal, and by them we can test positions on the war question: (1) Treatment of the struggle against war as a special struggle independent of the revolutionary struggle for socialism. (2) A merely negative attitude “against war”. (3) Refusal to support armed struggles – of colonies, suppressed peoples, etc. – which advance the cause of the workers and weaken the imperialist forces. (4) Advocacy of any form of class peace or class collaboration in a war situation. (5) Above all, perhaps, confusions on the nature of the state as the political instrument of the class enemy. Thus any war policy advocating “anti-war” actions (sanctions, defensive war against Fascism, collective actions by nations to defend peace or Ethiopia or the League or what not) by capitalist governments means necessarily betrayal, since the effect of such advocacy – no matter what “reservations” are made in words – is always to tie up the working class with the state, and through the state with the class enemy: that is, to disrupt, weaken, and disarm the revolutionary struggle against war, which can be carried on only and under all circumstances against the state and the class enemy.
 
Part 4


 West: War and the Workers (Part 5)



Burnham Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

War and the Workers

John West
War and the Workers

V. Betrayal in the Present Crisis
In the face of the developing war crisis, the forces for the betrayal of the workers in the struggle against war are maturing rapidly. From all sides, in all countries, the liberals, the pacifists, the reformists, the social-patriots, under the cover of what look like anti-war and pro-peace campaigns, are in actuality preparing for sell-out to the war-makers, are making ready to turn over the masses to the imperialists.
Again, as before the last war, we find the old ways and methods and slogans of betrayal. But the old methods are not enough. New appearances must be added: the masses cannot be deceived again in precisely the old ways. It therefore becomes of crucial importance to analyze the new and special forms of betrayal which are appearing in the present crisis.
 
1. “Good” and “Bad” Capitalist Powers
The most fatally dangerous doctrine, a doctrine which has been systematically propagated during recent years by liberals and by both the Socialist and Communist parties throughout the world, is the theory that a basic distinction must be drawn between the comparatively “good” capitalist nations, the “peace-loving” nations – Great Britain, France, and the United States, on the one hand; and, on the other, the altogether “wicked” capitalist nations – Italy and especially Germany.
This theory reasons as follows: Fascism, especially Hitlerism, means war. Therefore, the fight against war is the fight against Fascism, and especially against Hitlerism, the worst form of Fascism. The success of Fascism means the destruction of democratic rights. The destruction of democratic rights means the crushing of the organizations of the working class, and thus defeat for the revolutionary movement. But Fascism, especially Hitlerism, can succeed only by war, and, since, Fascism means war, will inevitably undertake war.
What then follows? What follows is the betrayal of the working class of France, England and the United States. For, on the basis of the above chain of reasoning, to support the democratic nations in a war against Hitler is to defend democratic rights against Fascism; thus to defend the organizations of the working class; and thereby the revolution. The wheel completes its circle. Defense of the national state – that is, defense of the imperialist bourgeoisie of England, France and the United States – becomes, through this theory, a revolutionary duty!
The mortal fallacy in this position is easy enough to understand when once examined from the point of view of Marxism. The statement, “Fascism means war” is incomplete. It is not Fascism that means war. Rather it is the continued existence of capitalism that means both Fascism and war. Fascism means war only in the sense that it marks outwardly a great intensification of the inner conflicts of capitalism, and is thus an indication of the more rapid drive of the whole capitalist system toward the highest expression of these conflicts – imperialist war. But in the linked chain of causes that make war an inevitable concomitant of the continued existence of capitalism, the democratic nations have as integral a part as the Fascist nations. From the point of view of the working class, there can be no “good”, no “peace-loving” capitalist states. Every capitalist state, democratic as well as Fascist, represents one or another form of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie over the working class. To defend the democratic rights of the working class is one thing. But this has nothing in common with the defense of the “democratic” capitalist state. The former is a primary duty of every working class party; the latter is the occupation of traitors. The latter will be put forward as the only way to protect the working class against war and Fascism; in practice, it will give the working class both war and Fascism, for the bourgeoisie of the democratic countries will not overcome the necessity for a resort to Fascism during the decline of capitalism merely by success in the next war. Indeed, the outbreak of war will in all probability be the signal for setting up Fascist governments in the “democratic” countries.
The business of the working class within any country is never under any circumstances to defend “the government” – that is, the political executive of the class enemy – but always to fight for its overthrow. To Fascism as to war there is only one answer: the workers’ revolution.
 
2. Defense of the Soviet Union
A closely similar preparation for betrayal has gone on under cover of the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union!”
As has already been indicated, the defense of the Soviet Union is one of the primary tasks of the working class in the coming war. But, to a Marxist, what does defense of the Soviet Union mean? The essence can be summed up quickly. It means: “Extend the October revolution.” It means to strengthen the economic and political organizations of the world proletariat, to carry the class struggle on a world basis to ever higher levels, to drive toward workers’ power. It means to put all faith in the working class. It means to achieve victory in the capitalist nations. And it means these things quite openly and realistically. For these are the only possible defense of the Soviet Union.
To Stalinism, however, and to the cynical Austro-Marxists, defense of the Soviet Union means: support the program of national Bolshevism; no word of criticism of Stalin and his bureaucratic associates; put all faith in diplomatic deals with bourgeois powers, in military alliances with France and Czechoslovakia, in maneuvering in the League of Nations; reduce the working class parties to branches of the foreign office of the Soviet state. And it means: do not carry on genuinely revolutionary activities within your own country, because this would upset “peace”; permit the working class of Germany and Austria to be crushed under Fascism rather than risk one ounce of cement at Dnieprostroy or one tractor at Stalingrad. And, lastly, it means: support the war policy of your democratic government, and offer the working class to the coming imperialist war in all nations where the bourgeoisie finds its imperialist aims best served by a temporary alliance with the Soviet bureaucracy.
Naturally, Marxists do not maintain that the Soviet Union should not, whenever possible, utilize the antagonisms and contradictions among the imperialist powers to its own advantage. This was the tactic of Lenin. But this tactic can only be understood as subordinate to the strategy of the world revolution, and this strategy can base itself only on the international working class. Stalin’s “maneuverings” with imperialist powers are the direct contrary of Lenin’s. For Stalin “maneuvers” in such a way as to subordinate the working class to the capitalist powers, not to advance its interests. The Franco-Soviet Pact is the most striking example of such subordination – whereby the French working class is turned over hand and foot to the French bourgeoisie, so long as the Pact formally endures – but this is only one aspect of the consistent and continuous policy of Stalinism. Lenin, to prevent the capitalist powers from attacking the Soviet Union, placed his full reliance on the only possible force which could in actuality defend the Soviet Union: on the working class of the various capitalist powers. If the working class and its party were sufficiently strengthened in a given country, Lenin reasoned, the government of that country would not dare to attack the Soviet Union, since it would realize that such an attack would only pave the way for its own overthrow. Stalin, with his eyes focused on national Russian socialism, asks only for “peace” elsewhere, to let him build at home. He places his reliance, thus, not on the international working class, but on the “friendly” capitalist governments, on any agreements or treaties or pacts he can come to with them. But to secure such friendship, he must direct the Communist parties in the various nations not toward revolutionary struggle against their governments at home (which would endanger the government’s “friendship” for Stalin), but toward putting pressure on the home governments to line up with the Soviet Union; and, then, to essential support of the home government so long as it stays or pretends to stay lined up. This necessarily weakens and destroys the revolutionary struggle, which is always against the home government; and thus, in the end, disrupts the only possible defense of the Soviet Union itself, which must be a defense against and an attack on the international bourgeoisie and all their political instruments – the capitalist governments, never a collaboration with them.
We shall see the workers of France, England and the United States rallied to the flag by the leaders of the Communist party. “Defend the Soviet Union! Enlist in the army, and – fight against war and Hitlerism! Defend the Soviet Union!”
This policy of betrayal has, also, been systematically developed over a period of many years. The recent Congress of the Communist International made it official for the section of the C.I.; and the Dan-Zyromski-Bauer resolution on war advances it within world social-democracy. Unlike the situation at the beginning of the last war, the betrayers this time wish to be fully ready beforehand.
 
3. Sanctions
A special and profoundly important feature of betrayal in the present war crisis revolves around the question of “sanctions”. The Covenant of the League of Nations provides that when a nation has been declared an aggressor against a member state, certain financial, economic, and even military measures shall be – following an elaborate procedure – invoked by the other League member states against the aggressor nation. These measures are called “sanctions”, and the term “sanctions” is being extended to include measures which might be taken by nations on their own initiative (e.g., closing of the Suez Canal by Great Britain) as well as measures taken collectively by the League members.
This extension of the use of the word “sanctions” is significant. It indicates a new and ingenious method for turning opposition to war into support of war. All that is necessary is to call the war an “application of sanctions”. Then it becomes the duty of all “friends of peace” to support it.
This, indeed, is the real meaning of the doctrine of sanctions. League sanctions are, of course, nothing else than sanctions undertaken by the leading member states of the League. The League, as we have seen, is only the instrument of its dominant members. Support of League sanctions, therefore, is exactly the same as support of sanctions applied by individual nations – e.g., by Great Britain or France.
But sanctions are war measures. They include withdrawal of financial credit, embargoes on trade, various forms of boycott. To enforce them genuinely would require a blockade of the country against whom the sanctions were invoked. The probable, the almost certain outcome of such a blockade, as history has so often proved, is war – since the blockaded nation cannot accept such a measure peacefully without surrendering political sovereignty.
Thus it follows that sanctions must be either ineffectual – a kind of large-scale bluff – or they must lead to war.
If they are ineffectual, support of them is certainly no aid to peace (or to Ethiopia). If they lead to war, support of them – no matter with what verbal reservations – means nothing else than support of war undertaken by the imperialist government applying the sanctions. In both cases, support of sanctions to be applied by capitalist governments (whether or not these are League members) is in effect support of these governments themselves. This means that such support necessarily leads to a betrayal of the revolutionary struggle against war, and the revolutionary defense of Ethiopia, which is always a struggle against the capitalist governments and the bourgeoisie whose governments they are.
It does no good to say, as the social-democrats and the Stalinists say, that we should support League and governmental sanctions, but at the same time “point out that the League and British and French imperialism are acting only in their own imperialist interests in applying them”; we are temporarily able to “use” the French and British governments to serve the interests of the working class, because their interests momentarily, though from “diametrically opposite causes”, coincide. This is the reasoning of a Stalin or a Blum, but not of a Marxist. The Marxist knows that we can never “use” capitalist governments for the interests of the working class, because what these governments are is instruments to be “used” for the interests of the bourgeoisie. On the contrary, we must always fight inexorably against the governments, and their acts. The Marxist knows that advocacy of governmental sanctions in any form necessarily binds the working class to the state and the class enemy, necessarily weakens the class position of the workers and thus the workers’ struggle for power, and necessarily prepares for turning the workers over to the sanction-applying government when the sanctions find their natural outcome in war. If we support sanctions, and the sanctions lead to war, then we have already by supporting the sanctions supported the war. It takes more than verbal reservations to crawl out of the inescapable logic of cause and effect.
The disastrous consequences of support of sanctions are already apparent. In Great Britain a year ago, the masses were turning rapidly away from the National Government. Then the British Labour Party and the British Communist party came out strongly for sanctions: that is, came out for the policy of British finance-capital and the National Government. This has, naturally, fatally obscured the class issue. No longer is there any clear line between the working class parties and the Conservatives on the war crisis. The Labour Party and the Communist party have done for Baldwin what he could not do for himself: they have brought about “national unity” on the war issue. Baldwin of course understands this; and consequently has called for the new elections to Parliament, confident of a substantial majority for the government. In France, the same result: The People’s Front, advocating sanctions, becomes the main support of the “Republic” – that is, of French imperialism; Laval could reasonably apply for admission; national unity on the war issue mortally weakens the ripening class struggle in France, which poses on the order of the day the revolutionary struggle for workers’ power and the overthrow of every form of capitalist government at the same time that the workers’ leaders lend all their efforts to upholding and defending the capitalist government.
Marxists, then, reject and expose as betrayal any and all advocacy of League or governmental “sanctions”. Naturally, however, this does not mean that they take a passive, hands-off position in the present crisis or in any other. Marxists are not neutral in the dispute between Italy and Ethiopia. They are for the defeat of Fascist Italy and the blow to imperialism which such a defeat would be; and they are therefore for the victory of Ethiopia. But they propose to aid in such defeat and such victory not by appealing to capitalist governments and the imperialist League for their assistance and sanctions; but to the working class to apply its proletarian “sanctions”. Only sanctions which are results of the independent and autonomous actions of the working class are of any value in the revolutionary struggle against war – since only these separate the class from the state and the class enemy, and only these build the fighting strength of the workers, which is alone the road to workers’ power and thus to the defeat of war. Mass demonstrations, strikes, labor boycotts, defense funds for material aid to Ethiopia, refusal to load munitions for Italy, revolutionary agitation for Marxism as it applies to the war crisis, these are such sanctions as the working class must make use of. But these will be ineffectual in the immediate crisis? They are romantic and utopian? If so, then the revolutionary struggle is itself ineffectual, romantic and utopian. Perhaps such sanctions will not “solve” the present crisis. But they, and they alone, will help steel the class, materially and ideologically, for the struggle to come – the struggle for workers’ power, which is, in the end, the only solution.
 
4. Neutrality
Careful notice should be given to a form of betrayal closely related to betrayal on the question of sanctions. This is a particular danger in the United States. In the United States, which is not a League member, the betrayers call, not for sanctions – which are formally irrelevant to League outsiders – but for “neutrality legislation”. In the present crisis, this demand is only an American form of the demand for sanctions, combined with the worst type of ordinary pacifism.
In the United States all the rotten reformist organizations, from World Peaceways and the League against War and Fascism to the Socialist and Communist parties, are joining in this call for “mandatory” neutrality legislation to be passed by the next Congress, and are “demanding” a “strong neutrality policy” on the part of the US government. What does this mean in the concrete? It means, in the first place, to spread among the people of the United States all the fatal pacifist illusions about US isolation. As we have seen, the United States is necessarily linked up economically, socially, and politically with the rest of the world. Its pretended isolation is a complete myth. As we have also seen, the US will inevitably be involved in the coming war, will in fact play a leading and decisive part in the coming war. Not to point this out honestly and straightforwardly, and instead to pretend that some form of neutrality legisolation will succeed or even aid in isolation the US in the world struggle is to deceive and isorient the masses, to disarm them ideologically, to turn them aside from the genuine struggle against war, and to teach them to put reliance in exactly those forces which are preparing war – namely, the imperialist government of the United States and US finance-capital, which that government represents.
Thus, as always, pacifism in the form of demands for neutrality legislation in actuality aids the war makers. It strengthens the hand of the US government, strengthens its hold over the people. Since the policy of the government, like that of every imperialist government, is and must be a war policy, these demands are in reality doing their part in carrying out the war policy. The capitalists and the government officials are not slow to take advantage of the opportunity. Hearst and Roosevelt alike point out – just as does Baldwin in England – that to preserve a “strong neutrality and peace policy” the US must build up its “national defense”. That is to say, they use the agitation for neutrality legislation as a basis for expanding the armed forces of US imperialism, to build new and more powerful battleships and airplanes, and to mechanize still further the already highly “modernized” US army.
But even more than this is involved in the so-called “neutrality legislation”. The substance of such legislation, if actually put into effect, can only be sanctions as the US can apply them – various forms of financial and economic restrictions, boycotts, etc. As in the case of sanctions proper, therefore, the neutrality acts would be in effect war acts, and the same conclusions must be drawn with respect to them as we have already come to in analyzing sanctions. Realizing this is enough to expose the pseudo-Marxists in the US who so bravely denounce the policy of sanctions in other countries (Great Britain, France); and then in the next breath advocate them (under the title of “neutrality legislation”) for this country.
Here, as in any other phase of the struggle against imperialist war, the fight for US “neutrality” must be a working-class fight, using the methods and means of the working class. It is only the working class, operating as an independent force, which can be counted on – certainly we cannot expect imperialism itself to put an end to imperialism, which is what we do when we call on an imperialist government to avoid imperialist war. The fight must be not for a “government policy of neutrality”, but always a fight against the government.
 
Part 6




The Power of Non-Violence
by Richard B. GRGregg.
369 pp. Philadelphia, J.P. Lippincott. $2.50.
This book is an odd mixture of simple-mindedness and sophistication. The style is that of a salesman turned YMCA secretary; and yet the references and careful documentation are witness to unusually wide reading in many fields. Mr. Gregg’s zeal in gathering a multitude of facts from psychology, history, politics, economics, military science, is exactly matched by his ability to misinterpret them.
Gregg’s central thesis is this: Non-violent resistance (what Gandhi calls Satyagraha) is a more effective method for bringing about desirable social change in the modern world than violence. Indeed, Gregg goes further, asserting that non-violent resistance is the only effective method, and that every violent method is doomed to failure. Notice – and this is what is unusual about the book – that Gregg’s thesis is not a moral one. He is not here primarily interested in maintaining that non-violence is morally preferable to violence, but that non-violence is superior as an instrument to bring about social change. And notice also that he is speaking of non-violent resistance, not of non-resistance, which is quite another matter.
I do not wish at this time to go into the details of Gregg’s arguments. They have, indeed, been adequately refuted by others, and most conclusively of all by the lessons of history. I wish, rather, to examine briefly the assumptions or postulates upon which his arguments rest. Underlying the lot of them is the general position of philosophic idealism, expressed in the belief that social and economic institutions are the outward manifestations of men’s thoughts and feelings and characters. Thus, Gregg concludes, we must change the thoughts and characters first before a significant change can he made in the institutions; and violence is unable to accomplish this; it can be done only by non-violent resistance, properly understood, and backed by good will.
Opposed to this, of course, is the Marxian contention that it is the institutions, themselves founded upon the productive process, that – on the whole at least – determine the thoughts and feelings and characters of men. The institutions, then, must be altered as the necessary pre-condition for raising the level of these thoughts and feelings and characters. The institutions can be basically altered only by being overthrown; and since (as Gregg himself admits) the institutions are founded on and supported by violence, only a superior and better directed violence can overthrow them.
Gregg further postulates that man is innately good (the Rousseau doctrine) and that the interests of all men are the same and can be understood by them as the same if once they can be led to see “the truth”. Violence, he claims, prevents the innate goodness from coming to the surface, is divisive rather than unifying in its effects, and forces men to act as if their interests were diverse, exaggerating and reënforcing the conflicts and thereby keeping men from realizing a community of interest. Nonviolence will let the good come forth, and will gradually teach the opponent that there is no real conflict. We are led imperceptibly to the step that Gregg does not openly take: the capitalist and the worker will clasp hands in brotherly truth over the buried illusion of class conflict, and so on and on to the spiritual regeneration of the corporate state.
The healthy contrast of Marxian realism is evident enough: Men are “innately” neither good nor bad. The interests and values they hold to are based upon the objective historical conditions of their lives. Community of interest is possible only when men stand in the same economic and social relations, that is, when they have the same economic and social status. A capitalist can have the same interest as a worker only when he is no longer a capitalist. Thus, once again, the necessary pre-condition of developing the “goodness” of men, of achieving a real community of interest among men, is the overthrow of the system which by its very nature makes such community of interest impossible. Gregg wants to do the job backwards.
Marxists are not worshippers of violence. Above all do they try to guard against the sporadic, meaningless and inevitably self-defeating violence that suffering and resentment are so likely to prompt. There are, moreover, many half-truths in Gregg’s book; and it is well always to remember that violence alone will not achieve socialism, that, for the long run, the physiological, psychological, and indeed the moral factors that Gregg stresses are fundamental if we are aiming at a better, a more human world. But Marxists deal with the society that confronts them, not with hopes and dreams. And consequently they will judge the effectiveness of non-violence less by the nobility of Gandhi’s sentiments than by the Constitutional Reforms for India, now before the British Parliament, which are the result of twenty years of Satyagraha.
John WEST



The Special Session of Congress has now been going on for nearly a month. To date, its score in work accomplished is exactly – zero. A remarkable fact when placed against the headlines which we read every day. There is, evidently, no lack of problems that might be dealt with.
And yet the Congressmen have spent by far the greater part of their time in debating “points of procedure.” The Congressional Record these days is a rich laboratory book in the intricacies of he rules of order.
 
Purpose of Special Session
Roosevelt called this Special Session, early in the autumn, to enact a four-point “social program”: Farm Aid, Housing, Wages and Hours, Reorganization of the Executive Branch of the Government. No one will deny that each of these matters is of the utmost importance, bound up with the interests and needs of large sections of the American people. No one should be so foolish as to imagine that Roosevelt actually intended that these questions should be genuinely solved by the Special Session. What was needed was a gesture in each field sufficient to arouse the hopes and illusions of the masses, to reinforce their faith in Roosevelt, but at the same time so vague and limited as to guarantee no breach in bourgeois economy and no real break with bourgeois tradition. This is the perennial method of the New Deal policy and New Deal demagogy.
But when the Special Session was called, the business “recession” was just beginning, and there was still confidence that it was only a minor drop of a few weeks, to be quickly “corrected.” During the intervening weeks, the index of production, along with the prices on the Stock Exchange, hurtled downward, at a rate twice as rapid as that during the last months of 1929. Wide-scale layoffs began. Whether or not a new major cyclical crisis has begun, no one any longer doubts the seriousness of the current drop. And, in addition, the war question thrust itself heavily and abruptly forward, not as a distant cloud, but as a heavy present shadow.
The real issues in the face of which the Session gathered were simple and direct: the downward swing of the business cycle, long before the optimistically anticipated upswing had been completed according to the norms of the bourgeois statisticians; and the approach of the war.
And with these issues, so intimately affecting the lives of the masses, in face of the lay-offs, the lowering of wages, the whole gathering storm of “economic crisis” and the untold human misery which it brings with it, Congress debates points of order. The President has a toothache (one always does well do be suspicious of the toothaches of politicians) and goes fishing off Miami. Senator Connally makes wise cracks about the Anti-Lynching Bill. No clearer symbols of the decay of capitalism could be found. Confronted with genuine social problems, the bourgeoisie itself, and its spokesmen, are dismayed and floundering.
Their attitude betrays the fact that, consciously or unconsciously, they have lost confidence in their own answer, the answer which in an earlier era they had so confidently ready. Their aim was once the progressive one of expanding the productive forces of society. This is no longer possible – for them. And now they seek only rationalizing formulas for preserving their social power and privilege, before going over to the open brutality of fascism.
 
Battle Behind the Scenes
It should not, however, be imagined that nothing is happening in Washington. Beneath the surface debate in Congress, a real and far-reaching battle is now going on, a battle which emerged in an earlier stage last Spring during the fight over the Court Bill. The first bone of contention, from the point of view of each group, is how to slough off responsibility for the new crisis which seems to impend ?
Roosevelt must seek to attribute it to the sabotage of “economic Tories” and to a recalcitrant Congress. The “economic Tories” and their immediate spokesmen, on the other hand, must try to make New Dealism responsible in the public mind. Thus Roosevelt, by giving the rope for Congress and making “concessions to business” (himself meanwhile having toothaches and going fishing), jockeys into a position where, if it seems desirable at a later stage, he can again denounce the Tories, prove that cooperation with them was the cause of all evil, and re-assert New Dealism on a “new and higher plane.”
One point, however, and by far the, most important point, Roosevelt, the various factions in Congress and the “Tories” have completely in common: namely, the necessity for attributing the new crisis to something, anything, other than its true cause which is, of course, simply the capitalist system itself. At all costs, they must hide this conclusion. The real importance of the present crisis is in providing the final proof (if one is needed) that reformism (represented by the New Deal) is no more capable than laisser faire of solving the the great social problems of our time.
As in the Court fight, so in the Special Session, the most bitter exchanges take place not between Republicans and Democrats, but between the different factions of the Democratic Party. The division between the Republican and Democratic Parties founded in the issues focused during the Civil War has reduced itself to a Tweedledum-Tweedledee contest; and the political framework it has provided is no longer convincing enough to sustain the illusions of capitalist politics in this country. The pressure of the Labor Party movement, containing beneath its distorted and bureaucratic surface the incipient class movement of the masses, is being felt; and the need for coming to terms with it in a way that will guarantee its harmless development. If the Republican and Democratic Parties are still in the field in 1940, they will not be the same parties that have been known since the Civil War.
 



BORIS SOUVARINE, in his monumental work on Stalin, preserves an unusual degree of objectivity. He is not, however, able to avoid a cry of pain and an apology to his reader when he finds it necessary to quote from the speeches or writings of Stalin’s protagonists. And, indeed, the influence of the style of the great chief of the world proletariat – that style compounded of “elementary dogmas, reworked platitudes, tiresome repetitions stated with that accent of absolute certainty which betrays utter ignorance” – is perhaps not the least among his sins. For the parrot-like imitation by which the little chiefs throughout the Comintern try to insure their term of office includes, alas, imitation of the indescribably tedious style of their master.
I hesitate, therefore, to recommend study of little chief Browder’s report to the Central Committee Plenum, delivered on December 4th, and reprinted in the DAILY WORKER of December 14th. Browder is so apt a parrot as to reproduce even that ponderous and pointless humor for which his leader earned the oft-repeated (and, when you come to think it over, rather sinister) epithet of “genial” – “I hope you will pardon me,” says Browder if I do not go into the details of the love affairs of King Edward.” Perhaps at that point the delegates breathed an inward sigh, and hitched forward in their seats, resolved to demonstrate that loyal Stalinists can stay awake even through 30,000 words of undeviating? sterility.
Nevertheless, this document is of great importance for the next months in the political development of the labor movement in this country. It begins a new phase in the application of Popular Frontism in the United States and as such we must, however painfully, analyze and evaluate certain of its features.
Under the Banner of Class Collaboration
Stalinism has always been under the necessity of playing a perpetual masquerade. It must always dress up its treachery in a Marxist costume. The reason for this is easy to understand: the prestige of Stalin and his bureaucracy among the masses both of the Soviet Union and in the rest of the world depends primarily upon the preservation of the illusion that. the bureaucracy is the true inheritor and defender of the October Revolution. Belief in this illusion will, in the minds of many sincere workers, cover a vast multitude of crimes. Belief in this illusion would scarcely hold up if Stalin were to declare: “We have altogether abandoned the international revolution ; we have given up the class struggle; we are liquidating the revolution inside of the Soviet Union; we are interested only in the maintenance of our own power and privilege; for this end we are prepared to sacrifice the workers in Germany, Austria, Spain or elsewhere, and to turn them over to the imperialist war in any country that will ally itself with us or promise neutrality.” This is the actual policy of Stalin; but, to be acceptable, it must be hidden in an elaborate context of the traditional and time-honored phrases of Marxism and Leninism. These phrases stimulate a favorable emotional, response in the hearer, producing a kind of mental anesthesia under which the treacherous needle can be inserted without any effective opposition from the patient. This method is not new. Rosmer’s magnificent study of the labor movement during the war, for example, shows in detail how working-class slogans were used by the reformists in 1914 to prepare the way, step by step, for the emergence of full-blown social-patriotism. The workers were led to slaughter as a sacred Marxist and proletarian duty.
The present policy of the Communist International, however, is so excessively opportunist and reactionary that it becomes increasingly difficult even to preserve the phrases; the mask itself becomes a handicap. And this is a first major point to observe in connection with Browder s report: in this entire, enormous document the class struggle – the foundation-stone of Marxism – is not once, not a single time referred to. “The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles” declares THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO. “ Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however this distinctive feature; it has simplified the class antagonisms. Society as a whole is more and more splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two great classes directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie and Proletariat” From the depths of Browder’s abandoned past, the stirring words seem to re-echo: “The world is divided more openly and consciously than at any previous time into two camps ...” But do not deceive yourself into imagining that this division is a class division; such a notion is a slander of our enemies, and, as Browder puts it, “hides the most essential fact.” The division, of course, is between the “fascist nations” on the one hand and the “non-fascist peace-loving nations” on the other.
Along with the abandonment of the class struggle goes, naturally, the class analysis of the state. As Marxists we were once taught that the state in every class society was the executive committee of the dominant class. But that was in the old, pre-Popular Front era. Now it is only in fascist countries that such a dreadful condition holds: “In Germany, Italy, Japan and their satellites, reaction and fascism are ascendant and carry on civil war against the people through the government.” In democratic capitalist countries (especially in the United States, where reaction was in November so decisively defeated) all is well, except that the democratic chieftains have a certain tendency to give way to the pressure of reaction, which must be reproved from time to time by “the people.”
In the first nine-tenths of Browder’s report, socialism is not even mentioned, literally not mentioned. The last section gives it a pious nod or two. And for what purpose? In order to explain why we must abandon our program for socialism: “We can organize and rouse them (the majority) – provided we do not demand of them that they agree with our socialist program, but unite with them on the basis of their program which we make also our own, (my emphasis : J. B.).” The last phrase is the most revealing – Popular Frontism summarized in a single line.
The policies outlined in Browder’s report are not, it is true, a new departure. They have been present from the beginning in the ideas and practices of the People’s Front. What is new is the blatant and open way in which they are expressed. And this marks, in turn, a new phase in the development of the People’s Front, a phase observable throughout the world movement.
In this country, the Communist party, as evidenced by this report, proposes to function not even in the disguise of a party of revolutionary opposition to capitalism, but quite openly as a party of “loyal opposition” – that is, as a party whose opposition is conceived of as revolving wholly within the framework of the existing order. “The Communists,” declares the Manifesto, “disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communist revolution.” The Stalinists, also, Browder is anxious to make clear, do not wish to conceal their views. Let the ruling class be reassured: we promise and guarantee not to interfere with your domination – if only, if only you will in turn give us some crumbs of hope that you will be on the “right side” in the coming war.
The Communist Party and Roosevelt
As head of the loyal opposition, Browder reviews the election campaign. With full satisfaction he notes the complete success of the first and primary aim of the Communist strategy: “The first objective was the defeat of Landon: This was accomplished to a degree far surpassing all expectations . . . this aim we shared with the largest number of people . . . Without exaggerating our role in bringing about this result, we can safely say that the weight of each individual Communist in the struggle was far higher, many fold, than that of the members of any other political group in America.” He has a number of apologetic Words to offer for the Communist party’s independent presidential ticket. But it was forced on us! If only “a national Farmer-Labor party ...” had “decided to place Roosevelt at the head of the ticket nationally ...” “Would we have refrained from putting forward our own independent tickets and supported the Farmer-Labor party ticket even with Roosevelt at the head? I venture to say that under such circumstances we would almost surely have done so.”
And how do things look now, with reaction so roundly trounced? Of course, Roosevelt “cannot be relied upon”; but if we keep applying pressure, “he will turn left.” Meanwhile, we will try not to inconvenience him. We will even delay formation of a national Farmer-Labor party. There are many progressive tendencies inside as well as outside of the old parties. “There is a fear among many progressives of prematurely forming such a party and thereby narrowing it down... Our experience in Washington and California confirms the correctness of this judgment. There is not the slightest doubt that we were correct in establishing the united front of these movements which were not yet independent of the Democratic party...” “This broader unity (of the People’s Front) will have to, for a time, at least, include in most places forces outside and inside of the two old parties.” We shall, of course, have to develop a legislative program, around which – “to build up a progressive bloc in Congress.” We will do this in union with “progressive forces,” making “such compromises as will be necessary to get a working relationship with the other ( !) progressives who have different ideas from us.”
The WPA cuts are something of an irritation. They sink, however, into insignificance alongside the mighty progressive step of the re-elected Administration: “The speech made by Secretary of State Hull, at the Inter-American Peace Conference, is of great significance. It was a contribution to the mobilization of the anti-fascist forces of the world in the struggle against war, for the maintenance of peace, not only in the Americas, but everywhere ...” (The TIMES is less fulsome.) As a loyal opposition, naturally, “there are ... points in Secretary Hull’s program where we will have to register some differences of opinion ...” (but only in the politest manner). Remember, you carping critics, that “the main significance of this speech is that America is more and more emerging as the greatest power of the capitalist world on the side of peace, and against the fascist war makers ...” And, somehow, Browder seems to have overlooked the new bombers, battleships, tanks and observation planes, the construction of which was announced by the Administration simultaneously with Hull’s departure for Buenos Aires. Or is the omission not altogether accidental? Might its inclusion have suggested even to the uninitiated some other import to this grandiose South American junket, this spectacular step forward in the well laid war plans of TJ. S. imperialism? Like the documents of that other loyal opposition, the Republican party, Browder’s entire report contains not one single word on United States armament and military expenditures. Well and proudly can Browder claim: “No one can deny that we thoroughly established our party as an American party, that our slogan – Communism is 20th Century Americanism, – registered deeply with the American people.” (“The Communists,” says the Manifesto, “are further reproached with desiring to abolish countries and nationalities ...” (Ah, most unkind and slanderous reproach, laments this 20th Century American.) And the MANIFESTO continues: “The working men have no country. We cannot take from them what they have not got.”
Communist Party and the A. F. of L.–C.I.O.
A reformist political line cannot be isolated into any supra-mundane sphere of “pure politics.” It must show its effects on every arena of the class struggle. We thus find during the past two years a progressive development of the People’s Front strategy as applied to Communist party activities in the trade unions and unemployed organizations. Browder’s report guarantees that during the next months this development will be carried unprecedented steps further. The basis of the People’s Front is class collaboration; and we know from past experience of reformism! what this means on the trade union field.
Are the reactionary trade union bureaucrats agents of the class enemy within the working class? Do their policies act as the major brake to militant class consciousness within the unions? This is what Marxism has always taught, but no one could possibly learn this lesson from however careful a reading of Browder’s report. Nowhere is there any explanation of or even reference to the role of the trade union bureaucracy. Nowhere is there even any sharp criticism of specific policies of the bureaucrats. A passing phrase about Ryan’s role in the Maritime Strike (one of the most vicious pieces of treachery in the entire history of the American labor movement – and it is allotted a passing phrase), the conventional witticism about Hutcheson voting the Carpenters’ International from his vest pocket; and that is virtually all.
Nor is this, also, an accident. The policy of class collaboration forces the Stalinists to abandon more and more the fighting struggle for economic demands, and through that struggle the raising of the level of class consciousness, for the practice of trying to curry favor with the bureaucrats, of settling disputes through deals behind the scenes, of relying on governmental arbitration boards and mediators. The Communist work in the unions must be subordinated to the great aim of achieving in this country a mass, classless People’s Front; to secure the adherence of a union to a Negro Congress or an American League Conference or a Farmer-Labor Progressive what-not or a Social Security Assembly is far more important than to get it to prepare and win a militant strike.
The results are already widely present within the labor movement, though not yet so widely recognized. In the WPA sit-downs, the Stalinists and the supervisors together explain why the workers must be peaceful and go home. In the Federation of Teachers the general fight against the Boards of Education is deprecated, dual organizations are met with conciliation, and the open struggle against the A. F. of L. Executive Council and for the C.I.O. principles is shunted aside. In the Cafeteria Workers there is disclosed an ironbound alliance between the Stalinists and the older racketeers. The furriers, the wild men of the Third Period, turn “respectable,” and devote their energies against the progressives and revolutionists in the union. Ben Gold, who roared for five years like an untameable lion, speaks now like the mildest lamb. In the United Textile Workers, the Stalinists at the Convention come to the rescue of the reactionary officials.  On the Pacific Coast, among the Maritime Unions, the Stalinists first try to put over the I.S.U. proposals on the Sailors, then attempt to head off the strike, then insist that it be delayed until after the elections (so as not to injure Roosevelt), and are forestalled only by the militant stand of the Sailors’ Union.
This trend will continue and increase. The Communist party now functions in the unions as a reactionary force, and the progressive movement in the unions will have to be built not along with but against it.
These conclusions are impressively illustrated in Browder’s report by the treatment of the A.F. of L.–C.I.O. struggle. The progressive movement within the trade unions at the present time, as socialists have made clear, must proceed in accordance with the basic slogans: for industrial unionism; for organization of the basic mass industries; for a class struggle policy; for trade union democracy. Every one of these slogans, taken individually or together, dictates repudiation of the policies and course of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy, and determined, though of course critical, support of the C.I.O., not because the C.I.O. as at present constituted and with its present leadership is the sufficient answer to the needs of the workers (indeed, through its fundamental class collaborationism and its violation of intra-union democracy, it acts even now and will in the future act to an increasing extent counter to the needs of the workers), but because in the light of the real and actual conditions of the present, the direction of the C.I.O. is the direction of advance for the labor movement in this country, just as the direction of the A.F. of L. officialdom is the direction of decay and disintegration. As against the A.F. of L. bureaucracy, therefore, we must, whole-heartedly and unambiguously, support the C.I.O., and only such an attitude at present is compatible with progressive trade-unionism.
Browder, however, formulates the entire Communist party policy for the next period around the slogan of “unity.” “We shall,” he says, “redouble our efforts in the fight for trade union unity, for the unity of the American Federation of Labor.” “We think that it would be harmful if any unions were divided, one section going to the C.I.O., the other to the A.F. of L. ... under no conditions do we carry that fight on in such a way as to make a split in that union . . . For example, in the probable organization of some sections of heavy machinery, we will have the problem of whether these new unions shall go into the Machinists or into some of the other unions, whether it be the Amalgamated Association, or what not. Generally, we have been clear on this last question. We refused to use our forces to carry sections of newly organized workers away from the jurisdictional claims of the Machinists Union over into some of the industrial unions, where there was a fear that this would intensify rivalries and sharpen the split.”
Now, no one will argue against the desirability of trade union unity, nor will anyone “advocate” splits. Nevertheless, it is always the concrete content of unity, not unity as an abstract slogan, that is important. And, under the present circumstances in the labor movement, the fight for unity itself can be understood only as a fight under the slogans of progressive unionism stated above, and – translated into organizational terms – for the C.I.O. movement as against the Executive Council. Such a fight alone makes possible the reintegration of the A.F. of L. on a basis that would mean an advance and not a defeat; and such a fight is equally necessary to prevent the C.LO. officials themselves from betraying the movement which at present they lead. Reintegration, of course, may not be possible without capitulation; and if this is the case, then we must be prepared to face the full consequences – prepared to face the necessity for the building of a new Federation; and the conduct of our campaign will have laid the basis for such an eventuality.
The campaign of the Communist party, on the contrary, conceived as outlined in Browder’s report, will disorient the progressive struggle.  It will block the sharp and fruitful fight against the policies of the Executive Council; and at the same time will contribute to reactionary tendencies on the part of the C.I.O. officials. We may expect, to an increasing extent, to discover its results in one union after another – as, indeed, they have already been discovered in a number of specific instances: for example, in the Maritime Federation of the Pacific, and at the Convention of the Federation of Teachers (where Stalinist influence smothered clear-cut support of the C.I.O.). With crucial days approaching for the trade unions in this country, this prospect, unless checked by the genuinely progressive forces in the labor movement, presents possibilities of incalculable damage.
The Communist Party, War and Spain
During the past three months the Comintern’s war policy has taken a major step: it has passed from veiled, hidden, and hypocritical social-patriotism into open social-patriotism. Here, as elsewhere, it has become more and more difficult to utilize even the Marxist language, with the Marxist content left so utterly behind. In the case of the war policy, this is to be observed especially in France, where it is symbolized strikingly by Thorez’ call for a “French Front” to replace the Popular Front, and by the Salengro incident. It should be remembered that the “crime” of which Salengro was accused was – that he had not been an ardent social patriot: a crime, moreover, of which (according to the defense of Socialists, Communists, and Salengro himself) he was entirely innocent. The present Communist posters in France directed against Hitler and the Nazis are exactly on a par, even artistically, with the French posters during the war; and, as Daladier reports with pleasure, all parties of the Popular Front are now whole-heartedly behind the French “defense program.”
The war crisis is not so acute in this country, and we find less attention paid to it by Browder. Nevertheless, it is to be remarked that Browder no longer pays even lip service to the Marxist conception of war as inherent in capitalism and flowing necessarily from capitalist class contradictions. The only cause of war mentioned by Browder is “Fascist aggression.” His deep satisfaction with the Buenos Aires meeting is because, “in spite of all its short-comings, the Inter-American Peace Conference does constitute a move against the fascist aggression” – that is, does seem to him to mark a step in the alignment of American imperialism on “the right side” in the coming war. It is now taken for granted that we will support an imperialist war "for democracy against fascism.
Browder correctly points out that the war problem is now concentrated in “the question of Spain.” And on Spain, “our slogan is everything to defend Spanish democracy.”  This slogan deserves a pause.  Spanish democracy – i.e., the bourgeois-democratic government in Spain – is threatened in two ways: from one direction, by Franco, who wishes to substitute for it a bourgeois-fascist government, the better to maintain capitalist property relations and bourgeois power; from the other, by the revolutionary workers of Spain, whose problems can be solved only by the overthrow of all forms of bourgeois government, and the establishment of a workers’ state. The Communist party is impartial: it announces that it will defend the bourgeois-democratic state – and give “everything” in its defense – both against the Fascist counter-revolution, and against the proletarian revolution. And that it means what it says is being rapidly and thoroughly demonstrated in Spain itself, where the Stalinists have launched an incredible campaign against all those revolutionists and near-revolutionists in Spain who define the issue as “socialism against capitalism” and in any way call for a workers’ government. The Comintern’s social-patriotism is – it could not be otherwise – bound up with an anti-revolutionary policy in a revolutionary crisis.
The Communist Party and the Socialist Party
In my earlier remarks on Browder’s style, I should have listed one exception. There is one subject, many times referred to during the course of the report, where something of the old fire is felt, one subject in dealing with which Browder’s words seem to spring to vitality and life. This subject is – the Socialist party. And this, too, is not accidental. For the sentences and paragraphs about the Socialist party are the heart and soul of the report. It is they that give the dominant line of the Communist Party for the next months; the task therein formulated is the chief task.
Browder is severely critical and deeply grieved at the course of the S.P. Let us see what it is that bothers him. The S.P., he says, “came out in principle against the People’s Front in America and advocated its liquidation in France and Spain ... it denounced Labor’s Non-Partisan League... It came to an unprincipled split with its local organizations, which had somewhat of a mass base in Connecticut and Pennsylvania; it split with the New York Old Guard which had trade union connections ...” Consequently, “we must offer to all sincere Socialists our sympathetic help in solving their difficult problems.”
It is clear enough. Browder is in despair because the S.P. has refused to succumb to his own opportunist and reformist course. He is deeply indignant because the S.P. has cast from its back the dragging weight of the reactionary and stultifying Old Guard (how much easier his problem would be if the Old Guard were still with us!). He is shocked because in the elections the S.P. insisted on making an independent working-class campaign. He froths at the mouth because the S.P. will not go over to support of the imperialist war, but puts forward the policies of the militant struggle against war. In a word, and in general, he grinds his teeth over the fact that the S.P. steadily advances toward the revolutionary road, and refuses to dissolve itself into the unholy social-patriotic brew which he has cooked up under the label of the People’s Front.
Let no one be so naive as to imagine that I exaggerate. The one great barricade in Browder’s happy class-collaborationist path is the Socialist party. On every other topic his sentences are larded with a smug and heavy complacency. On the S.P. alone does irritation break through. And his attitude is fully justified: to smash the S.P. as a revolutionary or potentially revolutionary force is the one absolutely essential precondition to the success of Browder’s strategy. If he cannot accomplish this, then all his well-laid plans must ignominiously fail.
Browder does not content himself with mere abstract analysis. By no means. He explains the strategy that should be employed in smashing the S.P. Trotsky-baiting, naturally, in the best Hearstian manner, has a prominent place. Every left-wing statement and act must be tarred and feathered as “Trotskyist” (i.e., the deed of a counter-revolutionary assassin), every effort to resist the Stalinist ideology or to move positively in a revolutionary direction. There are at least half a dozen jabs at Norman Thomas’ Trotskyism. And it was, of all things, Trotskyism which forced the S.P. to conduct an independent campaign.  Even Scott Nearing, with his recent comments on “the C.P. taking the reformist” road of people’s front and the S.P. becoming the “revolutionary party” is “influenced by the Trotskyite tendency of thought.”
What, then, are we to do about this devastating plague of “Trotskyism” (read: left-wing socialism, revolutionary Marxism)? Browder gives the answer, so far as the next few months are concerned, in an astoundingly brazen manner: “The only way to rid the Socialist party of Trotskyite influence is by concentrating the struggle for the expulsion of the Trotskyites against their most apparently harmful manifestations. The Socialist party has called a special convention for next March, as you know. We must consult with the best elements in the Socialist party about their problems in the most helpful way (! – my emphasis: J. B.)... . They must prepare for the March convention of the Socialist party to get results, to win the Socialist party for the united front and make a clear break with the counter-revolutionary Trotskyites.”
There it is, in just so many words. The major efforts of the Communist party for the next three months are to be devoted to – the attempt to split the Socialist party, to tear it apart, to destroy it as any kind of effective force, and then to gather together its bedraggled remnants tied hand and foot into the straight-jacket of People’s Frontism and social-patriotism.
A carefully laid plan, a plan to take your breath away. But we can take comfort from Bobbie Burns’ reminder that “the best laid plans of mice and men” (and who will deny that Browder has in him something of the mouse as well as of the man?) “gang aft aglae.” Our party, above all the developing left wing, will have an adequate answer to this shameless lackey of a traitor-master.
 



Events of the part ten days again serve to bring out sharply the unprecedented depth of the developing world crisis. Outstanding in their symptomatic importance were the hastily summoned Nyon Conference and the British Trades Union Congress. Both represent substantial victories for the delicate strategy of British Imperialism,
The policy of the British Government is based upon the central aim of preserving for exploitation by British capital the Empire’s colonial possessions and dominions, as against threats from rival imperialist powers or from colonial revolt. The British statesmen are well aware that success in this aim rests in the last analysis on armed force. Such force has been literally used during the past twenty years in the suppression of colonial uprisings; but the exhaustion of the rival powers following the last War enabled Great Britain to maintain its position against these powers, up to the present, by juridical means and without resort to armed international conflict.
 
Juridical Solution Inadequate
Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia demonstrated, however, that juridical solutions were becoming inadequate. The structure of international “legality”, crowned under the Versailles system by the League of Nations, was swept away by Mussolini’s legions in Africa and Hitler’s new army in the Rhineland. The first phase of the open struggle for the re-division of the world had begun. Henceforth the immediate and determining factor in the policies of all of the great powers was the concrete preparation Tor war on an international scale.
For Great Britain this meant the belated undertaking of a major rearmament program, a program not yet by any means completed. Meanwhile, Great Britain is confronted by the tasks: (a) of delaying the outbreak of war on a world scale at least until her rearmament program is well along; and (b) of jockeying for the most favorable position in the maze of alliances and counter-alliances.
 
Tactic to Delay
In pursuit of the first end, Great Britain first tries to delay as long as possible each new conflict, and then to localize it when it breaks out, as in the cases of Manchuria and Ethiopia, and now in Spain and China. She tries to do this not merely geographically, by keeping the area of the fighting to a minimum, but also diplomatically, by trying to prevent unnecessary repercussions in other spheres from the given conflict. In addition, at the appropriate moments, she offers “solutions” designed to provide a formula for settling the conflict with the least international disturbance. Often several solutions are attempted, offered at first experimentally, and withdrawn if the time is not ripe – as was so conspicuously true of Great Britain’s handling of the Ethiopian affair.
In seeking to delay the outbreak of the war, however, Great Britain finds herself in a partial dilemma. The advances of the rival powers threaten constantly to weaken Britain’s own military and naval position. She must weigh this threat always against her incomplete preparedness, for if her position were too much weakened in advance, she would not be recompensed even by gaining the delay for further rearmament. From this results the apparent inconsistency, hesitation, zig-zags of British foreign policy: in reality only the cautious, sober, and careful experimental moves of the world’s most accomplished diplomats in working out the most useful solutions to problems which by their very nature are incapable of being wholly solved.
The Italian conquest of Ethiopia did, in point of fact, to some degree weaken Britain’s position. Nevertheless, her astute maneuvers kept the loss to a minimum, and effectively gained time.
 
Compromise in Spain
For Spain, Britain has followed the same general course as in the Ethiopian affair: localization of the disturbance, protection so far as possible of her own position as against the other powers, attempts and proposals at a “solution”. The most favorable – though not the sole acceptable – solution from Britain’s point of view is a “compromise” of the Civil War by agreement between the opposing military staffs, the establishment of some form of unified bourgeois regime perhaps backed by international (troops), with protection for the “rights” and interests of all of the imperialist powers in Spain and no new naval bases for Italy or Germany. This solution is undoubtedly making headway, particularly since the internal developments in Spain have, since May, been rapidly erasing the line between the Loyalist and Franco regimes and thus taking the social content out of the Civil War.
 
Opposes Rome-Berlin Axis
Britain’s second task, of jockeying for the most favorable position in the maze of alliances and counter-alliances, is being carried out in her traditional manner, chiefly through the negative means of preventing the firm consolidation of an overpowering alliance on the Continent. This, of course, is her only worry over the “Rome-Berlin” axis: Britain is quite content to find terms with either Germany or Italy, but she must aim to obstruct the crystallization of too powerful a bloc, from which France would be excluded, around Germany and Italy.
Suddenly, about a month ago, the raids on neutral shipping – including many ships of British registry – began to occur almost daily in the Mediterranean. Here was a threat far more serious than the Civil War in Spain, for Britain must keep the Mediterranean open. At the same time the Rome-Berlin axis was tightening. The “lumbering democracy” proved able to act as quickly as the dictatorship: the Nyon Conference was called and completed in what must be close to record time.
 
Britain Wins “Strong Hand”
As a preliminary, Britain was willing to permit the Soviet Union the luxury of its sharp notes to Italy: an act which the Kremlin, slavishly dependent on the British Foreign Office, would never have committed without Britain’s prior knowledge.
The Conference was held, and Britain can record the following results: the Rome-Berlin axis was (through the exclusion of Italy and Germany) if not weakened, reminded that it should not have too exclusive a character but must take the rest of Europe into account; a juridical status was given to the presence of a large section of the British Fleet in the Mediterranean; recognition of belligerent rights for Franco – demanded by Germany and Italy, and a pre-requisite for a solution of the Spanish conflict – was advanced a stage further by giving identical treatment in the Nyon Declarations to the fleets of Franco and of the Loyalist Government; the Non-intervention Committee was dropped into the background; Britain recovered freedom to exercise effective control on how much material aid enters Spain for either side (it has been her general policy to attempt to balance aid in such a manner as to prevent either army from winning a quick and overwhelming victory, but this balance was upset by the serious threat of “piracy”’ to all aid to the Loyalists); all of these, together with the fact of the Conference itself and Britain’s new “strong hand”, constitute a further step toward Britain’s solution of the Spanish question through a “compromise”.
 
War Postponed
From Britain’s success at Nyon there follows the probability of the postponement for the immediate future of the imperialist world war, since such postponement is part of Britain’s basic strategy. This probability is by no means, however, a certainty, and no way alters the inexplicable fact that the conclusion of the present period of international developments will be found in the new war on a world scale. It is still possible that Britain will find her position being so seriously undermined that she will resort to what would be in effect “preventive” war before completing her rearmament program.
Again, it is not at all certain that the Spanish Civil War can be liquidated in any manner; in which case the struggle in Spain (together with that in China) may spread link by link until the great powers find themselves involved in war de facto with perhaps no diplomatic recognition or declaration of a “state of war”. And, furthermore, the general international tension is by now so grave that some one of the daily “incidents” might well lead to an irrevocable step.
 
Labor “Leaders” Help
Recognizing these possibilities, Britain does not wait “at home”. Military rearmament is not enough, her rulers know, for the successful prosecution of the war. She must solidify the “national union” of all classes in order both to have a free hand for rapid negotiations and maneuvers (such as the Nyon Conference), and likewise be assured of complete support when the war itself breaks. Thus the decisions of the Trades Union Congress, which ended its session simultaneously with the Nyon Conference, are by no means an accident. The entire Congress revolved around the question of the foreign policy of the National Government. The entire work of the Congress was summed up in its vote to support the rearmament policy of the Government. In this way, the officialdom of the British working class, following the lead of the Socialist and Stalinist deputies who in Prance in January voted the French war budget, announce their treachery in advance, in advance declare to the imperialist government that they will turn over to it the British masses for slaughter in the imperialist war.
 
Pledge Sell-Out Beforehand
During the last war it was not until after hostilities had begun that the parties of the Second International completed their betrayal and voted the war budget. The immeasurably greater profundity of the present crisis of world capitalism is indicated by this fact that today the bourgeoisie must exact its pledge beforehand. And it is this fact which at the same time gives the revolutionists the opportunity, which they did not have in 1914, to make clear before the outbreak of the war the exact character of the betrayal, to point unerringly at those guilty; of it, and to rally the forces which are determined, at any and every cost, to oppose the war.
 



It has been often noticed that military tacticians are almost always caught off guard in the first stages of a new war. The reason for this is easily explained: At the conclusion of one war, the tacticians set about learning the lessons which its campaigns have taught. They then base their plans for the coming war upon what they have learned from the war just finished, expecting to correct “mistakes” chiefly by extending the scope of operations. But in modern times, during the intervening period of peace, vast technological changes have profoundly altered the instruments of warfare, and social and political shifts have altered ways of handling masses of people. Consequently, the lessons of the past war are discovered not to apply to the new war, or to apply only indirectly. The military staff have to throw overboard most of their studies, and learn afresh, from reality.
 
Same in Politics
The same difficulty is as common in political as in military tactics. Painfully, exhaustively, we learn the political lessons from the last war. But, if we apply them directly and mechanically to the new crisis, we are left floundering and disoriented, and have to learn out lessons all over again. Valuable and instructive as are political analogies drawn from the past, they are never a sufficient substitute for the direct analysis of living and concrete reality. Every new historical crisis, deep as may be its roots in the past, is yet novel and unprecedented in certain of its fundamental aspects. We are as likely to be fooled as instructed by memories; and conventional formulas can never do the work of intelligence.
 
Central Task
Every serious person knows that the new world imperialist war is coming, and is in fact not far off. Every Marxist or near-Marxist realizes that in the new war the fate of mankind will be at issue; that out of this war will come either the workers’ revolution or a social barbarism more terrible and devastating than ever before known in history. Every revolutionist understands that in the last analysis his central task is to prepare for the challenge of the coming war with the unbreakable determination that it shall be at once the death of the monstrosity of capitalism and the birth of the new world order.
All the more fatal, then, will be any miscalculation concerning the nature and manner of the new war. A simple major error may well prove a disaster. Nor, to avoid miscalculation, is it enough to rely passively on what we have learned from the past.
 
The New Aspect
Right on the surface there is a peculiarity of the present world situation which is all-important. This peculiarity is suggested by asking the simple question: How will the new war begin?
At no time in the past would this question even have been raised. War was always a social activity with certain conventional standards and rules. Wars began with a formal announcement to that effect, called in modern times a “Declaration of War”, by the warring parties. This, in turn, was a modified development from the more elaborate ceremonies that preceded armed conflict in feudal society. The Declaration of War, in modern times, has itself almost invariably come as the conclusion of several other standardized actions: an “Ultimatum” of some kind, “breaking off of diplomatic relations”, “general mobilization”, and then the Declaration of War.
The past three or four years in international relations have witnessed a more complete breakdown in usual “diplomacy”, in the conventional ways of doing things, than has ever before occurred. Since the withdrawal of Japan from the League of Nations, the act has come first, and the formality is either added on later or dispensed with altogether. Armies march, ships are sunk, cities bombed, treaties violated, all without benefit of the traditional “rules”.
Does this mean that the new imperialist war will never be formally initiated, never “declared”?
 
No Formalities
There was, as we know, no declaration of war when Japan invaded Manchuria, none when Italy invaded Ethiopia, and there has been none in connection with the Spanish events. None of these situations is however, exactly comparable to an inter-imperialist war, at least as such a war has been up to now understood. The invasions of Manchuria and Ethiopia were carried out by imperialist powers against backward nations. In the past, such acts have been frequent enough in the history of all the great power; and very often the great power did not see fit to dignify the colonial aggression with a formal Declaration. Therefore, we are not able to conclude definitely from the evidence of the Manchurian and Ethiopian affairs that the inter-imperialist war itself will be undeclared.
But there is, when we examine the question more closely, a significant difference between the Manchurian and Ethiopian invasions, on the one hand, and earlier colonial enterprises on the other. During the 18th and 19th centuries there was still left in the world vast “virgin” territories, enormous areas as yet not brought under the sway of capitalist exploitation, and often not even definitely under the influence of any single great nation. But by the eve of 1914, almost the entire world had been divided up among the great powers, either as colonies, dominions, subject nations, or as some other type of “sphere of influence”. This meant that capitalism had reached its progressive limit, and was entering its decline as a world system. The War of 1914-18 was not a war of capitalist expansion, but a war for the re-division, of the world among the great powers, and out of the war there did in fact come a re-division, enshrined and “legalized” in the Versailles Treaty and the League of Nations.
 
End of Versailles
The Versailles system summed p the relationship of forces which held at the end of the war, after the military defeat of the Central Powers. It could hold only until intolerable inner conflicts compelled some one of the powers or group of powers to attempt to change it. Japan in Manchuria gave the first powerful blow to the Versailles system; but the system itself was able still to stand up under that blow.
It was Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia, more or less simultaneous with Hitler’s de facto repudiation of the provisions of the Versailles Treaty, which showed that the Versailles system had broken down, and that a new period was beginning. Political questions were now no longer going to be settled by diplomacy, but “by other means”, by armed conflict. In a world all farmed out among the various great powers, all linked together by the chains of world capitalism, Italy’s campaign could not be regarded as a mere “private” subjugation of the single backward country of Ethiopia. It was an armed attack on the whole political structure of the world as it has existed since 1918.
 
Prelude To The War
When Italy struck in Ethiopia, Marxists said that this was “the prelude to the new world war.” By that, they meant what has been stated above, that the stage of national and international conflicts had reached a level beyond solution within the framework of the League of Nations and the post-war Peace Treaties, that henceforth the conflicts could never be forced back within that framework, that it was now a race toward war on a world scale.
The phrase, “prelude to the new world war”, however, may have had a more literal meaning that was suspected even by those who used it. It is the remarkable and indisputable fact that since the beginning of the Ethiopian invasion there have been in the world taken as a whole bodies of armed men in conflict in numbers steadily increasing month by month, almost without exception. In form these armed men have been engaged chiefly in two “colonial wars” (Ethiopia and China) and in a civil war (Spain). But in the Ethiopian war, the fleets of Great Britain and Italy were brought into the Mediterranean; in the Spanish War, there have been tens of thousands of men and hundreds of millions of dollars worth of munitions poured in by the great powers, and there have been armed encounters between the ships, airplanes and submarines of the powers; and in China there is present a considerable concentration of the armed forces of the powers, some of whose tactics have amounted to at least partial intervention.
 
What Next?
It is still, of course, possible that a temporary “solution” can be found for both the Spanish and the Chinese struggles – though it is not possible that any solution could endure for long. But the sequence of events during the past three years now raises also, as another and distinct possibility, the alternative that, the process which began with the invasion of Ethiopia may continue, and that the armed struggles now going on may pass by a series of almost insensible gradations into conflict on a world scale, into the new imperialist world war. This process might, furthermore, be completed with no formalities whatever, above all with no formal Declarations of War. Military tacticians have already speculated with this notion from the point of view of its military desirability; it now becomes related, in a manner not foreseen by the militarists, to concrete events.
 
What This Means
The profound importance of this possibility for Marxists should be apparent. If we do not take it into account, we may wake up some morning to find, not that war has suddenly started, but that it stared some long while ago. The revolutionists would be caught completely off guard, organizationally and politically. Tactics applicable to a colonial civil war might be applied long after what began as dominantly a colonial or civil struggle had been subordinated to the inter-imperialist conflicts.
On the other hand, if this possibility turns out to be the case, or is even partly true, we may anticipate a different tempo in certain developments associated with the period following the Declaration of War: as for example, the passing of reformists and labor bureaucrats over to full-blown social-patriotism, measures by Governments for “consolidation of the nation”, etc. In fact, the voting of the war budgets by the French Communist and Socialist Parties in January, and the pro-Armament vote of the British Trades Union Congress this month, which we have tended to point to as an example of a difference in the character of the labor movement now as compared with 1914 (when such votes occurred only after the Declaration of War), might seem to strengthen the possibility which I have been discussing, and to suggest that the difference lies rather in the changed form of the development of the new war.
War is a continuation of politics by other means”. A war period of peace. Heretofore we have always had an easy convention to distinguish the two – the convention of the War Declaration. If this convention is, or may be, removed, we shall have to look more closely than ever at events themselves. In an article next week, I propose to make such an examination of the Spanish events, and to suggest certain political conclusions that follow.
 



How did LaGuardia get to be Mayor of New York? Who backed his candidacy? What interests put him into office, confident that he would represent them faithfully as the city’s chief executive? These are questions that are never raised by the Browder-Thomas-ALP-Republican Party directorate that has formed the LaGuardia People’s Front. Nevertheless, the answers to them are of profound weight to every worker in New York City. And It is possible to give the answers with exactness and precision.
 
New York’s Big Business
First of all, it must be realized that New York City is one of the largest “businesses” in the world. Its regular budget is in the neighborhood of $600,000,000 yearly. This figure, enormous as it is, includes only a part of its expenditures, for many of them, such as “capital improvements”, unemployed relief, subways, water works, etc., are classified as non-budgetary. The expenditures far exceed those of any State in the Union (including New York State), and are in fact surpassed only by the greatest of the imperialist nations. The public debt of New York City runs into several billions of dollars, and it likewise is exceeded only by that of the chief imperialist nations. The number of New York City employees is greater than that of the soldiers in the United States regular army. The police force alone is over 20,000.
There are two key features in the financing of this mighty “business”. In the first place, the overwhelming bulk of the normal income of the city is raised from the tax on real estate. Indeed, when the regular budget as drawn up, the rate of the real estate taxation is determined by the simple process of dividing The assessed valuation of all real property into the budgeted figure for expenditures. Secondly, capital funds for the city, together with funds to meet budgetary deficiencies (which occur every year, because of the peculiarities of the city’s system of budgeting), to cover tax deliquencies, and to provide cash for current outlays in anticipation of tax collections, are obtained by the sale of city bonds and corporate stock. Much the greatest part of the bonds and stock is sold not to private investors but to the banks, particularly fro the great New York banks. Every one of the large New York banks carries tens of millions of dollars of New York City securities in its portfolio.
 
The Budget Question
From these two key features, important consequences follow: First, it is of major concern to the real estate operators to keep the budget of New York City down to the lowest possible figure, since every increase in the budget is automatically followed by a relative increase in the rate of real estate taxation. (Of course, in the long run much of the increased rate of taxation is passed on to tenants; but many of the tenants in New York are big corporations, and in any case passing the burden on is a drawn out process which interferes at least temporarily and sometimes permanently with the profits from real estate operation.) Secondly, the affairs of the big New York banks are inextricably tied up with the city’s finances because of their heavy holdings in city bonds and stock. This is true in a double sense: On the one hand, since the big banks are the only market for city securities, they milk the city by demanding, and getting, an unusually high rate of interest, and thereby making their financing of the city an extremely profitable investment for themselves. But, on the other hand, they must take care that the bonds and stock of the city are properly secured and financed – that the city does not go bankrupt – for a deterioration of the city’s securities would have disastrous effects on the banks’ own condition.
During the boom years, there was plenty of money; in New York. The graft and inefficiency and generosity of Tammany, solidly in control of the city, was not felt deeply, and no one thought much about “civic reform” and “good government”. But the heavy hand of the crisis and subsequent depression began to make itself increasingly felt.
Above all, so far as the “business” of the New York City was concerned, it was felt by the real estate operators and the big banks. The reasons for this are easy to understand. The real estate operators were faced by declining and disappearing rents and profits, by empty and half empty buildings, by the collapse of real estate speculation; but the rate of real estate taxation, far from declining, continued up with the still rising city budget. The real estate operators were thus in the middle of a fatal squeeze which, in fact, sent many of them into bankruptcy. The banks, on their side, were compelled to take up greater and greater amounts of city securities (to cover increasing tax deliquencies and budgetary deficiencies, as well as continuing capital expenditures) at the same time that the credit of the city was falling, with the resulting fall in the market prices of city securities and the threat of possible defaults in interest payment – both of which in turn undermined the banks’ own credit. The LaGuardia Administration was conceived and born out of this background. The large real estate operators and the big banks took the leadership in the decision that Tammany had to go; that “good government” had to be introduced; that the budget had to be lowered (which meant necessarily the lowering of salaries and wages, the only item capable of any considerable reduction – it of course did not occur to the banks to advocate lowering the nearly two hundred millions of dollars of yearly interest payments); that an “efficient” Executive had to be put in.
The campaign of the banks and real estate operators was carefully and systematically planned. It was they, of course, who brought about the “Seabury investigations”, designed to discredit publicly Walker and Tammany in general. Seabury himself represents as attorney a number of the largest corporations. At the conclusion of the investigations, he “declined” to accept any fee, though it was offered to him, for what he said was a purely altruistic “public service”. It is reported that within two weeks after the investigations closed, his law office had more than a dozen new corporate accounts.
The real estate operators worked especially through the so-colled Citizens’ Budget Commission. This Commission, headed by an able publicist named Peter Grimm, was financed by “voluntary contributions” from those devoted to the “public welfare”. The great majority of these contributions came – as the Commission itself will admit – from the real estate operators. The Commission acted as a pressure group, for “economy” and “efficiency” in the City Administration, both in general publicity, and at the Board of Estimate meeting where, in accordance with the City Charter, all bills must be aired in a public hearing before they can be passed. For several years, there was not a single public meeting of the Board of Estimate from which Grimm or his associates were absent.
 
Banks Apply Pressure
Meanwhile the banks applied their own pressure in their own way. They steadily raised the interest rates at which they would lend money to the Tammany Administration. They enlisted all their big customers in the “reform movement”. Finally, when a large sum for a “revolving fund” became necessary in order to meet current expenditures including many wage and salary payments, the banks absolutely refused to make an agreement with the Administration.
At the same time, Tammany had still further discredited itself through the year’s Administration of the utterly stupid and incompetent O’Brien and Tammany’s brazen error in re-nominating O’Brien, and had not yet healed the breach with the Catholic hierarchy which had grown up at the time of Walker’s public marital scandal.
The scene was ripe. Everything was set for a fusion movement”, under slogans of “good government” and “end Tammany corruption” which would remodel the City Administration more completely in the image of the banks and real estate operators. The Fusion Party was formed.” LaGuardia was nominated. Peter Grimm was prominent as toast-master and leading speaker at banquets and rallies in the campaign. The Union League Club, with its might roster of wealthy Republicans, got behind the movement. The directors of the two great banking groups – the “Morgan” banks headed by the Guaranty Trust Company, and the “Rockefeller” banks headed by the Chase National Bank – joined in almost to a man. Throughout the city, the “respectable citizens” took the stump, in public and in private, for LaGuardia. Many of the machine politicians of the Republican Party were disgruntled: for years they had been quite content to remain as a minority group in the city, because of the patronage deals which Tammany had always arranged with them. But they were overcome by the social power and prestige of the LaGuardia backers.
 
Unity At Last!
The respectable citizens succeeded. And they were not slow in showing their delight. Within a few weeks, the Banker’s Agreement, refused to Tammany, was signed with LaGuardia. The city securities went up more than ten per cent in market price. The budget was slashed heavily and more heavily, with dismissals and wage reductions. The Citizens’ Budget Commission no longer appeared to disrupt public Board of Estimate meetings – it now met beforehand, in confidential session, with the members of the Administration. LaGuardia began and successfully pushed through his drive for that favorite of the bankers, the City sales Tax. The directors of the Guaranty Trust and the Chase sat back again in the Union League Club, with a long toast to good government and LaGuardia Socialism.
 



In an article published in last week’s issue of the Appeal, I discussed the possibility that the new imperialist war might grow by a series of gradual stages out of present (Ethiopian, Spanish, Chinese ...) and future armed conflicts on the world arena, without any sharp gulf between “peace” and war, and without formal “declaration of war” by the great powers.
It should be emphasized that it is only a possibility that I am dealing with. In the last analysis, only the very realistic criterion of a sufficiently large number of the armed forces of the great powers in the field fighting against each other, can test whether or not the war has begun. By this criterion the war has not begun. None of the great powers is yet at war, with the exception of Japan; and Japan is engaged not in an inter-imperialist war, but in a war against the semi-colonial country, China. The extent of Italian and German operations in Spain is not enough to constitute war in the full sense from the point of view of Italy or Germany; their troops in Spain are an “expeditionary force”, not “national armies”.
 
England’s Position
The great fact weighing against the possibility I have been discussing is, of course, the position of England – this along with the fear of revolution by all of the powers. England is not ready for war, and seeks consequently to delay its outbreak. England may succeed in keeping the Spanish and Chinese events sufficiently localized to prevent their spread into general war; and may even achieve temporary “solutions” for them. Even then, however, there are already France and the Near East approaching the boiling point. It is almost inconceivable that an analogue of the Spanish conflict, occurring in France – by no means unlikely, even in the comparatively near future – could remain within French national boundaries.
The key importance of understanding this possibility – and of preparing for it – is seen in this: that the attitude of Marxism toward inter-imperialist war is basically different from its attitude toward many other kinds of war. Marxism shows that the coming imperialist war, like the War of 1914–18, will be a struggle of two coalitions of the great powers over the “division of the spoils”, over colonies, spheres of influence, means of exploitation. From the point of view of both sides, it will be a reactionary and decadent war, no matter how it may be dressed up under slogans of “resist the aggressor”, “defend democracy against fascism’’, “defend the U.S.S.R.”, or what not. Marxism therefore advocates in the coming war as in the last war, a position of defeatism with respect to both sides and all the respective governments, with the exception of the Soviet Union. The masses have nothing to gain from victory on either side.
But Marxism supports, in the present era, the armed struggles of colonies and backward nations against their imperialist oppressors. Politically, of course, in the case of colonies or backward nations as in the case of every nation, Marxism supports only the revolutionary program and its adherents. But materially it supports the struggle of the colony or background nation as such, and rejects the conception of defeatism in these cases. It does so because these struggles weaken imperialism and because the road to the proletarian revolution in the colonies and backward nations lies through resistance to the imperialist oppressors.
Marxists, consequently support Ethiopia against Italy, and support China against Japan.
 
Fascism and Democracy
Even more obviously, in the case of a civil war which is not a mere palace intrigue or military-bureaucratic shift, do Marxists support the side of the workers and popular masses against the side of straightforward reaction. They do so not merely in the case of an outright civil war for proletarian power (tragically rare in history), but likewise when the class struggle assumes other forms: e.g., the form of an armed struggle between bourgeois democracy and fascism. Thus, Marxists support the struggle of the Loyalist army in Spain against Franco. They do make a distinction between the regime of Caballero or Negrin, on the one side, and of Franco on the other. Their tactics, with respect to Franco’s government and armies, advocate defeatism, sabotage, boycott of supplies, etc.; the tactics with respect to Caballero-Negrin advocate none of these.
The tactics of the Marxists toward the Spanish events flow from their conclusion that the dominant character of the struggle is that of civil war, in form of a war between bourgeois democracy and fascism, in substance a defense by the Spanish workers and peasants of their rights and positions against the certain annihilation of these by the victory of Franco. Though this is the dominant aspect of the Spanish struggle, from the beginning it has also had as secondary aspects: (a) that of a war of aggression against a backward nation by Italy and Germany; (b) that of an episode in the world-wide inter-imperialist conflict, which conflict is destined to issue in world imperialist war. It is in spite of (b) and in spite of the bourgeois coalition government which heads Loyalist Spain politically that Marxists support the Loyalist struggle against Franco, that they fight to win in the Loyalist armies, that they send aid to the Loyalist workers and soldiers even at the risk that such aid, controlled by the government, will in part be used against the workers, that they attempt to boycott aid to Franco and to agitate for a defeatist position in his ranks.
 
Two Kinds of Support
The Marxists give such support to the Loyalist struggle “for their own reasons”; they give it in absolute independence of the Loyalist government itself and of all bourgeois government’s; they give no political support whatever to the People’s Front government; they defend the rights and conquests of the workers against the government; and by their propaganda they prepare politically for the overthrow of the government and the victory of a workers’ regime when a decisive section of the Spanish masses shall have been won to the program of workers’ power. Such support and such support only is the road to the revolution in Spain.
The Stalinists, social-democrats, and other, types of reformists and social-patriots also support the Loyalist struggle, but their support is at the opposite pole from that of the Marxists. Their material support is subordinate to political support of the People’s Front government. Since the People’s Front government is a bourgeois government and thus ultimately counter-revolutionary in nature, political support of such a government is political treachery; it is, as the Barcelona events proved, not support of the Spanish workers but defense of a capitalist government, against the workers and the revolution.
Marxists support the Loyalist struggle, entailing for a period “defense of the government” against Franco, in order to aid the Spanish workers and to prepare the ground for the definitive victory of workers’ power, thus for the overthrow of that same government. The reformists support the government precisely in order to defend capitalism against socialism as well as against fascism, to betray the workers and to prepare the ground for the complete liquidation of the revolution. This is the harsh reality.
In order to bolster up their case not merely Franco but also Hitler and Mussolini are making war against “the legitimate democratic government” of Spain; and that therefore all “peace-loving democratic people” should unite to resist the mad dogs of Nazism and Fascism, the “aggressor nations” Germany and Italy. It happens to be false that Germany and Italy are making war against Valencia (though if true it would not at all alter the Marxist attitude toward the Spanish events), but the falsity of this contention is its least sinister aspect. Let us examine further.
 
The Call for Government Action
The conclusion that the Stalinists and reformists draw from their argument that Germany and Italy are at war with Valencia is not, primarily, that independent working class action should be taken against them, but that governmental action by the “democratic” powers should be taken against the “aggressor nations”. “Collective action” of the democratic nations is the password; action by the governments assembled in the League of Nations or on the basis of the Kellog Pact, or through the Non-Intervention Committee, or the Nyon Conference – the mechanism chosen is incidental. In this country precisely the same conception leads to a demand essentially the same; invocation of the Neutrality Act against Germany] and Italy, advocated alike by Browder, Thomas, Waldman, and the Socialist Call.
What is the meaning of this? Put simply and bluntly, the Stalinists and reformists are demanding war, imperialist war, and agreeing in advance to support it. Their entire international propaganda in connection with the Spanish events has, in fact, been consistently social-patriotic, and is merely a rehearsal for the betrayal to the new war And their position could result in nothing else: they support, politically and materially, the Valencia government, and defend politically and materially democratic capitalism against fascist aggression, whether by Franco, Hitler or Mussolini. If allies come in – England, say, or France – to aid in defending Valencia and in attacking Hitler and Mussolini, they can only welcome this with open arms, and support these allies just as they support Negrin. And they will do so.
Marxists, on the direct contrary, are against all intervention by capitalist governments in the Spanish struggle, and for working class aid only. If England and France should intervene on a large scale, if the Spanish struggle should thus be transformed into an inter-imperialist war, Marxists explain that under such circumstances, the dominant character of the Spanish struggle would be entirely changed; its aspect as a civil war would be subordinated to its aspect as one episode or phase in the inter-imperialist conflict. The imperialist “allies” of the Valencia government would be entering armed conflict only for their own imperialist interests, and the Valencia government would be in every respect subordinated to those interests. At that time, to fight loyally, to fight to win, in the Valencian armies, would in actuality be to fight to defend one set of imperialist interests as against another. The workers, then, could defend their own interests only by struggling, in every possible way, against the war, in Spain and in all countries. Marxists would go over to a position of defeatism with respect to the Loyalist armies, since only such a position would correspond with the changed character of the struggle itself.
 
Dangers of Spain
This change in the struggle, its complete subordination to the inter-imperialist conflicts, is possible even short of its transformation into imperialist war on a grand scale. In fact, the growing subordination of the progressive aspects of the Spanish struggle as a civil war, to its reactionary aspects as an episode in the inter-imperialist conflicts, is apparent during these last months, and corresponds closely to the growingly reactionary character of the Valencia regime internally. The inter-imperialist conflicts could become dominant not merely through war, but, for example, through large scale intervention by England and France either independently or through the League; or by a sell-out deal by Valencia with Franco engineered along the lines long ago suggested by England. Under any of these circumstances, the same conclusion would have to be drawn by Marxists: the continuation of struggle of the workers for their own interests and for the socialist revolution would become incompatible with any attitude even of temporary “toleration” or “defense” of the People’s Front regime; that regime would have become indistinguishable, for practical purposes, from the regime of Franco and from the imperialist regime which controlled it. This situation has not yet been reached, and it would be altogether false to anticipate it in action. The way for the Spanish workers is still to beat Franco, which now means fighting loyally in the Valencia armies, without any confidence at all in the People’s Front and its governments, and preparing politically for the establishment of workers’ power which alone will carry the war to a successful conclusion in the interests of the masses. But if the workers not merely in Spain but on a world scale, are not to be caught in the web of social-patriotism later on, the political preparation must also look forward to these possible outcomes, which, from all indications, are neither far off nor unlikely.
 

Burnham: The People’s Front: The New Betrayal (1937)



Burnham Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

James Burnham
The People’s Front: The New Betrayal
The following are the first two chapters of The People’s Front: The New Betrayal, by James Burnham, Pioneer Publishers, New York, 1937.
Full version of the original pamphlet in PDF is available here
I
Origin and Theory of the Peoples’ Front
I.
THE slogans of the Peoples’ Front were first advanced by the Communist International and its sections. They began to appear toward the end of 1933; moved forward slowly for some while; and received official sanction and theoretical expression at the Seventh Congress of the Communist International held during the summer of 1935. From then on they spread out at a headlong pace, and now present themselves as the key question of proletarian strategy throughout the world.
For some time these policies and slogans met with frantic resistance from those outside of the ranks of the Comintern and its sympathizers. This resistance, however, was largely based on a misunderstanding. Reformists and social-patriots could not at first convince themselves of the Comintern’s “sincerity.” They thought still in terms of the preceding strategy of the Comintern, the strategy of the so-called “Third Period.” Their minds were filled with memories of “social-fascism,” “united front from below,” and dual “red unions.” But the resistance was steadily overcome. The Comintern no longer even mentioned social fascism; the united front from below went into the discard; the red unions were liquidated.
And, one after another, the reformist parties went over to the slogans of the Peoples’ Front. In France the Peoples’ Front was formally established; soon afterwards, in Spain. Throughout the world it made headway in giant strides. Soon liberals and progressives” began to come over, in addition to the reformists and social-patriots. In this country, for example, The Nation  and The New Republic , the leading liberal periodicals, became wholehearted Peoples’ Fronters. By now, within the labor movement, and among the social groups sympathetic to the labor movement, only one firm opposition to the Peoples’ Front remains the opposition, namely, of the revolutionary socialists.
2.
The Peoples’ Front movement began under certain special international conditions, and it is necessary to review these, at least briefly.
First: The series of defeats of the working class, following the post-war revolutionary wave, had reached a climax in the triumph of Hitler. Hitler came to power without a blow struck against him by either of the great mass working-class parties of Germany Fascism seemed irresistibly on the ascendant.
Second: The threat of the new imperialist war, enhanced by the victory of Hitler, was growing ever more menacing.
Third: Within the Soviet Union itself, where the Peoples’ Front has its origin, great changes have been taking place during these years since 1933. The First Five Year Plan, with its forced and ruthlessly carried through collectivization of the peasantry, and its almost exclusive emphasis on the building up of heavy industry, gave way to the Second Five Year Plan. Among the important characteristics of the new Plan, we find more emphasis on “consumers  goods” as against heavy industry; conciliation of the peasantry; the introduction of Stakhanovism, with its stimulus to increased differentiation of wages and salaries, leading to the rise of a labor aristocracy economically far removed from the mass of the workers; abolition of the special economic and social privileges of the urban proletariat All of these and a multitude of other similar changes are most strikingly summed up in the New Constitution, adopted in November, 1936, which puts the legal finish to the Soviet foundation of political power in favor of a plebiscite form of parliamentarism.
Fourth: During these years the “Litvinov period” of Soviet diplomacy reached its climax. The Soviet Union entered the League of Nations; and its series of treaties and alliances found culmination in the signing of the Franco-Soviet Pact of military assistance.
As I shall show later on, these four major features of the recent past provide a background necessary to any understanding of the policy of the Peoples’ Front.
The most authoritative statements on the theory and justification of the Peoples’ Front are contained in the speeches of Dimitroff, new Secretary of the Comintern, to the Seventh Congress; and in a short book, The Work of the Seventh Congress , written by the Comintern theoretician, Manuilsky. I shall, therefore, base my presentation of the theory of the Peoples’ Front on these works.
We begin, then, with an alleged “analysis” of the nature of the present historical period. In this period, according to these new oracles of the Stalinist Delphi, “the main danger is Fascism”—from whence the Peoples’ Front is ordinarily known as the “anti-fascist” Peoples’ Front. The Seventh Congress, Manuilsky remarks on page 16, “turned its fire mainly against fascism.” But, it seems, there are many varieties of fascism, “good” and “bad” fascisms. And much the worst kind of fascism is German fascism, Nazism. Dimitroff explains: “The most reactionary variety of fascism is the German type  of fascism… . German fascism is acting as the spearhead of international counter-revolution, as the chief incendiary of imperialist war, as the initiator of a crusade against the Soviet Union, the great fatherland of the toilers of the whole world.”  (The italics are all Dimitroff’s.)
Now fascism, we are told, threatens not only the working class, but also the peasantry, the middle classes generally, and even certain sections of the bourgeoisie, especially the “small business man.” Indeed, fascism in actuality is nothing else than a plot or conspiracy on the party of a small and vicious clique among the ruling class (“the two hundred families,” as the clique is known in France, from the fact that two hundred large stockholders guide the destiny of the Bank of France). Let us hear again from Dimitroff: “… fascism in power is the open terrorist dictatorship of the most reactionary, most chauvinistic and most imperialist elements of finance capital.  … Fascism acts in the interests of the extreme imperialists… . It is in the interests of the most reactionary circles of the bourgeoisie that fascism intercepts the disappointed masses as they leave the old bourgeois parties.” Manuilsky repeats virtually the same words, though adding a psychological adjective of his own: “… fascism is the open and cynical form of the dictatorship of the most reactionary, most chauvinist, most imperialist [this matter of “degrees” of imperialism is a most subtle point] elements of finance capital.”
It is, moreover, fascism that makes war. Manuilsky: “The growing menace of world imperialist war is causing all class, national and state forces to separate into two camps: the camp of war and the camp of peace . The center of the forces  which are operating to bring about war, to accelerate its outbreak, is fascism … .“ This idea has been repeated and reinforced until it is now a Stalinist commonplace.
From these various premises, it follows, according to the Comintern logic, that the struggle for the proletarian dictatorship and for socialism is in the present period definitely removed from the agenda. “The situation is different today,” writes Manuilsky. “Today, the proletariat in most capitalist countries are not confronted with the alternative of bourgeois democracy or proletarian democracy; they are confronted with the alternative of bourgeois democracy or fascism.” Dimitroff amplifies: “Our attitude towards bourgeois democracy is not the same under all conditions. For instance, at the time of the October Revolution, the Russian Bolsheviks engaged in a life-and-death .struggle against all political parties which opposed the establishment of the proletarian dictatorship under the slogan of the defense of bourgeois democracy. The Bolsheviks fought these parties because the banner of bourgeois democracy had at that time become the standard around which all counter-revolutionary forces mobilized to challenge the victory of the proletariat. The situation is quite different in the capitalist countries at present. Now the fascist counter-revolution is attacking bourgeois democracy in an effort to establish a most barbaric regime of exploitation and suppression of the toiling masses. Now the toiling masses in a number of capitalist countries are faced with the necessity of making a definite  choice, and of making it today, not between proletarian dictatorship and bourgeois democracy, but between bourgeois democracy and fascism.”
This, then, is the theoretical foundation which provides the justification for the policy and tactics of the Peoples’ Front. And, in point of fact, the Peoples’ Front does follow legitimately enough from this foundation. There is only one difficulty: the foundation itself is entirely false.
By their definition of the nature of the present historical period, our Comintern scholars have already implied the proper strategy for the proletariat. The task of the proletariat is, quite flatly, to defend bourgeois democracy. And, in accomplishing this task, the proletariat must aim to ally itself with all other social groups which are threatened by the encroachments of fascism. These include, we have seen, the peasants, the middle classes generally, and likewise the non-fascist or rather “anti-fascist” sections of the bourgeoisie. All of these social groups, from proletariat to “anti-fascist bourgeoisie,” can, it is claimed, unite in a common program for the defense of bourgeois democracy against fascism. “We must,” Dimitroff advises, “strive everywhere for a broad anti-fascist people’s front of struggle against fascism.”
This, then, is what the Peoples’ Front is, as defined and advocated by its most authoritative sponsors: the broad union of these various social classes and groups on the basis of a common program for the defense of bourgeois democracy against fascism.
It is the avowed aim of such a Peoples’ Front not merely to carry on the day-by-day struggle and agitation; but, when conditions are favorable, to accept governmental power. “If we Communists are asked,” says Dimitroff, “whether we advocate the united front [and, as is shown by the next sentence, the Peoples’ Front] only  in the struggle for partial demands, or whether we are prepared to share the responsibility even when it will be a question of forming a government  on the basis of the united front then we say with a full sense of our responsibility: Yes, we recognize that a situation may arise in which the formation of a government of the proletarian united front , or of the anti-fascist people’s front , will become not only possible but necessary in the interests of the proletariat. And in that case we shall declare for the formation of such a government without the slightest hesitation.”
What is such a Peoples’ Front movement and such a Peoples’ Front government able to accomplish? Our teachers will once again provide the answers.
(1) The Peoples’ Front can win the middle classes to the side of the proletariat, can win even the actual organizations and parties of the non-proletarian groups. DimitrÃ³ff: “In the mobilization of the toiling masses for the struggle against fascism, the formation of a broad people’s anti-fascist front on the basis of the proletarian united front  is a particularly important task. The success of the entire struggle of the proletariat is closely connected with the establishment of a fighting alliance between the proletariat on the one hand and the toiling peasantry and the basic mass of the urban petty bourgeoisie constituting a majority in the population of even industrially developed countries, on the other… . In forming the anti-fascist people’s front, a correct approach to those organizations and parties to which a considerable number of the toiling peasantry and the mass of the urban petty bourgeoisie belong is of great importance. In the capitalist countries the majority of these parties and organizations, political as well as economic, are still under the influence of the bourgeoisie and follow it. The social composition of these parties and organizations is heterogeneous.
This makes it our duty to approach  these organizations in different ways , taking into consideration that not infrequently the bulk of the membership does not know anything about the real political character of its leadership. Under certain conditions, we can and must bend our efforts to the task of drawing these parties and organizations or certain sections of them to the side of the anti-fascist people’s front, despite their bourgeois leadership. Such, for instance, is today the situation in France with’the Radical Party…“
(2)	The Peoples’ Front can prevent war (the claims, we see, are by no means modest). Dimitroff: “The extent to which this world-wide front is realized and put into action will determine whether the fascist and other imperialist war incendiaries will be able in the near future to kindle a new imperialist war, or whether their fiendish hands will be hacked off by the ax of a powerful anti-war front.” Or Manuilsky: “We now have greater opportunities for waging a successful struggle against imperialist wars than we had on the eve of 1914… . Today, relying on the U.S.S.R., taking advantage of the antagonism among the capitalist states, the world proletariat has the opportunity of creating a broad people’s anti-war front, which should not only include other classes, but also weak nations and peoples whose independence is menaced by war.”
(3)	The Peoples’ Front can stop fascism. Dimitroff: “Will the movement of the united proletarian front and the anti-fascist people’s front at the particular stage be in a position only to suppress or overthrow fascism [Note: This is the minimum  claim which Dimitroff makes for it.—J. B.], without directly proceeding to abolish the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie?” Or Manuilsky: “By its experience [in setting up the Peoples’ Front], the French proletariat enriched the whole of the world working class movement and demonstrated to it that timely  action against fascism (unlike what happened in Austria and Spain) can avert heavy sacrifices and the bitterness of defeat.” Or from our own Earl Browder, in his pamphlet, The Peoples’ Front in America : “There is a tremendous need for the united front of progressives [i.e., the Peoples’ Front] which can awake the country to the danger of fascism, and organize the country to defeat this danger.”
(4)	Lastly, the Peoples’ Front government can provide a transitional step to the proletarian dictatorship. Manuilsky sums up what he pretends to be the differences between the “old-fashioned” type of Social-Democratic coalition government and the new-fashioned Peoples’ Front government, as follows: “One government [the Social-
Democratic coalition] paved the way for the fascist dictatorship; the other government [of the Peoples’ Front] must pave the way for the victory of the working class.”
*  *  	* 
Here, then, in summary, is the ideological structure through which the Soviet bureaucracy and the Communist International throughout the world attempt to deceive and betray the masses in the present historical crisis.
II
Analysis of the Theory of the Peoples’ Front
1.
IT would be a great mistake to imagine that the Peoples’ Front is a new policy. It is, it is true, a new slogan ; but, in actual content, it is simply an old policy in a new disguise, an old strategy dressed up for the new, occasion.
The words of its defenders make entirely clear what the real content of the policy of the Peoples’ Front is, and it is, therefore, not necessary to give elaborate external proof The Peoples’ Front is merely a re-wording of the theories and practices of class collaboration and coalition government, as these have been advocated by reformists since the beginning of the modern labor movement Class collaboration is what the Peoples’ Front specifically proposes: the union of organizations and parties representing various classes and sections of classes on the basis of a common program to defend bourgeois democracy A Peoples’ Front government means, as defined by Dimitroff and Manuilsky, the assumption of governmental responsibility in a capitalist state by the coalition of these organizations and parties.
It is not profitable to argue about words.  There are many honest supporters of the Peoples’ Front who will dislike and try to reject the realization that it is identical with class collaboration and coalition government. This is because they have previously been trained in an attitude of hostility toward class collaboration and coalition government as betrayals of Marxism Indeed, this training is one of the reasons why the Comintern nvented the new phrase, “Peoples’ Front,” thereby hoping to make the policy acceptable to those who would have been suspicious of the old phrases. However, if we examine the actual content, there can be no dispute. The Peoples’ Front proposes, quite openly and explicitly, the collaboration of classes and a coalition form of government Naturally it does so in the name of the proletariat, on the alleged grounds that this strategy will under present conditions best serve the interests of the proletariat. But reformism has always tried to justify itself on such grounds—otherwise the proletariat would not be influenced by it.
A striking indication of the fundamental identity between the Peoples’ Front and the traditional policies of class collaboration and coalition government is provided by the ease with which reformists and liberals in every country (who have always stood for these latter policies and stand for them today) have gone over to the slogans of the Peoples’ Front. They have done so because they have recognized that in the Peoples’ Front, Stalinism—for its own reasons—has gone over to their own policies, that is, to reformism. And, of course, they welcome this; though they are still shy of the Comintern, fearing that Stalin offers his reformist gifts only for the chance to swallow them up.
It is necessary to make a sharp distinction between the Peoples’ Front and the United Front. The Stalinist spokesmen are anxious to lump the two together, and to claim that the Peoples’ Front is nothing more than the logical extension of the United Front “to a higher plane.” Similarly, they attempt to confuse the workers by trying to make it appear that revolutionary socialists, in their consistent Opposition to the Peoples’ Front, are attacking the United Front. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Revolutionary socialists have consistently stood for, and fought for, the united front, and continue to do so. Indeed, during the years of Hitler’s rise to power, one of the chief criticisms leveled against the Comintern by the revolutionary Marxists was that by failing to adopt a united front tactic in Germany, the Comintern guaranteed the victory of Hitler. For this criticism, at that time, the Comintern branded the Marxists as capitulators to the Social-Democracy, and as social-fascists. The most elaborate defense ever made of the united front is to be found in the pamphlets written about Germany during that time by Trotsky.
The united front, however, has nothing at all in common with the Peoples’ Front. The united front Consists in an agreement reached between two or more parties and organizations, which have different programs , for joint action on specific issues. In this agreement there is absolutely no question of a common political program. Each organization retains intact its entire program; retains the right to put it forward; retains the right to criticize the other organizations in the united front agreement, either in general, or for failure to carry out properly the united front agreement. Thus, in the united front each organization guards its full independence; while at the same time the widest possible unity can be achieved for carrying through some action accepted as desirable by all of the constituent organizations of the united front.
The united front is possible because various organizations differing in complete program or in final social aim may nevertheless all be in favor of some specific action or set of actions For example, united fronts are readily possible on such issues as defense cases, support of a strike, resistance to attack on civil liberties and other democratic rights, breaking of injunctions, holding of demonstrations, etc. At more advanced stages of social crisis, they must be formed on such issues as the building of a workers’ militia, defense against fascist gangs, the founding of workers’ and peasants’ and soldiers’ committees The united front on such issues is in fact not merely possible but indispensable for successful struggle Through it the widest possible forces are organized, and at the same time the masses are given a chance to compare in action the worth and dependability of the ideas and methods of the various organizations and parties which strive for their allegiance.
Revolutionary socialists do not merely accept the united front passively. They are the most active and the only consistent advocates of the united front; whereas reformists always resist the united front and must be forced into it—just as the Stalinists now, in basing their policy on  the reformist Peoples’ Front, resist and fight a united front of action. How could it be otherwise? The ideas and principles of the revolutionary Marxists represent the historical interests of the proletariat. Consequently, any joint struggle by specific actions to the advantage of the proletariat will be welcomed by the Marxists, and the broader the basis, the better. At the same the Marxists are anxious to have an ever broader mass arena for the presentation of their own ideas and a demonstration of their own methods, confident that a true understanding of them will turn the masses away from the reformists toward the revolutionists.
The Peoples’ Front, on the other hand, is not merely, not even primarily, an agreement for joint action on specific issues It first and foremost involves the acceptance by all members of the Peoples’ Front of a common program  This difference is the key to the gulf which separates the Peoples’ Front from the united front.
What program?  We have already seen the answer. The program of the Peoples’ Front is a program for the defense of bourgeois democracy: that is, for the defense of one form of capitalism
Whose program is this? It is obviously not the program of the proletariat. The program of the proletariat, accepted by revolutionists since the publication of the Communist Manifesto , can be summed up in two slogans: for workers’ power and for socialism. Naturally the immediate tactic of the proletariat is not on all occasions the struggle for state power: that is possible only in a revolutionary crisis. But at all times and on all occasions the fundamental program remains the same—for the overthrow of capitalism, for workers’ power and for socialism. This program expresses the basic class conflict in modern Society; records the Marxist understanding that the problems of  society can be solved only by socialism, and that socialism can be achieved only through the conquest of power by the proletariat. The duty of the revolutionary party, the conscious vanguard of the proletariat, is to keep this full and fundamental program always to the fore and always uncompromised. In its program, the revolutionary party thus sums up the independence of the proletariat as a class, and asserts its independent historical destiny.
For the proletariat, through its parties, to give up its own independent program means to give up its independent functioning as a class. And this is precisely the meaning of the Peoples’ Front. In the Peoples’ Front the proletariat renounces its class  independence, gives up its class  aims—the only  aims, as Marxism teaches, which can serve its interests. By accepting the program of the Peoples’ Front, it thereby accepts the aims of another section of society; it accepts the aim of the defense of capitalism when all history demonstrates that the interests of the proletariat can be served only by the overthrow of capitalism. It subordinates itself to a middle-class version of how best and most comfortably to preserve the capitalist order. The Peoples’ Front is thus thoroughly and irrevocably non-proletarian, anti-proletarian.
By its very nature, the Peoples’ Front must  be so. The establishment of the Peoples’ Front, by definition, requires agreement on a common program between the working…class parties and non-working class parties. But the non-proletarian parties cannot agree to the proletarian program- the program of revolutionary socialism…without ceasing to be what they are, without becoming themselves revolutionary workers’ parties. But if that should happen, then there would be no basis left for a Peoples’ Front: there would be only revolutionary proletarian unity. Consequently, the Peoples’ Front must always  be an abandonment of the proletarian program, a subordination of the proletariat to non-proletarian social interests. In the Peoples’ Front, it is the proletariat and the proletariat alone that loses. Earl Browder, in his report to his Central Committee on December 4th, 1936, summed up the whole matter: “We can organize and rouse them [the majority of the people”] provided we do not demand of them that they agree with our socialist program, but unite with them on the basis of their program which we make also our own .” [My italics.- J. B.]
The attempt of the Comintern apologists to find a theoretical foundation which will justify the Peoples’ Front compels them to make a completely anti-Marxist analysis of the present historical situation. They must corrupt Marxism with respect to every single important issue: bourgeois democracy; fascism; war; the problem and task of the proletariat.
Let us summarize briefly the analysis which Marxists make of the present period, so that it may be compared with the Dimitroff-Manuilsky analysis outlined in the preceding chapter:
Marxism always approaches every social, political, and historical question from the point of view of the class struggle. The basic conflict in modern society—capitalist society—is, according to Marxism, the conflict and struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. This conflict must continue, and progressively deepen, until capitalism, on a world scale, is overthrown, and the bourgeoisie defeated, and liquidated as a class. Only the two basic classes of modern society—the bourgeoisie and the proletariat—are capable of independent historical action, and thus of formulating independent social and political programs. Reduced to simplest terms, the program of the bourgeoisie is the defense of the capitalist order; the program of the proletariat, its overthrow. The intermediary classes, however they may try to escape it, always in actuality support one side or another in the basic conflict.
In the light of these elementary first principles of Marxism, the Comintern division of the world into “war makers” and “peace lovers,” its statement that the two great hostile camps are “democracy” and “fascism,” its contention that the issue is “between democracy and fascism,” are seen to have nothing in common with Marxism. Its propagation of a program for the defense of capitalist democracy represents merely the extension of one type of bourgeois ideology into the ranks of the working class.
Capitalism, Marxism teaches, went through a great progressive phase. It was the bourgeoisie, the builders of capitalist society, who broke through the fetters of feudal society, who developed modern science and technic, who completely revolutionized industry and communication, who laid the material basis for the adequate fulfillment of human needs. During its progressive phase, capitalism was marked by terrible and devastating conflicts, and by the periodic ravages of the business crises. But after each crisis, capitalism rose stronger than ever, and went to new heights.
Now, however, capitalism, in the advanced period of imperialism, has entered the phase of its general decline as a world system. It is strangling itself. The very factors which once made it a progressive force now act as a brake and obstacle to its further progress. The capitalist system can no longer handle the things which it has itself created. And, as a consequence the conflicts and crises redouble in intensity. After each periodic crisis, capitalism rises weaker, not stronger. Permanent unemployment insecurity hunger, mass discontent progressively grow. Great social upheavals multiply and increase in scope and intensity. Wars and revolutions, on an unprecedented scale, become the general rule instead of the exception, quieting down only long enough to prepare for new wor1d-wide outbreaks.
In the face of this perspective, in the general decline of the capitalist order, the proletarian revolution on a world scale, the building of socialism, presents itself as the only  solution. Nothing else whatever can alter the perspective, nothing else can halt the progressive degeneration if not the utter destruction of Civilization.
Bourgeois democracy, Marxism teaches further, is a form of capitalism, one of the political forms through which the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie over the proletariat is exercised. It is, in a sense, the ânormal” form of bourgeois dictatorship during the progressive phase of capitalism. But Marxism is as unalterably opposed to bourgeois  democracy as to any other form of capitalist rule; it is opposed because it is opposed in general to capitalism and to bourgeois rule, and aims at the overthrow of capitalism and the defeat of the bourgeoisie. 	During the decline of capitalism the bourgeoisie finds greater and greater difficulty in keeping the deepening social conflicts within the basic framework of democratic parliamentarism.  Democracy becomes too awkward, too clumsy, slow, inefficient unreliable, as a mechanism for class rule. Consequently, manipulating middle-class discontent through a demagogic pseudo-radicalism, the bourgeoisie is compelled to resort to the iron strait-jacket of fascism to insure its continuance in power. Fascism, that is to say, is not a conspiracy or plot on the part of anybody. It is nothing accidental; nothing that results from any peculiar ill-will or viciousness. Fascism, or a fascist type of government, is, on the contrary, a wholly normal development: the normal (though not necessarily universal) mechanism for capitalist rule as the decline and disintegration of the capitalist order deepens, just as bourgeois democracy, parliamentarism, is the normal (though not necessarily universal) mechanism during the progressive phase of capitalism.
It may thus be seen that there is no basic social  conflict between bourgeois democracy and fascism. If we examine social questions historically, as Marxism does, we find in a sense the contrary: fascism is the resultant of bourgeois democracy in the period of capitalist decline; bourgeois democracy is the precursor of and the preparation for fascism.
A similar analysis applies in the question of war. War, imperialist war, is caused by the basic conflicts of capitalist society, by the struggle to which every capitalist power is forced for cheap raw materials, additional markets, opportunities for the export of capital. These causes operate within democratic capitalist nations as fully as in fascist nations. Fascism, though it may be a stimulus to war, is not at all the cause of war; war and fascism are both the results of capitalism. War, or the approach of war, may, on the other hand, be an immediate stimulus to fascism: since a nation faced by war, or the prospect of war, may well require the totalitarian state in order to prosecute the war successfully.
It follows with full certainty that fascism and war can be defeated only by the overthrow of capitalism. The attempt of the Peoples’ Front to preserve bourgeois democracy, any attempt to base a strategy on such a conception, is not merely helpless in the struggle against war and fascism. It makes both inevitable.

Burhnam Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.
Last updated: 8 November 2008




IT IS NOT EASY to be sure just what Max Eastman is trying to say in his article, Russia and the Socialist Ideal, published in the March issue of Harper’s Magazine. He ranges over a considerable field, meditates on a variety of problems, psychological, historical, political, moral; and, as a rule, reaches conclusions so vague and general as to be hardly arguable. He seems, however, if we sum up the general impression given by the article as a whole, to have two main concerns in mind:
In the first place, he revives at length his perennial attack upon the “philosophy” and “religion” which he attributes to Marx. Now, the problem of what Marx “really meant” is an interesting one for scholarly research. We all know, moreover, that Marx made a number of false statements. None of us, if we take historical method seriously, is surprised that Marx was limited by the stage which scientific knowledge had reached in his day, or that his terminology was influenced by the social context in which he lived. I, for one, agree with Eastman that it is desirable to change, in part, this terminology, in order to bring it more closely into accord with contemporary scientific method and practise.
However, these problems of scholarly research and linguistic reform are comparatively leisurely, impersonal and postponeable. The Marxism which is of decisive moment to revolutionists is not the dried letter of Marx’s books but the theory and strategy of the living revolutionary movement. And here Eastman adds to his familiar attack upon his conception of Marx a new attack, upon Marxism. In the past Eastman has attacked Marx, so he rightly or wrongly contended, for the sake of socialism. He has held that Marx’s philosophy and its literal interpretation by present-day Marxists is an ineffective instrument for the realization of socialism. But he has never called into question the socialist ideal itself.
In this current article—if it is meant seriously, if it isn’t mere eyewash and potboiler—Eastman takes up arms against precisely the socialist ideal. It is only a beginning; the attack is not yet launched against the socialist ideal in its entirety, nor indeed is it altogether clear just exactly what he is attacking. He still speaks, in one paragraph, of “we socialists”, which might unfortunately remind us of how Aristotle spoke of “we Platonists” when he began his fundamental break with Platonism. But at the end he sums up “our revision of the socialist ideal”. He remarks: “No mind not bold enough to reconsider the socialist hypothesis in the light of the Russian experiment can be called intelligent.” No legitimate exception could be taken to this statement as it stands by itself: every intelligent mind is ready to reconsider every hypothesis in the light of new evidence. But it is evident that when Eastman writes “reconsider” he means revise, modify or reject.
The traditional socialist hypothesis—the socialist proposals for the reconstruction of society and the solution of its major problems—has been, Eastman argues, disproved. It has been disproved from one direction by modern science, in particular by biology and psychology; from another by “the experiment in Russia”. It is therefore necessary to revise that hypothesis; and the article ends with the listing of eight proposed points for such a revision.  
2 It is Eastman’s claim that he approaches his problem, and reaches his conclusions, as a scientist; and he criticizes Marxists for not being scientific. I wish to begin by examining Eastman’s right to this claim, as shown by the evidence of the article itself. I certainly agree with Eastman about the desirability of employing scientific method in all problems where truth and falsity are at issue; but a method is not scientific merely from being called so by its user.
1. Eastman begins by stating that he is better situated than Trotsky for perceiving “the scope and significance of the Russian failure”. This follows, in part, because “I am completely detached from party struggle and not vitally concerned about revolutionary prestige. I am in a position to regard Stalin and his dictatorship not as an enemy, but as a result”. This opening is more than a little disingenuous. Eastman is saying that our processes of investigation and analysis are affected by the interests we have at stake. This is a psychological commonplace, and holds not merely for Trotsky but for everyone, including of course Eastman. Does Eastman mean that he has no interests at stake in pursuing his inquiries? This is what he suggests (and that is why I have called the statement disingenuous); but as a scientist he could scarcely defend the suggestion. His argument can be exactly countered by suggesting that he is unqualified because he is interested in defending his detachment. More than this: with reference to the particular problem at issue, it might well be maintained that “detachment from party struggle” not merely runs the always present risk of causing biased selection of evidence, but specifically disqualifies the investigator by depriving him of ready access to a great deal of significant data. Eastman will not hold that “party struggle” is irrelevant to an understanding of the Russian experiment. Quite the contrary. And in this respect Trotsky is not in a worse but a better position than Eastman: he is acquainted with more of the data, and with more kinds of data, relevant to the problem.
2. Eastman constantly stresses his belief that Marxists are guilty of wish-fulfillment thinking. It is amusing to notice that both the content and the very wording of a number of his eight points listed in his “revision of the socialist ideal in the light of science” are simply—wishes. Above all No.8: “We must guard with eternal vigilance the rest [of our individual freedom].” There is nothing necessarily wrong with this. An ideal is, in a sense, a wish. Socialists wish socialism. Max Eastman wishes individual freedom. But there is nothing particularly scientific about wishes as such. Science comes in when we ask whether the wish is possible of realization, and how. I mention this matter only to indicate how Eastman is using the word “scientific” primarily as an epithet of praise and blame and not as a description of one method as against another.
3. Point 2 in the revision is much more remarkable. “Problems of being and of universal history arising from this situation should be acknowledged to exist ...” Do I need to remind scientist and anti-metaphysician Eastman that contemporary science recognizes no problems of “being” or of “universal history”? These, the problems of traditional, arch-metaphysical Ontology and Cosmology are interpreted by contemporary science as either empirically meaningless or purely analytic, and are ruled out of scientific discourse. “It is a question,” Eastman writes, “of going forward or of being stuck in the mud.” Here, as elsewhere, Eastman is not in the least going forward in the light of contemporary science, but returning backward to pre-Marxian conceptions, to the very rationalist metaphysics which Marx himself so vigorously rejected.
4. “It is,” Eastman says, “in the definition of the end that Marxism falls most obviously short of the standards of science ...” It falls short, he somewhat inconsistently argues, because it does not specify what the end is, and because it specifies an impossible end. It should be remarked: The “definition of an end”, where the end in question is an ideal, is only partly a scientific procedure; in part it is an assertion of value, of what we want, or propose to try to get. It is possible, though it seldom happens, that someone might agree entirely with all of the Marxian descriptive analysis of capitalist society, and yet disagree with the end (socialism), preferring perhaps fascism and barbarism or simply retirement to the country. Science can tell me how to cure a disease, but it alone cannot make me take the cure. The analogy which Eastman draws between an empirical scientific hypothesis and an ideal end is not accurate.
But, secondly: it is not at all the case that a failure to blueprint in detail (as Eastman demands) the definition of an end is necessarily a defect. In fact, where the end is an end of moral or social action, the opposite is often true: too detailed a blueprint is a defect, imposing upon the agent either doctrinaire inflexibility or Utopian unrealism, both of which alike Eastman claims to deplore. Intelligent action demands as much elaboration of probable consequences as we can reasonably accomplish under the given circumstances. A detailed blueprint is possible only where we have, in advance, comprehensive knowledge of all relevant facts: as in building a bridge. We do not have such comprehensive knowledge about either life or society. The most we can do or need to do, therefore, is to lay out a general rough sketch. We learn about the details in action, through cumulative experience, modifying, shifting, adapting, filling in the outlines provided by the rough sketch as we go along.
If a man, for example, decided to become a doctor, he would be unable to blueprint his career. He would, if he were intelligent, have considered the available alternatives in the light of the satisfactions they might probably bring, he would have made reasonably sure that he had the requisite potential abilities and could secure the means for professional education. Nothing much more. He would, most likely, not determine in advance even what branch of medicine he would practise in—waiting to see through experience what he was best at or what had most openings; he would not know the hospital where he would try to get his internship, or the office with which he might later try to get associated. In behaving so, he would not be “unscientific”. He would be absurd if he did otherwise; it would be an astrologer, not a scientist who in such cases mapped out blueprints. Nor is it merely a question of insufficient knowledge in advance. The future is not laid out according to a prearranged pattern, but is itself modified by our actions.
How much more ridiculous would it be to lay out a detailed blueprint for the future in the case of a plan of social action, above all a drastic and revolutionary plan. If we are reasonably sure of the main outlines, we go ahead and find out what happens, adjusting ourselves flexibly to experience within the boundaries of our firm central purposes. Only in this way can we be genuinely scientific; the blueprinters are compelled to retire into their own imaginations from which their blueprints sprung, to become Utopians or sectarians, and to complain at history because it doesn’t fit their pattern. Eastman praises the Utopian socialists, Owen and St. Simon and Fourier, over Marx because they had blueprints. Revealing praise! Does he wish us to return to the Utopians? Here, as before, Eastman does not “move forward” toward contemporary science, but swings back to pre-Marxian fantasies. It was exactly Marx’s scientific scrupulousness which led him to reject sternly, whenever the question was raised, the illusion of Utopia by Blueprint.
In passing, it might also be noticed how necessary the anti-blueprint temperament is at every stage both to the understanding of contemporary events and especially to decisive political action. The blueprinters were not prepared to make the Russian Revolution because Marx had expected the revolution first in the most advanced industrial countries. Eastman himself is blocked from a scientific appraisal of the Russian Revolution because he confines his attention primarily to its non-conformity with the blueprint he had accepted a priori instead of devoting his analysis to the revolution as it is actually developing. For all his metaphysical doubts, I am sure Eastman will not be the first to deny that it is Trotsky who has done more than any other historian in the analysis of the Russian Revolution as it has actually happened; indeed Eastman says as much in this article. How does he reconcile this fact with his charge against Trotsky? Can a scientific theory so entirely wrong yield such fruitful scientific results?
But, thirdly, a directive ideal, though it is Utopian and religious, if utterly incapable of any considerable degree of realization, is not required to be fully and statically realizable. In fact, great ideals are never fully realizable (which is one reason why Heaven was invented: a land where ideals can be fully realized), and, because of their dynamic function would be meaningless if they could be. Eastman makes fun of many elements of the socialist ideal—“From each according to his ability, to each according to his need”; the disappearance of the State; the breaking down of the barrier between intellectual and physical labor; “society of the free and equal” ... What is he trying to prove? If he means merely that it is doubtful that all of these ideals can soon and universally and simultaneously be realized, that many of them can never be completely realized, there is no ground for argument. But if he means that, with the technical means and scientific knowledge even now at our disposal—without even allowing for the advances which all evidence permits us to predict—there is not even a possibility of realizing these ideals to a considerable extent, .immeasurably more than realized today (though even today they have restricted operations), then he is being not a scientist but a mystic. He is once more going back, going back to an acceptance of the “tragic sense of life”, to the belief in the original sin which dooms man forever, to those religious, not scientific, doctrines which express, not prove, man’s weakness and despair in the face of the problems which confront him. The remedy for these moods is not science alone, but more determination.
Formally speaking, the ideal of from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs is impossible, since man’s needs are indefinitely expansible. But even within capitalist society, this ideal has gained some operative efficacy—in, for example, the treatment of the unemployed, the blind and crippled and aged, within the family, in the assignment of wages within a working class political party, etc. What possible evidence suggests that it will not have enormously increased efficacy once the technical plant is harnessed—as it certainly can be—to provide enough for the major material needs of men. Certainly no evidence from psychology or biology, to which Eastman appeals, which have not the slightest relation to the problem.
Marx, not knowing the monotony of modern mass production methods, was perhaps over-optimistic in hoping that labor will become instead of drudgery “the highest desire of life”. But with manual factory labor reduced to a minimum through the application of inventive technique (compare even today a continuous rolling mill with the former still existing mill for the same process), and hours of that type of labor shortened to a small fraction of the day, with adequate sanitary and æsthetic conditions of work, with general education and leisure, with city and country planned as even today they are technically capable of being handled, why should not labor become if not man’s highest desire at least part of a highly desirable life? And why should not the barrier between intellectual and manual labor be gradually overcome? Certainly neither science nor facts stand in the way. On the contrary, they provide the means for approximating if not achieving exactly the ideals of socialism, and they show that those ideals are entirely possible, not merely logically but materially as well. What stands in the way are men’s attitudes, among others Eastman’s attitude of despair and resignation. And the business of revolutionary politics is, among other things, to change those attitudes so that the means may be used, the science applied, and the ideals approached.
5. Eastman writes, toward the end of his article, that Marx tried to combine two contradictory ideals: the Jeffersonian ideal of freedom and rank individualism together with the industrial ideal of equality, coöperativeness and governmental regulation. He concludes his article (points 7 and 8 of the “revision of the socialist ideal”) with remarks which make clear that with him the first of these ranks much the higher, and that he will surrender to the second only what is “indispensably necessary”. We have here one more example of Eastman’s purely rationalist—non-scientific and non-empirical—method of analysis; and we have besides an old-fashioned Romantic (again, pre-Marxian) conception of freedom as the equivalent of arbitrariness and sheer spontaneity (a conception, by the way, familiar in Eastman from his tastes in and criticism of art).
Eastman is writing about Platonic Forms of “freedom” and “coöperativeness”, and arguing about the logical incompatibility of abstract categories. An empirical scientist will, in contrast, always examine specific historical contexts. The Jeffersonian ideal of freedom, based upon the life of free farmers on rich, virgin soil (and, to tell the truth, farmers who like Jefferson himself had slaves and servants), has little relevance to contemporary and future society. Freedom takes on new concrete meaning in its new contexts. Eastman insists that cooperation and governmental regulation necessarily destroy freedom, because the two concepts are verbally contradictory. They would destroy a Jeffersonian kind of freedom, that is true. They would make impossible a Romantic kind of freedom, which considers the free man to be the one who does immediately whatever comes into his head, who acts from every momentary impulse with no thought of consequences or social effects. But cooperation, governmental regulation (if by this Eastman means, as he seems to mean, socialized economy), economic, social and political equality, in modern society are just what, and what alone, will make a more significant and meaningful individual freedom possible.
Here too we can discover faint foreshadowing examples even in capitalist society. In some places in the T.V.A. territory, the New Deal has introduced considerable “regulation” and coöperativeness among the subsistence farmers of the region. It has taught them how to save their soil, what to grow, how to terrace their land; it has introduced electricity and sanitary devices and even aided in building new homes; it has arranged in some instances that many individual plots of land shall be farmed cooperatively. In so doing it has undoubtedly decreased the Romantic and arbitrary “freedom” of the individual farmers to destroy their soil, half-starve, spread epidemics, raise rickets-weakened and pellagra-struck children, drink contaminated water, and work seventeen hours a day with little result. I do not think that this is the kind of freedom which Eastman seriously wishes to preserve. In any humanly important sense, the freedom of these TVA farmers has been vastly increased, not contradicted, by greater governmental regulation, cooperation and equality. Nor does this in the least entail “spiritual regimentation” against which Eastman so rightly fights. That is only a cock-and-bull story of reaction. The breeder of spiritual regimentation is slums, low wages, unsanitary factories, universal insecurity, poor land—anyone with eyes can see that by looking at the human products of these condition. The “regulated”, equalized, cooperating farmers are in an immeasurably better position to develop their own individual talents and tastes.
6. “To my more skeptical and yet far from pessimistic mind,” Eastman writes, “it seems obvious that if the socialist idea of a free and equal cooperative commonwealth emerging from the dictatorship of the proletariat were practical under an economy of abundance, we should find under an economy of scarcity some lame approximation to it.” This argument, Eastman’s main formal point against Trotsky’s analysis of the causes of the degeneration of the Russian Revolution, has become familiar during the past year. In fact, because of its specious plausibility, it has become a crux in the general attack on socialism as “disproved” by the “Russian experiment”. It has no weight whatever. Far from being “scientific”, it betrays once more an elementary misunderstanding of scientific method.
The fallacy here can be easily illustrated by analogous arguments in the same form. “To my skeptical mind, it seems obvious that if you can live comfortably on so many calories of food a day, you can live lamely on a tenth that number.” But you can’t; you starve to death on a tenth that number. “If heavy rain helps grass grow luxuriantly, then a light rain helps it somewhat.” But it doesn’t; a light rain, in a drought season, not penetrating to the roots and below, is worse for the grass than no rain at all. If intelligence plus honor make a noble man, it does not follow that intelligence plus a lack of honor make a somewhat noble man; rather might the latter make a much more ignoble man than would be the case in the absence of both qualities. Similarly, if an economy of abundance plus the dictatorship of the workers makes possible a rapid transition to socialism, including the decrease in coercive state authority, it does not at all follow that the dictatorship alone, based on an economy of scarcity, will make possible a somewhat rapid transition to socialism and some but less decrease in state authority. The opposite happened. The dictatorship in an isolated country plus an economy of scarcity led to the greatest increase in state authority in history. Many persons, including many revolutionary Marxists, hoped that this would not happen. But all that has been proved is that in the specific Russian circumstances, and probably in closely similar circumstances, the rapid transition to socialism with the rapid decrease in state authority which that implies, is not possible.  
3 I have been trying to demonstrate, up to this point, that Eastman’s pretension to scientific method hi his analysis of his problem is no more than a pose. I have dealt chiefly with his method. I now wish to turn to the crux of his material argument, and to examine this in the light of the conclusions of contemporary science.
I have pointed out that Eastman holds that the socialist hypothesis has been disproved by (a) the failure of the Russian experiment; and (b) the conclusions of modern biology and psychology. What then, according to Eastman, is the explanation of the failure of the Russian experiment and what are the conclusions of modern biology and psychology? He gives the same answer to both questions.
“Developments that to the most ordinary shrewd good sense reveal a conflict between Marxian theory [on the degeneration of the Russian Revolution] and the universal attributes of human nature ...” (my italics—JB). The theme constantly is reiterated: “... a scientific mind would raise the question what qualities in the material, human nature can be relied upon ...”; “What is there in human nature to give assurance ...”; “Is human nature ... sufficiently capable ...”. The explanation for the failure of the Russian experiment, provided by the grandiose achievements of contemporary biology and psychology, is: human nature; and not mere plain ordinary human nature but “the universal attributes of human nature”; which include prominently, as we have previously seen, what but our old friend Original Sin.
Alas, Max Eastman! All in the name of Science, he now wants us to go back not merely to the Romantic, to the Eighteenth Century Rationalists, but hurtling headlong into the Middle Ages. We will revive the doctrines of Substance and Essence. We will dispute together, like good Scholastics before the Emperor, over the problem of “the essential nature of man”, and refine our definitions to the vanishing point.
Are we to take him seriously? I do not need to tell him that among the very greatest of the methodological achievements of modern sciences, a presupposition of rapid advance in almost every field, is the abandonment of Substance and Essence in the interpretation of phenomena, and the substitution of functional analyses. Eastman himself praises highly Trotsky’s “sustained sense of human society as a process rather than a thing”. “Universal attributes ...”—these, he knows as well as I, are the dead lumber of the Platonic realm of Being. And he knows also that the whole approach of the best of contemporary theory in education, medicine, penology, ethnology, sociology ... is solidly based on the conception of human beings as active organisms, actively in inter-relationship with their changing material and social environments, changed by that environment and changing it. Is he tomorrow going to tell us again that men become criminals because they are “criminal types”, that there is an “essential” difference between various races, that slum-dwellers are “naturally” slovenly, that scoundrels and hoboes and tyrants are Born not Made. Of course not. But this is where explanations in terms of “universal attributes of human nature”, of doctrines about what human nature “essentially” is (his underlining), logically and plausibly lead.
To explain the failure of the Russian experiment by an appeal to “eternal human nature” is to abandon the last vestige of scientific method. And, in point of fact, nothing eternal or universal can ever explain anything specific which happens. If any factor were eternal or universal, it can never account for difference, and without difference there is no distinction among events: that is, time and history dissolve into everlasting and undifferentiated Being. Let us assume with you that human nature is eternally and universally what it is. Then what explains that blunt fact that the Russian Revolution occurred, and degenerated? We are no further advanced in solving this problem. We must relate our human nature to the environment, material and technical and social, in relation to which it operated. Included in our explanation will be the specific activities of specific men and groups of men (the Stalin clique, for example); but these activities in their turn must be explained. They do not explain themselves, unless you accept a doctrine of Essence, whereby out of the Essence of Man there logically unfolds the particular sector of the Absolute.  
4 A last question, which deserves extended treatment, but which I shall only summarize:
Human beings, assuming that we are not going to lie down and die, must be active in one way or another. Whether in individual or in social matters, we have no choice between action and no action, but only between this, that or the other line of action. This means that when selecting a moral or political program (which are generalizations of lines of action) we must make our choice from among the available alternatives.
To show that in Program A there is a difficulty, a confusion, a risk, is by itself without significance unless we are at the same or risk, together with approximately equal or greater positive time showing that in Program B there is less difficulty, confusion potentialities. There is confusion and risk in all programs.
Let us, for a moment, assume the truth of Eastman’s negative criticism of “the socialist hypothesis”. What does he wish us, then, to do? He is compelled, if he is responsible, to propose another alternative hypothesis, another program.
If nothing, in terms of action, follows from his argument, then the argument is not merely politically but also empirically meaningless, comparable to the idle academic debates over Ontology and Epistemology.
If something does follow, and it is not the program of the Fourth International, then what is it? If Eastman disagrees with the program of the Fourth International, just what does he disagree with and what does he propose to substitute? If he holds that the socialist hypothesis has been disproved, does he then conclude that we should be passive: i.e., submit to imperialism? There are those who draw this conclusion, both in words and in action, from his present position; his position in fact justifies and rationalizes their passivity—and he is morally and politically responsible for this unless he makes unequivocally clear that this is not the valid inference from his position.
Does he think, in the light of a scientific appraisal of history, that a purely individualistic struggle against specific individual injustices, without the “inevitably degenerative” party organization, is the best program for “arriving at a more reasonable and decent general form of social life”? There are some who draw this conclusion from his present position; and he is also responsible for them, unless, again, he makes unequivocally clear that this is not a valid inference from his position.
These seem to me the only two alternative programs which might be suggested by the general trend of his current argument as it has so far been developed. If so, Eastman has placed himself in an awkward dilemma: his position is either empirically meaningless, in that nothing whatever follows from it in terms of action; or it is reactionary. And in either case, it is the friend of neither science nor the revolution.
James BURNHAM



My America, 1928–1938
by Louis Adamic
xiii+669 pp. New York. Harper & Brothers. $3.50
Louis Adamic evidently emptied his files and notebooks to manufacture this large volume. Or, rather, drew from them at random. It is the collected by-products, not very thoroughly distilled, of a decade’s operations by a professional writer. Nearly everything is here: patches from the diary; dozens of letters from friends, and the replies to letters; old magazine articles and obscure pamphlets; an excellent ghost story and amateur philosophizing; interviews, character sketches and random meditations.
“Each of us living in the United States has his own America ...,” Adamic begins. “This book is an attempt to draw a partial picture of my America between 1928 and 1938 ... It is made up ... of things and people, chiefly people, within my experience and observation (from various angles, in various moods) during these last ten years in the United States that seem interesting or significant to me personally as an individual and as an American, and lend themselves to telling at this time.”
I am old-fashioned enough to believe that it is an author’s responsibility to integrate his material in terms of a more ordered and objective structure than that which Adamic here suggests. So integrated, and cut in half, My America would, I think, be a much more consistently readable book. However, its present looseness by no means prevents it from being frequently interesting in compensation for the repetitions and dullnesses.
Adamic has at least three important virtues for the writing of this sort of book. He has a genuine and active curiosity. When he hears that the textile towns of New England are in a bad way, he at once visits them, to see for himself. When he reads about sit-down strikes, he goes to Akron to find out how they started. To discover what the depression is like in human terms, he gets himself into the homes of the unemployed. When he becomes interested in a person, through one means or another he meets and talks to and if possible makes himself a friend of that person. From this derives a commendably first-hand quality in much of what he writes.
Adamic has also, or seems from the evidence of his books to have, a higher degree of reportorial honesty than is nowadays usual. Adamic reports what he has seen and heard and felt; and, however cockeyed may be his interpretations and conclusions, the report itself seems to be scrupulously honest and direct. This happens even when he himself cuts none too brave a figure in the report. The habit has, it may be remarked, often got Adamic into trouble, with manufacturers, trade union leaders, and the subjects of his interviews or character sketches.
Lastly, Adamic has a kind of feeling for what is sociologically important. The feeling, not backed rationally, leads him grievously astray, as when it makes him offer Black Mountain College as a first major step toward an American Utopia. But it is sustained enough to cause him to give a large section of this book to the CIO, to insist on the significance of the problem of the thirty million “New Americans” – children of immigrants, and to end with a chapter on The Next War.
These three vitrues would be quite enough to produce an admirable book of “observations” or “impressions”, a book of the sort that is always enjoyable and needed, and seldom found. The values which My America has are due primarily to these virtues. But, unfortunately, Adamic is not content with them. He aspires to another role: to that of theorist, generalizer, on the American scene; and long, dreary pages are up to their necks in his wilted theories and his limp generalizations.
A great scorner of “doctrinaire”, “schematic” thinking – by which he means any thinking stemming from Marx – is Adamic. “Isms” and “shortcuts” have no application to America, legislates Adamic. And, with this as a foundation, the experienced reader will be not at all surprised to find out that Adamic’s own thinking is precisely distinguished as – doctrinaire and schematic; and lurching ever and again toward “ism” and shortcut.
The basic ism is none other than our old friend Reform-ism. The guiding schema for interpretations is certainly a simple one. America is “democratic in politics and absolutist in industry”, and this “basic incongruity” explains all else besides. Quoting, and agreeing with, Edward Adams Cantrell: “America as she stood – democratic politically, absolutist industrially, dynastic economically – was ... an incongruity . . . this incongruity was the source of all manner of contradictions, hidden conflicts, social and political perversions, neuroticism, and violence within the country as a whole, within groups and institutions, and within individuals.” And as for “shortcuts”! Consider that the ultimate “danger” for the CIO is that its leaders are not sufficiently interested in “workers’ education”; that the solution of the problem of the thirty million New Americans lies in a voluntary organization to make them aware of their cultural and historical backgrounds and thus remove their inferiority complexes; and that the present government can keep America out of the war by appropriating now for housing and conservation the forty billion dollars which the war will cost.
The class struggle, revolution, violence, class consciousness, are all Old World notions which have no relevance to America. The hope of America lies most unequivocally in such “fundamental democrats” as Jack Raper of the Cleveland Press, Walter Locke, the “free editor” of James M. Cox’s Dayton Daily News, and Arthur E. Morgan, inconveniently thrown out of Washington for sabotage of the TVA while Adamic was finishing his proofs; and, above all, in the LaFollettes and the Wisconsin Idea, which Idea has also just had a none too savory blossom, but awkwardly after the book had already gone to press.
Adamic, starting out to see America, “a Land Nobody Knew”, with fresh and open eyes, desiring to become, “in some small way determined by my ability”, one of the Darwins “who would get busy in the vast Sargasso Sea that was America”, ends miserably up in these crippled platitudes and Utopian fantasies. There is, it is true, some excuse for him. His own background in Central Europe encourages him to overemphasize and misinterpret this country’s political democracy, seeing it not as one specific form of capitalist rule now getting itself primed and ready for its own fruition in fascism but as an independent ideal divorced from social context. And, secondly, Adamic’s own direct and honest observations of the working class parties in this country – in particular of the Stalinists, about whom he has a good deal to say – have left him rightly convinced, since he identifies Marxism with these parties taken as a whole, that if such be Marxism neither he nor America should wish any of it.
But to react from a too hurriedly scanned European background and a legitimate disgust with the ways and men of the last decade of American socialists and Stalinists to such an extreme of muddled, wishy-washy and indeed Philistine democratism will hardly provide Adamic with the compass he asks for and needs in order to chart and illumine his Sargasso Sea. The “basic incongruity” of AM account of his America is obvious enough at a single reading: his directly observed material painting a land poising mightily for devastating and world-shaking crisis; his theories imagining an indefinitely “long road” of stumbling but evolving “progress.”
J.B.



NO SOCIAL MOVEMENT, not even excepting the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat, has been so thoroughly and persistently misunderstood as fascism. Its historical roots, the social forces operative within it, its ideology and methods remain still, for all except a handful, the most obscure of mysteries. And this means, most important of all, that the way in which to fight it is still, to most men, unknown.
The “peculiarly Italian phenomenon” had no significance in Germany; and, in turn, what was “natural and inevitable” for Italy and Germany could have no relevance to France – repeated yet, as France hovers on the thin verge of fascism. And, naturally, these “European isms” can get nowhere in the United States. Similarly, for many years the plebeian mass base of fascism hid from most eyes the steel jaw of monopoly-capital which that mass base covered. But, when it became clearer that fascism was at the service of monopoly capital, it was most faultily deduced that open, blunt reaction was identical with fascism. Landon and Girdler are “fascists”. The statements and ideology of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce or the Association of Manufacturers are “fascist”. Nothing, of course, could be more misleading or more disorienting: the phrases and ideology of the genuine fascist movement are radical, even revolutionary in appearance, at a far remove from the stupidly reactionary press releases of Girdler or the Chamber of Commerce.
At the same time, concentrating on the “abuses”, excesses, brutality and gross demagogy of fascism, it has been thought by many that fascism could never be accepted willingly by “respectable people”, by professors and scientists and doctors and lawyers and intellectuals generally. This impression was bolstered by the exiling of many such respectable people from Nazi Germany. But we seldom remember how few the exiles are compared with the number that remains; and how much fewer, even, are the exiles from Italy. Nor does it in the least follow that all those who have remained are secretly stern anti-fascists and anti-Nazis.
If it were true that these “respectable people” did not and would not accept fascism, this would be a most important fact, and would indeed make incomparably more difficult the task of fascism. The respectable people, though powerless themselves and as a group, have nevertheless a decisive social function to perform. It is they who elaborate ideologies, who supply intellectual material out of which mass leaders fashion their demagogy, from whom there filters down to the masses suitably fashioned mental and moral attitudes without which no social system exercizing a tyranny over the masses could hope to endure.
 
2.
In February of this year there appeared the first open expression by some of the respectable people of this country that they are getting ready for American fascism. The Examiner, a quarterly of more than a hundred pages, was issued by Geoffrey Stone from Rye Beach, New York. The Spring issue has followed in due course.
During the past year or two, the American Review and the American Mercury have come to be known as more or less fascist magazines. Neither of these, however, would admit the charge. And, though they publish articles sympathetic to fascism on occasion, the bulk of their material is little or not at all fascist in character.
The Examiner is altogether another matter. Its policy is frankly and avowedly fascist; it seeks, more particularly, an American form of fascism. In the first issue, the editor quotes approvingly from J.L. Benvenisti: “‘Fascism is an unpleasant business, but so are most surgical operations. Unfortunately a surgical operation is becoming a matter of steadily increasing urgency.’” And the editor then adds: “It is far from The Examiner’s intention to offer the fascist program as wholly suited to America; but, since fascism alone of present movements attempts a radical break with the forces that have produced our dilemma, and does not propose to cure our disease by a killing dose of the virus that has caused it, it is suggested that we may learn much of positive value from an intelligent and disinterested consideration of the fascist revolution.” With the exception of two brief articles, the entire second issue of 120 pages is given to a symposium under the title, An Examination of Fascism. The final contribution to this symposium is called: Fascism: An American Version.
Let us put out of mind at once associations drawn from a knowledge of fascist mass journals and broadsides. Here is no wild invective, no ultra-violent Jew-baiting (a few carefully introduced anti-Semitic phrases, that is all), no flaming scare-heads, no shattering bombast. That is not at all the job of The Examiner. Here all, or almost all, is suave, calm, measured, most “reasonable”. This, we must not forget, is the voice of the respectable people. The writers are mostly professors: two from New York University (one of whom, Ross Hoffman, has just been rewarded by the Jesuit Fordham College with a chair of History); one each from Bates College, Boston University, and Bennington College. The several foreign contributors are not, be sure, tainted Italians or Germans, but Englishmen all – one of them (Sir Arnold Wilson) an M.P. no less.
But let no one dismiss The Examiner with a sneer at the vagaries of crack-pot professors. Professors, particularly a group of them, tend to be timid creatures; they are not given to sticking their necks out needlessly, merely for the sake of getting them chopped off. The Examiner could not have appeared unless the social soil had been ripening for it (Geoffrey Stone has been for years a fascist, but it was not until now that he was able to issue a magazine). Many of the respectable people have sensitive noses. They can smell corruption ahead; and they aim to get going while there are still pickings left.
This is why The Examiner is important. The Examiner is a barometer, marking the drop in the social atmosphere toward the storm of crisis.
 
3.
The first of the three basic convictions of The Examiner, is “that Western civilization is in the midst of a crisis which cannot be resolved except through an essential change in society. This change may be either of two kinds. One will occur inevitably if the most strenuous measures are not taken to prevent it, and it will result in the end of civilization as we have known it ...” Put only a trifle more directly: the socialist revolution will destroy capitalist society and will conquer the world, unless we smash it with blood and iron. “The other will depend upon a reinvigoration of the institutions which, while now perverted from their original forms, are still the safeguards of such health as remains in the community.” Again translated: fascism is the only alternative to the socialist revolution. “We must,” the editor reminds his readers, “pass beyond easy assumptions and undertake a scrupulous reexamination of our ideas, making sure when we come to apply these ideas to concrete issues, that we extend them into a world which actually exists beyond the pages of The Nation and The New Republic.” Even these brief samples will indicate that the world of The Examiner’s pages is far closer to actuality than that other which it so scornfully dismisses.
What stands out perhaps most sharply from a reading of these two issues is the utter emptiness of liberal, democratic, reformist ideology – that is, the ideology of democratic capitalism – before the crisis of our time. Politely, facilely, with hardly a sign or need of heavy exertion, these writers tear the democratic ideology, its pretenses and wish-thinking and illusions and hypocrisies, into little shreds, and with an argumentative puff send the shreds scattering to the winds.
Very revealing is the editorial comment on Austria and the Press in the second issue. How almost too easy a job it is for Geoffrey Stone to deflate entirely the comfortable liberal-popular story of the rape of Austria!
“Dr. Schuschnigg might have been another President Masaryk, a smiling, wordy, Wilsonian Liberal, for all one hears to the contrary ... It [the Berchtesgaden agreement] was not a moral question ... the Austrian Chancellor was secured in power by the divisions of the popular will – his strength, in short, was predicated on his country’s weakness ... The Press now sings dirges for gay Vienna – whose gaiety seems to have been of the typical febrile post-War variety – ignoring the fact that Vienna’s ‘downfall’ began not at Berchtesgaden but at Versailles, when, with the dismemberment of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Austria as a nation was reduced to the suburbs of a functionless city ... the same socialists who had been treated to more than a whiff of grapeshot by Dollfuss ...”
All of the writers chisel the democratic ideology to bits, with expertness and dispatch. Ross Hoffman traces the rise and decline of the Liberal State. Stebelton H. Nulle ironically makes use of Strachey:
“Do those who disagree think that America is a fairyland, ‘set apart’, as Strachey says, ‘from the rest of humanity, wholly and definitely different; in whose favor the laws of science and logic are suspended so that like causes will not produce like effects’? Some Americans seem to think that liberal democracy is the final phase of government; that there is something natural and eternally valid about it ...”
And the point is that the democratic ideology has no answer to these writers, and they know it, and are conscious and assured in that knowledge. For they are stronger than the democratic ideologists. False and corrupt and rotted as their own view is, it is nevertheless based upon a mighty half of the truth about our time, upon the realization that now it is either the socialist revolution or fascism, that democratic capitalism is finished on a world-historic scale. And against their view, so based, the democratic ideology is entirely helpless.
There is more to it than this. The intellectual helplessness of the democratic ideology before the attack of the fascist ideology is the expression of the helplessness of the democratic-liberal organization of society before the onslaught of the fascist movement. This lesson too is adequately symbolized by The Examiner. Just as the democratic ideas cannot stand up against the fascist ideas; so is the anti-fascist movement founded upon those democratic ideas – the popular or democratic fronts – defenseless against the fascist movement.
 
4.
It is hardly necessary to add that when we turn from their telling critique of the democratic ideology to their own positive conceptions, these writers, at their own lofty level, show fully the immeasurably reactionary and morally and intellectually depraved features which are the universal marks of the movement to which they have sold their minds. In their own polite way they demand totalitarian dictatorship, calling it “the principle of monarchy”, “rule by a single head, upon whom devolves full responsibility for the welfare of the people as a whole”, or “the positive state, something distasteful to Marxist and liberal alike”. Calmly they will guarantee in perpetuity class rule: “At the same time, by its [fascism’s] recognition of class as inevitable, and good, it negates the Marxian view of society.” The family, and since the family “can endure only upon a basis of private property”, therefore also private property will be society’s eternal foundation. Blandly they describe how the corporative guilds will absorb the class organizations. Naturally religion will play a great part: “Are fascism or National Socialism by their nature incompatible with Christianity?” asks Sir Arnold Wilson, M.P. “My reply in each case is a decisive negative. The principles in each case can be equated with belief in the revelation of Jesus ...” And of course reason and science, humanity’s dividing mark which alone raises it from the animal, will play second fiddle. “The dark religion of the blood” becomes smoothly translated in these essays. Let us not be surprised to find that the great underlying principle of fascism, as J.K. Heydon discovers for us, is – love. “We must not be afraid of the word ‘love’ or we shall never understand the truth, so simple and yet so profound, of human life and liberty ... It never occurs in communist literature ...; but I notice that fascists tend to avoid the word, perhaps fearing to seem lacking in blood and iron. The omission, however, shows that they have not yet got to the heart of their own idea, for at that heart is love.” Yes, dear reader, and ponder well the sentence that follows: “Nor need they be afraid, for love can be very stern.” So the workers of Italy and Germany have learned, from even more convincing teachers. And so will the workers of France and the United States learn also, on their torn flesh, if their minds will not learn sooner.
James BURNHAM



If we were a publishing house, we would discuss the question of a twice-weekly paper merely as a business venture. We would argue about whether it would make more or less money, whether there is a sufficient market, whether advertising would increase, and the like.
We are not a publishing house, but a political party. This means that we approach every publishing venture, and every other enterprise as well, in terms of political aims and needs.
This is a fact of primary importance, one sometimes overlooked even by ourselves. We must take care never to regard our publications as simply commercial or literary or cultural institutions.
Our publications are above all political weapons: and -in the final analysis they are perhaps our strongest and most decisive weapons. They bind us together as a united army; they strike our hardest blows; they are our daily and never-tiring organizers.
That is why the project for a twice-weekly APPEAL, is for us, modest as the action may seem in the light of the world crisis, an event of the first political magnitude. To carry it out successfully means to take a, major political step forward, to enter an altogether new stage in political development.
This step we must all understand, in turn, as only the prologue to the crucial test that we must place resolutely in the close future: the advance to a fighting daily.
Forward, then, to the twice-weekly APPEAL, on the road to the daily!
 



In their editorial notice preceding the debate between Earl Browder and Charles A. Beard, the editors of the New Republic write:
“No more important subject is before the American people today than the question of foreign policy usually described by the alternatives of ‘collective security’ and ‘isolation’.”
The current hearings on the naval appropriation measure before the House of Representatives Naval Affairs Committee are similarly being conducted in the light of this same alternative; “collective security” or “isolation.” Every speaker who has appeared before the Committee supports, with whatever personal modifications, one or another of these two policies.
Beard and Browder, also, throughout the course of their debate, assume that the choice is limited to these two policies. Neither of them makes any mention of any third possibility. Each of them takes for granted that if he can refute the position of his, opponent, then his own view is thereby proved.
 
Two Positions Fundamentally Related
This should serve to indicate that the two positions of collective security” and of “isolation,” in spite of the seeming contradiction between them, do in point of fact share important features in common. However great the gap between them may appear, they are in fundamental respects alike.
The two positions are alike, in the first place, in that neither analyzes the actual cause of modern war. Both argue merely on the surface, as if war were due to the wickedness of individual men, the effect of this or that law, or the success of some clever bit of diplomacy.
They are alike, secondly, in proposing a solution for “the problem of war” within the framework of capitalism. Collective security and isolation equally presuppose the continuing existence of capitalism.
Thirdly, they are alike in that each offers as its solution a program for adoption by the government of the United States: that is, each proposes as its answer to the war crisis a set of actions to be performed by an imperialist state.
 
Are Part of Preparation for War
As a consequence, both of these policies, both collective security and isolation, are in the ast analysis not programs against war at all, but are part of the preparation for war.
They act as part of the preparation for war in a number of decisive ways. For example, since both of them, and their advocates, presuppose support of the imperialist government of the United States, they aid in building up attitudes of loyalty toward that government; and thus, when the government goes to war, as it will, the same attitudes of loyalty will keep support behind it for the war.
Both policies, moreover, by hiding the true nature of war, of, the U.S. government, and of imperialism in general, spread disastrous illusions among the people, and divert any genuine struggle against imperialist war into a chase after impossible dreams.
Even more fatal is the fact that both of these policies, each in its own way, impotent to fight against war, serves to give moral justification to the war when it comes. This happens partly because, as the last war showed, the leading spokesmen, known publicly as “the leaders of the peace movement,” go over to open support of the war as soon as it starts. The masses reason: If these men, who lead the fight for peace, support the war, then it must be a good war; and, even if it is not, we cannot oppose it effectively without their help. But these policies themselves provide moral justification apart from the men who advocate them. The war will be propagandized as a lawless breaking of collective security, or a violation of neutrality and isolation; and thus the very fight for peace will seem to the masses to demand a war to enforce the “peace policy.”
 
Analysis of Capitalism Only Truthful Answer
Marxism, therefore, does not answer collective security by an appeal for isolation. Marxism, bases its answer to the problem of war squarely and bluntly upon a truthful analysis of the nature of; war and of capitalism. Any other basis must lead to lies, illusions, or demagogy.
Marxism points out that so long as capitalism endures, wars will come, that war under capitalism is not an “accident” or an “exceptional event” but an integral part of the very mechanism of capitalism. War is just as much a part of capitalism as are economic crises. You cannot have capitalism without having periodic crises, and you cannot have capitalism without periodically having wars. The causes which bring about wars, the inescapable need for every advanced capitalist nation to attempt to expand its markets, gain cheaper sources of raw materials, find new outlets beyond the internal market for capital investment, can none of them be eliminated without eliminating capitalism itself.
Every capitalist government, above all every imperialist government – including outstandingly the U.S. government – is therefore committed to war “as an instrument of national policy” by the very fact that it is a capitalist government. To ask it to renounce war is like asking a living man to renounce oxygen.
 
Struggle Against War Is Fight for Socialism
From these considerations, it follows that the struggle against war, the genuine struggle, is simply an aspect of the struggle against capitalism and for socialism. This is the truth of the matter, however unpleasant a truth it may seem. If capitalism necessarily brings about war, you obviously cannot get rid of war without getting rid of capitalism. To divorce the struggle against war from the struggle against capitalism is in reality to give up the struggle against war, so far as any possible effectiveness is concerned.
This simple truth is systematically obscured by both the ignorant and the conscious liars. So many persons wish to satisfy. their consciences by feeling that they are “working for peace”; but at the same time they do not wish to take the risk of working against capitalism. To these persons we must say: Deliberately or unconsciously you are fooling yourselves. Which do you really want – peace or capitalism? You cannot have both. If you are unwilling to give up capitalism, then your pretended fight for peace is a fraud, and a fraud which aids no one but the war-makers.
 
Fear of Workers Checks War Makers
The day-by-day class struggle of the workers, which by strengthening the working class is implicitly directed against capitalism, is thus a far more realistic means of checking the war preparations than all of the pacifism, isolation and collective security ever imagined. Fear of what the workers may do is the only real hindrance to the war-makers. They laugh at, and exploit to their own ends, the propaganda of isolation and collective security.
In the end, however, the overthrow of capitalism itself is the only conceivable means for stopping war. Socialism, and it alone, will end war because socialism and it alone will root out the causes of war. The program of the socialist revolution, when the question is finally and fully understood, is the only anti-war program.
 
Answer to War Is Socialist Revolution
This does not mean that it is impossible for revolutionary socialists to unite with, others not yet accepting their perspective to further certain specific objectives. Both concrete actions, such as boycotts and demonstrations, and even primarily agitational measures directed against specific moves of the war-makers (“Withdraw all U.S. Armed Forces from the Far East,” “Against the Naval Appropriations,” “All War Funds to the Unemployed”) can legitimately serve a limited purpose. But for the revolutionary socialists these must always be subordinated to the general perspective of the class struggle.
To Browder and to Beard, then, as to Roosevelt, the Marxists in the end give one short reply: The answer to war, the only answer, is the socialist revolution.

(This is the final article in the series of four by James Burnham on the New Republic debate over collective security between Charles A. Beard and Earl Browder.)
 



The current war program of the Stalinists is summed up in the phrase, “Collective Security.” Earl Browder’s half of the New Republic debate with Charles A, Beard, subsequently reprinted in The Daily Worker, is entitled For Collective Security. The Communist Party has recently issued several pamphlets with the same title. We must enquire further into the true meaning of Collective Security.
At first glance, the program of Collective Security seems reasonable and practical to many people.
“Clearly,” argues Browder, “in this relation of forces, there does exist the possibility of preventing the spread of war, and of extinguishing the wars going on, provided the peace-loving 90 per cent can arrive at a concerted program of action, at least to a degree in some relation to that of the concerted action of the Triple Alliance of the ‘anti-Communist’ bloc of fascist states ... Considering the economic resources of the war-makers, it would clearly be sufficient to bring them quickly to a halt if the United States, France, Britain, and the Soviet Union should jointly declare an embargo upon all economic transactions with the aggressors ...”
How can anyone object to such a calm and virtuous proposal? No wonder Browder is indignant at the scoundrels who insist on criticism!
 
Origin of Collective Security
But let us, approaching this as all questions from the point of view of the interests of the working class, ask: First, even assuming that Collective Security night preserve peace, is it a correct program; and, second, whether it can in fact preserve peace – or whether it is even designed to preserve peace. The answer to both of these questions requires a brief account of the origin of the idea of Collective Security.
The idea of Collective Security is not an invention of Browder, nor of Litvinov nor of Stalin. It arose in the camp of the Allied Powers during the latter part of the War of 1914–18, and was part of the basis for the construction of the “Versailles system.” Its chief early advocate was Aristide Briand, the renegade from socialism who became during that time an outstanding spokesman for French imperialism.
The theory of Collective Security was as follows: The Allied Powers had won the war, and taken for themselves the rich spoils of conquest. France and Great Britain, particularly, being satisfied with the results, glutted with colonies and other booty, wanted a method of protecting the spoils against any rival who might try to make a bid for them, either from among the defeated Central Powers, or from their own less satisfied allies. Briand wanted to solidify the imperialist division of the world as it existed at the time of the Versailles Treaty.
 
To Solidify Versailles Settlement
Collective Security was the plan for accomplishing just this solidification. All of the nations (united in the League) were to take joint steps against any nation which might attempt to break through the existing imperialist division. In addition, it was of course understood that collective action would above all be exercised against a bid for power by the working class of any nation – which would naturally be the greatest of all threats against the existing imperialist division.
It was as if two coalitions of gangs had been fighting for control of a racket. The winning gang, having consolidated its victory, decreed that henceforth “peace and order” were to reign over Brooklyn. All the gangsters together would take collective action against any rival gang which attempted to muscle in. And, of course, similar collective action would likewise be taken against any group of honest citizens who tried to break up the rackets themselves.
In the case of the gang, it is clear enough that Collective Action is hardly the answer to the problems of good citizens. Their interest is to smash all of the gangs, and to get rid altogether of the rackets.
 
“Peace” to Protect Imperialist Gangsters
The case of the imperialist powers is exactly the same. Even if Collective Security could preserve “peace,” that would mean simply protecting the dominant imperialist positions of the Anglo-French bloc; protecting their right to exploit the major part of the world; safeguarding their rule of starvation and terror in India, the Near East, Indo-China, Africa; guaranteeing for eternity their right to the exploitation and oppression of the workers in the home countries.
The workers have absolutely no interest in the preservation of any imperialist division whatever, no matter what nation or group of nations a given division favors. Their interest is to overthrow the whole imperialist system; and, if mankind is not to revert to barbarism, to do so in the shortest possible time. The program of Collective Security, which is the program for the preservation of an Anglo-French dominated imperialist system, is thus crassly and directly counter-revolutionary.
However, in any case the assumption that the program of Collective Security might preserve peace is directly contrary to fact. Italy, Germany, Japan do not begin military operations, do not try to upset the existing division of the world because Mussolini, Hitler and the Mikado are madmen or “war-lovers.” They are driven to military adventure by iron necessity. Their only alternative is economic and social death for their own national capitalism, and they are fighting desperately against that death. No conceivable system of treaties or Leagues or “peaceful economic sanctions” can stop them. A man faced with certain death in one direction will fight against any odds in the other.
The originators of Collective Security know all this. And that is why they have never pretended to themselves that Collective Security is in reality a “peace program.” It is a program to preserve peace (i.e., the status quo) as long as possible and convenient to the dominant powers; and in doing so to prepare for war they know to be inevitable on the most favorable physical and moral terms.
 
It Cements Military Alliances
Collective Security is a way of cementing military alliances in one of the imperialist coalitions. It has the great advantage of making the members of the opposing coalition appear to be the “breakers of the peace,” thereby permitting the mobilization of popular sentiment against them.
This last feature explains why Browder has now so ardently taken up the slogan of Collective Security. He knows, as well as Briand knew and Auriol and Chautemps and Daladier know today, that Collective Security is in the last analysis not a program for peace but a program for war. And he is using Collective Security in his attempt to make the war which he believes will aid his master popular among the people of the United States. Collective Security is his banner for enlisting the masses in this country in the next war of American imperialism.

(This is the second in a series of four articles on the New Republic debate over “Collective Security” between Earl Browder and Charles A. Beard. The remaining articles will deal with Beard’s “isolationist” reply to Browder and with the Marxist alternative to Collective Security.)
 



The idea of “collective security” has never been popular with the majority of the people of this country. This has been proved on a number of occasions, most conspicuously during the period following the last war. In spite of the fact that the war itself showed that neutrality for the United States in a major European conflict was impossible, as soon as the War was over Americans wanted to steer clear of Europe.
This sentiment was reflected in the Senate. Wilson came back from Versailles with his head full of the new Treaty, Briand’s plans for collective security, and the grandiose scheme for the League of Nations. The Senate blocked adherence to the League, and in doing so undoubtedly represented majority opinion.
Even now, with the entire Administration, especially Roosevelt and Hull, driving for collective security, and with the outstanding bourgeois press holding the same perspective, the anti-collective security Ludlow Amendment came close to a majority in the House of Representatives.
 
Majority Favor Neutrality Policy
The majority of the people has been traditionally in favor of “isolation;” or, as it is often called, “neutrality.” There are historical reasons for this feeling, so different from opinion in Europe, even among the masses. For one thing, there is the important geographical fact that the United States is far away from any other great power, whereas the European nations are situated right next to each other. Again, there is the carryover from the hopes of the American Revolution, which was to build a new civilization freed from the conflicts of the Old World. And, in addition, there were the unparalleled resources and opportunities for expansion on the North American Continent.
There was always, of course, hypocrisy and unreality in the idea of “isolation.” Isolation from Europe was found to be perfectly consistent with the ruthless extermination of the native inhabitants of North America. The Monroe Doctrine, dating from the early years of United States history, was hardly an “isolationist “ conception. In actuality, from the point of view of United States capitalism, isolation and neutrality means only that up to a certain point in its history the United States had a sufficient sphere for exploitation and advance, in the Americas, and did not need to develop a “world outlook.”
 
Base for Isolation No Longer Exists
As the United States entered the imperialist stage of its development, the economic basis for the policy of isolation was destroyed. The idea of isolation lingered on in a vacuum. This was already clear in the Spanish War. It was fully shown by the War of 1914–18. The ramifications of American capitalism had become world-wide, and it was drawn irresistibly into the vortex of world affairs.
With the last War, the United States became a creditor nation, and has since become the first and most powerful of the imperialist powers. Its whole internal economy now depends upon its stake in the world market. Without its foreign trade and foreign capital investments, it would be bankrupt within six months. Far from decreasing in importance, the foreign trade and investments must necessarily play an ever more crucial role.
 
Beard Sees Where Policies Are Leading
In the New Republic debate over collective security between Earl Browder and Charles A. Beard, there is no doubt at all that Dr. Beard has much the best of the argument. He understands what Browder’s argument means, that it means advocacy and preparation for war; and with his mature and rather tired irony he exposes Browder’s meaning. He knows what Roosevelt is up to: “The Roosevelt Administration, bewildered and baffled by the economic impasse at home, is employing sentimental coverages for excursions abroad.”
He knows how “peace-loving” France and Great Britain are: “Having all the European territory required by their traditional ambitions and loaded with the spoils of empire, Great Britain and France do want peace – at their price ... The great democratic powers want peace and the possession of all they have ...” He knows that Italy and Germany and Japan are driven by conflicts too great to be stopped by any peaceful “quarantines “: “I find in history no justification whatever for assuming as truth that Italy, Germany and Japan would surrender unconditionally to a grand quarantine.”
 
Understands Value of Democracy
He knows also just what “democracy” is worth to imperialism, and just how democracy is served by imperialist war:
“Does anyone conversant with British history really believe that the operations of the British government since 1914, let us say, have been controlled by some conception of democracy, as distinguished from British interests in the Mediterranean, Africa and elsewhere? Or the operations of the French government? What did these governments do for democracy in Germany between 1919 and 1933? ... And if it comes to another war for democracy against the three offenders, have we any ground for expecting beneficent results in the way of a universal democratic advance? All I ask anyone to consider on this point is the record ...”
Lastly, Beard knows the real direction of Roosevelt’s program, which Browder so ardently defends: “That Roosevelt would take them in (to the next world war) swiftly if it comes is highly probable ...”
 
Fails to Make Positive Proposals
Beard knows all these things about the Roosevelt-Browder program, about collective security. But what does he propose in its place? In the debate he makes no explicit proposals. His views, developed elsewhere in his writings, are left implicit. They are the views of isolationism; he wants the Uridted States to stay home and mind its own business.
But, in truth, this alternative is no alternative at all; and Beard’s program is no program. The truth is that the business of U.S. imperialism is everybody’s business. The truth is that foreign trade and capital markets are necessary to U.S. capitalism if it is not to collapse. There are not enough markets to go around among the powers. The competition for them is a life and death question for each power. Therefore, in the end, they – including the United States, fight each other for them.
 
Does He Think U.S. Will Abdicate?
To assume that the U.S. capitalists, controlling the U.S. government, will not fight under such circumstances, is to assume that they will voluntarily abdicate, will stand by while the social system which supports them goes bankrupt. Does Dr. Beard, with all his historical knowledge and his irony, make such an assumption?
The idea that isolation is possible for imperialist United States is thus an empty illusion, utterly unrelated to historical and economic reality. If it and those who advocate it are less treacherous than collective security, the illusion of isolation is also a most powerful danger. For it is an illusion which leads the masses away from the genuine fight against war, dissipates their energies in empty air, and leaves them helpless when the war breaks out in spite of – in part because of – the illusion.

(This is the third in a series of four articles by James Burnham on the New Republic debate over collective security between Earl Browder and Charles A. Beard. The last article, summarizing the Marxist answer to collective security, will appear in the next issue.)
 



1.
FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT is probably the most daring and brilliant politician whom this country has yet produced. He is, in the first place, remarkable among American Presidents in being in the fullest sense a trained, professional politician, and not a lawyer, general, or schoolteacher raised to political office as a temporarily convenient spokesman for the ruling class. He has fitted himself with the most precise and painstaking care, acquiring every knowledge and talent relevant to his chosen function. He has studied the history of the United States itself until he handles it and molds its tradition to his purpose with easy and conscious mastery. A magnificent orator, he has not been content to learn from the past, but has adapted his delivery to the new requirements of loudspeakers and above all the radio. His speeches – whose continuity of style proves that their final form is not left in the hands of ghost-writers – show an amazing grasp of wide fields of contemporary science and culture. Much more remarkable – indeed almost unprecedented – in an American politician, his actions prove him a close and critical student of international politics and their methods; he has made his own the lessons to be drawn from the political experiences of the great European nations.
In addition, in striking contrast to the three Presidents who preceded him, especially to Coolidge and Harding, and indeed to the great majority of Presidents from the beginning, Roosevelt is in the full sense a political leader. Harding and Coolidge, for example, were narrow, stupid, weak, uncultured men, trivial pawns pulled back and forth by the major forces within American society. They had no coherent and distinctive policies. They were not conscious of the true meaning of their own roles. In entire contrast, Roosevelt is fully conscious; and vigorously, indeed ruthlessly, pursues integrated and deliberately thought-out policies.
Roosevelt knows that it is his business to represent, in the political sphere, the general interests of the American bourgeoisie as a whole, knows that he is the standard bearer of American imperialism in its present phase. It is precisely because of this, and because he is by far the ablest present representative of American imperialism, that he enters so frequently into collision with individuals and groups within the bourgeoisie. The very nature of capitalism, with its life-and-death internal competitive struggle, makes it exceedingly difficult for any member or section of the bourgeoisie to rise to the point of view of the historical interests of the class as a whole. The struggle of individual against individual, corporation against corporation, monopoly against monopoly, one branch of industry against another, blots out the longer-term perspective, and makes the individual bourgeois – unless confronted with a definite social crisis – grasp at immediate practical advantage at the expense of the general interests of the class. When such an individual is told, in effect, that he must sacrifice in one degree or another some immediate practical advantage for the sake of the longer perspective, he is ordinarily resentful and resists. It is the very bitterness against Roosevelt on the part of such large numbers of the bourgeoisie that is the surest sign of Roosevelt’s class leadership.
This bitterness is increased by the boldness and imperiousness with which Roosevelt announces his policies and carries them through. He hurts people’s feelings because he tells them what to do instead of waiting around and asking advice, and flattering Congressmen or bankers by suggesting that he is merely following their superior wisdom. Roosevelt closes the banks, launches the NRA, PWA, WPA, builds dams, changes the gold content of the dollar, makes treaties, reforms Stock Exchange practise, demands a change in the Supreme Court; and in all such measures, he calls the turn first and lets the grumblers and delayers fall into line afterwards.
But more than this: Not only does Roosevelt understand clearly his role as general representative of American imperialism; he knows too that a chief – perhaps the primary – task of the bourgeois politician is to keep the confidence of the masses in the bourgeois state and the capitalist order. He is extraordinarily sensitive to the moods of the masses, and unscrupulous to the last degree in exploiting those moods. And this is why Roosevelt, in spite of all his brilliance and knowledge and abilities, is and must remain a demagogue; why every successful bourgeois politician, in the epoch of the decline of capitalism, must be a demagogue. They cannot tell the truth to the masses; for that would be to tell them that the continuance of capitalism dooms them to increasing misery, starvation, tyranny, war. They can only exploit, pervert, distort, with one or another brand of demagogy, the moods of discontent and despair, and the half-conscious search by the masses for a way out In 1932, these moods of discontent and despair were enormously widespread in this country. It was Roosevelt’s dramatic actions and his far more dramatic demagogy that seized hold of these moods, transformed them, and re-forged the chains that tied the minds of the masses to capitalism. It is hard to see how it could have been done in any other than Roosevelt’s way.
Roosevelt enjoyed four and a half years of virtually uninterrupted success. Against the business upturn – part of the international upturn, but also in part stimulated and supported here by Roosevelt’s own measures, against the grandiose plans and real though much less grandiose governmental achievements, against the triumphant New Deal ideology, no attack from any quarter stood a chance. A popular whirlwind carried him into office for his second term.
His first major political crisis occurred over the Bill to reorganize the Supreme Court. But it would be a superficial error to imagine that the rejection of this Bill was half the defeat to Roosevelt that his opponents fondly imagined and his friends timorously feared. On the one hand, through advocacy of the reorganization, Roosevelt terrorized the Court into upholding all of his important measures which came before it last year; and he has already forced out two of the anti-Roosevelt Justices. On the other hand, through his championing of the Bill, Roosevelt was mightily aided in maintaining his psychological position as the leader of the masses against the “Tories”.
The real crisis, or rather its beginning, has a more substantial foundation: the economic slump which began last autumn and continues downward with a velocity twice that of 1929; and the deepening of the war crisis. It is these which Roosevelt is now called upon to solve, after his own manner.
 
2.
How does Roosevelt understand his own general problem? It would seem to be something as follows: American capitalism is the most vigorous and powerful section of international capitalism. It does not yet need to turn toward fascism for preservation. It can continue, and thereby uphold and even extend the strength and privileges of the American bourgeoisie, for a considerable future period. But it can do so only if three conditions, themselves integrally related, are fulfilled.
First, it must “modernize”. It must abandon the remnants and the attitudes of laisser-faire. It must draw the lessons from the older capitalisms of Europe, including the lessons from reformist politics and from the totalitarian states. It must try to reduce the excessive anarchy of industry on the one side; and in the relations between capital and labor on the other – recognizing that a working class organized and closely related to the governmental structure can, if properly managed, be less dangerous in the present period than a disorganized and chaotic working class. The parts must accept “controls” for the sake of the well-being of the whole. Above all, it must recognize that modern capitalism can work only with the extension of the function of the state into wider and wider spheres.
Second (as I have already discussed), the loyalty of the masses toward the capitalist order must be kept. This cannot be done through the ideologies carried over by the Republican and Democratic parties from earlier and no longer relevant periods. Those ideologies make use of myths no longer convincing. The United States requires a New Deal in ideology. The New Deal ideology is not, of course, an invention by Roosevelt, but merely an adaptation. He has taken over traditional reformism, up to and including the Popular Front, mixed in an American sauce of Jeffersonianism and Populism, and with new seasoning and decoration brought up to date as a native American product. The object of the ideology is to convince the masses that the government – at least while Roosevelt is at its head – is their government; that their enemies are neither capitalism nor its state, but merely “the sixty families”. This ideology must be backed up with a necessary minimum of actual or apparent concessions, a running expense which American capitalism cannot at present afford to eliminate.
This third and most vital condition for the continuance of American capitalism is the extension of its capital market. The most vigorous and powerful section of international capitalism must take its place openly and aggressively as the dominant power in the world. The internal market is already completely inadequate to sustain U.S. economy on a profitable basis; but today’s inadequacy is only a foreshadowing of the future. The economy must expand, or be destroyed. From the beginning Roosevelt has understood this. That is why he and his lieutenants have brushed aside so unceremoniously the Borahs, the isolationists and provincials, and have made one series after another of commercial treaties designed to further trade. That is why the Soviet Union was recognized as one of the first acts of his regime. It is this that explains the “good neighbor” policy toward South and Central America, Cuba, the Philippines, Porto Rico – a policy which in exchange for surface concessions in terms of political prestige strengthens the base of economic advantage and genuine political control. That is what explains the participation in and domination of the Buenos Aires Conference a year ago.
But all of this is not enough. Roosevelt knows that not alone the United States, but all of the imperialist powers need, to stave off death, expansion, or at the very least preservation of what they now have. And therefore he knows that this primary condition for the continuance of American imperialism entails necessarily and inevitably war. Consequently, as a serious politician, his course is deliberately and consciously set toward war, and toward the creation of the most favorable circumstances for the conduct of the war. There is no other way to understand his policy.
 
3.
Right now, then, Roosevelt stands faced with the economic recession, the foreshadowing if not the first act of a major economic crisis; and with the deepening war crisis. His specific problem now is: (a) to shift the blame for the recession and impending crisis to the “Tories” and at least to a certain extent to Congress; (b) to meet the slump in such a way as not to alienate the masses from capitalism; and (c) to prepare for the war which he regards as certain. These three factors are naturally related, since in reality the war is Roosevelt’s solution for the economic crisis.
It was thought for several months that Roosevelt would meet the slump by abandoning the New Deal. The Special Session gave some evidence for this view. But in actuality Roosevelt utilized the Special Session to discredit Congress as against the Executive. And free rein, for a while, to the views of the Tories only makes it easier for Roosevelt to attribute the slump to the “sabotage” of the “sixty families”; and thus also easier to prevent the masses from discovering its true causes in capitalism itself. In this way, he is breaking up the strategy of the Republicans, with its attempt to ride back to popular favor by holding Roosevelt and the New Deal solely responsible for the slump – an attempt doomed to failure, since it proceeds from an ideology which can no longer win the faith of the popular majority.
The toothache and fishing trip of the Special Session were quickly followed by a sortie from the Roosevelt camp. Jackson and Ickes took the air and sent their New Deal shafts against the wicked monopolies. Why this, at this moment? Clearly: a major, and in this country always congenial, way to slough off responsibility for the evils of capitalism. But in addition: The appeal of an “anti-monopoly” campaign is primarily to the middle classes; Roosevelt realizes that the onslaught of the “Tories” makes its chief effect upon the middle classes, and he must move now to keep them in line. The working class is still with him, and will besides be far less affected in any case by “big business” propaganda. Roosevelt himself followed up Jackson and Ickes with a much more “reasonable” address to Congress. He is willing to cooperate with “all loyal Americans”; the “disruption” does not come from his side. But a few days later he openly declares that he is not going to balance the budget; and the tone of the Jackson Day speech is much sharper.
The New Deal is by no means dead. It is simply entering a new and fuller stage.
Roosevelt’s great and crucial weapon, however, is the war. With his Chicago speech, in October, he began its open preparation. For Roosevelt, first things come first; and in the Address to Congress, the opening and by far the most forceful section dealt with the war crisis. The new armament program is already on the way. The notes on the Panay incident, the blows at the proposed Ludlow amendment, the new tone of State Department releases, all make unmistakably clear the direction and meaning of Roosevelt’s international policy.
But his utilization of the war crisis serves not merely the general interests of the future of American imperialism; it serves also and is made to serve Roosevelt’s own interests. The war question is the decisive question. By demanding and getting pledges of national unity on the decisive question (even Landon has telegraphed his pledge of loyalty to Roosevelt’s foreign policy), the strength of the opposition on the other and subsidiary issues is dissipated – just as the British government undermines the Labour Party opposition on internal questions through the Labour Party’s support of the government’s foreign policy. Still further, Roosevelt keeps control of his mass following by explaining the war in the terms of the Popular Frontist conceptions of a crusade against fascism and dictatorship, and for peace and democracy. More and more, the Popular Frontists proper, as the Daily Worker of the last months so eloquently witnesses, become mere appendages of Roosevelt. And, just as the war itself is Roosevelt’s answer to the major crisis of US capitalism, his foundation for America’s future, so does the armaments program aid in the immediate task of alleviating the threatening slump in profits.
 
4.
There is no political leader in this country at present comparable to Roosevelt. It was for Roosevelt, and not for the Democratic party that the people voted a little more than a year ago. It is in Roosevelt, and not in his party, that the majority still has faith. The Democratic party itself is a strange and complex medley. Its historic origin under Jefferson, its development as the party of the slave-holders, have both little bearing on the contemporary United States. Within its ranks are represented diverse and gravely conflicting interests. Only the crisis and Roosevelt’s leadership have held it together during these past five years. It is almost certain that, within the next three years, it will undergo a major split; there are many indications that Roosevelt is deliberately preparing for a split. The only thing that might prevent the split is the pressure of the war.
In point of fact, the split in the Democratic party did begin in a small way during the 1936 election, with the break by Al Smith, Davis, Raskob, and other prominent party members. During the past year the most bitter fights in Congress have been between fellow-Democrats; for the most part the Republicans have been content to bloc up with the anti-Roosevelt Democrats, and to let the latter take the lead. Such a bloc won the majority against the Court Reorganization Bill; and sent the Wages and Hours Bill back to Committee during the Special Session. It was and is the Democratic Senator, Connally, who has lead the filibuster against the Anti-Lynching Bill; and he has made the debate a violent attack against the loyal Roosevelt Senators. It seems likely that Roosevelt will drive the wedge deeper during this current Session.
In the Republican Party there is a similar division – the division, roughly, between a kind of Americanized Popular Frontist liberals and the more traditional kind of conservatives. In the House of Representatives, especially, the outstanding progressives are Farmer-Labor, Wisconsin Progressive, or Republican, and not Democrats. The New York City mayoralty election, with the Republican LaGuardia receiving the support of most of those who voted a year before for Roosevelt, showed a complication in the same development.
At the same time, a Popular Frontist Labor Party movement is gaining headway. Though this movement represents from the side of the workers, a genuine advance in class consciousness, there is little to distinguish its avowed program or its leaders from the left Republicans or the Roosevelt Democrats.
A re-shuffling is thus in process, the first deal of which should be finished by the time of the 1940 presidential elections. The exact outcome cannot yet be predicted, but the probable general plan is already reasonably clear. On one side will be the Rooseveltians, the left Republicans, the Farmer-Laborites, Progressives, and the Labor Party movement. On the other will be a coalition of the old-line Democrats and the bulk of the Republicans. This division, however, might take any of several organizational forms. Roosevelt will probably retain the majority in the Democratic party. He might sweep into such a “purified” party all of the other forces. But it is more likely that there will be an electoral coalition. The left Republicans may well retain for a while an independent organization. The various Labor Party groups, either on a local scale or nationally, profiting by the example of the American Labor Party in New York, may and probably will keep organizational independence in an effort to hold a balance of power position for bargaining purposes. However, if (as is unlikely) Roosevelt loses the Democratic party, he may well take the initiative in forming a single all-embracing Third Party set-up for the 1940 campaign.
Whatever the alternative, it may be remarked, it is far from excluded that Roosevelt will himself be the presidential candidate. If he retains his health, who is there to take his place? If the war has not already started, it will be close enough to be made the excuse for the abandonment of the no-third-term tradition. No one will be able to claim the right to lead the war with half the justice of Roosevelt.
In any case, we are now witnessing the breakup of the inherited pattern of American politics. American capitalism is coming of age at the same time that capitalism internationally is in its death throes. This paradox promises a rate of change and a scale of struggle never before seen in history. The resulting ferment, the drastic uprooting of fixed ideas and accepted institutions, for the first time offer the revolutionary party in this country a real path of entry to the masses. These next three years may well be decisive for the next decades.
James BURNHAM
 
Footnote
1. This article is the first of several by the same author on current problems of American politics. It will be followed in the next issue by an analysis of the Labor Party movement. – ED.
 



When Marxists state that Stalinism now functions in the world labor movement as a counter-revolutionary force, as the chief obstacle in the struggle for workers’ power and for socialism, there are still, of course, many who do not believe them. There are, for example, honest members and sympathizers of the Communist Party itself who think that this altogether sober and scientific analysis of the Marxists is the slander and ravings of “mad dogs.” Such persons are compelled by their own conscience to think in this manner.
They differ in their whole moral makeup from the cynical, depraved and shameless bureaucrats who actually run the Communist Parties of the world. In their own hearts, they sincerely want socialism ; and they believe that the only road toward socialism lies through support of the Communist Party, which they mistakenly look upon as the heir to – instead of the most bitter enemy of – the October Revolution. If they understood the true role of Stalinism, they would abandon it overnight. That is why we must dissect every concrete manifestation of Stalinism, in order to remove the false outer skin and lay bare the internal decay.
 
War Question Is Decisive
It will need no argument to prove that today “the war question is the decisive question. Since it is the decisive question, the answers given to it provide the surest touchstone to the character of every political movement. To anyone who doubts what the Stalinist answer is and means, the New Republic of February 2 offers an easy and spectacular way of clearing up those doubts. In this issue of the New Republic there is published a debate between Earl Browder and Charles A. Beard on the general subject of Collective Security. I plan, on another occasion, to analyze Browder’s arguments in this debate, as well as those of Dr. Beard, and in particular to discuss this whole conception of “collective security.” I wish, in the present article, to consider merely the point of view from which Browder writes.
Naturally enough, Stalinists pretend to their own followers that they write from the point of view of the international proletariat. Even a brief survey of Browder’s article in the New Republic can demonstrate beyond any doubt that he is reasoning and writing from the point of view of the defense of U.S. Imperialism.
 
Browder Speaks for Roosevelt Policy
In no line does Browder even suggest that his policy is a working class policy, or an independent policy of any kind. He himself speaks openly for Roosevelt’s policy. The cover of the magazine correctly reads: “Earl Browder – for the President’s Policy.” “Clearly, then,” Browder writes, “in our country the task is to organize effective support, behind the President’s policy, of the 27,000,000 who voted for him in 1936.” Replying to Bruce Bliven’s objection that his policy is peculiarly “Russian,” Browder says: “We will not quarrel with Mr. Bliven as to how the policy could be best ‘framed in American terms’; we are willing to leave that to the President ...”
The President, according to Marxism, is the chief political executive of the ruling class, the bourgeoisie, in this country. Browder, by his own words, accepts the war policy of the chief executive of the bourgeoisie, accepts it one hundred per cent, and is willing to leave its fuller formulation altogether to that chief executive.
 
Would Suppress Labor’s Struggle Against Capital
In Browder’s article, the class struggle – according to Marxism the motive force of history, from an understanding of which all Marxian analysis of all social and political problems proceeds – is mentioned only once. There is no word of the class struggle in the discussion either of the causes of, of the cure for, war. On the one occasion where the class struggle appears, it is cited as one of the major weaknesses of the United States as against Japan; and, it therefore follows, as a factor which must be overcome if an “effective peace policy” is to be achieved.
Browder’s argument thus advocates the suppression of the class struggle, as a necessary part of the means for achieving what he calls an effective peace policy. This does not appear so odd when we understand that in reality Browder wants to achieve not a peace but a war policy for the United States: suppression of the class struggle is, in fact, necessary for an effective war policy on the part of a capitalist nation.
“But America, rich and full of potential booty, is still considered by the world to be in a pacifist funk, is torn by a constitutional crisis and sharp class struggles, and contains powerful forces that would welcome Japanese aggression for their own fascist ends.”
 
Filled with Frank Jingoism
Browder’s article is filled with the frankest jingo appeals to the interests of U.S. Imperialism.
“A continuance of isolation policies by the United States will surely convince the arrogant militarists of Tokyo that now is the time for them to take over the Philippines, Hawaii, Guam and Alaska, as guarantees against the future, when the United States might dare. From that it would not be a large step to recall how much more successful are Japanese than Americans in cultivating the beautiful and rich lands of California.”
This is the crux of Browder’s argument.
He continues it by stating that the United States is in more danger from Japan than is the Soviet Union. “A continuance of the same line (pursued up to now by Japan) leads her not to Vladivostock, Habarovsk and Chita, but rather to Manila, Honolulu and Nome.” That is to say, Browder’s central argument in favor of his own war position is that his policy alone can protect and defend – what? The working class? The struggle for socialism? Not in the least. His policy, he says in his own words, alone can defend the possessions of U.S. imperialism.
There is nothing more revealing in this article than Browder’s use of “our” and “we.” In every instance these words stand for the United States as a nation – that is, for the imperialist state. For Marx, the workers had no fatherland until they conquered one for themselves. Browder is less lonely. “Our country” appears twenty times. “If we continue to desert them to their fate, as Mr. Bliven advocates, we will have no one to blame but ourselves when we have to take up the full military burden under more unfavorable conditions.” Browder speaks these days with the full rounded phrases of a statesman. But not, he is careful to make clear, of a statesman of the working ciass. “We,” says Browder, we and the other representatives of the imperialist United States, will be ready to assume “the full military burden” even “under more unfavorable conditions.”
 
Roosevelt Will Save Humanity
The most startling and naked of all the sentences in this remarkable article is, however, the following: “Only the courageous implementing of the policy laid down by President Roosevelt in Chicago can save our country, and all the capitalist world, from unparalleled reaction and catastrophe.” Criticism itself becomes tongue-tied when faced with such a remark.
Whom is the working class called upon by Browder to save? He answers: “Our country, and all the capitalist world.” And what must this capitalist world be saved from? He answers: “From catastrophe.” But what is catastrophe for the capitalist world? Catastrophe for the capitalist world is, and is only the socialist revolution. Browder’s entire article is summed up in this clarion call: join with me to save capitalism from the socialist revolution.

(This article is the first in a series of four on the New Republic debate between Earl Browder and Charles A. Beard. The remaining three will discuss the origin and meaning of “collective security”; Dr. Beard’s “isolationist” reply to Browder’s advocacy of collective security; and the Marxist answer to collective security. – ED.)
 



The wave of shame and horror that has swept the world at the spectacle of the latest Nazi anti-Semitic bestialities gives witness once again to a depth of noble feeling that promises well for the future of mankind, whatever the darkness of the present.
But shame and horror are not .enough, and reaction is always awake and ready to harness the noblest feelings to its own bitter shafts. We must also understand; and if we do not understand the meaning of what is now happening, our very indignation will be turned into a further instrument of our own destruction.
Why does this monstrosity in Germany take place? What makes the rulers of Germany scourge an entire people with such animal-like ferocity, hound them in public and in private, drive them from every refuge, seek to deprive them not only of every human comfort and decency but, apparently, of life itself? Who and what are responsible?
 
Masked Hypocrisy
The Roosevelts and Al Smiths and Hoovers and Dorothy Thompsons, quick to exploit the popular response for their own prestige and aims, tell us that this persecution is “unbelievable” and “unprecedented in history,” that it is the work of “madmen” cut off from all connection with the glories of “western civilization.”
When they tell us this, and use their words to justify the imperialist war that they are preparing, they lie. In reality, these Nazi persecutions are the natural and normal harvest of the social system which these pious hypocrites, the Roosevelts and Smiths and Hoovers and Thompsons, spend their days in defending. It is only a festering sore, present always and everywhere in capitalism, breaking open as disease and rottenness spread more widely throughout the whole social organism.
 
Capitalist-Bred
Are these persecutions truly “unbelievable” and “unprecedented”? Not in the least. All that is unprecedented is their openness and cold ruthlessness, and even these are by no means unexampled. From its beginnings capitalism has bred on the fanning of the most frightful and hideous racial and religious hatreds – the means whereby capitalism keeps its exploited slaves divided, by which it redoubles oppression of subject races, and provides scapegoats to turn away wrath from its own head.
Do we in the United States need to be reminded that in this country thirteen million Negroes live in precisely those conditions which Hitler today proposes for the Jews: in Ghettoes, in squalor and disease and poverty, deprived of adequate medical care, shut out from all the cultural institutions of the dominant race, prevented from exercising political rights, barred from all dignified or lucrative employment? Does an Englishman need to be reminded how Chamberlain today in Palestine pits Arab and Jew savagely against each other for the safety of British imperialist rule or how he sweats the natives in the gold mines of South Africa? Does a Frenchman have to be told what happens in the Sudan or in Indo-China?
 
Get at Roots!
The blood of the German Jews, dripping from the hands of Goebbels and Goering and their gangs of maddened sadists, drips also from the white hands of Chamberlain and Roosevelt and from the whole international association of cut-throats and murderers who sustain in life a system whose price for humanity is now measured only in a daily and continuous increase of torment and death.
Hitler launches his thugs against the Jews because, in his desperation, he has no other recourse. Perhaps the expropriation will patch up the cracks in his shattering economy. Even more, he must try to whip the German masses into insane and futile frenzy against the Jews so that they will forget their own chains and their own hunger. And on the other side of the medal the Roosevelts and Hoovers seek to turn the popular fury against the persecutions from its only genuine and effective outlet in a drive against capitalism itself, the source of the persecutions, to their own ends of a defense of the most mighty and sinister of all the sectors of capitalism – American imperialism and its schemes for world-wide conquest.
 



Time, in its current issue, observes that no daily or weekly journal in the entire world, outside of the press of the Communist International, believes the trial of the 21 was an honest affair.
Probably never before in history has any trial met with such immediate and universal rejection. Everyone, from the hitherto silent Populaire, organ of the French Socialist Party, to the New York Times, from Hearst to the Oswald Garrison Villard group of liberals, to Jack Altman and Jay Lovestone, is compelled to say that the charges in this trial are plainly and flatly false.
 
Even the Stalinists
The last week has shown that this recognition of the falsity of the trial of the 21 extends even further, goes right down into the ranks of the Stalinists themselves, in particular to the proletarian strata of the party.
Why is it that disbelief in the latest trial has been so much more widespread than in the case of the former two?
First, there is the character of the charges. Fantastic as were the charges in the earlier trials the last went far beyond them, into the realms of the madhouse. This is perhaps most obviously the case with “little” points which the trial featured: Trotsky’s million dollars; Rakovsky’s espionage negotiations with Lady Paget; Max Eastman as liaison officer with the British Intelligence Service ...
 
Makes Revolution Absurd
Second, tracing the “crimes” back to 1918 is not merely a shameless libel on the Revolution (a point naturally of no concern to the Times or Altman or Villard) but it makes the course of the Revolution simply absurd. If only two of the leaders of the Revolution were reliable and the remainder all fascist traitors from the beginning, then the Revolution was a miracle that makes the Bible seem like a report of scientific experiments.
Third, the appearance of Yagoda among the defendants has a special importance. Everyone knows that Yagoda was the stage manager of the early trials, including the trial of Zinoviev-Kamenev. By the indictment of Yagoda, the whole system of trials stands self-indicted.
Fourth, in this trial even more than in the others, there is absolutely no psychological basis for ascribing any motivation for the purported acts of the defendants.
 
Confessions to Order
Fifth, in this trial the relevance of Stalin’s present political needs to the substance of the charges is too patent to be ignored. Great Britain and Poland suddenly appear among the “conspiring” nations. Every defendant “confesses” to just the difficulties in Soviet economy for which Stalin imperatively needs to find scapegoats.
In addition, the work of the International Commission of Inquiry, and the political analysis of the Fourth Internationalists, with reference to the first two trials, have consciously clarified ever wider circles of public opinion as to the real nature and meaning of the system of trials.
Lastly, it should be remarked that in many cases the changed attitude toward the new trial has nothing to do with the evidence, but comes rather from new doubts about the stability of the Stalin regime and the strength of Stalinism internationally. Many were willing to “go along with” the trials (though not really believing them) when they felt that Stalinism would last more or less forever. Now they begin to wonder whether the ship may not be sinking. And suddenly they become very concerned over the “truth” – which they themselves were often leaders in attempting to suppress.
 
Disbelief Not Enough
Merely not believing in the trials, is not the least identical with facing the full issue of the trials: and we have said from the beginning that no more crucial issue than that of the trials has ever faced mankind.
With the trials exposed before world public opinion, what is now being done by the newly-converted “friends of truth”? The past week or two are giving the answers.
As might be expected, the reformists, liberals, reactionaries, many of whom a year ago were busily making use of belief in the trials for their own purposes, re now trying to exploit disbelief for those same purposes – after all, truth for them has never been anything more than a word to agitate with.
 
They Come to Life
The Villard group of liberals – most of whom were so very conveniently silent during the past two years – suddenly jumps into print in an effort to take the “leadership” in the unmasking of the new trial. Jack Altman – who less than a year ago devoted all of his (vain) political efforts to smashing the American Committee for the Defense of Trotsky and the International Commission of Inquiry so that the truth could not be known – calls a special Socialist Party meeting to “expose” the trial of the 21. The Lovestoneites, who defended the Zinoviev-Kamenev trial publicly, become, though without a word of explanation for their past, the “experts’” on the trials. All these unprincipled weather-cocks want to jump on the band-wagon of changing mass opinion before it gets beyond their reach.
Two “reactions” among the new disbelievers may be traced to sources among the Stalinists themselves. So shatteringly have the trials exploded in the face of the Stalinists that they must now provide “theories” which can keep in line even those who disbelieve the trials.
 
Smoke-Fire Theory
On the one hand, we are told that even though the trials are not true “as they stand,” nevertheless, “somebody is undoubtedly guilty of something,” on the theory that “where there is so much smoke there must be some fire.” Harold Denny, Times Moscow correspondent, the Nation and the New Republic belong to this school.
With reference to this point of view: (1) In any frame-up, many statements included are true. Only one fact – whether or not the specific defendant is guilty of the specific crime with which he is charged – is relevant. Everything else alleged may be true, but still the trial would be a frame-up! (2) However, with the exception of Yagoda, there is not the slightest evidence that any of the leading defendants in any of the trials is guilty of any of the acts with which they are charged – or of any other crime for that matter. Neither physics nor jurisprudence beats out the “where there is so much smoke there must be some fire” theory. The smoke of a thousand similar trials will do nothing to prove the guilt of any defendants – they would be proof only of Stalin’s needs and of the character of his regime. Even Yagoda, though guilty of plenty of crimes, was not guilty of some or even all of the specific crimes with which he was charged. Even Yagoda, the framer, was framed.
 
For Straying Faithful
On the other hand, we are asked to “submerge” the trial in “other more important issues” – Austria, Spain, the war; and to “forget about the trial.” The Stalinist machine adopts this attitude sub rosa as one way of pulling back the straying faithful who have seen through the trial.
But: (1) There is no more important issue. And: (2) The trials are not accidents. They are an integral part of Stalinism, as integral to Stalinism as war is to capitalism. Really facing the issue of the trials means facing the issue of Stalinism in its entirety, and all of its policies. Whoever fails to do this, thereby fails to face the issue of the trials themselves, in spite of any self-congratulating “enlightenment” with respect to them.
 
Socialism Attacked
But above all, the collapse of public belief is being used by the whole swarm of reactionaries, liberals and reformists as the basis for a vicious attack upon the ideal of socialism and the methods of revolutionary Marxism. These people, whose record on the trials itself is the clearest possible demonstration of their corrupt opportunism and the utter bankruptcy of their own ideologies and methods, try to swing the mass revolt against the trials into a line of attack on revolutionary socialism, whose record again on the trials, alone of all currents in the world, stands up throughout to any and every examination.
No! The exposure of the falsity of the trials does not finish “the issue of the trials.” The issue remains in all its burning actuality, and will remain to the very end. The working class will not grant certificates of political health to every charlatan merely because he now (after that half of the battle is nearly won in spite of him and his friends) finds it useful to “protest” and “expose” the trials.
 



To Have and Have Not
By Ernest Hemingway
262 pp. New York. Charles Scribner’s Sons. $2.50
No creative writer can be without ideals or values, and the critical commonplace which has called Hemingway’s work “purely negative” is thoroughly mistaken. All of Hemingway’s novels and stories seem to have asserted with unusual consistency two chief ideals: to fight, in strict accordance with the rules, alone; and to be able to take it. These are apparent in the very earliest of his short stories, summed up in the figure of the fisherman, who appears and reappears throughout his writing. The fisherman fights the trout alone, with the lightest possible rod and the lightest possible line (what heresy it would be to imagine a Hemingway fisherman using a heavy rod and a worm!); and he shows not the smallest trace of emotion at the heavy disappointments which come to all fishermen.
It sounds rather silly, particularly when the figure of the fisherman is lifted out of the admirable prose which describes the stream and the cast and the strike and the sunlight and shadows. But the fisherman is no accident. He undergoes constant metamorphosis. Here he is again as the bullfighter, alone with the bull, executing the delicate steps as prescribed by the immemorial rules, never giving way, allowing the horns just to brush across his belly. Or he searches for big game in Africa – and eternal woe to the Philistine who would shoot from the auto (even his wife, as in one story, will have to shoot him). Sometimes he simply gets beaten unconscious, or shot, or dies, without a murmur. Or he is in a hospital, in terrible and silent pain, recovering from an immeasurably cruel wound or operation. Or he is perhaps a gangster – a movie gangster, really, as the movies have bodied him forth. And like all fishermen, he talks little, and he often kills.
In themselves, these two ideals are not necessarily either despicable or absurd. To fight alone, and in strict accordance with the rules: this is not so distant from the conscious adherence to principle which is at the root of moral integrity. To be able to take it: this is at least the negative half of heroism. The trouble is that in Hemingway’s work these ideals have been divorced from an adequate context, from a completing set of values; and, by themselves, they stand stark and lame and often foolish. By themselves, they suggest praise for lack of intelligence, for inarticulateness, for insensitivity and brutality. And this is what we find in Hemingway’s novels and stories. Intelligence is hypocrisy or clap-trap; sensitivity or deep feeling is sentimentality. The “realism” turns into the cult of the sub-normal.
In To Have and Have Not these same two ideals continue, but they have begun a certain change. Harry Morgan, the protagonist is again the fisherman and the bullfighter; he fights alone, and he can take it, take more than perhaps anyone Hemingway ever before wrote about. But, though Harry fights, alone and according to the rules (his rules), part at least of his fight is – to make a living, for himself and his family. This is altogether unprecedented. The notion that people do things in order to make a living, and that authors write about such people, lands us in what is almost another universe. This, then, is the first change in To Have and Have Not. Along with it goes a greater impersonalization. Hemingway seems to be trying to create a character and a situation which are not reflections of his own moods and personal experiences, as the characters and situations of his earlier writings ordinarily are. He is, that is to say, trying to write a very different and more important kind of book than those he has written up to now.
Until To Have and Have Not, almost all that Hemingway wrote was about the aftermath of the last War. The War was his source and focus. What the War did to those who fought in it, and to their friends and mistresses; how it exploded their moral universe; how they have ever since been plunging around, trying to discover some new pole of integration; – this is what Hemingway has been writing of for nearly twenty years. Now, in To Have and Have Not, the focus at last shifts. The War is still there (obviously enough in the American Legionnaires), but it is only a background remnant. Hemingway has finished fighting the War of 1914–1918. In part, perhaps, he seems to be realizing that the War was not in and by itself the dominating and controlling event, but rather takes its normal place in the pattern of our time.
The reviewers have been telling us that To Have and Have Not is Hemingway’s first “socially significant” writing, and have been allotting praise and blame on that basis. This is not, however, strictly the case. Many of his novels and stories have been of very considerable social significance. The Sun Also Rises, for example, is no doubt the most thorough expression of the mood of an important section of a whole generation. But there, of course, the “social interest” is entirely implicit. In the latter part of To Have and Have Not, “social interest” is dragged in by the hair, above all in the scenes describing life on the yachts as Harry is brought into the harbor, or in Harry’s dying words. These, far from marking any sort of advance, are as banal and unconvincing from the point of view of social criticism as they are disastrous to the structure of the novel. Fresh social interests, if properly and successfully integrated, can add to Hemingway’s writing a new and absorbing dimension. Since he has already proved himself, in many technical respects, as able as any contemporary American writer, this is a result very much to be hoped for. But it will not be achieved by transplanting lessons from New Masses, which is what the yacht scenes read like. “Social significance” is not a decoration to be purchased from a political warehouse and tacked on to a novel. It must – as Alan’s Fate or When the Looms Are Silent or Fontamara teach (or, for that matter, all great novels) – be simply the organic relevance of the novel both internally and to its own time.
To Have and Have Not is thus in many key respects a transitional book. Whether Hemingway can complete the transition which this novel confusedly aims toward, the next few years will doubtless show. If he does not, he will either slip back into a rewarmed version of his past, which can be now nothing but stale and vapid; or he will – it is not excluded – turn into a superior People’s Front hack. If he does, his chief work is still ahead of him.
James BURNHAM
 



THE PRESENT POLITICAL developments in this country which are vaguely and somewhat inaccurately referred to as the “labor party movement” are by no means uniform in character. The existing forms include: the Farmer-Labor Party of Minnesota; the Farmer-Labor Progressive Federation of Wisconsin; the American Labor Party of New York; Labors’ Non-Partisan League, in some localities still remaining as an informal committee carried over from the 1936 campaign, in others more elaborately and solidly organized, with local clubs and dues-paying members; and a few local attempts to run candidates on a “trade union ticket”.
These existing forms differ among themselves. The Farmer-Labor Progressive Federation is a loose coalition tagging along after the liberal, purely bourgeois third party of the LaFollettes, which itself dates back to 1924. The Minnesota party goes back formally to 1918, and even before that to its roots in Arthur C. Townley’s Non-Partisan League. The only independent party organization of this new period is the American Labor Party, though it is interesting to notice that the Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party has been undergoing an evolution bringing it closer in political content and social composition to the American Labor Party. All of the various forms are, of course, in rapid transition.
We sometimes forget that Labor, Farmer-Labor, and third parties have a long history in the United States. The first labor party was briefly established more than a century ago, in Philadelphia in 1828 – not merely before Marxism came to the United States but before it came to Marx. Every decade since then has seen some sort of attempt to initiate one or another kind of “progressive” party, sometimes a party professedly of labor, more often of workers and farmers, always a party aiming to get the votes of workers and farmers even when it made few pretenses about its class character.
The present movement, however, differs in decisive respects from all of the earlier movements:
In the first place, the present movement takes place against the background of a far more mature capitalism; indeed, a capitalism which has entered its stage of decay. The earlier movements had no deep social roots. The possibilities for capitalist advance and the comparative fluidity of class relationships were a firm foundation only for the traditional capitalist politics; or, at an earlier time, the capitalist-slaveholder politics. The earlier movements flickered briefly, and went out. Now, however, the two-party system is palpably outworn, a fact recognized by every commentator of every camp, and attested daily by political events. It is outworn both from the point of view of the workers, who are beginning to see through it, and also from the point of view of the bourgeoisie who can no longer utilize it to solve efficiently either their general class problems or their internecine conflicts.
Second, it is observable that in this new movement the influence of the farmers is far less than in any of the previous movements.
The farmers often, indeed usually, dominated the earlier movements, in terms both of organisational control and of program. Platforms always featured farmers’ planks: cheap money, debt relief, free coinage, lower transportation rates, lower tariffs on manufactured goods, etc. Today this is no longer the case. Even in, for example, the Farmer-Labor Party of Minnesota, which at its start was dominated both in composition and program by the farmers, the influence of the farmers in recent years has continuously lessened. The change in the relative position of the farmers reflects, of course, the general shift which has reduced the importance of the farmers in the United States, in terms both of relative number and more especially of weight in the national economy.
Third, and of crucial significance, the present movement is taking shape in a United States where the workers are to an unprecedented extent beginning to consolidate as a class. It must always be remembered that though Marxism defines a class economically through the relations of groups of men to the instruments of production, a class does not assume a specific functional role politically until its members reach at least some degree of class consciousness. It is only in recent years in the United States, with the ever decreasing social fluidity, the spread of mass production technique, the heavy impact of the 1929 crisis, and the drawing of the mass production workers into the organized trade union movement, that the extension and deepening of class consciousness has been making gigantic headway. The really enormous importance of this factor cannot be too much underlined; it marks a change in the whole character of American society. It is amusingly and strikingly revealed in, for example, changes in the verbal habits of those sensitive weather-cocks, the journalists and intellectuals. Ten or even five years ago, many “radical” intellectuals used to say that Marxism would never take in the United States because American workers refused to think of themselves as “workers”. They were “as good as the next man”, and all potential executives or at least chief clerks – in their own minds. “Worker” was a word seldom found in the news columns, and “proletarian” never; a more polite substitute, such as “employee”, was almost always used. Today the argument and the practise have changed. The workers know that they are workers, and most of them know that they are always going to remain workers; and more and more they know that they have certain common problems and interests as workers, as a class. This class consciousness is as yet primitive, it is true. It extends much further under its economic than under its political aspect. Politically most workers still feel that they are free citizens in a democracy, and therefore the equal of anyone else, even while they understand that economically there is an absolute gulf between them and the bosses.
These differences I have mentioned between the movement now as compared with previous movements are not episodic. History will not unreel; the differences will increase and will deepen. What they indicate is that the present movement is far more serious, goes much further down, than any of its predecessors. Nevertheless, it would be an error to conclude that there stretches before the United States a long period of social-reformism and the perspective of a slowly, “normally” evolving American version of the British Labour Party as its chief carrier. The paradox is that the American labor movement is first seriously entering its reformist stage at the same time that reformism is losing its basis for existence in the general decline and crisis of international capitalism; and this is a derivative of the further paradox of the emergence of the United States into maturity and dominance among the capitalist nations at the same time that capitalism internationally is in permanent crisis and decline. In the older nations the reformist labor parties took the field against the traditional bourgeois parties. In this country the reformist labor political movement will in a very short time find that its chief rivals are not the old bourgeois parties in their old form, but on the one side the fascist, on the other the revolutionary, movements.
 
2.
What does this vague, amorphous, developing “labor party movement” represent? Let us answer this question from three diverse points of view:
(1) From the point of view of the workers themselves, this movement must be understood as a groping but nonetheless genuine advance toward fuller class consciousness. With a far greater economic class consciousness than ever before in its history, the American working class is herein taking steps toward political class consciousness. Having felt something of the power and the limitations of its chances on the economic field, it reaches out to test ways and means for discovering what it can do on the political field. The political consciousness is as yet elementary, embryonic even. It is threaded with an infinite multitude of illusions. There is scarcely any awareness of the actual meaning of independent class political action. But in spite of the primitiveness and the illusions, the movement from this point of view, from the point of view of the mass of the workers, is unequivocally progressive.
(2) From the point of view of the labor bureaucrats – that is, of the agents of the bourgeoisie within the organized working class – this movement is both a threat and a promise. The labor bureaucrats are whole-heartedly devoted to capitalism; their position and leadership depends upon the maintenance of democratic capitalism, which in turn depends upon the dominance of a policy of class collaboration over the minds of the workers; and therefore any movement which contains the potentialities of independent class activity – no matter how undeveloped these potentialities may be – is an ominous threat to the bureaucrats. But this movement is also a promise to the bureaucrats: for, they believe, if they can hold its leadership, sweep it in every respect behind them, and confine it to a safe reformist course within the framework of capitalism, they will be able to use it as a bargaining instrument to increase their own share of the available plums of power and privilege.
The role, aims, and interests of the bureaucrats in this movement are, therefore, reactionary.
After a brief test period during the past two years, the tentative plans of the bureaucrats are becoming clearer. In general, they aim to catch up the movements within the boundaries of Labors’ Non-Partisan League. Labors’ Non-Partisan League will function as an independent organization, with members, clubs, dues, constitution, but not as an independent party. It will, as a rule, try to act as a balance of power between the two old parties, getting as much as it can in the way of naming candidates (to run on old party tickets) and influencing policy. Superficial observers say that this is merely the old Gompers neutrality policy, dressed up. This view is entirely wrong. A radical departure from the neutrality policy, it is one form of organized labor political action, intermediate between the neutrality policy and a clear-cut reformist labor party.
The plans of the bureaucrats do not exclude independent parties – as distinguished from LN-PL – on a local or State scale, where these are retired to solve some special problem. In New York there is already the American Labor Party, an independent party though as yet running only a few candidates entirely of its own. This step was needed partly because of the large number of politically advanced workers in New York, partly because the workers accustomed to vote communist or socialist would not have been satisfied with LN-PL and partly perhaps as an experiment.
Many experiences of the past few months (New Jersey is an outstanding instance) show that the workers really want an independent (reformist) labor party, and that the plan of the bureaucrats to herd them into LN-PL is a definite setback to their actual sentiments. They have as yet, however, too much confidence in the bureaucrats and too little skill in fighting them to be able so far to resist effectively.
(3) From the point of view of the bourgeoisie, in particular of the liberal bourgeoisie, this movement is also a threat and a promise: a threat for much the same reason that it is a threat to the bureaucrats; and a promise provided that the liberals hop aboard at the right time for exploiting it to their own ends. The aims, interests, and role of the liberals within this movement, are also, it goes without saying, reactionary.
It should be remarked that though the bureaucrats and the liberals have very much the same political programs and the same devotion to capitalism, their roles in this movement are not wholly identical. This follows because of the difference in their social base. Conflicts and struggles between the bureaucrats and liberals are not, consequently, excluded; and have already appeared where, as in Minnesota and New York, the movement is organized and active. For example, the bureaucrats, in order to preserve their own positions, need to keep the trade unions organizationally ascendant, whereas the liberals wish to subordinate the unions. It may be remarked that in such conflicts nowadays the Stalinists are ordinarily found with the liberals.
However, the similarity in the fundamental policies of the liberals and bureaucrats tends to drive them together. Thus, the dominance in the movement of the bureaucrats and liberals as against the workers tends in the direction of People’s Frontism rather than in that of a more orthodox labor party.
 
3.
I do not propose herein to deal with the probable outcome of this present “labor party movement”. I have discussed it briefly elsewhere, and shall find occasion to do so more at length. A plausible view is given by Arne Swabeck in this issue of The New International. There is a danger in attaching too much importance to the precise form that developments may take. There is no type of Labor party or People’s Front which Marxists regard as capable of solving the problems of the workers. The attitude of revolutionary socialists toward the movement is determined by the real social forces actually functioning in it, and not by the particular variety of reformism in which it eventuates. Moreover, the outbreak of the war would overturn all speculation.
In general, the task of revolutionary socialists with respect to this movement is to strengthen and extend its progressive component, and to fight against its reactionary components. This means, in other words, to act alongside the workers in such a way as to develop and advance their political consciousness through meeting the genuine concrete problems and issues which arise; and to fight against the bureaucrats and liberals, not merely in general, but in particular to block their concrete reactionary moves.
The liquidation of the revolutionary organization into this reformist movement is clearly excluded. The revolutionists are not the originators or initiators of any labor or any other kind of reformist party; they not merely give no guarantees or false hopes for such a party but, on the contrary, warn against the illusion that such a party can solve any major problem of the working class. The central task in the period ahead remains the building of the revolutionary party itself; it must at all times put forward its full program and concentrate on recruiting directly into its own ranks.
However, the reformist movement exists, is growing, and is drawing toward it wider sections of the workers. It cannot be ignored; and, through the trade unions and in part through the local clubs, the revolutionists must sympathetically and critically go through this experience with the workers in order to realize to the maximum its progressive potentialities and minimize so far as possible those that are reactionary.
From this it follows, for example, that where the Labor party already exists (as in Minnesota or New York), the revolutionists will demand independent candidates and no endorsement of old party candidates. The revolutionary party as such can legitimately give critical support to independent candidates, but not to candidates also on old party tickets. In the latter case, where possible, the revolutionary party can run candidates of its own against the coalition candidates, as is being done by the Socialist Workers Party in the coming St Paul mayoralty campaign (whereas the party is giving critical support to the independent Farmer-Labor candidates in the same election).
Where the labor party or Labors’ Non-Partisan League is up for consideration in the trade unions, the job of the revolutionists will be to press for a provision against all support of old party candidates as a condition for adherence, and to continue such pressure if the union joins without such a condition. Similarly, it is most important to demand a broad democratic organizational setup and to fight against the purely bureaucratic type of organization desired by the union officials and the liberals.
Under some circumstances, such as for instance occurred recently in California, it would be correct to support sentiment for a “trade union candidate” in a local election as against union support for an old party candidate or LN-PL endorsement of an old party candidate. Whatever form the labor party developments take in given localities, revolutionists and militants generally will find it necessary to fight against reactionary planks in the election platform; and, though it would be incorrect for revolutionists to interest themselves in the “general program” of a reformist party, they can well push for specific progressive planks on such questions as war, labor legislation and other social measures. Similarly, militants should preserve the right within the given labor party setup for criticism of the acts of elected candidates, and should demand repudiation by the labor party or the LN-PL of anti-labor acts of its own candidates, or candidates endorsed by it. Again, it is necessary to press within the labor party movement for the extension of activities to the non-parliamentary field: demonstrations, boycotts, support of strikes, and the like. This will further a better understanding of the real meaning of independent working class activity; and at the same time will act as a severe critique of the bureaucrats who wish to confine the movement to deals and jockeying on the parliamentary front. Finally, however small the chance of success in this, the militants must try to maintain the ascendancy of the trade unions within the movement and resist each step to turn it over to the liberals and a full-blown People’s Front.
James BURNHAM
 



Recent developments in the New York state primary campaign are serving to bring out the futility of the coalition policy adopted by the leadership of the American Labor Party. The result of the coalition policy, originally argued for as giving the A.L.P, the key position in New York politics, has been to send the A.L.P. further and further into the background, and to leave the field of the current elections under the clear domination of the two bourgeois parties.
The outstanding contest for those nominations to be decided in the direct primary, September 20, is occurring in the Democratic struggle in the Sixteenth Congressional District between Representative O’Connor, incumbent chairman of the House Rules Committee, and the Administration-backed James H. Fay. In this fight the A.L.P. acts only as an obedient ward heeler for Farley. The A.L.P. meekly forbore putting up an independent candidate of its own, and is running Fay, unopposed, on its ticket.
 
Fay Machine Politician
Farley, as is to be expected, gave the A.L.P. absolutely nothing in return for this capitulation. The A.L.P. had not the slightest voice in naming Fay. Fay himself is an old-time machine politician, a Tammany stalwart, and one of the chief links between Tammany and the national Administration. From the point of view of the workers, there is not two cents’ worth of difference between O’Connor and Fay.
The humiliating consequences of the coalition policy, of the failure to launch resolutely into one hundred per cent independent working-class politics, are, however, to be seen even more strikingly in the case of the state-wide offices (governor, short-term and long-term Senators), nominations for which are to be decided at the party conventions following the primaries.
In the case of these offices, the A.L.P. leaders have made not one single move toward the naming of independent candidates, and the organization of a genuine independent campaign. From the beginning, they have let it be known that they will make a deal with one or the other of the old parties.
 
A.L.P. Trails Along
The illusion was spread that in this way the A.L.P. would have the deciding voice in picking the nominees of at least one of the old parties. Naturally, nothing of the sort is happening.
When the old party bosses saw the tactic of the A.L.P., saw that the A.L.P. was subordinating itself wholly in these instances to capitalist politics, they realized that they no longer had to take the A.L.P. into account. They are simply going ahead to straighten out their own internal difficulties, knowing that when they have finished, the A.L.P. will have to trail along whatever has been the outcome.
Their difficulties are, it is true, embarrassing. The Republicans now plan to nominate Tom Dewey, riding high on the crest of his racket-busting wave, for the governorship. With Lehman already declared for the two remaining years of Copeland’s unexpired term, and Senator Wagner a candidate to succeed himself for the six-year term, the Democrats feel they have no candidate for the governorship strong enough to put against Dewey. Strenuous efforts are being made to get Lehman to reconsider, and to run again for the governorship; but if these fail, they will doubtless have to fall back on Representative Mead of Buffalo.
 
Face Predicament
If, however, Lehman runs against Dewey, the A.L.P. will be placed in an absurd predicament. Dewey was supported with great fanfare by the A.L.P. when he ran for the office of District Attorney. Lehman, during the last two years, has publicly fought the New Deal bills such as the Executive Reorganization Plan and the Supreme Court revision – upon which the A.L.P. leaders have claimed the progress of the country depended. Nevertheless, the tie-up of the A.L.P. leadership with Roosevelt would in virtual certainty compel it to support Lehman.
The result of such backings and fillings can only be to disillusion workers about the whole conception of working-class politics. They see the party which they are trying to build as the expression of their own political interests being batted back and forth like a shuttlecock between the two old capitalist parties.
 
Bosses Pick Candidate
No trade unionist would ever stand for a situation in which, when choosing a business agent for his union, he was told to endorse one or another of two candidates named by committees of the bosses. This, however, is exactly comparable to what the A.L.P. leadership is proposing with respect to the state-wide offices. The Republicans and Democrats will name their candidates during the week following the primaries. The A.L.P. State Committee will then meet, and, according to present plans, will argue merely as to which of these sets shall be put on the A.L.P. ticket.
This outcome would not occur so placidly and automatically if, between now and that time the voice of the actual members of the A.L.P. and of the unions which adhere to it were heard to the effect that workers have as little use for company-unionism in political as in economic affairs. The time has come for New York workers to remind Alex Rose that the American Labor Party is their property, not a blank check issued in his name. If the reminder is too long delayed, there will be nothing but a deficit left in the bank.
 



The Presidential Purge, on the surface at any rate, has taken he worst beating of any Rooseveltian enterprise of the past decade. For the first time in these Six Lean Years, there is rejoicing in the camp of the Republican National Committee.
There is no doubt, moreover, that Roosevelt’s prestige has genuinely suffered by the severity of the defeats of his candidates in the primaries. Like all demagogues, he thrives on victory, and shrinks rapidly when he loses. He relies on the all-powerful magic of his name; but in this instance the spell of his magic proved ineffectual.
Nevertheless, surface appearances are, as so often, at least partly deceiving.
 
Defeats Expected
In the first place, it should be noted that Roosevelt, in most of the primaries where he intervened, expected his favored candidate to be defeated. This is established by fully authentic reports.
Secondly, a sharp distinction was made by many voters between their feeling for Roosevelt himself and their action on the local candidate for whom he had declared. This was strikingly shown in, for example, Maryland On the eve of the election, the Gallup survey – which has been functioning with great accuracy during the past year – made an estimate. Their returns showed Tydings with 60 per cent of the vote, which was exactly what he got.
But at the same time they tested Roosevelt’s personal popularity, and found him with a clear 55 per cent support. Though this percentage is lower than that in the 1936 election, it had not dropped as a result of his intervention in the Maryland primary There is every reason to believe that this paradox is typical of the other States involved in the purge.
 
Personal Prestige High
The recently conducted Fortune poll indicated a somewhat similar phenomenon: it showed a decisive continuing majority in popular support for Roosevelt personally, but much lower support of, or even opposition to, a number of specific plans and policies.
These facts serve to indicate th e underlying meaning of the purge. Its chief purpose was not to win the nomination of the given candidates in question – though that would also, no doubt, have been a pleasing outcome. First and foremost, it was a gesture to bolster up Roosevelt’s mass standing in the country as a whole, especially in the heavily populated northern States.
It is Roosevelt’s “left face” that keeps for him the support of the workers and the unemployed and the masses generally. In the purge he put this face forward. His mouthpieces in the labor movements of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois, etc., could thus point proudly to him as still the great champion of the masses against the Tories.
 
Farm-Labor Union
Roosevelt’s speech at Denton Maryland, where he called for a union of farm and labor behind the ostensible aims of the New Deal, fitted in perfectly. He was obviously talking not to the small and unimportant State where the speech was delivered but to the broader reaches of the towns and plains of North and West.
But in spite of these compensating considerations, the extent of the failure of the purge remains a sign of a certain weakening of Roosevelt’s position. The abysmal collapse of the New Deal, the blows of the renewed economic slump, are beginning to stir the consciousness of the masses, to puncture the myth of Roosevelt, the Savior.
Under present conditions, the normal movement for such a process, on the part of the workers and unemployed and poor farmers, would be to the left. But, tragically, the policy of the Lewises and Greens and reformists and Stalinists provides no organized outlet to such a movement to the left. Through Labor Non-Partisan League they try to whip the gradually rising discontent back into the line for New Deal class collaborationism.
 
Discontent Flares
The discontent and disillusion are thus in part vainly dissipated. Some is finding its way, incredible as it might seem, temporarily back toward the Republican Party. Another part flares up in the pension movement of the Far West. Still another section listens more eagerly than would have been the case five years ago to the ravings of Senators Smith and George, whose campaigns boiled down to “white supremacy.”
The danger is thus clearly pointed: as the break with Roosevelt begins, unless the vacuum to the left is filled, unless a new political instrument is forged whereby the independent class strength of the workers can be mobilized for advance, then the break will lead either to dissipation and disorientation, or toward reaction.
 



The tremendous popular support of Franklin Roosevelt has been, and is, based upon the feeling that he is the Great Liberal, the champion of the masses and their needs and hopes against the machinations of the Tories.
From the 1932 election campaign onward, therefore, Roosevelt has been compelled to nourish this feeling, to find suitable gestures in order to keep it alive and breathing. To accomplish this task while at the same time carrying out firmly his fundamental job of preserving U.S. capitalism against the blows of the crisis: this is the heart of the remarkable, and up to now successful, Roosevelt demagogy, the key to the unique value of his services to the bourgeoisie.
 
Purpose of “Purge”
The chief purpose of Roosevelt’s current “purge” is to bolster up his standing as a Great Liberal and champion of the masses. The mechanism of the purge shows that this purpose is paramount over the secondary object of strengthening the hold of the Roosevelt faction on the Democratic Party machinery.
Against the advice of the leading machine politicians, Roosevelt was compelled to undertake the purge: compelled not by the desire for “unlimited personal power” – the stock public explanation of his bourgeois opponents, nor by lofty adherence to abstract principles – the explanation which he and his sycophants would like to have believed, but because only such a gesture as the purge could re-consolidate the popular faith in New Dealism, shaken by the depression of the past year.
This is why it is not at all necessary for Roosevelt to win out in most of his purge attempts. He knew that Smith would win the nomination in South Carolina: he had himself predicted so. But the glamorous popular effect of his opposition to Smith was as great, perhaps even greater, in spite of Smith’s victory. So also in the cases of George, Tydings and O’Connor – though, it is true, he has more at stake in actually defeating the latter two.
The real nature of the purge comes out most sharply in what it omits – Hague, for example, is not touched by It – and in the California contest.
 
Left Defeats F.D.R.
The California Primary campaign was entirely different from all others. There Roosevelt supported the conservative and doddering old William McAdoo; and the opponent was not in the least a “disguised Republican” or a Tory, but the “radical” Sheridan Downey, champion of the California Pension Plan. And on the issue of the Pension Plan, Roosevelt was for the first time defeated from the left: Downey carried the Senatorial nomination by more than 100,000 votes.
The California Pension Plan, whatever its utopianism and unworkable as it unquestionably would be in practice, represents in its aims legitimate aspirations of the people, in particular of the middle classes. It is analogous in many respects to the Ludlow Amendment, which expressed the hope and need of the people for peace.
 
Cracks Down on Masses
In one case as in the other, when confronted with concrete demands, for peace or for decent pensions, the Great Liberal cracked down with the full force of his machine. In spite of overwhelming majority support for the Ludlow Amendment, revealed in accurate unofficial polls, Roosevelt was able to smash it in Congress. The California Primaries, however, permitted popular support for the Pension Plan to came into the open at this stage, and to nominate Downey.
Roosevelt’s manner of intervening in California exposes the demagogy of his purge in the mine way that his intervention against the Ludlow Amendment exposed the demagogy of his “anti-war” declarations. In both instances, New Dealism is shown to be a means not of fulfilling the needs and desires of the masses, but of leashing the masses to the interests of capitalism.
It is true that the California Plan cannot work, that it would either have no discernible effect (through refusal to accept the script for goods) or result in unbridled inflation.
But the answer to this must not be the condemnation, and rejection of its aims, and what these express on the part of the masses. On the contrary, we must affirm the legitimacy of these aims, call for their extension, and show how they may be implemented.
 
A Thirty Dollar Minimum
We must demand $30.00 weekly as a minimum income not merely for the aged, but for every worker and farmer, employed, unemployed or part-time unemployed, in the country. This is a paltry enough claim in a country of literally unlimited resources, in a country where Sixty Families own and control for their own private delights untold billions of dollars.
Is such a demand “utopian”? It is utopian only so long as we grant the right of capitalists to shut down and sabotage industry, to confiscate for themselves billions of dollars, millions of annual income. It is paltry, over-modest even, if we look at what the factories are able to turn out, the land to produce.
It is utopian if we put our faith in the smiles and demagogy of New Dealism. But it lies only a short way ahead if the masses cast from their backs their worst enemy – their illusions, and take control of their own destiny.
The sweep of the California Plan shows once more, in its own destiny.
The sweep of the California Plan shows once more, in its own way, that the masses are ready to respond to bold and far-reaching perspectives. Let labor learn that lesson: for if labor does not give such a perspective, it will be supplied in good time by labor’s grave-digger.
 



During the past month, the long sniping from many quarters at the Wagner Act and its creation, the National Labor Relations Board, has broken out into a sustained and rounded attack. As in the past, we discover in the vanguard spokesmen for the Republican Party and for the National Association of Manufacturers.
On this occasion, however, the American Federation of Labor is taking more conspicuous part, and indeed is currently the chief public critic. Hardly a day goes by without a new denunciation from Bill Green.
For the first time, moreover, President Roosevelt has entered the controversy. Green last week held a long conference with the President. Following it, Green told the press that they had discussed possible amendments to the Wagner Act, and that Roosevelt was in favor of (unspecified) changes in order to clear up certain “ambiguities.” By failing to issue a denial, Roosevelt has tacitly admitted the correctness of Green’s report.
 
Want Courts Supreme
The bosses have long since made blear the nature of their attack, and the amendments which they demand. They wish to give employers the right to petition the N.L.R.B. directly, at present excluded by the wording of the law. They wish to subordinate more completely the actions of the Board to the regular Courts, in which they have full confidence. And they wish especially to write into the law certain requirements of union “responsibility” which would enable them to utilize faked-up or even genuine contracts as a means of smashing militant union activities.
The A.F. of L. charges that through its power to designate the bargaining unit, the N.L.R.B. has favored industrial unionism and the C.I.O., and that the law should be amended so as to “protect” the right of employees to bargain in craft unions. Green objects also to the personnel of the N.L.R.B. and tried unsuccessfully to block the re-appointment of Board member Smith. Green joins hands with the bosses in wanting the Board to be compelled to give increased recognition to contracts: that is, Green wants to be able to negotiate, over the heads of the workers, a contract which the Board cannot upset|
It would be a delusion to imagine that the present attack is a merely legalistic one. Like the passing of the Wagner Act, the present attack must be understood in terms of the actual relationship of the social forces involved.
 
Aims of Wagner Act
The Wagner Act, sequel to Section 7A of the N.R.A., came into being as a class collaborationist device designed: (1) to swing the workers behind the New Deal’s method of salvaging U.S. capitalism; and (2) to keep the growing mass movement of the workers from getting out of capitalist bounds, to restrain it firmly within the frame-work of the bourgeois state.
The Act was thus in one sense a concession to the workers, a concession for the sake of the more general aim of preserving capitalism and renewing profits. At its inception it was opposed by many (though by no means all) employers, who were short-sightedly against making such concessions. Interestingly enough, there is no longer any explicit employer objection to the Act as a whole; the demand now is only for “amendments” or “modifications.”
 
Act Is “Ambiguous”
The Act, called into being by the incipient movement of the workers, became itself a factor stimulating union organization. The “ambiguity” mentioned by Roosevelt is a fact, and no accident. The Act is sufficiently flexible to be utilized on one occasion as a factor in the growth and strengthening of workers’ organization; on another – as it has several times already been – as a factor weakening the workers and their unions.
There is no doubt that the N.L.R.B. has made many decisions in general favorable to the unions, and specifically favorable to the C.I.O.
This is not, however, a tribute to the beneficence of the Wagner Act and the N.L.R.B. In reality, it is a reflection in the juridical sphere of the strength, during the period recently ended, of the upsurge of the labor movement in general and of the C.I.O. in particular. The problem of the N.L.R.B. was to adjust class conflicts; and this meant above all to meet the challenge of the C.I.O. Strength Shifts to A.F. of L.
Today’s drive to amend the Wagner Act in a reactionary direction, and the prominence of the A.F. of L. in this drive, similarly reflects the weakening of the organized labor movement before the new slump and more specifically the terrific set-backs which the C.I.O. has received during the past year. These setbacks are altering sharply the relative positions of C.I.O. and A.F. of L. A year and a half ago no one would have dreamed of disputing the dominance of the C.I.O. in the American labor movement. Today the A.F. of L. is shifting again toward the ascendant.
As in all important cases, the parliamentary questions, though having a secondary relative autonomy, are in the last analysis subordinated to the relationship of social forces. The fate of unionism in this country will be decided neither by preservation nor by amendment of the Wagner Act, but by the class strength and militancy of the workers themselves, outside of the courts and the halls of Congress.
This does not, of course, mean that workers should be indifferent to the fate of the Wagner Act. On the contrary, all proposed amendments designed to aid craft against industrial unionism, to bolster faked contracts, to lessen employer responsibility, or to limit and bind trade union activities should be vigorously resisted. But the best way of putting up this resistance also is not by parliamentary jockeying but by extending and deepening the mass organization of the workers and by combating militantly the direct offensive of the bosses on the economic front.
 



In the history of the politics of the labor movement, there have been few more shameful and shameless deals than the coalitions recently entered into in New York City by the American Labor Party. With the workers genuinely striving to create a party of their own, the bureaucrats running the A.L.P. have treated them like a flock of cattle, and have handed them over to one of the old parties in every district where they were able to strike up some kind of contemptible bargain with the old party bosses.
The incipient mass protest from the ranks has finally stimulated an official statement from Alex Rose, Secretary of the A.L.P., published in full in the New Leader. This lick-spittling apology comes close to a new low.
 
Three Main Points
The statement makes three main points. To begin with, Rose explains that “only a few” Republicans and Democrats have been endorsed – so why should everyone be so excited? In other words, there have been only about 25 or 30 sell-outs, which is not bad for an imperfect world. He argues like the father of the Indian princess who was only “a wee bit pregnant.”
Secondly, he claims that there is a chance – just a chance, mind you – that with the coalition policy the A.L.P. will hold the balance of power in the State Senate. Few points could be worth less. In the first place, he doesn’t even pretend that the A.L.P. could also possibly hold the balance in the State Assembly – and even if in general a position of holding the balance is worth anything, it obviously does not do the slightest good to hold it in one house and not in the other. But in the second place, even holding a balance of power in the Legislature as a whole, when that balance would be bought at such a price as the A.L.P. is now paying, would not be worth a tinker’s damn to the workers.
Rose himself really proves this in his third point, which is, surprisingly enough, that neither of the old parties is any good. “The A.L.P. rejects the illusion that either one of the major parties, as a political party, as against the other is more concerned with progressive legislation.”
 
Argument Worthless
How this argument is in favor of the deal made with the regular Republican Party organization of New York County is beyond the powers of ordinary mortals to discover.
The truth is that for labor to organize its own political strength on the basis of numbers of officials immediately elected is always wrong and self-defeating. This holds not merely for the long term, but for the short term as well. Clearly, the A.L.P. can bloc up with one or the other of the old parties at Albany only by accepting a policy acceptable to the given old party: that is, only by accepting a capitalist policy and by throwing over a working-class policy.
Far more substantial and concrete gains, even on the short term, are made by the display of independent working - class strength: it is this which forces concessions much more thoroughly than drawing the teeth of working-class strength through coalitions. An A.L.P. candidate running a solid second or even third in Manhattan, but doing so on a clear-cut working-class program with firm working-class support will get a lot more attention in Albany, and everywhere else, than an A.L.P. candidate running with the support of Kenneth Simpson’s Republican machine, and on a program acceptable to Kenneth Simpson.
 
Only G.O.P. Wins
But what caps the climax is that the Republicans have endorsed A.L.P. candidates only in districts which are virtually certain to go A.L.P. without outside help, or virtually certain to to lose even with it; whereas the A.L.P. endorsements to Republicans are in each case absolutely essential to give the Republican nominees a chance to win. The sell-out was paid for by a rubber check.
Naturally, Bro. Rose does not see fit to explain why the whole deal was carried through in the dead of the night, with the membership of the A.L.P. given not one single chance to make its voice heard. Rose and his friends all express their eagerness to defend democracy on the battlefields which Roosevelt is preparing for them. But they are terrified even at the thought of a little democracy intruding into “their” party.
 



In spite of all that has been said and written during the past few years, I do not think that we in this country yet comprehend the condition of the political refugees in Europe. There has been nothing comparable to it in the whole history of mankind.
A friend of mine, recently returned from two years in Switzerland, last week described to me what was happening in that country. Since the 16th Century, Switzerland has had the glory of offering hospitality and freedom to untold thousands of religious and political exiles from all nations. Today, under the pressure of fear of Hitler and of its own internal reaction, that hospitality is drying up, and the freedom has already disappeared.
In Switzerland, as every European country, every inhabitant is required to have dozens of “permits” – Federal, Cantonal, District, Municipal residence permits; corresponding “work permits,” professional permits, etc., all in addition to the usual passports. But the refugees are more and more being refused any and all of these permits.
Deprived of work permits, they are forbidden by law to undertake any kind of remunerative employment. Deprived of residence permits, they are permanently subject to arrest and imprisonment, for no cause whatsoever, at the whim of any authority.
Forbidden to take jobs, thousands of the refugees can only wander the streets, or huddle in the cellar of a decaying slum, slowly starving to death. Seeing not the slightest way out, hundreds are driven to insanity or suicide.
In addition, tens of thousands of the refugees are deprived of citizenship before expulsion. Naturally, none of the pious “democracies” grant new citizenship, except in a very few instances. “Men without countries,” these refugees are in the most terrible sense outcasts on the face of the earth.
Though many of the refugees are professionals or intellectuals, the fate of the worker-refugees, above all of those who have been active in working-class politics, is the most appalling of all. The professionals are more likely to have relatives or connections of some sort, or to have retained some small percentage of former property, so that they can get at least bread. The workers have nothing, and no chance of getting anything. The big bourgeois and liberal relief organizations are not interested in them. They can, some of them, take a few scraps from the Stalinist table: at the price, it goes without saying, of one hundred percent allegiance to Stalinism, not seldom as unofficial agents for the G.P.U. For the non-Stalinists, that door is likewise shut.
These refugees include genuine heroes in the fight for socialism, authentic martyrs in the anti-fascist struggle. Their defense and aid is not at all a mere act of charity. It is part and parcel of the world-wide battle for freedom.
The work of the American Fund for Political Prisoners and Refugees, though modest in its beginnings, is a crucial sector of this battle. The American Fund duplicates none of the existing agencies. Every dollar given to it yields concrete results in the lives of the most desperately situated of the refugees. It deserves the support of every serious antifascist.
(EDITOR’S NOTE: Contributions and statements of support should be sent to the American Fund for Political Prisoners and Refugees, Room 1609, 100 Fifth Ave., New York, N.Y.)
 



FOR A MAN SO BORED with my article that he says so twice over, Max Eastman displays an unconscionable degree of heat in replying to it.
And for one who has had so much to say about the viciousness of amalgams, he does some pretty fancy amalgam-making out of Hitler, Mussolini, Stalin, myself – and George Soule. I am rather accustomed to the Hitler-Mussolini amalgam, since the era of the Trials began; the inclusion of Stalin is no surprise, what with the Nation, the New Republic, and the Evening Post; but I’ll admit that George Soule brings in a new angle.
And for so constant a critic of the shocking tone of Trotskyists, the repetitions of “ashamed”, “disgraceful”, “afraid”, “does not dare”, ring with a peculiarly lurid note.
And for an opponent whose main thesis it is that I have “dodged his views”, it is unexpected to discover that the main portion of his rebuttal is occupied with personal apologetics and analysis of my character and motives.
The personal apologetics deserve an additional few sentences. I did not suggest that Eastman’s article might be mere eyewash and pot-boiler. I mentioned this assumption to reject it, and to make clear that I was taking his article seriously, as a responsible statement of his views. But even if I had made this suggestion, I would obviously have meant the term “pot-boiler” to refer to an ideological not to an economic pot-boiler; just as Trotsky obviously meant ideological not economic profession when he spoke of Eastman fashioning a profession for himself out of the struggle against dialectics. When we say that Lovestone has made a profession out of Trotsky-baiting, nobody understands this to mean making it a financial racket: everyone grants that Lovestone could do much better for his financial self in other and quite different fields. Since all this is quite usual and obvious, Eastman’s comments on the subject, whatever his intention, perform the function of vulgar demagogy, a form of the “Look-at-my-wounds;-and-vote-for-me” argument which was traditional with candidates for the Roman consulship. In Coriolanus’ bittery irony:



Your voices: for your voices I have fought;
Watch’d for your voices; for your voices bear
Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six
I have seen and heard of; for your voices have
Done many things, some less, some more; your voices:
Indeed, I would be consul.



I judge a man’s views by the weight of the argument and evidence; and these are not altered by the financial arrangements. Eastman says that I am guilty of “disingenuous pretense” when I wrote that he reached conclusions “so vague and general as to be hardly arguable”. Consider a couple of the ostensible conclusions, to which I was referring: “4. Those [components of the socialist ideal] obviously fantastic in the light of modern biological and psychological knowledge, to say nothing of modern common sense, should be thrown out. 5. None of those remaining should be conceived as absolute.” Can any man deny that these are “vague and general”? And who would be so foolish as to argue them, I cannot imagine.
What then is the argument about?
It is not, of course, about dialectical materialism. This is merely Eastman’s own brand of herring. It is true that I do not believe in orthodox dialectical materialism. This should certainly be no surprise to Eastman: he will find in his files of The New International, for example, a critique by me of one of the key doctrines of dialectical materialism (“the inevitability of socialism”) to which no reply has yet been made and which I have found no reason to alter. On other occasions where it seems relevant and called for I have made and will make my criticisms of dialectical materialism.
But I was precise in defining the incidence of the article, Max Eastman as Scientist. His Harper’s article, I pointed out, was a new departure. Along with “his perennial attack upon the ‘philosophy’ and ‘religion’ which he attributes to Marx”, along with the “vague and general conclusions”, “Eastman takes up arms against the socialist ideal”. Eastman, in his Harper’s essay, attacked the socialist ideal and revolutionary politics as a method for achieving that ideal. He based his attack, so he said, on scientific method, the conclusions of modern science, and the experiences of the Russian Revolution.
Does he deny that this was done in his essay? Have I misrepresented him? Then why doesn’t he say so, explicitly and directly? Or does he find it more expedient to list eight points in “our revision of the socialist ideal” and in the next breath speak of “we socialists”; to write for a “practical socialist hypothesis” with one hand, and a “scientific compromise between anarchism and socialism” with the other? And then to pass the whole attack off as an exposure of the “theology of dialectical materialism”.
I was then concerned to defend the legitimacy of the socialist ideal and of revolutionary politics as the method for realizing it from his attack by proving on the basis of his article that: Eastman does not understand scientific method; he has failed to prove any incompatibility between the conclusions of science and the socialist ideal or revolutionary politics; he has failed abysmally in his pretended explanation for the degeneration of the Russian Revolution; his argument tends toward conclusions which are politically either meaningless or reactionary. “In general,” writes Eastman, “the pretense of my critics that I am posing as a ‘scientist’ makes me tired. I know what scientific method is, and so do they.” I am afraid I am not so generous. If Eastman is not posing as a “scientist”, with or without quotes, then what in the world is he posing as? And if he is not, what business does he have dealing with such subjects as he selects? But, with reference at least to the problems under question, my article sought to show, in detail, that Eastman does not “know what scientific method is”. The mere statement of claim is hardly proof to the contrary. And in general, with two exceptions to be noted in a moment, Eastman answers none of my specific argumentation.
Eastman finds me involved in the “disgraceful business of redefining a clear term”, an occupation which sends me well on the road toward liquidating the opposition. I do not quite comprehend, I confess, just why redefining a term, even a clear term, should be disgraceful. And if “freedom” is a clear term, a great many thousands of pages have been lamentably wasted in worrying over it. But let us consider what this clear term clearly means: “being in a position to do what comes into your own head, to act whether soon or late on your own impulses, to restrain those impulses when you restrain them because of your own judgment ...” If dialectical materialism is theological baloney, this is certainly cracker barrel soda-pop, the genuine country store article. What conceivable meaning, in terms of discernible empirical consequences and determinate procedures (as the scientist demands), could be given to this cluster of particles and abstractions?
But, trying in all charity to discover a meaning, the only possibility would call for the social system of Robinson Crusoe – though with Friday left out. If this is freedom, it is then not so much wrong as silly; it has neither relevance to nor importance for actual life. Freedom, like all other general ideals, takes on new meaning and content for every significant change in the conditions of life and society (which means, among other things, that it must constantly be “redefined”). And the kind of freedom appropriate to the complex society of now and the future has no relation whatever to the backwoods anarchism of Eastman’s definition.
And as for human nature: this section of his reply serves as a comment not merely on Eastman’s science but on his polemics as well. Eastman objects to my shifting from his “universal attributes of human nature” to “the essential nature of man”. Now ordinarily, to speak of the universal attributes of human nature would be taken to presuppose a doctrine of substance: a substance which had those universal attributes. But let us waive answer, with an exception, here. Eastman now goes on: “Everybody knows that there are universal attributes of human nature. Does not blood flow in all our veins? Is not arsenic poisonous to us all?” Well, the careful scientist, so much concerned over the religion of Marxists who believe in “inevitability”, would hardly call these loose statements of generalizations (the second of which, by the way, a generalization with notorious exceptions) universal attributes. Why is it, in passing, that Eastman, so particular about the words used by “religious” Marxists, permits himself so cavalier a vagueness in his own language.
But the payoff: Where and how did the dispute about “human nature” come in? Eastman offered “the universal attributes of human nature” as the explanation for the degeneration of the Russian Revolution, as well as the reason why the socialist ideal must be revised. Did he perhaps rely on this having been forgotten by the reader? or did he himself forget it? Or is he seriously meaning to tell us that such “universal attributes” as the blood in our veins and the poisonous properties of arsenic (whether these or any similar in kind) explain – the degeneration of the Revolution.
Though, naturally, relatively stable biological and physiological characteristics of human beings constitute a limiting condition for the possibilities in social change, “human nature” could be relevant as a causal factor in explaining historical events only in its social and historical aspects. And it is precisely these which Marx outstandingly and virtually all of contemporary social scientists of any school show can be treated intelligibly only as functional, as changing, only by rejecting the truly theological and idealist conception of “universal attributes”. Eastman’s preposterous dragging in of blood and arsenic is only another yard of the wool he is pulling.
I hardly feel it necessary to comment on Eastman’s remarks about “blueprints” and the “anti-blueprint temperament”, since I devoted more than a thousand words of my article to a careful explanation of the role of “blueprints” in social action, to what extent and how, they are appropriate, to Eastman’s disastrous confusion on this point between scientific hypotheses and directive ideals (a confusion, by the way, which is a distinguishing and peculiar mark of all idealist philosophies), and to establishing a context where what I meant by “anti-blueprint temperament” would be clear.
The pressure for Eastman’s amalgam is compounded out of his gross and unwarranted distortion of my remarks about “anti-blueprint temperament”, squeezed further by the “redefinition of freedom”. Since the amalgam is spun out of Eastman’s head, and bears no relation to my views or those of Fourth Internationalists generally, there is no particular reason to write on it at length. An observation or two might, however, be in order:
Eastman, in his zeal to exhibit a rational deduction of fascism from the ideas and policies of revolutionary Marxism, in his haste toward the full-flowered position against dictatorships, whether of the left or the right (“the scientific compromise between anarchism and socialism”?), which Eastman apparently kids himself into thinking a brand new discovery of his own, implicitly and in part explicitly rejects the class analysis of fascism. Fascism, we now learn, sails down from the non-material skies as a seductive medley of the anti-blueprint temperament plus decisive political action plus a redefinition of freedom. Ah, if it were only as easy as that! Then, indeed, could the pure men of good will, following the shining ideals that came into their own head, acting under the dictate of their own impulses, soon put the dragon to rout. But, alas, in a world of struggling classes, good will must be linked to strong arms and disciplined organizations, ideals carried out through, I am afraid, that very decisive political action from which Eastman so prophetically shies. Chastity was felt by the Schoolmen to be the purest of virtues; but no virgin ever had a child.
Eastman, in conclusion, accepts his responsibility to produce another program; though he declines to declare himself on the policies of the Fourth International, which are well known to him, which are not obscure, which apply to the burning and immediate questions of our time, which daily guide the actions of revolutionists. Let us hope that his program will be in our hands before the war, or at the very least before fascism. To him, “it seems just now in America a period for deliberation”. To an intelligent man it is always a tune for deliberation, but deliberation is not necessarily divorced from action, even temporally. If an individual seriously doubts and sincerely wishes to retire for deliberation apart from action, we may regret this but we can hardly condemn him. But it is then his duty to keep his deliberations to himself until they have at least reached a point where they issue in an alternative program of action. This course Eastman does not follow. For in truth he is not deliberating: he is publicly advocating a program of deliberation ; that is, a program of passivity, of inaction, of submission. I am for my own part always ready to examine any program, and to accept it if I find it better than the one I hold. But, after examining the premises from which he is starting, I confess to a certain scepticism not merely with reference to Eastman’s present program but even toward that future program which he promises.
James BURNHAM



POLITICAL FORMATIONS IN THE United States are undergoing a radical realignment, and in addition to the old formations, new ones are appearing on the scene. The changes, in the situation are of such a nature as to dictate a change in or amplification of the tactics pursued by the revolutionary Marxists in this country.
Two unprecedented economic crises, the second following the first before it reached the stage of boom; the increasingly deep social crisis in which the bourgeoisie finds it impossible to solve the problems of its social order in any of the traditional ways; and the organization of the workers in the basic, mass-production industries under the banner of the CIO, numbering more than 3,000,000 genuine proletarians, have not only brought into existence an unmistakable movement for working class political action, but have developed it – for all its backwardness – on a vast scale, one never before known in the USA
The Labor Non-Partisan League, the direct intervention of the unions in the Detroit and Seattle elections and in the Pennsylvania primaries – these are only superficially similar to the ancient Gompers’ policy of “reward your friends and punish your enemies”; the formation of the American Labor Party in New York is an even sharper break from the traditional position of the labor movement. The advance consists in the fact that for the first time the American unionists are being mobilized as a class to participate in politics. The leaders of labor, however, strive to confine this movement to the old capitalist parties, that is, to prevent this class movement from exceeding the bounds of bourgeois politics, and taking the form of independent working class political action. The movement is not temporary or accidental. Under the impulsion of the social crisis it will grow and find clearer expression. Who can challenge this save those who expect an early stabilization of US capitalism, an easy surmounting of the crisis?
Side by side with this movement, however, exists and develops the movement for a “third party”. Its most concrete form to date is the organization of the National Progressives. This too is not the product of an individual caprice or aberration, but is based objectively upon the discontent and the dilemma of the middle classes suffering intensely from the crisis, which have been deliberately exploited by demagogues like LaFollette. While its very class basis deprives it of an enduring character, at least with its present form and program, it is an important sign of the times.
More important is the simultaneous movement to develop the “American form” of coalition in one party – a reconstituted Democratic party, freed of the “conservatives”, and composed of Roosevelt’s “liberals”, plus the Republican “progressives” and supported by the LN-PL, the ALP, and the two trade union movements. The division in the Democratic camp in 1936, the violent inner-Democratic fights in Congress, the present primary campaign, all of which are based on social conflicts within the party itself, indicate the lines of the schism which the crisis will only deepen and toward which many right wing and left wing Democrats are consciously working. Both camps realize that the old alignments no longer correspond to the needs of the new situation.
What, then, are the actual possibilities of development for working class political action on a mass scale in the next period? There appear to us to be three.
A national Labor party, similar in scope and position to the British Labour Party, would be far the most probable development if one could arbitrarily transfer the present forces back to the period of America’s expansion and rise, approximating the the present period of capitalist decline, so forcefully evident in the United States as well, such a development is distinctly less likely. The social limitations imposed upon a reformist party by desperate, decaying capitalism, set the political limits of such a party. Those who believe that a Labor party in the US would play the same progressive role, and for the same period of time, as the British Labour Party, are guilty of flagrant dogmaticism and of blindness to those very national peculiarities which they accuse their critics of ignoring. While local Labor party movements are already crystallizing and others will undoubtedly develop, there are few outstanding leaders of the trade unions consciously and firmly working toward a Labor party. On the other hand, other movements, now more powerful and having more conscious and determined leaders, are at work absorbing the incipient Labor party trends.
A “third party” is not unlikely to develop. On a small (state) scale, at least, its establishment is even certain. But its class instability, especially under the brutal blows of the crisis, gives it no great future and indicates that it will split in two extreme directions before it even grows to full stature. A long-lived independent middle class party, especially in our times, is a chimera; politically, the middle class must fly apart, one section following the leadership of the workers, the other – under fascism – the leadership of big capital.
A reorganized Democratic party, embracing in one coalition all the classic components of the People’s Front, has powerful forces working for its development. They include not only the Roosevelt wing, but virtually all the prominent leaders of the unions, especially of the CIO, and the powerful machinery of the Stalinist party, which is now firmly mobilized against the organization of a Labor party or any other form of independent working class political action. The almost certain reorganization of the Democratic party, while it does not necessarily exclude the other possibilities mentioned, could, for a short but indeterminate period, swallow up the other movements. In the worst case, which is not at all excluded, its realization might conclusively prevent the American working class from developing a Labor party on any important scale. It would, instead, open up two direct roads, one leading straight to revolutionary politics, the other to fascism.
Finally, it should be borne in mind that a new world war – no small or remote factor! – might well interrupt the whole process, especially the trend toward a Labor party, and at all events impel it to find new channels and forms of expression.
 
2.
The position on the question of a Labor party held up to now by the Socialist Workers Party and the movement out of which it developed, may be summarized as follows: The “revolutionary party [cannot] properly take the initiative in advocating the formation of Labor or Farmer-Labor parties” which our Declaration of Principles characterizes as reformist by virtue of “their false program and perspective”; further, “far from constituting independent class politics, the present labor party development is, from the point of view of the bureaucrats and the bourgeoisie, the method for preventing the growth of independent class politics”; however, “the labor party movement, from the point of the workers themselves, does reveal a progressive development in general towards class consciousness”; therefore, “where the labor party develops as a genuine mass movement separate from the capitalist parties, the revolutionists must remain in the midst of the workers ... [and] stand at each stage for those concrete policies and actions which sum up a progressive and class perspective” (Our emphasis – JB-MS).
A study of the development of our position indicates that we based ourselves on two alternatives. If there is no mass reformist party, or movement for it, we do not initiate or form one as a substitute for the revolutionary party, but build the latter directly as a mass party. Where a mass Labor party does exist, we, to whom sectarianism is alien, are flexible in our tactics and, generally, give critical support to such a party; and, as is known, we followed this course in Minnesota where there is an established Farmer-Labor party, supported by the mass of the unions.
But our analysis was incomplete, and in some respects, not sufficiently clear. It did not allow for the present stage of development, in which an undeveloped and only party conscious mass movement exists and is torn by warring tendencies of progress and reaction, but is not yet crystallized. A contributory cause preventing us from supplementing our analysis was the need of concentrating our attention and attack upon the reformist Labor party conceptions of the right wingers and centrists in the old Socialist party, in connection, particularly, with the problem of the ALP which originated not as a break-away from the old parties, but as a machine to break the advanced and traditional socialist influence upon the New York workers and to corral the labor vote for an old capitalist party and ticket.
In brief, our old position cannot and does not effectively answer the problems raised by the present stage of development. It cannot even in theory, for the reason that the new situation was not clearly allowed for. More decisive is the fact that practise has also demonstrated its inadequacy, and consequently, the fact that it does not permit us to give concrete answers, not only such as are understandable and acceptable to the masses, but as will develop more speedily their class consciousness, their break with the bourgeoisie and its parties, and also with their petty bourgeois leaders.
In Pennsylvania, after Kennedy’s defeat in the primaries, if we do not urge the workers to put up their own independent ticket on a militant program (which, in view of the election machinery alone that is required, means the decisive step towards a Labor party formation), and break with the Democratic party – we can only urge them to support in the elections the SWP (which, alas, is yet too weak to put a ticket in the field); in effect, therefore, we leave the CIO bureaucracy and the Stalinists associated with them a free hand in keeping the masses tied to the Democratic party. In New Jersey, our participation in the conferences of the LN-PL is sterilized because we do not counterpose in the most concrete form independent political action to the Holderman-Stalinist policy of paralyzing the movement, disorienting it, rendering it passive and delivering it to one gang or another in the capitalist parties. In the ALP, similar indecision deprives us in advance of the possibility of playing any role whatsoever.
Our old position, irrespective of whether it was right or wrong, or of what specific position we adopt now, must be brought up to date. We advocate a positive policy, one that is based upon the present reality, as well as the objective needs of the working class.
 
3.
Our attitude toward the present movement for workers’ political action must give concrete and unambiguous answer to these questions:
Are we indifferent to it? We are not indifferent, and cannot be, toward any mass movement of the workers.
Is the movement, in so far as it represents and expresses a break with the tradition of supporting the old capitalist parties, progressive or reactionary? On the part of the workers, as we have declared in the past, it is obviously progressive.
Will the trend towards independent working class political action, towards increased political consciousness of the working class, grow weaker or stronger in the coming period? One cannot seriously hold to the belief that the social crisis in the United States is deepening, that sharper class conflicts are ahead, that the bourgeoisie must seek to burden the masses increasingly with the cost of the crisis, that mere economic action will prove increasingly difficult and insufficient and therefore give greater point to the urgency of political action – without concluding that the American workers are certain to move at a faster and clearer pace towards independent political class action in the period ahead, whatever organizational forms it may at any given moment take.
Will this movement, in any decisive respect, take the form of a mass revolutionary Marxian party during the next period? At most, one can say that it is not theoretically excluded; but all practical and realistic considerations indicate that this will not be the case.
The actual alternatives, therefore, are the development of a mass Labor party, or the immersion and sterilization of the movement into a reorganized Democratic or third party. Powerful political forces are working in the latter direction: the bourgeois and social reformists, the trade union bureaucracy, the Stalinists, the pressure of the petty bourgeoisie, etc. They are all deliberately impeding the development of an independent Labor party.
In this concrete dispute, we have, and must have, an active preference. As against the last-named elements and their strategy, we are positively in favor of the political organization of the American workers as a class, that is, of a Labor party. This alone makes it possible for us to intervene in the labor movement in such a way as to heighten the class consciousness of the workers in the given circumstances, to sharpen their antagonism to the bourgeois parties, to widen the breach between them and their class-collaborationist, bureaucratic misleadership.
In Pennsylvania, we counterpose to the capitulatory policy of the CIO chiefs, the proposal that labor should enter its own ticket, and set up the political-organizational machinery to run this ticket; we conduct a vigorous campaign for this policy which will be realistic and acceptable to thousands of workers, perhaps only a handful of whom will be interested in an SWP ticket. And the policy will be correct not only because it is “realistic and acceptable”, but because it will impel thousands of workers to break from the Democratic party, to break with bourgeois politics and also its sponsors in the CIO and AF of L, and to seek the road to independent class action. When the bosses of a Labor Non-Partisan League conference propose the endorsement of Democratic Smith or Republican Jones, we cannot seriously counterpose Trotskyist Robinson; it is entirely correct, however, and fruitful for our movement, to fight at the conference for a candidate put forward by labor itself, for a Labor party organized and controlled by the workers. In the ensuing fight, the militant, advanced, comparatively conscious workers will rally to our side and, in time, swell the ranks of the revolutionary party.
Do we then become a “Labor-party party”, which, like the Lovestoneites and Thomasites, will carry on an abstract, general, universal and perpetual campaign for a Labor party? Nothing of the kind. We need a position that enables us to give the concrete revolutionary answer to the specific situations that arise (Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Michigan, the ALP, Workers Alliance, etc.). But more important than this is the fundamental point of difference between our revolutionary position and the opportunist position of the Lovestone and Thomas groups. They are the advocates and defenders of a reformist Labor party, a “good” reformist party. Our Declaration of Principles properly defines the present Labor party movement as reformist on the basis of its “false program and perspective”. The Socialist Workers Party does not and cannot advocate or support this program and perspective.
Let us put it more concretely. We are not the advocates of a Labor party “in general”, in the abstract, or even of the Labor party as it stands now. We say to the workers: You want to break from the capitalist parties, to form a party of your own? Excellent! That is a step forward, it is progressive. Such a step we will support; we will urge all workers to do likewise. A political party is formed to take control of the affairs of the nation, and we are for the workers taking such control. But – you cannot take control and impose your will and interests by means of a reformist program and tactics or under a reformist leadership. That is demonstrated by the experiences in England; right now in the United States; in fact, throughout the world. We of the SWP are a revolutionary party. We therefore propose to you, not a program of petty reforms which the deepening crisis prevents from really improving your conditions; not a program of reforms for reconciling you with your hateful class enemy and its bankrupt social order; but a program of revolutionary transitional demands which correspond at once to your needs and desires and to the objective situation. We propose, in order to advance the Labor party movement toward class struggle and not class collaboration, that you adopt a program calling for workers’ control of production, for militant Labor Defense
Guards to protect our democratic rights and combat fascism, for the expropriation of the industrial and financial dictators of the country, etc., etc.
This is our program. If the workers do not adopt it as a whole, or at all, we continue to give support to the Labor party, but critical support. We are not sectarians or ultimatists. We give the labor movement no ultimatum: Accept our program, join our party or we will have nothing to do with you. On the other hand, we accept no ultimatums, even from the labor movement. We have our views, and if labor does not accept them in full, we continue with our comradely criticism and do not make our own the inadequacies or mistakes of the working class; but support unmistakably every progressive step, even small ones. In this way, we help to revolutionize the mass movement, and to make a mass movement out of the revolutionary party. There is no other way.
Our main aim is to build the revolutionary party, and all tactics must subserve this aim. The Labor party tactic is not, of course, given for all time. It is imperative for the period ahead. If the trend toward a Labor party is swallowed up in the coming period by a third party or “Democratic Front”, the Labor party slogan may lose its effectiveness, and the struggle will take the form of combat for direct leadership of the masses between the revolutionary party and the reformist-patriotic movement. The coming war, after a short period, would, for example, enormously sharpen all relations and problems. It will be recalled that the big reformist movements after the last war broke in two, with such large sections coming over to revolutionary Marxism that the small communist sects in many countries became mass parties almost overnight. Such a perspective is far from excluded in the United States. But it is still not on the immediate horizon.
While the next period does not indicate the likelihood of the revolutionary party directly becoming a mass party, there is no reason at all for lack of confidence. The adoption of the Labor party slogan, as elucidated by us, does not mean giving up the revolutionary party; it means the best way, under the concrete circumstances, of rooting the party in the living mass movement and of building it into a stronger force. Given a correct policy on our part, the very same forces pushing the workers now toward a Labor party will, as they deepen and as experience is accumulated, push the workers even more firmly towards the revolutionary party. The terrific social crisis, and the impending war, open out directly revolutionary perspectives, with a concomitant tumultuous growth of our party which will bring the United States to the very forefront of this old world. We need only, know how to exploit the vast possibilities in a realistic, practical, effective, i.e., Marxist manner. An arena in which our ideas are brought to the masses and our party built – it is in this sense, above all, that our tactics toward the Labor party must be understood.



 


James BURNHAM
Max SHACHTMAN






The Conference for Progressive Labor Action came together in 1928 primarily as the result of the then existing situation in the American labor movement. The trade unions, cramped in the corsets of the craft form and a passive and entrenched bureaucracy, were lethargic. No direction was being given to the growing millions of unemployed. The Communist Party, by its insane Red Union tactics dictated by the strategy of the “Third Period,” had succeeded in isolating itself and the many militant workers under its influence from the main stream of the labor movement. The Communist League of America, not yet emerged from its stage of functioning as an opposition faction to the Communist International, was active only to a negligible degree in trade union situations.
There was thus no center for the development of progressive influence within the trade union movement itself. The conception of the founders of the C.P.L.A. was, at first, that of such a center: an organized group of militants who would promote progressive trade union policies, by propaganda, but in particular through direct participation in the mass action of the unions, in strikes, demonstrations, organizing campaigns, and in building up the organization of the unemployed.
 
Not a Party
It was believed that for such a task no specific party formation and no specific party allegiance were necessary. The C.P.L.A. did not regard itself as a party. At the beginning its membership included a number of members of the Socialist Party, as well as many without any party affiliations. It was soon apparent, however, that its path led necessarily away from the existing parties, and within a brief time the Socialists had dropped out.
The task which the C.P.L.A. had set for itself was beyond its powers; but in spite of the smallness of its numbers and resources, its mark was definitely and in a number of instances splendidly felt within the American labor movement. The militant and determined work of its members in a series of notable strikes was climaxed at the great Auto-Lite strike of 1934 at Toledo. The National Unemployed Leagues, organised under its leadership, played no small part in forcing the federal government to accept some measure of responsibility for relief, and gave an example of class struggle methods which has not yet been equalled in the unemployed movement.
The experiences of the C.P.L.A.. in the class struggle Were not long in proving to its membership that the scope of its perspective would have to be expanded. The problems posed day by day within the trade union and unemployed movements were seen to be, in the last analysis, political problems, and to demand precise and unequivocal political answers. The existing political parties not being able to give such answers, the issue presented was realized to be nothing else and nothing less than the building of a new political party of the working class.
This realization was expressed at and by the Convention held at the end of 1933. The resolutions adopted at the Convention stated the need for a new party of the workers, divorced from the Socialist and Communist Parties; declared the period of the C.P.L.A. finished; and elected a Provisional Organizing Committee for the American Workers Party.
 
Choice of the A.W.P.
This great step, however, could not conclude the evolution of the C.P.L.A. Once having shaken loose of the social-democracy and of Stalinism, once having recognized and asserted the need for the new party, it was faced positively and inescapably with the central fact of the new epoch then beginning: with the Fourth International. The sole completion to its progressive evolution meant fusion with the movement for the Fourth International. Falling this, the embryonic American Workers Party could only reverse direction, and fall back into the blind alleys of reformism [line of text missing] ment of the 4th International Movement altogether. This was the choice for the group as a whole and for every individual one of its members.
Fortunately, the greater part of the membership both of the A.W.P. and of the Communist League understood the need for the bringing together of all available forces into the movement for the new party. And fortunately, also, there were those in both organizations who saw clearly just what steps this need called for. Negotiations, discussions and united activities reached their fruitful conclusion in the fusion of the two groups in December 1934 under the banner of the Fourth International.
 
Obstacles Met
All was not, of course, smooth sailing. Within the C.P.L.A.-A.W.P. there were those who were at heart bitter enemies of the new perspective, who made nominal declaration for a new party in 1933 only under the compulsion of events too strong for them to withstand; and there were others whose backbones, adequate for the earlier tasks, were not strong enough for the stern jobs that lay ahead.
Their resistance, treacherous and disloyal from some, confused or weak-kneed from others, could not alter the outcome. Their own fate – bought off for a few contemptible dollars by Stalinism, or sliding back to an evangelical God, or pulling up the stakes from the labor movement as a whole – points in its own way to that great lesson from the history of the A.W.P.: that today there is no neutral ground. There is only one way to cast off the dregs of reformism and Stalinism, of imperialism which finally these serve: by taking the road of the Fourth International.
 
A Foreshadowing
The A.W.P. found the road. It was this that proved its own basic health and vitality. Its own accomplishments, and all that is finest in its traditions have ber come incorporated organically into the young but sturdily growing body of the new International.
Just how or by what stages the Fourth International will complete its development we cannot know in advance. The fusion of the A.W.P. is, however, in many essentials a correct foreshadowing. The Fourth International is projected into the historical arena as a political magnet. Its function and its destiny are to draw to itself all those, from whatever quarter, who resolve to break from the old world and its refuse, and who set for themselves the goal of the new world of international socialism.
 



What, exactly, led John L. Lewis to open up against Roosevelt and
the Democratic Party at the recent convention of the United Mine
Workers? Where does it suggest that he is leading?
There is no doubt that Lewis is a sensitive reflector of mass
opinion. He has proved this by his whole career, outstandingly by the
organization of the CIO itself. He now feels a groundswell of
discontent, or resentment against Roosevelt, beginning to grow among
the workers. It is undoubtedly there, though not yet explicit enough
to be noticed by the Gallup polls.
Roosevelt is becoming too open and too crude in his drive toward
reaction. During the last year, he has had to appear more and more
into the open: his budgets propose the slashing of relief; he gives
the quotation to help break the WPA strike; his department of Justice
smashes down on civil rights; he becomes brazenly the head
war-monger.
Lewis’ speeches at the convention articulated the resentment
felt at this lengthening series of actions. He went – in words
– farther than the workers themselves have yet gone – in
words, and thereby holds on to his position of leadership, at the
front of the rising wave.
 
CIO and the Administration
But there was additional motivation as well. Until a year and a
half or so ago, it was undoubtedly the case that the administration
favored the CIO as against the AFL. This was shown by many decisions
of the Labor Board, by the designation of bargaining units, etc.; and
was marked for Lewis himself by his easy personal entry to the White
House. He was made to feel very much at home around the Presidential
fireside.
It would hardly be correct to say that the pendulum has swung
today all the distance to the AFL side, but this has certainly been
the trend. Last Spring the private Washington letters had already
begun to note that Congress and the White House were paying more
serious attention to the AFL leaders than to the CIO.
The Labor Board, with Leiserson replacing Smith, has been handing
down frequent decisions with an AFL slant. It is rumored that, in the
talks dealing with war plans in their relation to labor, Lewis is not
being given much consideration. At the same time, Lewis has more
difficulty arranging conversations with the smiling chief of the
White House.
Here, then, was a second group of reasons calling for public
action by Lewis.
 
What Is Lewis After?
Lewis seemed to be burning a good many bridges by his remarks. But
a careful study of what he said, and left unsaid, shows that there
were not so many teeth behind the barks.
For a labor bureaucrat to express the resentment of the workers
does not at all mean that he will act to implement this resentment.
Indeed, history shows that most often the expression serves to quiet
down and divert the resentment: if it were allowed to remain bottled
up, it might explode in ways most awkward for the bureaucrat. There
is no good reason to imagine that Lewis intended to do much more than
carry out this time-worn function of the labor bureaucracy.
In order to keep his hold on the workers, he has got to show more
than he has been able to during the past year. Unquestionably his
speeches were meant as bargaining threats directed to the leaders of
both the Republican and Democratic parties, He is trying to remind
them that if they want to get labor votes, they will at the very
least have to give more lip-service to labor.
I do not, however, think that he himself took even his predictions
of “inglorious defeat” for Roosevelt, if Roosevelt tries
a third term, as literally as the words would seem to say. If
Roosevelt runs again – and it seems to me the most probable
variant – I think Lewis will still want to go along. Roosevelt
is clever enough to give him a formula which will help him in
re-writing his convention predictions.
There has been much gossip in Washington of Lewis’ dickering
with members of the Republican National Committee. Many of the
younger men in the administration are convinced that Lewis wants to
swing the CIO into the Republican column next November – the
Republican Party, until a few years ago, has been Lewis’
traditional allegiance.
In the face of the attitude of most of the other union heads, this
would seem to be a move almost too dangerous even for Lewis. It is
noteworthy that his remarks at the convention were almost all in the
mode of a critical, “left” supporter of the Democrats. He
was calling on the Democratic Party to “be sensible”
about labor.
 
What of a Labor Party?
There is not the slightest indication in Lewis’ actions that
he is moving toward a labor party for this year. Here also, his words
were, if anything, designed to head off, not to further, incipient
labor party sentiment. Lewis remains convinced that a labor party is
“unrealistic politics” in this country, with its
two-party parliamentary structure.
Nevertheless, Lewis was compelled to say more than he doubtless
wanted to. The only possible logical conclusion from his attack was,
in actuality, a clean break with both of the boss parties and the
building of a labor party. Though he refused to state the conclusion,
Lewis really proved that labor cannot make use of the boss parties
and must have a party of its own. There must have been many delegates
at the convention, and many workers throughout the country, who drew
this conclusion for themselves in spite of their not hearing it from
the platform.
A first step to put this conclusion into practise will have to be
the realization that a fight for an independent labor party now is a
fight against Lewis. We must not allow Lewis’ bold words to
deceive us into thinking that he intends to follow them with bold
actions next summer and autumn. If Lewis goes into a labor party, it
will be because he sees as the alternative getting out of the labor
movement altogether. It would be a fine thing if that choice could be
put before him.
 



Dear Comrade Trotsky:
I find the Open Letter which you have addressed nominally to me more than a little disarming. It is not easy, I confess, for me to undertake an answer.
In reading it I was reminded of a conversation I had some while ago with one of our good comrades from Central Europe. We were discussing, in that idle and profligate way we intellectuals have, the possible conflicts between the aesthetic sense, the feeling for beauty, and the demands of political action. He told me a story.
A number of years ago, the country in which he lived was going through a period of social crisis. The masses were surging forward, heading, it seemed, toward revolt. One morning, near the height of the movement, a crowd of many thousand workers gathered on one side of the wonderful great square of the capital city of that country. Our comrade was assigned as captain to direct one wing of the workers’ detachments.
The sky was dark blue, with the white morning sun throwing across the square the shadows of the buildings that lined its sides. From the side of the square opposite the workers, the troops of the police filed out and took formation: in straight rows, mounted on their tense horses, equipment gleaming. At the shout of command, in a single swift gesture their sabres were drawn, and flashed in the rays of that white sun. The second command came: forward against the workers.
The instant had come for reply: for our comrade, to launch his wing of the workers into a driving counter-attack. But for a long moment he found his will paralysed and his voice stopped by the sensuous beauty of the unfolded scene. And all that day, while the bitter struggle lasted – more than fifty were killed that day, hundreds wounded, our comrade among them – he could not forget that sun, those shadows, that blue sky, those whirling horses and flashing sabres.
So, too, on this verbal battleground, pale reflex – and indispensable spark – of the battles in the streets, I, when all my will should be concentrated in launching my ranked arguments into counter-attack against your letter (so wrong, so false, so very false), find I must stop awhile in wonder: at the technical perfection of the verbal structure you have created, the dynamic sweep of your rhetoric, the burning expression of your unconquerable devotion to the socialist ideal, the sudden, witty, flashing metaphors that sparkle through your pages.
How unpleasant and thankless a duty to submit that splendid structure to the dissolving acids from those two so pedestrian, so unromantic flasks: logic and science!
Comrade Trotsky, while reading and thinking about this Letter, I recalled also the first time that I had ever given really serious attention to your work: in a lengthy review of the first volume of your History, published in the July 1932 issue of The Symposium. I re-read that review, which I had not done for many years. There, too, I found that I had been compelled to discuss first of all your style, your wonderful style, which in fact I analysed at considerable length. And I saw more clearly than ever before what is, in my eyes, an important truth: that you have a too literary conception of proof, of evidence; that you deceive yourself into treating persuasive rhetoric as logical demonstration, a brilliant metaphor as argument. Here, I believe, is the heart of the mystery of the dialectic, as it appears in your books and articles: the dialectic, for you, is a device of style – the contrasting epithets, the flowing rhythms, the verbal paradoxes which characterise your way of writing.
Comrade Trotsky, I will not match metaphors with you. In such a verbal tournament, I concede you the ribbon in advance. Evidence, argument, proof: these only are my weapons.
 
The Skeleton Undraped
I will now summarise your argument:
With reference to your own position, you assert the following:

The philosophy of dialectical materialism is true.
 
Marxian sociology, in particular the Marxian theory of the state, is true.
 
Russia is a workers’ state.
 
A tactic of defence of the Russian state in the present war is correct.

With reference to the position of the opposition – or, more exactly, of Burnham who you claim expresses the ‘essence’ of the opposition – you assert the following:

Burnham is a bourgeois democrat.
Burnham rejects dialectics.
Burnham rejects Marxian sociology, in particular the Marxian theory of the state.
Burnham denies that Russia is a workers’ state.
Burnham’s practical politics are ‘abstentionist’.
Burnham rejects Bolshevik organisation theories and methods.

But you not merely assert these individual propositions. You are even more concerned to assert certain connections which you allege hold among these propositions.
With reference to your own position, you thus assert the following additional propositions:

From dialectical materialism, it follows that Marxian sociology, in particular the Marxian theory of the state, is true.
From the Marxian theory of the state, it follows that Russia is a workers’ state.
From Russia’s being a workers’ state, it follows that a tactic of defence of the Russian state in the present war is correct.

With reference to Burnham’s position, you assert the following connections:

From Burnham’s being a bourgeois democrat, it follows that he rejects dialectics.
 
From his rejection of dialectics, it follows that he rejects Marxian sociology, in particular the Marxian theory of the state.
 
From his rejection of the Marxian theory of the state, it follows that he denies that Russia is a workers’ state.
 
From his denial that Russia is a workers’ state (and from 1 and 2), it follows that his practical politics are ‘abstentionist’.
 
From his being a bourgeois democrat and his rejection of dialectics, it follows that he rejects Bolshevik organisation theories and methods.

So far as I have been able, I have been scrupulously fair in presenting here your central argument. These 18 propositions constitute that ‘unified conception’ whose absence you so deplore in the point of view of the opposition. But as soon as these propositions are made explicit, as soon as they are brought to the surface from beneath the shrouds of metaphor and rhetoric, it is clear that each of them stands on its own feet, that each would have to be proved independently of the others. Moreover, the structure of your argument, of your ‘unified conception’ and ‘explanation’, stands or falls on the truth of all of these propositions. And who, even of your most ardent supporters, would be so brash as to claim that you have proved all of them to be true?
Examination shows, more specifically, that these 18 propositions are either trivial or irrelevant or obviously false or at the least unproved. It would be wearisome, and unnecessary, to demonstrate this with reference to each of these propositions; every comrade has, indeed, material at his disposal to carry out the analysis for himself. I shall confine my attention to only a few of those which raise special problems.
 
Dialectics as a Red Herring
‘Since in the course of the factional struggle,’ you write, ‘the question (of dialectics) has been posed point blank ...’ How innocent, objective and impersonal, Comrade Trotsky! Dialectics, suddenly, like Banquo’s ghost, thrust its wild face into our political midst, to dismay all sceptics. But, alas, as in the case of all ghosts, it was a very human hand that manipulated the apparatus producing our supernatural phenomenon; and that hand was yours, Comrade Trotsky. Like all good mediums, you attribute the visitation to the working of another and a higher realm – to ‘the logic of events’, the ‘historical course of the struggle’ – but like all good observers, we will admire the artistry, and smile at the explanation.
I can understand, and even sympathise with, your recourse to dialectics in the current dispute. There is little else for you to write about, with every appeal you make to actual events refuted the day after you make it, with each week’s development in the war smashing another pillar of your political position. An argument about dialectics is 100 per cent safe, a century ago or a century hence. Among those lofty generalities, no humble and inconvenient fact intrudes; no earthyest or observation or experiment mar their Olympian calm; those serene words remain forever free from the gross touch of everyday events.
I have participated in a number of previous faction fights, some very bitter, some in which you also were concerned, Comrade Trotsky. Where was dialectics then? How did it happen that no word came from you in those times about the dangers of my rejection of dialectics? Can it be (the suggestion is so banal as to be unseemly in these philosophical days) that the difference has some connection with the fact that in those previous disputes I happened to be on the same side as you? Is the speculation altogether absurd that if, by a chance that cannot be completely excluded, I happened today to be with you and Cannon, dialectics might not have appeared so, shall we say, prominently on the scene?
Comrade Trotsky, I regard you as one of the most competent historians and political scientists in the world. I did so yesterday, when I agreed with you on most points, today when I disagree on a number of very important questions, and will doubtless tomorrow. My beliefs, tolerant scientist that I am, are not at the service of my immediate factional interests. But your qualifications in these fields do not automatically assure your competence also in the fields of philosophy, logic, natural science and scientific method.
I find about 75 per cent of what Engels wrote in these latter fields to be confused or outmoded by subsequent scientific investigation – in either case of little value. It seems to me (and as a Marxist I do not find it astonishing) that in them Engels was a true son of his generation, the generation of Herbert Spencer and Thomas Huxley, of the popularisers of Darwin who thought that by a metaphorical extension of the hypothesis of biological evolution they had discovered the ultimate key to the mysteries of the universe. Nevertheless, Engels made a real effort to acquaint himself with the philosophy, logic and science of his day, and wrote with this acquaintance in mind.
You, however, serve up to us only a stale re-hash of Engels. The latest scientist admitted to your pages is – Darwin; apart from Aristotle, the only ‘logic worthy of attention’ is that of – Hegel, the century-dead arch-muddler of human thought. Comrade Trotsky, as we Americans ask: where have you been all these years? During the 125 years since Hegel wrote, science has progressed more than during the entire preceding history of mankind. During that same period, after 2300 years of stability, logic has undergone a revolutionary transformation: a transformation in which Hegel and his ideas have had an influence of exactly zero.
You ask me: ‘Do you hold that the progress of the sciences, including Darwinism, Marxism, modern physics, chemistry, etc., have not influenced in any way the forms of our thought?’ But it is to yourself that you should address this question, not to me. Of course I hold that they have (and one way that they have influenced it is to show that Hegelian dialectics has nothing whatever to do with science). How the sciences have influenced the forms of thought no one will ever discover by spending even a lifetime on the tortuous syntax of the reactionary absolutist, Hegel, but only by studying modern science and mathematics, and the careful analysts of modern science and mathematics.
In a most sarcastic vein, you keep asking me to ‘take the trouble to inform us just who following Aristotle analysed and systematised the subsequent progress of logic’, ‘perhaps you will call my attention to those works which should supplant the system of dialectic materialism for the proletariat ...’ as if this demand were so obviously impossible of fulfillment that I must collapse like a pricked balloon before it. The sarcasm is misplaced, for the demand is the easiest in the world to fulfil. Do you wish me to prepare a reading list, Comrade Trotsky? It would be long, ranging from the work of the brilliant mathematicians and logicians of the middle of the last century to one climax in the monumental Principia Mathematica of Russell and Whitehead (the historic turning point in modern logic), and then spreading out in many directions – one of the most fruitful represented by the scientists, mathematicians and logicians now cooperating in the new Encyclopedia of Unified Science. For logic in its narrower sense, C.I. Lewis’ Survey of Symbolic Logic is an excellent, though not easy, introduction. I am afraid, however, that in all of these works you will find scarcely a single reference to Hegelian (or Marxian) dialectics; nor will you in those of a single reputable contemporary scientist – except the Soviet scientists, whose necks depend upon such references, or one or two Kremlin hangers-on, like J.B.S. Haldane, in other nations. The study of these works would be not uninteresting; but I am afraid that when we finished we would be not much nearer the solution of the question of the role of Russia in the war.
You have an altogether incorrect idea of logic, Comrade Trotsky. You draw an analogy between a machine or instrument and logic: ‘Just as a machine shop in a plant supplies instruments for all departments, so logic is indispensable for all spheres of human knowledge.’ This analogy is false. For our politics, the analogy to a machine or instrument or tool is not logic or ‘method’, but the party; the party, the actual party, is the instrument we use to achieve our political goals. Logic is indispensable to human knowledge only in this respect: that logic states the conditions of intelligible discourse, so that we ‘violate’ logic only at the risk of talking nonsense. But no one has to know the science of logic in order to make sense or even to be a great empirical scientist – in fact very few people know logic, which is a highly specialised and, when divorced from empirical knowledge, rather useless subject. Perhaps a clear knowledge of logic (‘method’) will aid someone to make sense, to be a better scientist (especially in highly theoretical science does this seem possible); but experience does not indicate that this happens as often or as importantly as logicians would like to think it does. Otherwise we may be sure that there would be much less unemployment among logicians.
Nor is there any such thing as an ‘unconscious logician’. I read your passage on ‘unconscious dialecticians’ – your peasant woman and fox – with amazement, hoping to discover that the entire section was meant only humorously. But I was forced to the conclusion that you intended it seriously also. By your reasoning, a toad – or for that matter a stone – must be a scientist, because, forsooth, they both act in accordance with the law of gravity! What makes a scientist (differentiating him from a savage or a stone) is not that he behaves in accordance with scientific law – which all things do equally; and if they don’t, the scientific laws are altered to explain better how they do act – but the fact that the scientist knows the laws, and knows them not ‘unconsciously’ (whatever that could mean) but quite consciously, deliberately.
You tell us that workers, proletarians, are ‘naturally inclined to dialectical thinking’. Where are these workers, Comrade Trotsky? It seems to me that you are presenting a very damaging advertisement for dialectics. The only workers I, or anyone else, know anything about are these human beings found in the mines of Kennecott Copper, the mills of US Steel, the ships of the merchant marine ... These workers, in spite of what has been happening in the world, continue to trust John L. Lewis and Citrine and Jouhaux and Stalin, continue to vote Democratic or Republican, continue to believe in capitalism. I think they will change their thinking, perhaps one day very quickly. But I find their thought, for the most part, false or where not false, confused. If this is what you mean by ‘dialectical thinking’, I can agree with you.
In all the elaborated confusion of your new remarks on dialectics, you make only one attempt at an argument in favour of dialectics; and this argument, upon examination, turns out to be both irrelevant and reactionary. ‘All the great and outstanding revolutionists,’ you write, ‘ – first and foremost, Marx, Engels, Lenin, Luxemburg, Franz Mehring – stood on the ground of dialectic materialism’; whereas many deserters from the revolution began with an attack on dialectics. Is this weapon not identical in form with the weapon in extremis of all reaction: do you dare to disbelieve when our fathers believed, and their fathers and fore-fathers before them? Has not virtually every single one of us had to break through this very argument in taking our place on the side of socialism? The argument is not an iota more valid when a socialist employs it.
Even if it were true – as it is not – that every revolutionist believed in dialectics and everyone who was against the revolution disbelieved, this fact (interesting as it would be from a psychological and historical point of view) would not have the slightest relevance to the question of the truth, falsity, or scientific meaninglessness of dialectics. These are two entirely different types of question.
You yourself are well able to recognise this difference when you are not subordinating truth to factional rhetoric; indeed, you have often most tellingly insisted upon it. For example: In analysing the Moscow Trials, you (and all of us) showed that the confessions of the defendants could be proved false by the available evidence, by their internal contradictions, and by an understanding of the historical process which culminated in the Trials. The Stalinists replied – and very effectively from the point of view of many persons – by pointing to the undoubted fact that they all did confess. We said: this is a different question altogether, independent of the question of the truth or falsity of the confessions themselves; we also have our hypotheses about why they confessed, but even if these latter are incorrect, it has nothing to do with the truth of what is said in the confessions.
Why Marx, Engels and Lenin believed in dialectics is a problem for psychological and historical examination, and stands on its own feet.
But your account of ‘who believed what?’ is, shall I say, a little incomplete. You turn a couple of pages of somersaults explaining away the awkward fact that Liebknecht did not accept dialectics while Plekhanov did. But how about the Mensheviks pretty much as a whole, Comrade Trotsky? I have always read that they devoted as much or more attention to writing about and defending dialectics as even the ultra-dialectical Bolsheviks. And, much more pertinently: what of the Stalinist theoreticians, Comrade Trotsky? The bibliography of Stalinist writings on dialectics would fill a shelf or two, I assure you. And, very conspicuously, the sectarians. Did you know, Comrade Trsotky, that of those who have been in our ranks during the past decade, the one by far most concerned of all over dialectics was Hugo Oehler? (It was Oehler, come to think of it, who was the only predecessor of yours in attacking me for anti-dialectics during a political dispute. That was over the problem of SP entry; somehow, at that time, you, Cannon, and even Comrade Wright, failed to recognise that your bloc with me was unprincipled and that principled politics demanded that you should line up with Oehler until the ‘fundamental question’ of dialectics was cleared up. Instead, we hung together on the ‘conjunctural’, episodic, merely empirical tactic of entry. Fortunately, we have learned principles since that day.) Isn’t it remarkable that when our bookstore, under its new impulse, begins advertising treatises on dialectics, the list is mostly of Mensheviks, Brandlerites, Stalinists even? ... And how about Shachtman and Abern, whose dialectics haven’t prevented them from going astray with me? Now I naturally understand that all these turncoats – ‘are not really dialecticians’, are just giving lip-service to dialectics, etc.
Can it be, Comrade Trotsky, that the only really real (conscious and unconscious) dialecticians are: those who agree with you politically!
* * *
You reproach me as derelict in not taking up arms against the opium of religion-dialectics. Well, Comrade Trotsky, I will match my writings on dialectics during the past decade with yours against religion (or for dialectics); we are, I suspect, fellow-sinners with respect to our anti-narcotic duties.
Nevertheless, you have placed dialectics on the agenda. Very well. I will debate the question with you. But I will do so only when the two conditions already given in my recent article (The Politics of Desperation) are fulfilled: First, that you make clear what we are debating about by formulating significantly the laws and principles of dialectics. I am not, let me repeat, merely going to juggle words with you. Second, that we discuss dialectics and not utilise dialectics as a red herring to throw the party and the International off the track of the political issues before us.
I do not recognise dialectics, but, as you say, dialectics recognises me. Evidently, if Cannon has a majority at the Convention, this recognition will be a blow on the head in the form of a resolution adding acceptance of dialectics as part of the programmatic basis of the party – if I interpret your remarks correctly, you have answered my challenge on this point even before receiving it. I do not know whether to find this plan more ludicrous or shocking. Let me ask, in an off-the-record, non-factional aside: Whatever the merits of dialectics, do you imagine, have you so lost your intellectual bearings as to imagine, that such a question can be settled by the present sort of factional dispute, followed by a vote at a Convention – a vote, moreover, which would be determined by hard factional lines drawn on quite other issues? But perhaps I can answer my own question, for there is a sense in which such questions get settled in such a manner – yes, the history of the past two decades has taught us how to decide even that 2 plus 2 equal 5.
* * *
I return, finally, to the query I raised in my previous article. I will grant you your ‘logic of evolution’, from quantity to quality to united opposites, from the distant stars all the way to your dialectical peasant-cook and foxes. And now, Comrade Trotsky, please, please, explain to me and all of us: how, just how, does there follow from any and all of this the answer to the political dispute we are arguing, a dispute over the strategical orientation of our movement during the first phase of the second world war? Your inability to answer this question – and you will not be able to answer it – proves that your introduction of dialectics is an evasion, a perfumed trap for the unwary.
 
What Are Fundamentals?
It is a popular illusion of ancient lineage that the ‘fundamental questions’ are those dealing with the grand and often-capitalised nouns like God, Freedom, Immortality, Universe, Reality, Creation, and the like. The churches have always been anxious to sustain this illusion, since these pretended questions, being outside the domain of science, can then be claimed as the peculiar province of the church, and thus the church alone gives answer to man’s fundamental problem. I judge, Comrade Trotsky, from your attack on the opposition for ‘neglecting fundamentals’, that you remain a victim of this illusion.
Since you and Cannon, following the example of Hardman, Oehler, Muste and Jack Altman, have by now pretty clearly established the fact that I am a teacher, I shall take the liberty of drawing for a moment from my teaching experience. Many students who enter my introductory courses in philosophy have heard vaguely that philosophy deals somehow with ‘fundamentals’; and they register for the course with the hope of hearing ‘answers’ to just such questions as I have referred to. To their surprise, and often to their dismay, they discover that their attention is turned to quite another set of topics: they learn to become critical of their beliefs, and how to test them; they learn the difference between significant statement and nonsense; they learn how to clarify problems and how to answer them – when they can be answered; they learn how science has developed and what the scientific enterprise means, what a hypothesis is, how it is confirmed or refuted; they learn how the vast ‘fundamental questions’ are not genuine questions at all, but requests for emotional satisfaction – and how the abuse of the intense feelings surrounding these capitalised words has for many ages been used by church and authority, by priest and philosopher and ‘tyrant, to serve obscurantist and reactionary ends. A number of the students resent what they have learned, feel cheated in the expectations they had formed of the course (expectations, in actuality, of verbal balm for their wounded and disoriented feelings), and they do not reregister for the second term. But others, and I believe the best of them, gradually realise that they are reaching daylight from a land of mists, and they find a new confidence like a man whose brain clears after a drunken stupor.
There are no fundamental questions ‘in general’, Comrade Trotsky. Within each systematised field of knowledge there are certain principles which can be regarded, from the point of view of that field, as fundamental: either in the logical sense of being the basic axioms, postulates, and theorems upon which the logical structure of the field rests; or in the instrumental sense of being the directing aim or purpose which the field serves. But in each field to which we may refer, there are different ‘fundamentals’.
The only fundamentals relevant to our present dispute are the fundamentals of politics – presumably we are not banded together as a society of mathematicians or a school of art. The fundamentals of politics are constituted by: the central aim, together with the most important means which are regarded as necessary in achieving that aim. Isn’t that obvious? In order to remain members of one political organisation, we of the Fourth International must agree on our central aim: namely, socialism. And we must agree on the most important means which we regard as necessary for achieving that aim: the dictatorship of the proletariat, the revolutionary overthrow of capitalist society, the building of the party, etc. What means are ‘important’ and how closely must we agree on them? This we cannot answer in advance; only experience can show us, and the limits of required agreement may vary from time to time. Experience has already shown that persons cannot long remain in the same political party if they differ over such a means toward socialism as involved in the dispute over the revolutionary or parliamentary road; it has similarly shown that they can remain in the same organisation when they differ over such a means as a labour party.
Our basic programme (and the same analysis holds for any political party) is properly speaking simply the statement of our central aim and the most important means regarded as necessary to achieve it. It is this, for example, that, in fact, determines the conditions of membership and directs our activities. In addition, of course, in order to meet the requirements of day-to-day or even year-to-year practical activity, the basic programme is supplemented by guiding statements on means regarded as less crucial or more temporary (labour party, New Deal ... etc.). These, though binding as guides for the party, need not demand agreement from all members, nor constitute conditions of membership.
But what about Marxian sociology (the theory of the state) and dialectics? for it is upon the alleged rejection of the former and Burnham’s rejection of the latter that you condemn the opposition’s ‘disregard of fundamentals’.
In the first place, it is a direct falsehood to say that I, or any other member of the opposition, rejects the Marxian theory of the state. We disagree with your interpretation and application of the Marxian theory of the state; but all of us proceed in our analysis from the basis, among other factors, of the Marxian theory of the state. Since when have we granted one individual the right of infallible interpretation? All of the opposition disagree with your application of the theory to the role of Russia in the present war; some of us (for example, Carter and myself) believe further that the application of the theory to the whole problem of the proletarian dictatorship requires clarification. But none of us denies the theory (though naturally, for my own part, I accept it as a hypothesis, not as revealed dogma). What else but my insistence on the theory do you suppose would have led me to call my column Their Government – a name I selected some time before joining the Fourth Internationalist movement?
However, the theory of the state is not a ‘fundamental’ of politics in precisely the same sense that I have explained. If it is fundamental, it is so from this point of view: that it has been pretty clearly demonstrated that from no other hypothesis can we consistently reach such conclusions as are embodied in many of the planks of our basic programme (rejection of parliamentary road, attitude toward imperialist war, dictatorship of the proletariat, etc.), whereas any other theory of the state leads to different (and wrong) conclusions about the necessary means for achieving socialism. Thus it would seem that acceptance of our basic programme logically entails acceptance of the Marxian theory of the state, though this may not be clear at every stage to every person. Nevertheless, so far as politics goes, it is the programme and the empirical consequences that follow from it which are fundamental in relation to the theory of the state, rather than the theory fundamental in relation to the programme.
But there is no sense at all in which dialectics (even if dialectics were not, as it is, scientifically meaningless) is fundamental in politics, none at all. An opinion on dialectics is no more fundamental for politics than an opinion on non-Euclidean geometry or relativity physics. By claiming that it is, you from your side, and Eastman from his, are alike submitting to the same vulgar and damaging illusion to which I referred at the beginning of this section.
You are wrong, Comrade Trotsky. The opposition is very much concerned with fundamentals, but with political fundamentals. Our political fundamentals are expressed by and large in the programme of the International and the party. We are proposing to revise one section of that programme, just as we have revised other sections in the past; but we propose to revise it precisely from the point of view of the basic and fundamental planks of the programme: the central aim of world socialism and the crucial means which we jointly regard as necessary for the achievement of that aim.
Comrade Trotsky, you have absorbed too much of Hegel, of his monolithic, his totalitarian, vision of a block universe in which every part is related to every other part, in which everything is relevant to everything else, where the destruction of a single grain of dust means the annihilation of the Whole. I am as opposed to totalitarianism in philosophy as in the state or in the party.
It is false that we reject Marxian sociology; it is false that I reject fundamentals in rejecting dialectics. It is doubly false when you try to bolster up your shaky case on ‘fundamentals’ with the pretended story that with reference to the events of the present war, the opposition has had a purely episodic position that changed and veered with every change in passing events – that ‘the tasks in Finland’ were split from ‘our position on Poland’, and so on. It is not we but you, Comrade Trotsky, and much more grossly Cannon, who, since the war began, have confused the party, those who read our press, and you yourselves, with a succession of bewildering shifts in position which have shown nothing but the helplessness of your doctrine in the face of events. Anyone who has read the Appeal knows this to be most blatantly the case. We, on our side, from the time when, shortly after the war began, we saw clearly what kind of a war it was and what Russia’s role in it, have consistently analysed events in the light of a single strategical orientation – which we call the strategy of the third camp, it in turn based upon our fundamental objectives. We have made no ‘principled’ distinctions between Poland and the Baltic countries and Finland; but you and the Cannons and Goldmans have done so, issuing from week to week, self-contradicting analyses and directives. You cannot help doing so, because your central strategical orientation – defence of the Stalinist state and its army – is now in direct conflict with the fundamental objectives of our movement, and you are attempting the impossible – to juggle them both in the same hand.
Your appeal to ‘fundamentals’ is of exactly the same character as your essays on dialectics: a red herring to divert attention from the political issues at stake.
 
The Namelessness of Science
You make very merry, Comrade Trotsky, over the anonymity, the namelessness, of the science for which I stand. You find it most droll when our document advocates ‘bold, flexible, critical and experimental politics – in a word, scientific politics’. ‘With this formula,’ you remark, ‘one can enter any democratic salon.’ I want no misunderstanding, none whatever and no chance of any, on this point.
You find these adjectives ‘pretentious and deliberately abstruse’. What is pretentious and abstruse about them, Comrade Trotsky? They are words that every child is acquainted with.
Do they describe science or not, Comrade Trotsky? And if Marxism is part of science, do they describe Marxism or not? Is it the word-magic you find lacking? Where is the dispute clarified by calling for ‘Marxist’ politics? The dispute is over what kind of politics, in the present instance, Marxist politics happens to be. And for me, certainly, ‘Marxist polities’ means ‘scientific politics’; if it did not, then I would reject Marxist politics.
But more may lurk here than we have yet brought to light.
Does science as you understand it, and the truths it demonstrates, have a name? What name? ‘Proletarian’ science and ‘proletarian’ truth – class science and class truth?
If that is right – and I cannot fathom the point of your sneers if it is not – then indeed there is a gulf between us.
Yes, most certainly, the science and the truths I stand for are anonymous, nameless. They are the monopoly of no man or group or class, but a common human possession; for them all men are equal. The truths that science tells are as true for Stalin as for Trotsky, for Morgan as for Cannon, for Roosevelt as for Browder. Naturally, the psychological and social interests (including, conspicuously, their class interests) of men may constitute obstacles, even insurmountable obstacles, to their discovering or admitting these truths; but the truths themselves are based solely on the evidence, and the evidence is available to all men.
You are on treacherous ground, Comrade Trotsky. The doctrine of ‘class truth’ is the road of Plato’s Philosopher-Kings, of prophets and Popes and Stalins. For all of them, also, a man must be among the anointed in order to know truth. It leads in a direction diametrically opposite to that of socialism, of a truly human society.
You issue many warnings to the young comrades of our movement. I add an ominous warning to the list: Beware, beware, comrades, of anyone or any doctrine that tells you that any man, or group of men, holds a monopoly on truth, or on the ways of getting truth.
 
‘I Don’t Smoke ...’
‘Throughout all the vacillations and convulsions of the opposition, contradictory though they may be, two general features run like a guiding thread from the pinnacles of theory down to the most trifling political episodes ... the second general feature intimately bound to the first, namely, a tendency to refrain from active participation, a tendency to self-elimination, to abstentionism, naturally, under cover of ultra-radical phrases ...’
Again the mighty wind of the rhetoric, the sweeping style backed here with the delicious wit of the repeated phrase, ‘Thank you, I don’t smoke’.
The unsuspicious might gather from the mountainous style in this passage that here at last a real point was being established, and that acres of evidence, of proof, will be spread before us to justify the rhetoric. But the analytic microscope is able to disclose: exactly two, two and no more, items offered for exhibit; two taken singly, and utterly unrelated to the hundreds of other items that constitute the political course of the members of the opposition taken singly or as a group. The opposition is ‘abstentionist’ in practical politics because: (a) Burnham was opposed to Trotsky’s appearing before the Dies committee; and (b) the opposition rejects both sides equally in the Finnish-Russian conflict. Even if both specific charges were justified, when they are compared with the cosmic general conclusion, I can only remark with Prince Hal, as he read over the list of the colossal quantity of wine that Falstaff had ordered as compared with the tiny piece of bread: ‘Oh, monstrous! But one poor half-pennyworth of bread to this intolerable deal of sack!’
But let us consider also the two items.
There is not the slightest reason for considering the Dies question as relevant to the general politics of either of the two contending factions. Again you proceed from a totalitarian conception, which relates everything to everything, with iron bonds. The NC opposition members divided on this issue; in the ranks, the attitudes expressed crossed the faction lines in both directions. In the eyes of any sensible person, it was certainly a question about which a difference of opinion was natural, and where – assuming that there was a clearly correct opinion – a mistake is to be understood easily as merely a mistake.
But it is surprising to me, Comrade Trotsky, that you are so ill-advised as to bring up this miserable episode in the present context – as an argument against the opposition!
You have a curious way of reasoning. It is in keeping with revolutionary principle to utilise bourgeois parliamentary institutions as a forum. This is not in dispute, and never has been in our ranks. But then you go on to deduce from this that it was correct to accept the Dies invitation; and that, irrespective of results, the decision was correct, and opposition to it was a proof of violation of revolutionary politics. Your reasoning here is very similar ‘to that which you employ in connection with dialectics and the theory of the state.
But our principle does not hold that it is always correct to try to utilise every bourgeois parliamentary institution. That would be a completely absurd interpretation. We recognise that principle does not exclude, for example, our going to court against even a working-class opponent; but we are very cautious indeed in applying this principled permission. We will sit in Congresses, but not always or in every Congress: sometimes we boycott a Congress, as you, certainly, should very well remember. The principle does little more than to leave the question open; the specific decision always has to be based on an estimate of how the specific situation is related to our political aims, and which tactic under the given circumstances will best serve those aims.
When the invitation to the Dies committee came before the PC, the problem was to estimate what the consequences would be with respect to our aims; there was no problem over principle. Comrade Bern and I made one estimate; the rest of the Committee, and yourself, another.
Who was right? One could not be very sure then – it was in part a guess. But one can be sure, in my opinion, now, because now we have the actual consequences to judge by. I was prepared, indeed anxious (as I stated before the New York membership), to be proved wrong. But, unfortunately, Bern and I were proved even more correct than we had imagined.
The truth is that Dies won hands down. That is obvious to anyone who looks at events and not at abstract dogmas.
What were the actual consequences:
In the first place, we were compelled to tell a base lie to our members and sympathisers. This lie took the form of an editorial in the Appeal in answer to Zack, pretending that we had changed our views on the Dies committee because of this, that and the other consideration, when in truth it was because Trotsky had been asked to testify.
The further consequences were that, through the publicity connected with the invitation and the later withdrawal, we in effect gave a partial white-wash to the Committee and its purposes, to the renegades who had appeared before it; we, you might say, legitimised the Committee in the eyes of the radical workers (not of the democrats, who were most of them well enough pleased with the committee for some time back). And we also gave what could only seem as a sample of cynical opportunism in our own agitation.
If you had actually appeared before the Committee, this might have been counter-balanced by your testimony – though, having watched the Committee’s procedure carefully, and the publicity it received, I continue to doubt it. But you did not. Do you think your statement in the Appeal, with its few thousand readers, compensated for all the damage?
(Your way of reasoning here is identical with that which you employ in connection with the invitation to Hook, Eastman, et al. given at the end of our article, Intellectuals in Retreat. Shachtman and I had sufficient wisdom to understand that none of our opponents would be bold enough to accept the invitation – we discussed the question carefully beforehand. When you read the invitation, you, misjudging the men we were dealing with, flew into a panic, and wrote in horror that we were turning the magazine over to the democrats. Experience proved that we were right and you mistaken. And now you have the temerity to accuse us of a lack of political sagacity!)
As for your second exhibit in substantiation of your charge of abstentionism – our policy with respect to the present war. We, you say, ‘withdraw from the struggle’, ‘do not take part in this filthy business’. Here your rhetoric and your content equally betray you, Comrade Trotsky. Your reasoning on the matter of the Dies Committee is of a type so peculiar that I have seldom heretofore met with it; but your reasoning on this second item comes from a well-known, a very well known variety. It is the eternal charge of reaction when it attacks the supporters of the third camp. How many times do we find it in the writings of 1914-18! And today it re-appears from all sides. In this country, The New Leader is perhaps the most skilful exponent, and I particularly recommend the column of Charles Yale Harrison for instances of its shrewd manipulation. How Harrison rips into the ‘pacifists’ and ‘Utopian socialists’ and all the other ‘Idealists’ – you could have borrowed your very phrases from him. You’ve got to take sides now, he shouts; no more standing in your ivory tower! True enough, he takes Mannerheim’s side and you Stalin’s. But both of you now unite in the attempt to hide from the sight of the workers the only side that can deserve socialist loyalty: the side of the third camp. No, Comrade Trotsky, we do not withdraw from the struggle, or advocate any withdrawal. But we are concerned with whom we struggle, and for what. And we will not fight alongside the GPU for the salvation of the counter-revolution in the Kremlin.
So much, then, for the two items of pretended ‘evidence’ by which you bolster your grandiose charge of abstentionism.
But to bring such a charge against the present opposition, and myself in particular, is – apart from your two items – to put things at their mildest, absurd. Without any hesitation, I can say with no chance of motivated denial from anyone, that of all leading members of the party, the charge of abstentionism has the remotest application to me. I am, indeed, almost notorious in the party for trying to find ways of participating in almost anything that shows itself on the political horizon: from Ludlow amendments to elections; from Ham and Eggs to labour parties; from conferences to anti-Nazi demonstrations. If any charge were to be seriously brought against me, it would – and with a certain measure of justification – be the exact opposite of abstentionism. Unlike Cannon and Cochran, I am not one of those who are able to boast about how I never make political mistakes. But my mistakes are not abstentionist mistakes. Even the most sung of my mistakes of the past year – over policy in auto – was the insistence that we had to head toward one of the conventions (Martin’s) as against the initial Cochran-Clarke policy which was that of boycotting both conventions.
In this respect, furthermore, I am not at all an exception, but typical of the leading members of the opposition. During the past few years, it is from them that virtually all proposals for active participation in actions of all kinds have come, as against the passive, negative approach of Cannon-Goldman-Lewitt. This difference is for the most part written into the record of the party. The record of the leaders of the YPSL is most illuminating in this connection. This charge of abstentionism, like your other charges, is the product only of the nightmare you are imaginatively creating out of your own false doctrine, and has no relation to reality.
* * *
The verdict on the evidence: Proposition (5), like Propositions (3), (C), (II), (III), (IV) ... – unproved; further: false, utterly false.
 
What Are the Issues?
The dominant issues dividing the ranks of our party and the International are not dialectics or sociology or logic. To pose the question in this manner is an evasion or a fraud. It is with the greatest impatience and reluctance that I have written on them to the extent that I have.
The dominant, the fundamental issues, in the present dispute are two, one involving the entire International, the other particularly concerning the Socialist Workers Party.
The first is the central political issue. This has been clarified and simplified by the course of events and the discussion. What it concerns is the problem of the strategical orientation of the Fourth International in the present phase of the second world war. It is an issue which every single party member can understand clearly, without any obfuscation from Hegel and dialectical foxes.
The practical politics of every active and serious political organisation is normally governed by what might be called a strategical focus, an axis around which the major part of agitation and action revolves. The Popular Front, for example, constituted such a focus, or axis, for the Stalinist movement during a number of years: the agitation, actions, proposals, analyses of the CI and its sections revolved around this strategic centre. For our movement, during several years, the orientation toward the Second International was such a focus.
Today there are two tendencies in the Fourth International. They are differentiated by the fact that they propose two sharply different strategical orientations, different axes to govern our practical politics.
Trotsky-Cannon propose the strategy of defence of the Stalinist bureaucracy as the lesser evil. It doesn’t make any difference what Trotsky-Cannon say about their policies; this is what it comes down to in practice. This focus governs their major specific proposals, their agitation, their interpretation of events, their predictions (not always, not consistently, but on the whole – sufficiently to determine the practical direction), their weighting of agitation (in the Appeal, for example), and so on. Let any party member re-trace in his mind the events of the past months, let him read the party press and internal documents, remember the speeches and committee proposals; and he will see for himself how an understanding of this underlying strategical orientation provides a clear pattern which makes the events intelligible.
The opposition, nationally and internationally (for the dispute has of course already spread beyond the borders of our party, as it should), proposes the strategy of the third camp. Any party member who makes a similar review of the actions of the opposition during this period, their proposals and speeches and articles, their interpretations of what is happening in the world, their emphases and stresses, will similarly see for himself how an understanding of this opposed strategical orientation provides an adequate pattern and guide.
This conflict of strategical orientations is the central political issue, and nothing else. When once this key is grasped, a decision should not be hard for the membership of the party and the International. Ninety-five per cent of the polemical output of Trotsky-Cannon can be estimated for what it really is: irrelevance, evasion, smoke-screen. The distinguishing feature of the present factional struggle is not the difficulty of the question at dispute – it is an unusually simple and direct question, but the difficulty of understanding what the question is. This difficulty results from the fact that Trotsky-Cannon, standing on a hopeless position, indefensible on its own merits, are compelled to devote their entire factional energies to the attempt to prevent the membership from seeing what the question is.
The second central issue is the question of the regime in the Socialist Workers Party. This question has been thoroughly treated in the document, The War and Bureaucratic Conservatism. No reply has been made to this document; and it is safe to predict that no serious reply will be forthcoming.
These are the issues. The course of our movement will depend on the answers given to them.
 
Morality and Polemics
Comrade Trotsky, in the course of your intervention in the. present dispute, you have struck such heavy blows against the Fourth International that, for my own part, I am not convinced that the International will be able to survive them. I say advisedly that your blows have been directed ‘against the Fourth International’; from the narrower factional interests of the opposition they have altogether failed of the effect you have intended; the ranks of the opposition have increased and their determination been strengthened as a result of them, and it is only Cannon’s followers who have been disconcerted.
You have done these injuries directly, in your own name; and indirectly, by lending your illustrious name as a cloak for the rotten clique of Cannon.
You have elected to defend a false theory and a wrong policy; and to stand as attorney for a cynical group of small-time bureaucrats. No one can choose such a course and hope to avoid its consequences; as evidenced by your recent articles and letters, these consequences step by step are swamping you.
The truth can only destroy a false doctrine; and therefore you are compelled to evade the truth, and to hide it.
To evade the truth? Witness: Your systematic failure to take up the actual problems posed not only by the opposition but by the realities of the war. Your unscrupulous dragging in of dialectics as a polemical manoeuvre. Your endless discussions of everything under the sun – except the actual issues which the party is facing.
To hide the truth? Yes: Your failure to mention, even, that a belief in dialectics has been professed by Stalinists, Mensheviks, sectarians and others among the enemies of the proletarian revolution. Your never saying a word about property relations in the three Baltic countries which are now Stalin’s provinces. Your failure to say a word about the shifts and contradictions in the policy of Cannon toward the war, as shown in committee votes and Appeal articles from the days of Poland onward. Your silence, your so very diplomatic silence, on the specific charges which the opposition has brought against the Cannon clique.
At the very beginning of the struggle, you made not the slightest effort to discover what the position of the opposition was; at every stage you have made no effort to verify a single report relayed to you by Cannon and his followers. In your documents you have not once tried to present fairly the position of the opposition, but have invariably given a carefully distorted account of its position – in direct contrast to us, who have always used the most scrupulous care in trying to show exactly what your position is (precisely because only in that way can the membership be genuinely educated). Similarly, on a broader scale, you have distorted what is happening in the war. You attribute to me a position on Russia, on Marxian sociology, in philosophy, which does not have the slightest resemblance to that which I actually hold, and which is well known to you. In your Open Letter you have gravely distorted the history of the relations between Mensheviks and Bolsheviks to accord with your immediate polemical aim.
The distortions breed offspring in their own image. In your article, A Petty-Bourgeois Opposition ..., you discovered a non-existent civil war going on in Finland. Then, in later articles, you have tried to get out of the bad hole you had dug for yourself by denying you had said what you said, by giving it another significance than that contained in the clear words of your first statement. You invented an origin in the Communist Party for ‘the Abern group’, and make no effort to abandon the invention now that it has been undeniably disproved. You wrote of the opposition’s resolution on Finland, ‘As to just how these three “concrete” circumstances (in Finland and Russia) will be “taken into account”, the resolution doesn’t give the slightest inkling ...’, when the very next lines of the resolution outline the answer to this very problem.
Your defence of a false doctrine drives you away from the truth; your defence of a bureaucratic clique compels you toward the methods of such a clique. When in the history of our movement was a more infamous, and more gratuitous, slander introduced than that footnote to the letter signed ‘Rork’ (on the ‘press’), where the opposition is so clearly linked with ‘Stalinist influence’? Where is there a record of a more disloyal sneer than the one you direct against Abern (who has devoted his entire life to the movement) on the basis of a remark falsely attributed to him by the gossips of the Cannon clique?
You sin more grievously than you even understand, Comrade Trotsky. In a cheap manner you twice grimace at Shachtman for trying to ‘conduct the revolution’ from ‘the Bronx’. Not merely are you here appealing to a usual reactionary provincialism, directed against the metropolis. Do you know what further meaning ‘the Bronx’ has in this country, Comrade Trotsky? Do you know that to nearly every American it means not only a New Yorker, but a Jew? And are you so naive as to think that our party – yes, even our party – is altogether immune to influence from such an association? The weapons you are now using have a fearful habit of back-firing.
You attribute to the opposition a practice of gossip and scandal-mongering. This is simply another of your ‘deductions’ from your airy theory: the opposition is petty-bourgeois; petty-bourgeois individuals go in for gossip; therefore the opposition gossips. Now I will not pretend that in a long faction fight either side can avoid completely a certain amount of personal gossip; to gossip seems to be a fairly general human trait. However, to state that the opposition uses gossip as a method is simply false, like so much else of what you say with no evidence whatever. It is not the opposition, but the Cannon clique which employs gossip as a tool, an instrument in the struggle, and, furthermore, its chief instrument. For some while, even before the present faction struggle began, it has been systematically corrupting the minds of its followers by the circulation of the vilest personal gossip. This is today its main stock in trade.
I find it revealing in the extreme that the structure of your Open Letter is draped around three tit-bits of gossip – all naturally unverified – in which remarks are assigned to myself, to Abern, and to Shachtman. This is symptomatic. The truth is that your Open Letter, in spite of its pretentious theorising and its grandiose rhetoric, is in reality only a kind of apotheosis, a super-sophisticated rendering, of the gutter-gossip of the Cannon clique. Stripped of its irrelevancies, this is what your Open Letter comes down to: Shachtman is a clownish and superficial Bronx intellectual; Abern a sly and treacherous intriguant; Burnham a professor. You deal with the ‘dialectical’ variations on these themes. The Cannon hangers-on provide the juicy filling that makes them so tasty a side-dish for evening coffee.
From what source springs this unending reiteration of ‘academic’, ‘school bench’, ‘professor’, ‘pedant’, ‘democratic salon’ ...? I have met this often before, Comrade Trotsky, in political struggle; and without any exception it has been a mark of reaction.
Please don’t try to tell me that even the gossip of the Cannon clique represents, in a somewhat distorted form, a ‘healthy’ and ‘progressive’ response of the ‘proletarian rank-and-file’. We know too well the originators of this gossip, and how close they are to being ‘healthy proletarians’. The proletariat does well, I grant you, to distrust petty bourgeois, very much including intellectuals and professors. This is in particular true where it is a question of personnel, of organisational leadership. But this does not in the least alter the reactionary character of making, as you do, the sly introduction of appeals to this feeling the central focus of your attack on our position, our arguments, our policy. In the actual context of the actual struggle, these appeals to anti-metropolitan, anti-intellectual prejudices have exclusively reactionary effects; they pander to backward provincialism, to anti-theoretical, anti-political even, bias. And these effects will be felt beyond the close of the present fight. Yes, they will plague you in months and even years to come when the political disintegration already well on its way among the Cannon forces reaches maturity. Perhaps even you will be discovered to be an intellectual and a big-city man, Comrade Trotsky.
A large section of the Cannon clique – especially its articulate spokesmen – are already deeply sunk in cynicism. They have no perspective beyond their votes. This mood expresses itself in the acceptance of the principle: ‘Anything goes!’ They act in accordance with this principle. Lies, slanders, gossip, denunciation, contradictions, brutality, fake indignation, rhetoric turned on and off with an actor’s spigot ... Anything goes! I watched these manifestations with dismay at, for example, the New York City convention. And they do more than corrupt the members of the Cannon clique itself. Many comrades came to me during the course of the New York City convention and remarked that they ‘were certainly learning a lot about politics through the faction fight’; alas, the lesson that Cannon and Cochran and Lewitt and Gordon were teaching them was the lesson of ‘anything goes’. You have done nothing to counter-act that lesson.
You attempt to turn aside all criticism of your ‘methods’ by two devices: You say that all who mention methods do so because they are losing on the field of political principles. You say that anyone who objects is doing so from the point of view of God or the Kantian categorical imperative or ‘the eternal norms of petty-bourgeois morality’. This is sometimes, even often, the case. But I have no intention of remaining silent about the methods you are now using out of any fear of being called a petty-bourgeois. My moral norms are not drawn from either religion or Kant, and we have refuted your present political policy with arguments and evidence, with a finality that I do not expect you even to try to challenge on its merits.
Yes, I judge a political struggle morally as well as politically. Socialism is a moral ideal, which reflective men choose deliberately, by a moral act. Cold and sober scientific analysis convinces me that this ideal dictates an appropriate morality which must govern the struggle for it. Just as we say that the white man cannot be free while the black man is enslaved, so a social order based upon truth and freedom and loyal cooperation cannot be won by those who in their relations with each other base their methods of action on lies and disloyalty and slander. It is dangerous to have a false political policy. But it need not be fatal: for the policy can be changed, if a critical, democratic and loyal morale prevails, when experience makes clearer the need for change. But it is disastrous if the very springs of action are poisoned.
You conclude your letter on a strange note, Comrade Trotsky.
‘If,’ you say to me, ‘we can arrive at an agreement with you on the basis of these principles, then without difficulty we shall find a correct policy in relation to Poland, Finland, and even India. At the same time, I pledge myself to help you conduct a struggle against any manifestation whatsoever of bureaucratism and conservatism ...’
In the face of the events of these past months, you will understand why such a pledge can carry little weight for me. As to agreement on principles: There is only one way in which such agreement is possible for me – when I am convinced that my principles are wrong, and others are right. And I am afraid that the metaphors, even of a Shakespeare, would not be enough to convince me.



February 1, 1940


JAMES BURNHAM



 



It is a key principle of realistic political analysis that the
foreign and domestic policies of governments are inseparably linked,
that they are, in fact, for the most part simply two phases of the
same policy. It could hardly be otherwise. The basic problem for each
government is to run the state institutions, which it administers, in
the interests of the ruling class of the given nation; to uphold
against all enemies the social structure upon which the power of the
ruling class rests. This problem confronts the government equally on
the domestic and the international arena. Foreign policy (including
war) is the attempt to solve this problem as it is posed externally,
just as domestic policy is the attempt to solve the same problem
internally.
Most liberals and reformists try to obscure the link between
foreign and domestic policy. Up until recently some of them used to
tell us that they “approved Roosevelt’s New Deal”
(his domestic policy) but disagreed with his “aggressive”
foreign policy. Now many of them are reversing. They say that they
object to his internal measures (cutting down of relief, drive
against civil rights, prosecution of labor unions ...) but are in
accord with his “peace” and “neutrality”
program in external affairs.
Social-patriotic support of wars is often founded upon a pretended
separation between foreign and domestic policy. During peace, the
social-patriot criticizes the government, even calls for ousting it
and putting a labor government in its place. Internally, they admit,
the government (Daladier’s, for example!) run by bourgeois
parties acts for the bankers and the industrialists, and against the
masses of the people. But beyond the borders the government changes
its spots: there it acts as the representative of “the entire
nation.” Consequently (as in France and England today) the
social-patriotic parties vote unanimously for the government when it
comes to prosecuting a war.
 
New Deal and War Deal
The general rule that foreign and domestic policies are linked
applies, of course, to the Roosevelt government. Roosevelt was not a
Dr. Jekyll when proposing New Deal laws to Congress and a Mr. Hyde
when sending a note to Japan or intervening in Mexico. In both types
of action, he proceeded from the same premise in the effort to solve
the same problem.
The transition from New Deal to War Deal, which began in October
1937, swung into high a year ago, and will be completed with the
entry of the country directly into the war, can be understood as a
shift in emphasis. During the New Deal the emphasis, the weighting,
was on internal measures as the primary mechanism for solving the
problems of American capitalism; the War Deal means the realization
that the internal measures have failed, and the consequent shifting
of relative emphasis to external measures.
The shift is symbolized by the difference in the way that
Roosevelt is looked upon by most people. Until a year ago he appeared
primarily as a national reformer on the home front. More and more he
now figures as the bearer of the country’s destiny on the
international scene.
However, the linkage between domestic and foreign affairs does not
stop merely because of the shift of emphasis. Major stress on
external measures came about as a result of the breakdown of
preceding internal measures; similarly the current external measures
react upon the internal situation.
This is true for American society as a whole, and in relation to
the government’s basic problem of upholding capitalist rule. It
is true also for Roosevelt’s narrower problem as head of the
governmental bureaucracy, as party politician and as an individual.
The enormous, swollen bureaucracy (Federal, State and local), the
Democratic party and Roosevelt as a person have very important
special interests of their own, in addition to and sometimes in
conflict with the interests of the ruling class which they serve.
Roosevelt knows that, just as formerly these special interests
depended chiefly on the showing made internally, so now they depend
first of all on the showing made externally. Roosevelt knows that his
own political fate, and the fate of his wing of the Democratic party,
and the jobs in the bureaucratic apparatus, are being decided by
“foreign affairs.”
I believe that this background must be kept in mind if we are to
evaluate correctly many of the recent moves which Roosevelt has been
making in foreign affairs – including his flirtations with the
Vatican, the particular manner in which he has been handling the
Soviet-Finnish war, and the junket of Sumner Welles.
If the war had not started, Roosevelt would, I think, have been
washed up by now. He took an almost unalloyed beating from the
regular Congress last year, and from the opposition wing of his own
party. But the war put him back on his feet. His rating in the Gallup
Poll made an unprecedented jump in September and October.
At first his advisers apparently thought that the United States
would declare war within six or eight months, and that he and his
followers would ride back into office as the only adequate war
leaders. With the war developing as no one expected, they have become
puzzled. Will they campaign, in the party convention and the
election, on a “he kept us out of war” platform or with a
“unite to win the war” slogan? They can keep both roads
open provided (1) the war increases in seriousness and extent and (2)
Roosevelt is made to seem the only man who can handle the war crisis,
whether or not this country is formally a belligerent.
The first condition will take care of itself, without any pushing
from Roosevelt. The fulfillment of the second is a congenial task for
so accomplished a demagogue as Roosevelt. He and his publicity staff
constantly reinforce the impression that he is indispensable; his war
moves and his “peace moves” are alike presented with that
twist.
Some of these moves, like the armament appropriations, the
pressure on Japan, the drive in Latin America, the munitions sales
to France and Britain, are altogether serious parts of the general
war preparations and would be undertaken by any administration,
Democratic or Republican. In the case of others (the overtures to the
Vatican, the trip of Welles, and even the policy on Finland), we
observe a great gap between the grandiose words and the insignificant
actions. (With all the talk, Finland has got next to nothing that it
needs from this country, and probably is never going to get much.) It
is reasonable to suppose that in these latter moves, at least one of
Roosevelt’s eyes and maybe half of the other is on next
summer’s Chicago convention and November’s election day
to follow.
 



Election Day next November will be pointed to with pride by
defenders of the “American system’’ as convincing
proof that “genuine democracy” prevails in this country.
On that day, they will argue, the adult population, of its own free
will, without coercion and by secret ballot, selects its own chief
executive, together with the other major officials who govern the
nation. In the case of the Presidency, all citizens over 21 years of
age may vote for anyone he wishes who is native-born and more than 35
years old. What further evidence could be required to show that the
people rule themselves, that they have the kind of government which
the majority wants to have?
Universal suffrage and the secret ballot are, in truth, precious
rights, and no Marxist will advocate abandoning them; on the
contrary, the problem in this country is rather to extend them so
that they will apply in fact to all, and not be restricted as at
present through various kinds of racial and property
disqualifications. Nevertheless, a very little examination of what
happens on and before Election Day will be enough to show that
universal suffrage and the secret ballot are in themselves powerless
to guarantee a full and genuine democracy.
 
How Do Names Get on the Ballot?
The Presidency is the decisive political office in the United
States today. The extension of the power of the executive branch of
the government during the past two or three decades gives it in
practice the controlling power over the most important political and
social issues, including power to involve the country in war.
On Election Day, though theoretically free to vote for anyone we
wish, the ballot actually prints the names of electors for only from
two to five or six candidates for the Presidency. In many if not most
States, only two candidates – those of the Republican and
Democratic parties – appear on the ballot.
How did those names get there? If the people have no real say
about what names they select from on the November ballot, or what
policies the men named stand for, then the pretended freedom of
choice in November is largely an illusion. It would be like telling
someone he is free to select any card he may wish from a deck, but
then constructing the deck so that it contained only two’s and
three’s.
The decision about the two principal names to appear on the
November ballot will be made at the national conventions of the
Republican and Democratic parties, to be held in June and July.
Preparations for these conventions are now going rapidly forward.
Beginning next month, a series of primary elections will be held in
many States to select the convention delegates.
It might seem that through these primary elections, the people
should be able to control the work of the conventions, and thus
decide whose names go on the convention ballots. This is not at all
the case. The delegate slates at the primary elections are publicized
as if they were men pledged to Roosevelt, Garner, Dewey, Taft, or
whoever it might be; but, with the exception of only one or two
States, the pledges are not binding. The delegates are in no way
responsible to the people who voted for them; they may do anything
they please at the conventions. They are almost always hardened
machine-men, ready to do whatever they are told. The public pledge to
one candidate or another is only a temporary device to attract votes
and interest.
So much so is this the case that many of the chief candidates do
not even bother to enter slates in the primary elections. Senator
Taft, for example, high on the list of Republican possibilities, is
steering clear of public primary battles. He is lining up delegates
quietly, behind the scenes in the club-houses and committee-rooms.
Some years ago, many liberal reformers thought that direct
primaries for convention delegates would break the backs of the
corrupt political machines. A majority of States introduced them.
Experience showed that they were seldom a handicap, and often an
additional advantage, to the machines. In recent years, several
States have abandoned direct primaries, and gone back to the standard
method of selection by the State party committees.
Indirectly, of course, popular feeling influences to some extent
the selection of candidates. A convention, unless it wants to out its
own party throat, has got to pick a man with a certain amount of mass
appeal, who can be put across to the voters. But it remains a fact
that in the United States today there is no serious and responsible
democratic control over the major political parties and, through
them, over the personnel and policies of the government.
 
A Labor Party and Democracy
There is no mystery in this fact when once we understand that the
existing parliamentary and party machinery in this country has as its
object not merely or even primarily to express a certain (very minor)
degree of democracy, but to limit and restrict democracy
within narrow and closely guarded borders. These borders are defined
by the property relations of capitalist economy and the interests of
the owners of property.
Inside those borders, some democracy is permissible, at least
until capitalism in order to save itself is compelled to resort to
fascist totalitarian politics. Outside those borders, attempts at
democracy become – “subversive agitation.” The
parliamentary machinery, the “two-party system,” are
designed to defend those borders, and thus to limit democratic
control by the masses in such a way that it cannot interfere with
capitalism.
These general considerations indicate one reason why it is so vain
to hope that the workers can ever “use” either the
Democratic or Republic parties to achieve their aims: by their very
nature these parties are anti-working class, and workers support them
only at the cost of making their own aims impossible.
For the workers to get anywhere on the political arena, the first
step has got to be to break out of the framework of capitalist –
that is, anti-working class – politics; specifically, in this
country, to break away from both the Democratic and Republican
parties, and build a workers’ party with a workers’
program and workers’ candidates. If this isn’t done, the
choice in November isn’t worth the time it takes to walk to the
polls. A vote over who is to be warden is not very crucial when the
real problem is how to get out of jail.
 



When the war began last September, most of the Washington insiders expected that the United States would be in it within a very few months. “War by the first of the year” was almost a slogan during those first weeks. This expectation was shared, more or less, by many political analysts outside of government circles. For my own part, I wrote then that June 1940 seemed an approximate date for United States entry.
Three miscalculations figured in the belief that this country would join the war so quickly.
First, there was the almost universal conception that the war would be fought “all out” from the beginning, that at least continuous mass bombings of the major European cities and most probably also mass war on the western front would start at once. This would have meant an exceedingly rapid depletion of materiel. and a relatively short time for the war to near a decision. Both results would have demanded quick intervention in the full military sense by the United States.
Second, the significance of the thin line that divides war from peace these days was not clearly enough realized.
It was overlooked that the United States could, for some while, function as a key part in one of the warring coalitions without being formally at war and without having soldiers killed. Munitions factories do not have to be located near the front; the United States Navy can – for a while – remain technically neutral and still patrol a large percentage of the seas as effectively as if war had been declared. Moreover, in this war living men are only one among many other equally or even more important mechanisms; and there are still millions of men in France and England and their colonies to be killed. All of these factors combined to make it less urgent for the United States to declare war so soon as was expected. Finally, though everyone knew that the people of this country did not want war, hardly anyone estimated in advance how mighty was the popular sentiment against it. The Gallup polls make a startling record: the latest release shows more than 96% still opposed to entry, unchanged since December, and several percent higher than when the war began.
 
The War Machine Changes Dates
To imagine that the delay is anything more than a breathing space, that there is any reason to feel that the danger of entry has been removed or even made less probable by what has happened since September 1st would be a most terrible illusion.
Informed Washington opinion now looks forward to a repetition of the Wilson 1916–17 performance. “Keeping out of war” will be the big talk of both parties for the Presidential elections. When the elections are safely under the political belt, the administration will drive ahead into the war by the quickest possible route – in a few months after November, at most.
This prospect is not at all unlikely. But it is not, of course, excluded that the break will come even sooner. After Hull’s statement on the Dutch East Indies last week, backed the next day by Roosevelt, no one would be greatly surprised to find the Navy Immediately in action if Hitler (or Chamberlain) moves into Holland. And how much longer has Holland to live?
 
Public Opinion in the Making
With the people remembering what preceded entry into the last war, the present Neutrality Act prohibits credits to the belligerent powers, and requires that all goods purchased by them be paid for with cash.
The provision is a genuine difficulty for Britain and France, and irksome to all in this country who regard themselves as allies of Britain and France.
From their side, Britain and France have moved shrewdly. They are confining purchases almost entirely to munitions and a few key goods such as machine tools. In all other fields, they are cutting their U.S. purchases to the bone, cutting them far below the pre-war level. The general boom expected from war buying has never come. On the contrary U.S. producers of many products – textiles and tobacco and fruit and cars and a hundred and one other items – find their chief export markets, in England and France and their empires, drying up.
Two or three months ago, articles began appearing on the financial pages of leading newspapers, and speeches began to be made before business associations, explaining that the credit restrictions “were not working out” as expected when the Neutrality Act was passed.
Now the subject is being brought into the editorial and the news pages. Radio reporters, broadcasting from London, ask with tears in their voices, how long the American people will deny their English brothers what they must have if they are not to be destroyed.
A popular formula has been worked out. Credits will be granted for non-military goods only; munitions will still have to bought for cash – like a drunkard who might say to his grocer: I want credit only for food; I’ll pay cash out of my wages for my liquor.
Preventing credit is not enough to keep out of war. But granting it is one of the surest and fastest ways of getting in. as we learned last time. And the war-makers have put credit grants up near the top of their list. We will hear a great deal about it before the year is over. The war-makers are serious about their plans. They will go through with this one, unless events move so fast that they have to skip this credit stage in order to drive even more directly.
 

nham: Letter of Resignation (1940)








Burnham Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

James Burnham
Letter of resignation from the Workers Party
(21 May 1940)

From Fourth International, Vol. 1 No. 4, August 1940, pp. 106–107.

New York, May 21, 1940
To the National Committee of the Workers Party:
I am compelled to place before the committee the question of my status in relation to the newly formed Workers Party.
The faction fight in the Socialist Workers Party, its conclusion, and the recent formation of the Workers Party have been in my own case, the unavoidable occasion for the review of my own theoretical and political beliefs. This review has shown me that by no stretching of terminology can I any longer regard myself, or permit others to regard me, as a Marxist.
Of the most important beliefs, which have been associated with the Marxist movement, whether in its reformist, Leninist, Stalinist or Trotskyist variants, there is virtually none which I accept in its traditional form. I regard these beliefs as either false or obsolete or meaningless; or in a few cases, as at best true only in a form so restricted and modified as no longer properly to be called Marxist.
This communication is not meant to be an elaborate analysis or a lengthy personal credo. Nevertheless, I wish to illustrate my opinions with a few specific examples:
I reject, as you know, the “philosophy of Marxism,” dialectical materialism. I have never, it is true, accepted this philosophy. In the past I excused this discrepancy and compromised this belief with the idea that the philosophy was “unimportant” and “did not matter” so far as practise and politics were concerned. Experience, and further study and reflection, have convinced me that I have been wrong and Trotsky – with so many others – right on this score; that dialectical materialism, though scientifically meaningless, is psychologically and historically an integral part of Marxism, and does have its many and adverse effects upon practice and politics.
The general Marxian theory of “universal history,” to the extent that it has any empirical content, seems to me disproved by modern historical and anthropological investigation.
Marxian economics seems to me for the most part either false or obsolete or meaningless in application to contemporary economic phenomena. Those aspects of Marxian economics which retain validity do not seem to me to justify the theoretical structure of the economics.
Not only do I believe it meaningless to say that “socialism is inevitable” and false that socialism is “the only alternative to capitalism”; I consider that on the basis of the evidence now available to us a new form of exploitive society (what I call “managerial society”) is not only possible as an alternative to capitalism but is a more probable outcome of the present period than socialism.
As you know, I do not believe that Russia can be considered a “workers state” in any intelligible sense of the term. This opinion, however, is related to far more basic conclusions: for example, that Stalinism must be understood as one manifestation of the same general historical forces of which fascism is another manifestation. There is still doubt in my mind as to whether this conclusion applies also to Leninism and Trotskyism.
I disagree flatly and entirely, as Cannon has understood for a long while, with the Leninist conception of a party – not merely with Stalin’s or Cannon’s modifications of that conception, but with Lenin’s and Trotsky’s. I disagree with the theory of the party, but even more, and more important, with the established pattern of behavior which displays the character of the party as a living reality. The Leninist type of party seems to me incompatible with genuine scientific method and genuine democracy.
In the light of such beliefs, and others similar to them, it goes without saying that I must reject a considerable part of the programmatic documents of the Fourth Internationalist movement (accepted by the Workers Party). The “transition program” document seems to me – as it pretty much did when first presented – more or less arrant nonsense, and a key example of the inability of Marxism, even in the hands of its most brilliant intellectual representative, to handle contemporary history.
These beliefs, especially in their negative aspect – that is, insofar as they involve disagreement with Marxism – are not at all “sudden” or episodic, nor are they products merely of the recent faction struggle. Several I have always held. Many others I have held for some years. Others have, during the past year or two, changed from doubt and uncertainty into conviction. The faction fight has only served to compel me to make them explicit and to consider them more or less in their entirety. I understand, naturally, that many of them are not “new” or “original,” and that in holding some of them I find myself in very bad company. However, I have never been able to judge the truth of beliefs by the moral character of those who hold them.

The newly-formed Workers Party is a Marxist party, and more particularly a Bolshevik, a Leninist party. This is not a mere matter of definition. It is guaranteed alike by its programmatic documents (especially the key document on The Aims, the Tasks, and the Structure of the Workers Party), by the statements and convictions of the overwhelming majority of its leadership and of a substantial majority of its membership, and by the habits of action of this majority. It is strikingly symbolized by the statement on the masthead of Labor Action that the party is a section of the Fourth International, by the definition of its theoretical magazine as “an organ of revolutionary Marxism,” by the reiterated appeal in the key document above mentioned to “the revolutionary traditions of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky” and to the “principles of Marxism,” and by the convention episode of the cable to Trotsky. Nothing whatever in the faction fight indicated a decisive tendency away from this orientation; on the contrary, every sharp suggestion in such a direction was at once blocked. In reality, the split from the Socialist Workers Party was not based upon anything fundamental, and the Workers Party exists now as a faction of the Trotskyist movement. This was the actual cause of the extreme difficulty which the faction found in drawing up its position on “the nature of the party,” and in differentiating that position from Cannon’s. This was hard to do, was in fact not done, because the two positions, except in details and emphases, did not really differ.
I do not, of course, wish to mitigate my own share of responsibility of what happened in the immediate and more distant past. I wish here to record the facts as I see them, among which is the fact that I have not been a full-time political worker and have not accepted a full share of organizational responsibility.

From the facts about my own present beliefs and the character of the Workers Party, the following conclusion inescapably follows: I cannot be a loyal member of the Workers Party; I cannot accept its program or discipline; I cannot speak or act for it. Naturally I do not disagree with everything for which the Workers Party stands. I believe that socialism would be a good thing if it can be achieved (though “socialism as a moral ideal” is in bad repute among Marxists, we learn). I agree with the Workers Party attitude toward the war, at least insofar as this was involved in the just concluded faction dispute. But I share agreement on those points with many other organizations and tens of thousands of individuals wholly apart from the Workers Party. To the extent that I function politically, I cannot confine what I say and do to rhapsodies on the desirability of socialism and denunciations of both camps in the war. This was brought home to me with particular keenness by the first public mass meeting of the Workers Party. For I tried to figure out what I could say, and I could not find any way of saying what I felt I ought to say and still appear on the platform as a loyal spokesman of the group. I finally compromised once more, spoke “safely” on the third camp, and felt like a liar when I had finished.
Two alternatives only, therefore, present themselves to me:

Continuing as a member of the party, I can immediately launch a faction struggle along the lines suggested by this document.

This struggle would, of course, be, from a political and theoretical standpoint, far broader and more fundamental than the struggle just concluded with Cannon and would have as its general aim, from my standpoint, to break the group altogether away from Marxism.
 
Or I can simply separate from the Workers Party.

From the usual conception of “principled” and “responsible” politics, the first course is incumbent upon me. However, I do not believe that it makes sense under the actual circumstances. On the one hand, a sharp faction struggle now in the Workers Party (in which my point of view would be supported by a very small minority) would mean the breakup of the group, at the very least its reduction to impotence – and it begins with foundations none too firm. What could be gained would not be worth while, would simply not mean anything politically. On the other hand, I personally am not willing to undertake leadership in such a struggle. I am not, have not been, and cannot be a “practical politician” and “organization man,” above all not a leader.
Thus the second course alone remains.
It will be thought and said by many that my present beliefs and the decision which follows from them are a “rationalization” of, on the one side, the pressure of a soft and bourgeois personal environment, and, on the other, the influence of the terrible defeats of labor, and mankind during the past twenty years, and of the war crisis.
I should be the last to pretend that any man should be so brash as to imagine that he knows clearly the motives and springs of his own actions. This whole letter may be an over-elaborate way of saying the single sentence: “I feel like quitting politics.” It is certainly the case that I am influenced by the defeats and betrayals of the past twenty and more years. These form part of the evidence for my belief that Marxism must be rejected: at every single one of the many tests provided by history, Marxist movements have either failed socialism or betrayed it. And they influence also my feelings and attitudes, I know that.
As for my “personal life,” how is one ever to know which is chicken and which egg, whether unwillingness fully to enter Marxist politics confuses beliefs, or whether clear beliefs keep one from entering Marxist politics fully? I am a little tired, I confess, of the habit of settling accounts with opponents and critics, of deciding scientific disputes, by smug references to “rationalizations” and the “pressure of alien classes and influences.” Because this habit is a well established part of the tradition of Marxism is not the least of my objections to Marxism. My beliefs are facts; and the defeats and betrayals, and the mode of my life and my tastes are also facts. There they are, whatever the truth about sources and origins and motives.

On no ideological, theoretic or political ground, then, can I recognize, or do I feel, any bond or allegiance to the Workers Party (or to any other Marxist party). That is simply the case, and I can no longer pretend about it, either to myself or to others.
Unfortunately, one factor still remains. This factor is a sense of moral obligation and responsibility to my past self – seven years dominated, however, inadequately but on the whole, by Marxism or any comparable structure, cannot be wiped out by a few minutes at the typewriter – and more especially to other persons, to those with whom I have joined in loyal collaboration on both sides, and to others who have been influenced in their ideas and acts by me. Trotsky and Cannon will exploit my decision as a confirmation of their views – Burnham’s quitting will be, by their remarkable but humanly understandable logic, evidence for the truth of their opinions on the character of the war, the nature of the Russian state, and the role of Russia in the war. To many members of the Workers Party, my separation will appear as a desertion. From a moral and personal point of view, I cannot but agree that there will be a good deal of truth in this latter judgment.
But this factor, weighed against the others, is no longer sufficient to decide my actions. Indeed, it now seems clear to me that if it had not been for these moral and personal considerations, I should properly have left the party some while ago. On the grounds of beliefs and interests (which are also a fact) I have for several years had no real place in a Marxist party.
This communication constitutes my definitive resignation from the group. However, because of the obligations which I recognize, I am, within strict limitations, prepared to discuss with the committee, if the committee so wishes, the manner of my separation. There are four alternatives:

The committee can expel me. There would be no difficulty in finding grounds for expulsion: I have already written an article, which, if published in the non-party press (and there is the opportunity for such publication), would be adequate grounds.
 
I can simply withdraw, without any special notice being taken on either side, from the group and its activities.
 
I can be, nominally, granted a “leave of absence” for six months. If this alternative were chosen, there should be no misunderstanding. The future is never certain, but the probability of such a leave’s coming to an end would be very slight indeed.
 
I am, finally, prepared, if the committee feels that it would make any serious difference in this first period of the group’s independent existence, to carry out a form of partial collaboration during the next two months. This would consist primarily of writing signed and unsigned articles for the party press, consistent with the party’s position; and during that time refraining from public acts contrary to the party and its program. At the conclusion of these two months, any of the three other alternatives could be put into effect. I would not like this fourth solution, to be quite honest, but, as I have stated, I am prepared to accept it.


Writing this letter has been a painful and difficult task for me. It is in no way an impulsive act, but has been preceded by the most careful and lengthy deliberation. I am above all anxious that I avoid giving any impression that I seek to excuse or extenuate myself, my own weaknesses or deficiencies or failures. I do not propose to blame others or history for my faults. When I say that I reject Marxism, I do not at all mean that I am scornful of or consider myself “superior to” Marxists. Not at all. I am humble, believe me before the loyalty, sacrifice and heroism of so many Marxists – qualities found so widely within the ranks of the Workers Party. But I cannot act otherwise than I do.
Believing as I do, I cannot wish success to the Workers Party; but I can and do wish its members well. To the extent that each of us, in his own way and arena, preserves the values and truth and freedom, I hope that we shall continue to regard ourselves as comrades, whatever names we use and whatever labels may be tied around our necks.



 


Fraternally yours,
JAMES BURNHAM



 



There was no recess in the war moves of the Roosevelt
administration after the close of the Special Session. Repeal of the
arms embargo was a major step in freeing the hands of the war-makers
for intervention, but they did not rest on their oars. Nor will they
rest until this country takes its place as a full-fledged
belligerent. I want here to review a few of the landmarks of recent
weeks in the trail toward war:
1. Two days after the scuttling of the it was revealed that the
United States had played the decisive role in forcing the German ship
to leave the docks at Montevideo. The legal rights under
international law, in this case as in all others, are obscure. The
result is obvious: a unilateral blow was struck at Germany, one of
the belligerent powers.
2. A British cruiser chased a German freighter into Ft.
Lauderdale, Florida. The evidence of eyewitnesses indicates that the
cruiser violated not merely the “safety zone” established
by the Panama Conference but the territorial waters of the United
States. This violation was supposed to be “investigated”.
The investigation has quietly dropped out of the news. Anyone who
still thinks that Roosevelt is neutral might well ask himself what
would have happened if a similar circumstance had taken place with
the battleship German and the freighter British.
 
The Law Is What You Make It
3. In connection with the war in Finland, Roosevelt has been
discovering the beauties of the device which he calls a “moral
embargo”. There is no sanction whatever in law or tradition for
these moral embargoes. They are, in fact, directly counter to the
avowed intentions of the various laws on neutrality which have passed
Congress; and, indeed, are counter to the whole professed theory of
American government, since they are actions taken solely by the
executive without any control or check whatever from Congress or the
Courts.
According even to the Roosevelt Neutrality Act, which passed the
Special Session, no credits can be granted to warring governments;
transfer of title on all goods for such governments must be completed
before shipment from this country; and ships of U.S. registry cannot
sail to ports of such governments.
When Roosevelt argued in public for his law, he made the people
believe that it would keep the U.S. free from involvement in the war.
When war began in Finland, presumably the Neutrality Act should have
been invoked at once. But it was not: Roosevelt has not found that a
“state of war” exists in Finland – apparently
having the same view on this point as the Kremlin. Consequently none
of the provisions of the Act apply: credit can be extended to the
belligerents, U.S. ships can sail to their ports, and so on. The
ground is laid for a whole series of those “incidents”
from which the people were told that the Neutrality Act would
guarantee avoidance.
But not merely has the law of the land been suspended. Roosevelt
has, through the invention of the “moral embargo”, a
grandiose new law of his own. The moral embargo, proclaimed by
Secretary of State Hull, prohibits shipment of airplanes, airplane
parts, bombs, airplane gasoline and gasoline refining equipment and
several other types of munitions to – not both belligerents,
which would have , been in line with the older neutrality law –
but to one, to the Soviet Union.
It might be thought that a moral embargo is merely a Platonic
gesture or at most a propaganda measure (which latter of course it
also is). But the truth is that the moral embargo is a hard and fast
kind of sanction. It is enforced by confidentially telling armament
manufacturers that if they break it they will no longer get U.S.
government orders.
 
War Birds on Top of the Roost
4. Last week Roosevelt appointed Charles Edison Secretary of the
Navy. Edison is a plain-speaking-man, who has
broadcast his opinions. He favors a “two-ocean navy”, big
enough to smash everything else afloat, and he believes, as he puts
it, in protecting this country by carrying the war as far as possible
away from its shores: that is, by sending U.S. soldiers to fight in
Asia and Europe.
For some months Louis Johnson, though still rated as Assistant
Secretary, has been running the War Office. Johnson is of exactly the
same war-mongering breed as Edison, and has among his other
accomplishments the distinction of perfecting the M-Day plans for the
war-time dictatorship.
Putting these two men in charge of the war machine is a complete
answer to those scoundrels who try to “excuse”
Roosevelt’s “errors” as being due to the influence
of “bad advisers” who have managed to worm their way into
the administration. Johnson and Edison take their rightful place
alongside of Colonel Harrington, in charge of WPA, and Colonel
Fleming, now running the Wages and Hours administration. Roosevelt,
for all his smiles, deliberately picks for key positions those men
who can and will carry out his own ruthless policies.
5. Taking advantage of a loophole in a law, “competitive
bidding” on armament orders has, during the past few months,
been dumped. Competitive bidding was, it is true, often enough a
farce, but now and then – when there was genuine rivalry among
the companies concerned – it did serve to cut somewhat the
armament profits. Now the companies can write up their costs
virtually to where they please, and get a 10 per cent profit added
for good measure, with no chance for a rival concern to put in a
lower bid.
6. The bold and unprecedented act of sending Myron Taylor
(ex-Chairman of the U.S. Steel Corporation, by the way) as diplomatic
representative to the Vatican can only be understood as a means of
mobilizing Catholic opinion for “national unity” in
preparation for war. The Catholic hierarchy, because partly of its
leaning toward fascism and the tie-up between the Vatican and Rome,
is rather shy about Roosevelt’s coming war – and the
Catholics are the most powerful and best organized of the religious
groups. Roosevelt’s gesture – which cost a few demurrers
from Protestants – seems to have taken them 100 per cent into
camp.
 







We are publishing herewith, for the information and study of our readers, the complete text of one of the political documents circulated in the ranks of the Socialist Workers Party by the Opposition group during the discussion that has just closed. We think this document is of more than purely internal-party interest, and we hope to be able, in future issues of the review, to make public other key documents of the SWP discussion. – ED.





WHAT A COMFORT it will prove to Max Eastman! For ten years he insisted that what separated him from us was – dialectical materialism. For ten years we replied: No, Max Eastman, you are only fooling others and yourself, and trying to fool us; what separates you from us is your unwillingness to accept the political program of the international revolution, and the practical political consequences that flow from that program. We will not permit you to evade the political issues by turning the debate aside into the abstract regions of speculative metaphysics.
But Eastman, it seems, was right all along. The real root of the matter, the ineluctable heart and core – it is now Trotsky who makes it at last clear to us – is, precisely – dialectical materialism. Burnham rejects dialectical materialism: from this original sin flow, like the conceptual links of the endless closed chain of the Hegelian universe, all the errors and crimes of the party opposition. But, we recall, it is not today or yesterday that Burnham rejected dialectical materialism. Indeed, since he never accepted it, he can hardly be said ever to have rejected it. His opinion of dialectical materialism has been a constant: it has not been unknown in the Fourth International. A curious coincidence, and a mark of almost criminal laxity, that Trotsky waited until 1940, in the midst of a bitter factional struggle on concrete political issues, to discover its burning and all-vital importance.
The rule says: we must think things through to the end. The discovery having been made, even if so belatedly and under such exceptional circumstances, the International must draw the consequences. Trotsky must, I would feel, now propose a Special Commission to investigate and weed out all traces of anti-dialectics that have crept into the Socialist Workers Party through Burnham’s activities during these years. It will, I am afraid, have plenty of work cut our for it.
It might begin, for example, with the party’s Declaration of Principles, its foundation programmatic document, which was, by an oversight, written by Burnham. With the war actually started, it will have to devote particular attention to most of the pamphlets and articles on war, since most were written by Burnham. Surely it cannot overlook the political resolution for the last convention, also the product of Burnham’s Aristotelian typewriter; or, for that matter, a fair percentage of all the political resolutions for conventions and conferences and plenums during the past live or six years. And not a few special articles and lead editorials in the Appeal and New International, the political document motivating the break with the Socialist Party – as well, come to think of it, as the first resolution proposing entry into the Socialist Party (the anti-entrists were, evidently, right, since the whole orientation sprang from anti-dialectics). And the Spanish resolution, around which centered the chief political light in the Socialist Party. Let us not speak of the fact that perhaps the bulk of motions, resolutions, articles on American politics (the main enemy is, is it not, in our own country?) came from the same tainted source.
And let us above all not mention that even today, when anti-dialectics has come into the lull anti-revolutionary open, the party was compelled to turn – to Burnham, in order to formulate a political plan in connection with the Congressional session (Appeal, issue of December 30th) and to ask – Burnham, to defend the policy of the party when criticized by a local branch (Rochester; unanimous PC motion, meeting of January 9), and to accept Burnham’s motions (as against both Cannon and Cochran) when an important branch (Newark) asked how to handle the spreading Food Stamp Plan.
But the investigation will unearth even more curious, and ironic circumstances. It will find, to take one instance, that at the founding convention of the SWP, the lengthy Russian resolution itself, the resolution which defeated Burnham was, with the sole exception of the paragraph or two repeating the dictum that “Russia is a workers’ state,” – written by Burnham. All, that is, of the concrete analysis, all that dealt with origins and sources and conditions and relations and predictions and history and changes, was the product of anti-dialectics (anti-dialectics operating, true enough, largely on material unearthed by Trotsky); dialectics contributed to the resolution – the “fixed” category (“workers’ state”) of “vulgar” and “Aristotelian” thinking.
The reply comes: Agreed, Burnham has done some service in his day; when, a tame petty-bourgeois journalist, he submitted himself docilely to the “proletarian element”, he could reach correct Marxist conclusions in spite of his dialectical peccadilloes; now, with the war broken, he capitulates to the mighty pressure of the Hooks and Eastmans, becomes a petty-bourgeois “enraged”, and all his proposals, motions, speeches, articles, are false and “absolutely stale”. If he were a dialectician, he would understand how this happens. If he would recognize his heresy, confess, and resubmit it, he might even live to do further service in the future. But a more central point is: not whether Burnham has done service in the past or will behave in the future (both very minor problems), but how the past illumines in its own way the sudden appearance on the scene of dialectics at just this time, at the time when Burnham is in an opposition struggling against Trotsky and Cannon over the concrete political issues of today and tomorrow.
Perhaps, however, it was only that the American comrades were naive, being only (by their own admission) “students” of dialectics rather than ordained dialecticians, and did not recognize the monster they were harboring. But then there is a new, and this time international, scandal to explain: Two years ago Max Eastman wrote in Harper’s Magazine a theoretical attack on Marxism. Trotsky thereafter wrote me a personal letter requesting and proposing to me that I answer Eastman and defend the theories of the Fourth International against his attack (which, a few months later in the New International, I did). I was neither more nor less of a dialectician then than today. My views on the subject were as well known to Trotsky then as today. I therefore enquire: By what right did Trotsky make this proposal to me? By what right did he entrust the theoretical defense of the Fourth International against a theoretic opponent who was himself an anti-dialectician to – an avowed anti-dialectician? Was he ignorant then about the importance of dialectic, but suddenly wise today? Or was he light-minded and irresponsible in giving the defense over to a theoretic enemy? Equally astounding: last June, after the article Intellectuals in Retreat, after my review of Haldane in Partisan Review where I once more summarized flatly my point of view toward dialectics, Trotsky, through Abern, requested me to edit and cut 1,000 words from his introduction to the Longmans Green edition of Capital – and to do so at my own discretion. An extraordinary attitude toward one’s own theoretical work: to turn it over to an irreconcilable enemy for revision!
 
Dialectics and Finland
Trotsky complains that I do not take dialectics seriously, limiting myself to “rather cynical aphorisms”. I have not, it seems, the proper attitude of respect toward sacred doctrine, and this is unbecoming in a Marxist. It is true that, considered as an alleged scientific theory, I do not take dialectics seriously, any more than I would take seriously, as alleged scientific theories, any other theology or metaphysics. How can I take a doctrine seriously when, during the course of an entire century, its alleged “laws” or “principles” have never even been formulated – they have only been named, given titles. How can I even say whether I agree or disagree with, for example, the “law of the change of quantity into quality”, when no one yet has told me or anyone else what that law says? Of what use are all the metaphors (good and bad) and the “examples” brought forward to illustrate the “law” when no one has yet stated what they are supposed to be illustrating?
It would be the easiest thing in the world to make me take dialectics seriously, and to persuade me of its truth, if it is true. All that would have to be done is the following: Formulate its laws in a clear and unambiguous manner, in such a manner that the terms used in the formulation refer directly or indirectly to objects or events or procedures or operations that are publicly recognizable in the experience of any normal human being; and show what predictions can be made about the future on the basis of deductions from these laws. Then I will grant that dialectics is significant, and will take it seriously. Show, second, that on the basis of deductions from these laws predictions about the future can be made that are verifiable and verified, and that they enable such predictions to be made as well as or better than any alternative proposed hypotheses. Then I will grant that these laws are not merely significant but true. An Open Letter to Burnham on dialectics is announced. It will give an opportunity for this enlightenment. Looking back over the hundred years’ failures of the past, I am not over-optimistic about its coining this week.
I do not take dialectics seriously as a scientific doctrine, but I take very seriously indeed the uses to which dialectics is put in some political disputes, in particular by Eastman, the anti-dialectician, in his way, and by Trotsky in the current dispute. I object, and very strongly, to the substitution of theological disputation in the manner of the Council of Nicaea (which split Europe over the question of whether the Son of God was of “one substance” or “similar substance” with the Father), of loose metaphors and platitudes about science and pseudo-science in the style of the 19th century popularizers of Darwin, for – clear discussion of the genuine issues of the politics of 1939 and 1940.
Consider: the opposition raises questions with reference to the war, the Nazi-Soviet Pact, the actions of the Soviet Union, the invasion of Finland. The reply is: the problem is whether or not Russia is a workers’ state. The opposition demonstrates convincingly that a decision on the definition of the class character of the Soviet Union cannot answer the strategic and tactical issues posed to the movement. The reply is: the problem is the laws of dialectics. (There is a fourth stage which does not appear in written documents: the abominable personal gossip with which the Cannon clique corrupts its followers.) In an analogous manner, the opposition makes and proves concrete criticisms of the conservative and bureaucratic Cannon regime. The reply is: the problem is the alien petty-bourgeois social roots of the opposition.
Why is dialectics brought into the dispute? In the first instance, as an obvious and mechanical maneuver, which deceives no one of “trying to drive a wedge into the ranks of the opponents.” But more generally: to evade issues that cannot be and have not been answered on their own legitimate plane, to escape from an inconvenient reality to a verbal jousting ground, to confuse and turn aside the attention of the membership from the actual problems that face them, to – in the century-sanctioned way of all “authority”, all “dogma”, all bureaucracy – brand the critic as heretic so that his criticism will not be heard. The textbooks (“the school bench”) give a name to this device: Ignoratio Elenchi or Irrelevant Conclusion. The remarks on it of Whately – a contemporary of Darwin, by the way – are not, however, themselves irrelevant:
“Various kinds of propositions are, according to the occasion, substituted for the one of which proof is required: ... and various are the contrivances employed to effect and to conceal this substitution, and to make the conclusion which the sophist has drawn answer, practically, the same purpose as the one he ought to have established. I say ‘practically the same purpose’, because it will very often happen that some emotion will be excited – some sentiment impressed on the mind – (by a dexterous employment of this fallacy) such as shall bring men into the disposition requisite for your purpose, though they may not have assented to. or even stated distinctly in their own minds, the proposition which it was your business to establish.”
Let us suppose, however, that I accept the entire first half of Trotsky’s article, that I grant my errors on dialectics, and accept dialectics as the key to truth and socialism. What has changed with reference to the political issues in dispute, the problems discussed in the second half of his article? Nothing has been changed a centimeter. Everything remains just as it was when dialectics had never been mentioned. For Trotsky does not in any respect whatever establish any connection between what he says about dialectics in the first part of his article, and what he says about the defense of Russia, the Soviet-Finnish War, and the “organizational question” in the second half. Does anyone doubt this? Let him re-read the article, and see for himself. It follows therefore that the entire discussion of dialectics is totally irrelevant – as Trotsky himself presents the discussion – to the political questions. “Consciousness grew out of the unconscious, psychology out of physiology, the organic world out of the inorganic, the solar system out of nebulae ...” Very well; let it be so. Now show us how from generalizations of that type it follows – even by the most dialectical of logics – that ... the Red Army is introducing workers’ control in Finland and we ought to defend it.
The fact that Trotsky thinks and says there is a necessary connection between his dialectics and his politics has nothing to do with the question of whether there actually is such a connection. All through history, men have thought and said that there were connections between their scientific investigations or practical decisions on the one hand and their theologies or metaphysics on the other. Pasteur said that there was such a connection between his bacteriology and his Catholic faith; Einstein today between his field physics and his pantheistic idealism; Millikan finds God proved in his cosmic rays.
Either the dialectics is relevant or irrelevant to the empirical and practical questions in dispute. If it is irrelevant, to drag it in is scientifically useless. If it is relevant, the empirical and practical questions can in any case be settled on their own merits on the basis of the available evidence and our goals. In neither case is a decision as to dialectics required.

Trotsky writes: “To demand that every Party member occupy himself with the philosophy of dialectics would be lifeless pedantry.” I want to enquire: if it is true, as Trotsky claims, that dialectics is “the foundation of scientific socialism”, if rejecting does, as he declares, define the one who rejects as an alien class influence, if dialectics is indeed the method whereby we can solve correctly political problems, then by what conceivable principle does Trotsky conclude that it would be “lifeless pedantry” for more than a few Party members to occupy themselves with it? Rather would we have to say that dialectics must be the first and last study of all party members if they wish to be consistent and clear-headed revolutionary socialists.
Or must we seek another kind of explanation for Trotsky’s dictum: There is one doctrine – the “secret doctrine” – for the elite, the leaders, the inner circle; and another – the vulgar doctrine – for the mass, the ranks, the followers. What is the relation of the followers to the secret doctrine? They are not to know it, to study it, to test it in their own conscious and deliberate experience: that is excluded as “lifeless pedantry.” But may they then consider it unimportant, or reject it? Not on your life: then they are alien class elements. No: they must believe, they must have faith. As for the doctrine itself, it is safe in the hands of the elite; they will bring it out on appropriate occasions (a sharp factional fight, for example) to smite and confound the Enemy.
For my own part, I do not believe in Faith.
My friend and colleague Max Shachtman (may he forgive me for the reference, as I must, perforce, forgive him for what he has recently written about me) says: I do not really understand much about dialectics; I am only a humble student of the subject; of course I believe in it as all good Marxists must. This attitude is not unique in Shachtman. Whenever I have talked to any pro-dialectics party comrade about dialectics – or tried to talk about it – I have been given the same response (except, to be complete, in the case of Wright, who seems to think he understands dialectics because its words so well express the conflicts and shifts and confusions in his own attitudes and actions). We do not really understand it; we believe of course; we cannot formulate its laws; we cannot tell you how you can test them; some day we hope to get around to studying it. This response is as characteristic of pro-dialecticians in the Cannon clique as in the opposition. Few even pretend to “understand”, for example, the first part of the Trotsky article which I am now discussing.
Now I ask Shachtman and all these comrades of the party: if you don’t understand it, if you can’t explain or prove it, why then do you “believe” it? Whence springs your faith?
Throughout the centuries, it has been characteristic of religious groups to have two doctrines: the “esoteric” doctrine of the “inner circle”, the monopoly and carefully guarded secret of the high priests; and the “exoteric” doctrine of the “outer circle”, for the followers. Is this not exactly the situation with dialectics – whether or not you “believe” in dialectics? And the existence of an esoteric doctrine is always potentially reactionary, anti-democratic. It is so because the esoteric doctrine is by the nature of the case irresponsible, not subject to control by the humble followers, a weapon in the hands only of the priests.
For the method which I advocate – the method of science – there is only one doctrine, available to all. And what it says is subject always to tests that can be made by any normal man. There is no revelation, and no short cut, and no prophet.
I conclude on dialectics with a challenge:
In the letter dated January 3rd it is clearly implied that my attitude toward dialectics is incompatible with my being editor of the theoretical journal of the party. In the article (p. 11) it is stated explicitly that my rejection of dialectics represents the influence of another class.
First I want to ask: Where in the program of the Socialist Workers Party or the Fourth International is a belief in dialectics made part of the programmatic basis of our movement, the acceptance of which defines the conditions of membership? And if it is not, by what right does Trotsky or any one else attack me politically or object to my editorship of an organ of the International on the grounds of my attitude toward dialectics?
Is not our movement founded on its program, decided by conventions representing the membership? Or – do we communists hide our views, and is our real program something different from our public and adopted program?
But if Trotsky is justified in what he says about dialectics, and the conclusions he draws in connection with dialectics, I say further:
Let him propose to the forthcoming convention that this lack in our program be filled, that the convention adopt a specific clause, to be added to the Declaration of Principles, affirming acceptance of the philosophy of dialectical materialism.
If he does not make such a proposal, then only one of two conclusions is possible: either what he is now writing about dialectics is not meant seriously, is mere polemical rhetoric for the faction fight of the moment; or dialectics is indeed an esoteric doctrine, not suited for the public opinion of the party to pass upon, but a private monopoly of the priests.
If he does make the proposal, it is true that he will have only one precedent in the history of labor politics: Stalin’s program adopted at the Sixth Congress of the Comintern, in which the abandonment of Marxism was consummated. I confess that I should not like to feel that our movement is ready to regard such a precedent as appropriate.
 
The Finnish Invasion and the Perspective of the Third Camp
If by a “workers’ state” we mean that form of society transitional from capitalism to socialism, then Russia today can be considered a workers’ state only on the basis of its nationalized economy. Of those various major features of the “transitional society” described in advance (in State and Revolution, for example), no one, absolutely no one in any political camp except that of the Stalinists themselves, maintains that any other socialist factor remains in Russia today except the nationalized economy. Nationalized economy, must, therefore, in the view of those who hold that Russia is a workers’ state, be a sufficient condition for so characterizing it, and by a workers’ state Marxists have always meant, from Marx on, that form of society which is transitional from capitalism to socialism.
The assumption therein involved I, of course, reject. I hold that at least one other major condition is necessary for that form of society which is transitional to socialism – namely, workers’ democracy; and that therefore Russia today is incorrectly characterized as a workers’ state. This was Marx’ opinion; and his opinion has been entirely confirmed by the experiences of the last fifteen years of Soviet history.
Nevertheless, even if the assumption is granted, if it is thus further granted that Russia today is a workers’ state, this will not at all suffice to motivate a tactic of defense of the Soviet State and the Red Army in the present war (just as, conversely, if the assumption is denied and it is thus denied that Russia is a workers’ state, this will not by itself suffice to motivate a tactic of defeatism). We cannot deduce a tactic of defense from our definition of the Soviet state any more than we could deduce it from the “law of the negation of the negation.” Nor are we aided further in determining our tactic by the assumption that nationalized economy, in and by itself, divorced from the concrete social and political and historical relations which form the context of the nationalized economy, is “progressive” (an assumption which is involved in the initial assumption of our “dialectical” defenders of the workers’ state doctrine – an assumption which effectively eliminates all the changing actual reality which they say dialectics teaches us to take into account, and substitutes: a static, abstract category).
The general strategic aim of our movement is the world proletarian revolution (and socialism). We all hold (in words, at any rate) that this aim is now a goal not for the indefinitely remote future, but for the present period, that is, for the war and the postwar period. We concretize our goal in the statement of our “war aims” – united socialist states of Europe, the Americas, a free Asia and Africa, a world federation of socialist republics. Presumably we mean these seriously.
Any tactic we propose, therefore, can be justified only by proof that, directly or indirectly, it is in fact the best available means for reaching our general strategic goal.
Even granted, then, Trotsky’s assumptions, granted that Russia is a workers’ state, the tactic of defense can be justified only if certain additional propositions are, in fact, true.
These would have to include: (a) Defense of the Red Army is in fact the best available means of defending the nationalized economy (which, for the purpose of discussion, let us assume to be in and of itself progressive); (b) Defense of the Russian nationalized economy as a primary task is the best available means for promoting the world revolution.
But everyone grants (in words, at least) that the defense of Russia is not the only major necessary means for achieving our general strategic aim; other necessary means include, certainly: the overthrow of Stalinism; colonial revolts; the lifting of the revolutionary consciousness of the masses; the deepening of the class struggle throughout the world, in at least several major nations to the point of successful proletarian revolution. In and of Itself, defense of the present (i.e., Stalinist) Russian state and the Red Army, even if 100 per cent successful, would be of not the slightest value in achieving our goal; on the contrary, would make our goal impossible, since it would mean only the continuation in power and the extension of Stalinism.
The two propositions required by Trotsky to justify the tactic of defense therefore involve a third: (c) Defense of Russia in the present war does, in fact, serve as the best available means, or as an integral part of the best available means, for promoting colonial revolts, the lifting of the revolutionary consciousness of the masses, the overthrow of Stalinism, the deepening of the class struggle throughout the world (including, naturally, Russia itself and those countries against which Russian military action is conducted), and the completion of this struggle in successful revolutions.
Unless these three propositions are true, then the tactic of defense is not justified – no matter what may be the truth about dialectics and the definition of the Russian state. Their truth can be established in one way and one way only: not by changing quantity into quality or uniting opposites, but by relating them to the relevant evidence that can be brought to bear from modern historical experience – including prominently the evidence presented by the first months of the war itself.
As soon as these propositions are formulated, it is clear that Trotsky and the Cannon clique have utterly failed to present sufficient evidence to permit us to regard them as true. Proposition (a), especially on Trotsky’s premises (which include the belief in a “fundamental contradiction” between the bureaucracy and the nationalized economy) is certainly at best very doubtful, and becomes increasingly doubtful as we observe the economic program in the small Baltic countries – now Russian provinces, in the declaration of the Kunsinen government, and for that matter in Poland, or if we estimate the probable effects of increasing economic collaboration with Germany.
But it is Propositions (b) and (c) which are crucial; and any child should be able to realize that all the evidence from the beginning of the war, far from giving any remote likelihood of their truth, shows them to be undeniably false.
Trotsky, concentrated on the sociology and psychology of polemics, does not recognize explicitly the nature of the scientific problem posed in the dispute. Nevertheless he is compelled to give it implicit recognition. He seems to sense that all the thousands of words he has been writing since September on the “workers’ state” and dialectics are beside the point; and he tries to introduce at last – a few hundred words out of the many, many thousands (chiefly on p. 10 of the mimeographed version of the article I am now discussing) – some evidence for the truth of the key proposition (c).
What is this alleged evidence? I will quote the central sentences:
“In the second case (Poland and Finland) it (the Stalinist bureaucracy) gave an impulse to the socialist revolution through bureaucratic methods ...
“... the resolution (of the opposition on Finland) does not mention by so much as a word that the Red Army in Finland expropriates large land-owners and introduces workers’ control while preparing for the expropriation of the capitalists ... they (the Stalinists) are giving – they are compelled to give – a tremendous impulse to the class struggle in its sharpest form ... The Soviet-Finnish war is evidently already beginning to be completed with a civil war in which the Red Army finds itself at the given stage in the same camp as the Finnish petty peasants and the workers, while the Finnish army supports the owning classes, the conservative workers’ bureaucracy and the Anglo-Saxon imperialists ... in this ‘concrete’ civil war that is taking place on Finnish territory.
“As for the Kremlin it is at the present time forced – and this idnot a hypothetical but a real situation – to provoke a social revolutionary movement in Finland ...”
Now the first thing to be observed about this alleged evidence is that the whole world – including Trotsky himself – knows it to be false. Nothing of this kind has happened or is happening. Trotsky, indeed, admits it to be false when, in the letter dated January 5th (to “Joe”), evidently replying to the qualms his statements about Finland had raised even in the stern breasts of the Cannon clique itself, he “explains” what he wrote by saying ... that such things did happen – in Poland! – and will happen in Finland. But what he said in the article was that they had happened and were happening in Finland. (From where, by the way, Comrade Trotsky, did you borrow this method of “explanation”?)
(In passing, it was the opposition that pointed out, long ago, that an embryonic civil war began in Poland; and this fact was repeatedly denied and ridiculed by Cannon.)
What did actually happen – so far as we can learn by sifting all the reports – in Poland, Finland (and let us not forget Lithuania and her two sisters), up to now?
In Poland, important manifestations of the class struggle, including embryonic revolutionary steps, began – before the Red Army marched and independently of Russia – with the military and civil breakdown of the Polish bourgeois government. This is a normal and natural occurrence in all countries, whatever the character of the opposing army, when the home government goes to pieces. In a number of towns (including, apparently, Vilna and Warsaw itself) embryo “Soviets” arose on a loose basis, with labor and other popular organizations assuming de facto many of the tasks of sovereign power; in the villages, peasants began ousting the landlords – or, more exactly, the landlords had already run away.
It is quite possible (though the evidence is far from clear) that in some sections the march of the Red Army excited certain hopes – at least hope in comparison to the fears of the advance of the Reichswehr, and even encouraged some peasants to bolder steps in occupying the land of their former masters (who were no longer there to oppose them). These hopes were in the shortest time liquidated, together with the persons of any peasants or workers hardy enough to persist in them. The regime of Stalinism – and Stalinism without completely collectivized economy – was imposed by the representatives of the GPU. In the Vilna region the embryo “soviet” was smashed and the militants killed, in preparation for handing the territory back to bourgeois Lithuania.
Then the Red Army took over the three small Baltic states. Anyone who thought that in that action “the Kremlin (was) forced ... to provoke a social revolutionary movement” was rapidly undeceived. From the reports, a few underground communists began to show their heads. With public statement (released in the world press) and by police action, the Red Army joined the Baltic government in shoving those heads down again, and in reinforcing bourgeois rule and capitalist economy in those nations.
Meanwhile, it was revealed to all who had initially doubted it that Hitler and Stalin had divided Poland in complete and prior agreement.
These events were observed by the workers and peasants of the world, and above all, we may be sure, by the workers and peasants of the other nations bordering Russia – not least by the people of Finland. Not being highly skilled In sociological definition nor belonging to the inner dialectical circle, they drew nevertheless, in their humble way, certain conclusions (where they had not already drawn them from the Trials and Spain). Their conclusion, in short, was: the Red Army in this war is not our ally.
The propaganda campaign began against Finland, and then the invasion. For a number of days, the Red Army triumphantly advanced. The Kuusinen government was proclaimed, issued its program (a bourgeois, not a proletarian program, by the way, in spite of Trotsky’s dialectical deduction that the Kremlin must use social revolutionary policies – bureaucratically carried out; the Kremlin did not consult Trotsky).
What was the effect – the actual effect that happened, not the effect that we can read about in our former theses (which coincides with what Trotsky writes in the present article) or deduce from theories? The effect was, not to stimulate, but to wipe out what there had been of the class struggle (and there had been more than a trace of it) in Finland, to throw the Finnish workers and peasants into the hands of their own bourgeoisie. This is proved, first, by reports which, properly sifted, can legitimately be believed; but, second, independently, by what may be deduced from (1) the failure of the Kuuslnen government to excite any favorable response and (2) the high morale of the Finnish army which is obviously supported by a huge percentage of the population. This last fact the NC majority and Trotsky explain by the shockingly Philistine argument that the Finnish army has such good supplies and training – as if the Red Army were equipped with bows and arrows.
This reaction was not surprising. Knowing the Red Army fought against their interests, and seeing no third alternative, the Finnish workers drew what seemed to them the only possible conclusion under the circumstances: to fight desperately for the bourgeois “fatherland”; with the third alternative (an Independent struggle for freedom and power against the main enemy, at home, and the invading enemy) excluded, they chose what appeared to them as the “lesser evil”. Those responsible for this reactionary conclusion are the imperialists on the one hand and the Stalinists on the other (and all others!) who, ruling out the third camp, posed the choice exclusively as either Mannerheim’s army or Stalin’s.
On the other side, according to our theses (War and the Fourth International), the Russian soldiers and workers should have been reacting as follows: “Within the USSR war against imperialist intervention will undoubtedly provoke a veritable outburst of genuine fighting enthusiasm. All the contradictions and antagonisms will seem overcome or at any rate relegated to the background. The young generations of workers and peasants that emerged from the revolution will reveal on the field of battle colossal dynamic power.” But (to paraphrase a remark of Trotsky’s), “events did not recognize our theses.” In the Finnish war, the Russian soldiers and workers have shown – just the opposite, as everyone knows. There is no mystery here. The soldiers fight so poorly, so unenthusiastically, because – though without benefit of dialectics – they understand clearly enough that in this war the Red Army fights not for but against their interests and the interests of workers everywhere, and of socialism.
Who is it who is closest to socialist consciousness; those Soviet soldiers and workers who recognize the reactionary character of the war, are resentful and distrustful of it, and show no enthusiasm for it; or those (notably including the G.P.U.) who are whipped up into a frenzy of Stalino-patriotism for it? We, the opposition, say: the former. Trotsky is compelled by his doctrine to say: the latter.
But, in the further course of the Finnish war, will not the class struggle re-assert itself in Finland? Certainly, as we have declared from the beginning. When the Finnish defense and the Finnish government begin to crack, just as in Poland the overt class struggle will re-appear; workers and peasants will take social revolutionary steps, will, perforce, begin moves toward independent power and sovereignty. Above all will they do so if there are revolutionists and militants among them who have not, meanwhile, been functioning as spies of the counter-revolutionary Bed Army, but have made clear to them that their struggle, In the first instance directed against the main enemy at home, finds an also implacable enemy In the Kremlin and all its institutions, that the Red Army marches in not to aid them but to crush them; and if internationalists within the ranks of the Red Army have guided in a parallel manner the ranks of the Red soldiers, urging them to throw off the yoke of the Kremlin-GPU and to join in common struggle against their oppressors with the Finnish workers and peasants – not to obey the orders of the Kremlin to reduce the workers and peasants of Finland to a new type of slavery.
Does the policy of the Kremlin (through “compulsion” or voluntary will, it does not matter) in reality stimulate the class struggle, the social revolution? If so, then Marxism has been wrong from the beginning, for then the struggle for socialism can be carried on by bureaucratic-military means as a substitute (good or bad) for the popular, conscious and deliberate mass struggle of the workers and peasants. To accept Trotsky’s interpretation of the events of the present war is to accept the theory of the Bureaucratic road to socialism. I refer the reader to Max Shachtman’s excellent discussion of this point in his recent reply to this same article of Trotsky’s.
But is not the Kremlin stimulating the social revolution by its new policy, both directly through its own state agencies, and by the new line of the Comintern? If this is true – as Trotsky now holds – we cannot possibly explain intelligibly to the workers the meaning of the new line of the CI (and we have not done so up to now – everyone recognizes that from reading our press), we have no sufficient reason for not re-applying for admission as a faction of the CI.
No. The present policy of the Kremlin stimulates the class struggle and is “socialist” only in the same general sense as Wilson’s policy with reference to “defeatism” in Germany in 1917–18, or Chamberlain’s policy in his broadcasts to and leaflet-droppings on Germany today, or Hitler’s similar appeals. These “revolutionary” policies – with respect to the enemy country – are all simply supplementary military-strategic devices. As a matter of fact, in this sense the most “radical” of all of them at the present time is Hitler’s, not Stalin’s: Hitler’s New Year speech was far more “socialist” than the proclamation of the Kuusinen government. True enough, the nation employing this device is always playing with social dynamite – above all in this war. Even Chamberlain’s propaganda is capable of “stimulating the class struggle” within Germany under appropriate circumstances – but we hardly support it, for that reason (though we do support the class struggle, no matter how stimulated). But the more usual effect is for it to aid in stifling the class struggle in the enemy nation, (precisely because it is not internationalist in character, and because the workers understand it as merely a maneuver of a rival oppressor). This is just what has happened in Finland, just as in Germany after the Chamberlain leaflet raids.
Cannon and Trotsky tell us: But then you want the imperialists to take over the Soviet Union. This is nothing but the standard slander which has always been directed against those who uphold the internationalist position of revolutionary defeatism. We are for the defeat of all the belligerent armies and the overthrow of all the belligerent governments; but for defeat and overthrow not by the opposing armies in the field, but by the third camp, by the workers of each respective country.
But Cannon and Trotsky say nothing of the meaning of their alternative in relation to the general strategic aim, to the world proletarian revolution. How, just how, will a defensive tactic with respect to the Red Army serve the development of the revolution, how in this war – not the war of our theses – where the Red Army fights, in alliance with the Reichswehr, for the defense, preservation and extension solely and simply of the power, privileges and revenues of the counter-revolutionary bureaucracy? Trotsky and Cannon do not tell us, cannot tell us. And yet their position could rest only upon a clear, convincing and reasonable answer to this question.

The position of the opposition is based upon the perspective of the collapse of existing governments, upon the optimistic expectation of mass revolt against the war. It is summed up as: the strategy of the third camp. In this war, the actual war which has broken out and is now going on, the revolutionists must take their stand unambiguously in the third camp, the camp of the workers and peasants, of the oppressed of the entire world, of the peoples of India and Africa, the camp of struggle against the camps of all the belligerent powers and the belligerent governments. Today the troops of the third camp are atomized, disordered and disorganized, scattered through the framework of society. Tomorrow their ranks will close; they will form in great army corps; the popular army of India, the revolting Negro divisions of Africa, the workers’ fronts of Germany and the Ukraine and France and the United States ... But they will do so successfully only if the troops of tomorrow can hold clearly and simply and unambiguously before themselves the firm strategic aim: the third camp, the camp of struggle against the war and the war-makers, for workers’ power and socialism.
Trotsky and Cannon, desperately clinging to a doctrine no longer adequate to meet the test of events, have abandoned the strategy of the third camp. How revealing that even the phrase (used so effectively – after being mistakenly borrowed from the opposition – in putting forward the revolutionary position in the ALP controversy between Rose and the Stalinists) has dropped out of the party press and agitation! They have joined one of the belligerent camps, one of the war camps. In this can be seen the basic defeatism of their perspective (they, who accuse us of being defeatists!), defeatism toward the possibility of successful proletarian revolution in the course of the war. They are compelled, more and more, to argue for Stalinism as the “lesser evil” (their description): this lesser evil is the goal they place before the workers – a fine goal indeed to inspire revolutionary struggle! They must reason in terms of the maintenance of existing governments (what if, Cannon asks in debate, Finland takes over northern Russia?). Everything is turned upside down. The strategic aim of world revolution issuing out of the war is subordinated to defense of Russia. Their whole policy becomes oriented around the tactic of defensism with respect to the Red Army – on the very best account, the part usurping the place of the whole. For the sake of a hand the head and heart are sacrificed.
Trotsky has permitted a frantic clinging to a false doctrine to drive him, in short, to a policy of defeat and desperation.
 
What the Record Shows
In the article, The War and Bureaucratic Conservatism, we analyzed the character of the Cannon group, its regime, and its present policy. We showed that it is not a principled tendency, but a permanent clique; that its only real policy is self-maintenance; that it on all occasions subordinates political to organizational questions; that in actuality it has no genuine program, but only the substitute for a program – the substitute being usually borrowed from Trotsky.
In the present dispute, Trotsky puts forward the program which the Cannon clique appropriates, and Trotsky supports – unconditionally – the Cannon clique. It does not, however, follow that the analysis which we made of Cannon’s present policy applies also to Trotsky. I wish now to examine briefly the political record of Trotsky since August 21st with the aim of throwing some light on the problem of how Trotsky has reached his present impasse, in which he finds himself upholding an incorrect political perspective, a false analysis of events, and a sterile, cynical and rotten bureaucratic clique. I will draw only upon facts which are well known, and which can be checked at every point.
For more than a week following the first announcement of the Nazi-Soviet agreement – the most startling International shift of recent years, and obviously of the most peculiar moment to the Fourth International – Trotsky made no public statement to the press. He then gave out two short and very general statements in which he did not attempt any analysis or prediction; in fact they summed up to little more than the view that there was nothing much to be said about the agreement. Trotsky issued no statement – so far as we know – on the outbreak of the second world war, the most momentous event in the history of mankind. In fact, he has to this day made no general analysis of the war and its meaning, a lack which has been widely remarked among the general public.
Since the war began, Trotsky has made only two specific predictions of any importance. The first was when the Red Army was mobilizing on the borders of Poland, when Trotsky stated that Stalin did not know why the army was mobilizing. A short time later he was compelled to recognize that the Polish invasion had been carried out by prior agreement with Hitler. A few weeks before the Finnish invasion, Trotsky was preparing an article for a magazine. According to an outline of this article which was received in New York, he therein predicted that there would be no Finnish invasion (that year at any rate) but that the issues would be “compromised”.
The first major article written by Trotsky was the one which was published in the New International (The USSR and the War). This did not concern itself in a single sentence with the problems and prospects of the war already started, but with the most general possible theoretic issues. The second (published in an internal bulletin) was on the class character of the Soviet Union. Meanwhile (and continuing through the present) have been numerous shorter documents dealing with the internal factional struggle, the overwhelming percentage of them concerned with such issues as the character of the groups in the party and their methods, etc. The next long document (the one here under discussion) brought in one new subject: the dialectics; and a new document (the Open Letter to me) on the same subject is now promised. The only specific statements about current events in this document (those on Finland) turn out, by Trotsky’s own admission, to be false.
So far as I am aware, he has said nothing about the taking over of the three Baltic countries. And nothing was said about the taking over of Poland and the invasion of Finland until after these events occurred.
Let us sum up the undeniable general features of this 4½ months’ picture: virtually no specific predictions, and those made disproved by events; nothing specific foreseen in advance; no proposals or guides for action in advance; a minimum concern with the major historical action now occurring – the second world war; a maximum of energies devoted either to general theoretic questions (up to and beyond dialectics) or immediate internal polemic.
This picture has a great political-symptomatic importance. This is easily grasped when we compare it with Trotsky’s almost invariable political record in connection with other major historic occurrences (none of which since the Russian revolution approaches the significance of the second world war) – such as, for example, the German events or the Trials. There, while not neglecting general theoretic concerns or internal factional struggle when necessary, Trotsky has been distinguished over all other political figures in the entire world for precisely what is absent now: for immediate and constant reaction to the events; for exact predictions, so often brilliantly confirmed; for stating at every stage guides for the action of the workers; for illuminating by specific analysis the meaning of actually occurring events. The whole world knows this.
To the present picture, we must, unfortunately, add further elements: Trotsky not merely supports the Cannon regime, but whitewashes it 100% – an attitude which even its most ardent follower in the party could not even pretend to justify by objective reference. Trotsky not merely condemns the opposition, but slanders it, misstates and distorts not merely its views but its very words. Trotsky (for example, in the sheaf of letters of the first days of January) indulges in absurd exaggerations.
Now Trotsky has amply proved by his entire career that he above all takes ideas, doctrine, principles seriously, that he bases himself upon and operates from principles. When we keep this in mind, the picture of these months falls into a classic and often repeated pattern: the pattern of one who proceeds from a theory, who is motivated in his actions by that theory, but where the theory itself is false. Clinging to the theory becomes under these circumstances an act of desperation; and the desperation communicates itself to the actions, even to the very style.
The theory, the doctrine, at all costs. But the doctrine is not in accord with events. Then, refusing to abandon the doctrine, there are only two solutions: to evade events (by treating, say, of very general theoretic questions or of dialectics), and to falsify events to bring them into accord with the (false) doctrine. No intent to deceive is involved in this: it follows almost automatically when one clings desperately to a false doctrine.
Therefore also the opposition must be smashed at any cost. The only vehicle for the doctrine is Cannon (who will accept any doctrine that suits his clique purpose). Therefore complete support for Cannon. But here, too, just as in treating international events, Trotsky must pay a heavy price – and the price, alas, is assessed not merely against Trotsky but against the International and indeed in the last analysis against the workers everywhere – for his false doctrine. To implement his (false) doctrine he finds he can utilize only a rotten bureaucratic clique; but by supporting this clique he becomes an accomplice in and defender of its crimes against the movement.
If we realize that Trotsky proceeds seriously and firmly from theory, and that this theory with relation to the war is false, his present political position, and the manner of his political and organizational intervention in the party dispute – so puzzling and often shocking to many comrades – become at once intelligible. (This of course is not that “class analysis” which Trotsky demands from all Marxists. All that such analysis could mean in his case would be: what social group is aided by the effects of Trotsky’s present policy? The answer is perfectly evident: the Russian bureaucracy. His present policy is a deviation from the direction of the international proletarian struggle for socialism, toward Stalinism.)
The party and the International face in the immediate future the most serious decision of many years. We will either be dragged by a false doctrine, a distorted perspective, and a bankrupt regime into a blind gulf where the waves of the war will leave us floundering and finally drown us; or we will, with however painful a wrench, break out onto the high road, the best soldiers in the one army to which we can give our loyalty; the army of the third camp.




 


James BURNHAM
 January 10, 1940




 



Politicians ordinarily use key words not so much to describe
clearly what they mean as for the sake of the feelings the words
arouse. Imagine, for example, what a difference it would make in the
public attitude if armament expenditures in the budget were listed
under the title, “Imperialist Aggression,” instead of
“National Defense.”
Now the funds for armaments which Roosevelt has proposed for the
fiscal year 1940–41 are worth thinking about. $1,800,000,000 are
included for the “regular” expenses of the army and navy.
$272,000,000 is asked as an emergency deficiency appropriation for
this year; and $302,000,000 for “emergency” items during
the coming fiscal year. These, totalling the colossal sum of
$2,374,000,000, only begin to indicate the true burden of war on the
community.
Interest on the public debt will come to $1,100,000,000. War and
armament expenditures during the past twenty-five years have amounted
to far more than the entire federal debt; and, since these
expenditures serve no conceivably useful social function, it is
entirely legitimate to charge the whole interest payment against war.
Pensions will come to $1,200,000,000; at least three-fourths
resulting from war. Out of the $1,100,000,000 listed for public
works, a minimum of several hundred millions will go to war projects.
Similarly with the $1,300,000,000 allotted for work relief. The
$1,000,000,000 for “regular operating expenditures”
includes at least a couple of hundred millions for activities of
State, War, Navy, Justice departments that would have no place except
for war.
Figured very conservatively, this will give us around:
$5,300,000,000 which last week Roosevelt proposed for war –
nearly two-thirds of the budget of the federal government. We can say
without exaggeration that governments in the modern imperialist world
have become, first and foremost, war-making machines.
 
What is to be Defended?
When the phrase “national defense” is used about
armaments, it is designed to suggest certain pictures to the minds of
the ordinary honest people of the country. We imagine bombers
swarming over the cities, troops landing in California and Florida,
tanks storming down from Canada or up from Mexico. And it seems most
natural to think: “Should we not have the means to defend
ourselves – our homes and children – from the invaders.”
Even if we approached the problem from a purely military point of
view, and thought carefully about what the money is being spent for,
these pictures would rapidly disappear.
On the new program, for instance, are ten huge battleships either
already begun or soon to be started. Two of them are at present
designed to be of 45,000 tons displacement – the largest in the
world, costing $90,000,000 each. Still larger sizes are being
debated.
But battleships are not suited to defend the shores of a country
in a literal sense. They operate at a long distance from their bases.
Shore defenses feature submarines, mines, coastal artillery, mosquito
boats, etc. No imaginable attack against the shores of the United
States would require these battleships (though, for that matter, no
attack of any kind against the shores of the United States is
imaginable).
The truth is that the military expert’s idea of “defensive”
and “offensive” is completely different from that of the
layman. For the expert, the job is simply that of winning the given
war; and he adopts a defensive or offensive strategy, or shifts them,
in line with this single objective. He cannot permit himself the
sentimental luxury of preferring defense merely because it gives him
a better conscience.
And, in the case of a war against another nation or nations, the
fighting machine of this country is designed to carry on war
thousands of miles away from the shores. It is defensive only with
respect to an internal war: that is, to suppress a workers’
revolution.
Those who honestly support Roosevelt’s “national
defense” program because they believe its object is to
safeguard home and children are, whether they like it or not,
upholding a policy of aggressive external war. This can be clearly
seen from a military analysis alone.
 
And Whose Nation?
As always, the military objective is subordinate to the social and
political objectives. The government is building ah aggressive
military machine, designed for external combat far from the shores of
this country, because the government has an aggressive social and
political policy.
From this more fundamental point of view, it is correct to speak
of “national defense,” just as the armies and navies of
France and Germany and England are all part of their national
“defenses.” The purpose of the armed forces is to defend
the interests of the nation; and “nation” here means the
imperialist ‘ government, representative of the big bankers and
industrialists, of the Sixty Families.
But defense of these interests requires offense
against the interests of the peoples of South America, China, and
against rival powers and, above all, offense against the interests of
the people of the United States. The new budget shows this last point
in the most brazen fashion: in order to achieve funds for “national
defense,” the budget takes funds away from the people, from the
starving and homeless unemployed. Roosevelt’s first line of
“national defense” is his attack on the living
standards and rights of the people of the United States.
It is in every way legitimate for the people to wish to defend
themselves and their homes and their freedom from any and all
enemies. But the chief enemy attacking the people is neither Hitler
nor Stalin nor the Mikado, but Roosevelt himself and his government:
it is his G-men who are smashing labor and democratic rights, his
whip that is slashing relief funds, his party that refuses to
establish humanly decent wages’ and hours’ standards, his
general staff that is completing its plans to hurl the youth of the
country into death far away, for the sake of his program of
imperialist expansion.
 



National politics, in its narrower aspects, continues to be
dominated by “the third term issue”, Roosevelt, as
always, plays his cards shrewdly – close to his chest, as the
gamblers say. By his careful silence, broken only by the smiling
wisecracks, he has kept in domination of the whole field, in both
parties. The entire struggle for the Presidency centers around him;
every eager candidate is measured first and last against him, not
against his fellow-hopefuls.
The best-informed opinion runs at present about as follows: Within
the next month or two Roosevelt will issue a statement on his
candidacy. In this he will give a Rooseveltian version of Coolidge’s
famous 1928 “I do not choose to run”. Meanwhile, he will
continue leaning toward Secretary of State Hull, following up the
boost he gave in the annual message to Congress. Hull (who, in spite
of his white hair and his innocent honest expression is well known as
a hardened and skillful machine man) is acceptable to the right wing
of the Democratic party, and looks right now like the ideal
compromise between the New Deal and the Garner factions. Garner,
according to this perspective, would withdraw his name, since he has
entered the race chiefly to block a third term.
For Vice President, Roosevelt is supposed to be supporting his
newly appointed Attorney-General, Robert H. Jackson, whom last year
the Corcoran-Cohen group favored for Governor of New York. Jackson,
however, would be stiffly fought by Garner and, probably, Farley.
 
To Run or Not to Run?
It should not be imagined, however, that the “I do not
choose” statement (and the rumors expecting it are doubtless
correct) will end the third term issue. The potential candidate who
does not choose, can always be “drafted” – for, as
it would be explained, the good of the Party and the country. Even if
Roosevelt had actually reached an irrevocable decision not to run
again, he would hardly say so with 100% clarity, since this would
eliminate him not only as a candidate but as a factor in the party
machine and at the convention.
But there is no reason to believe that Roosevelt has reached such
an irrevocable decision. On the contrary, it seems fairly clear that
Roosevelt is ready to run again if he thinks he can get away with it.
It is even clearer that most of the leaders in the national party
machine do not want him to run. Some of them, like Garner and Glass,
do really consider him dangerous politically. Others are afraid of
the popular effect of a break from the anti-third term tradition.
Many, like Farley, get disturbed by his often erratic and headstrong
moves, and would like someone in office who would be more docile and
“regular”.
Nevertheless, it is an indisputable fact that the overwhelming
majority of the rank and file Democratic voters are in favor of
Roosevelt’s running again; and that a decisive majority of the
voters of all parties are still pro-Roosevelt. As a public
personality, no candidate in either party comes within striking
distance of Roosevelt. Party machines are very powerful, but they run
a suicidal risk when they go headlong against popular sentiment.
The drawing appeal of the Presidential candidate is, as
Attorney-General Jackson took recent occasion to point out, of
particular importance to the Democratic party. Since the World War,
the Republicans have always been able to count on at least 14,000,000
votes in a Presidential election; but the Democratic vote has varied
from 8,000,000 to Roosevelt’s 27,000,000 in 1936. These figures
show that the Democrats must be able to swing the unattached voters
in order to win, and it is hard to see that a man so old, and so
colorless as a public figure, as Hull could be safely counted on to
do the trick.
It is of the greatest significance to observe that the firmest
support for a third term (apart from the playboys in the
Administration, who don’t count much when it comes to votes) is
appearing from the hardened big-city bosses, like Hague in New Jersey
and the Kelly-Nash gang in Chicago. Tammany, in New York, is reported
ready to go along. The New Leader, which is also 100% third term, has
embarrassing allies!
 
Will Roosevelt Run Again?
Roosevelt’s New Deal lives now only as a memory. In most
respects he is to the right even of the current Congress. He has
dropped all mention of the “Lend-Spend” program that he
got so many headlines for last summer. He has proposed such drastic
reductions in relief that Congress will probably increase them over
his budget figures. He is ready, without resistance, to let the NLRB
and the Wage- Hour Administration be altered further in favor of the
bosses. He is backing the G-Men to the hilt in their drive against
labor rights.
On the domestic front, Roosevelt’s program is a complete
shambles. All that he has left is the war, toward which he is driving
with such recklessness that Congress, feeling something of the
pressure of the people, is compelled now and then to draw him back –
as in attempts to cut down armament expenditures or to block an
outright war loan to Finland.
But it is precisely his bold attitude toward the war that
recommends Roosevelt to widening circles in Wall Street; and even the
memory of the New Deal has more substance in the eyes of the people
than any program that his opponents have brought forth.
Roosevelt is so strong because none of the other representatives
of the bosses have anything at all to offer – except the war,
and Roosevelt has monopolized first claim on the war; and because
labor has failed to strike out on an independent road. If the only
shelter to be seen is a pig-sty, then it will seem that we will have
to remain in the pig-sty, even that we will try to pretend to
ourselves that the pig-sty is a palace.
Since these things are so, it seems probable that the Democratic
party will have to re-nominate Roosevelt, that it cannot risk losing
that smile, those memories, and that ruthless hand on the reins of
the war chariot. And if he runs, how can the New York cop, Dewey, or
the Ohio platitude, Taft, or the Michigan vacuum, Vandenberg, expect
to beat him?
 



INSURRECTION and war are, in the end, the ordeals by fire that test beyond appeal the integrity of working class parties. When faced with war or insurrection, no further equivocation is possible, no fine phrases can any longer hide inner decay, no abstractly noble slogans can serve to check the impact of the mailed fist of history. All veils are torn aside; and the working class is given its clearest chance to see and to judge.
These tests are infallible, and the parties that fail to meet them are thereby forever condemned. It was the Bolshevik party alone—even more narrowly, the Leninist wing of the Bolshevik party—that stood unshaken before the October insurrection. Before the insurrection, however, the leaders of the Bolshevik party, by their position during the imperialist war, had already demonstrated that they would not fail.
Conversely, it was the outbreak of the war which proved conclusively that social democracy could not lead the revolutionary movement of the working class. All the municipal housing and “honest government” and social insurance in the world could not weigh a feather against the lead weight of the handing over of the workers to the war machines of the imperialist powers. This verdict needed no confirmation. History, however, generously provided her second great test to remove any trace of doubt: and once more, in the German revolution, she exposed the corrupted sinews of social democracy.
Now it must be clearly understood that failure or success in these two final tests—war and insurrection—is not at all an accident of the moment. Rather is one or the other prepared for slowly, in cumulative fashion, over a long period of years. Corruption does not set in in an instant. It is the result of a developing decay, manifested first in little things, in isolated spots and tissues, and finally, unchecked, taking possession of the entire body. So, likewise, is strength built up—by a long process of vigorous exercize, healthy diet, discipline and control. Thus, it was the generation-long fight of Lenin against the incursions of opportunism, reformism, sectarianism, that brought the Bolsheviks intact and ready through to 1918. And it was a generation of too much ease, too much minor success, and above all a subtly, increasing confusion, both in theory and in actions, on the question of the nature of the state, that brought social democracy to the betrayal of 1914. Since, in 1914, the social democracy no longer saw the bourgeois state as its irreconcilable enemy, it was thus ready, under the “exceptional circumstances”, to support the bourgeois state.
It is the duty of Marxists to foresee and to prepare. Although Lenin and the other genuine Marxists, before the war of 1914-18, had been aware of the growing corruption of social democracy; although they had analyzed it and fought against it; yet even they had not clearly enough warned the working class against betrayal. Consequently, the blow to the working class was even greater than it need have been. “If these, our leaders, who have so long propagandized against imperialist war,” reasoned the workers, “now support this war, then this war must be just, it must be our war.” The workers had not been told often and forcibly enough that the whole development of their leaders’ policies was carrying them to support of the oncoming war and the sell-out of their class.
Once again, the prospect of imperialist war, a war far greater and more deadly than the last, confronts us. The day and the hour when it will break out openly cannot, of course, be predicted. It will not be next month, nor in all probability during the next twelve months. Certain necessary factors are not yet in line. However, the material presuppositions for war are now present The imperialist tensions are more taut even than in 1914. Armaments are not merely at their highest point in history, but are being increased more rapidly than ever before. Inescapable inner forces are driving Japan and Germany to expansion. The hegemony of France over Continental Europe, temporarily secured by the Versailles Treaty, is threatened by the treaty revisionists; and France must steadily slip back unless she reasserts herself, and resolutely goes forward—that is, unless she is victor in a new war. Italy’s Ethiopian campaign brings her directly and indirectly into potential conflict with Japan, France, and England, all three of whom have greedy eyes fixed on the Empire of Haile Selassie. The imperialist interests of the United States are daily more threatened by, on the one hand, Japan, and on the other England.
The chief factor now delaying the outbreak of war is the lack of sufficiently secure “national unity” in certain of the imperialist nations, notably France and England. To wage external war successfully, the bourgeois state must be reasonably certain of no major disturbances within. Above all in France this certainty does not at present hold. This situation, however, cannot long endure; and whichever way the internal issue is decided in France will complete the preparation for war: Fascism will consolidate the nation through the totalitarian state, and make France ready for external war; whereas a workers’ insurrection would itself be the signal for an immediate continental outbreak.
This, then, is what confronts us. We must therefore ask: What will be the position of the working class parties in the face of war? Will it be the Marxian position, the position of intransigent struggle against the enemy at home, the fight to turn the imperialist war into civil war and to utilize the war crisis to achieve the victory of the workers’ state? Or will it be again a “truce with the bourgeoisie”—that is, capitulation and betrayal?
No future event is inevitable, and it is therefore impossible to predict with certainty the answer to this question. Nevertheless it is clear that all of the evidence of every kind, in the case of the parties of the Second and the Third Internationals, points to: betrayal. No charge can be more serious than this one, and it is with a full sense of responsibility that it is made. Silence, in this case, would mean to share in the betrayal.
We are concerned here primarily with the socialist and Stalinist parties in France, Great Britain, and the United States, and with the respective Internationals in relation to these. In Germany and Italy, the parties are not at present important forces. The three former are the decisive countries.
A betrayal, naturally, is not a successful betrayal if it is an open and straightforward repudiation. That is not the danger. The danger is that slogans which may be—abstractly and formally considered—correct and unassailable, are manipulated in the concrete to serve the betrayal. Slogans are always historically meaningless when taken in the abstract; it is not until we examine their specific content in particular policies and actions that we can estimate their role. In the present article it is chiefly by the examination of two such formally correct slogans, together with their specific content, that I shall present some of the evidence substantiating the prediction that the Second and Third Internationals will capitulate at the outbreak of the next war.
These slogans are: (1) “Against War and Fascism”; (2) “Defend the Soviet Union”.
As to the social democracy, however, one point, in itself sufficiently conclusive, must be made to begin with: Lack of clarity on the question of the state was the central issue that led to the capitulation of social democracy in 1914. Since 1914, however, in spite of the hammering of history, social democracy has not in any respect clarified this question, either in theory or in practise. Indeed, the opposite is the case. Today, among the social democratic leadership, there is more confusion on this question than in 1914. We do not need to look far for proof. For example: the British Labor party’s declaration “against dictatorship whether of the Right or the Left”; the behavior of the social democrats in office in the Scandinavian countries; voting for Hindenburg in Germany; the attitude toward the NRA at the beginning of Roosevelt’s administration; above all, among recent events, the entry of Vandervelde—the leader of the Second International—into the Belgian Government. Like results, fortunately or unfortunately, follow from like causes. And the like result in this case will be the new betrayal.
  
2.
“Against War and Fascism!” How persuasive and unimpeachable a slogan this seems to be! Is there any Marxist who is not against these two primary scourges of the working class? It is easy to be carried along by the appealing surface. Yes, Marxists are against war and against Fascism, but their opposition is a revolutionary opposition, and to understand this we must go beneath the surface.
There are two cardinal errors in the use made by the socialists and Stalinists (in this respect they are scarcely distinguishable, though their positions spring from different roots) of the slogan, “Against War and Fascism!”
The first is old and familiar. The slogan, negative in form, is used as a cover for purely “defensive” and pacifist agitation against war. This has always been true of social democratic opposition to war. In the case of the Stalinists it has become most striking during the past two years. The pacifist peace policy of the Soviet Union is only the home counterpart of the building of pacifist “Leagues Against War and Fascism” throughout the world. In Moscow, Radek, writing officially for Pravda, praises Barthou, after the Marseilles assassination, as one whose whole life had been devoted to the cause of peace. Barthou, world agent of French imperialism! And in this country the communist party unites in the League, in program as well as in activities, with the worst liberal, ministerial, and women’s club riff-raff. The League of Nations has suddenly become the great defender of world peace—so outstanding a defender that Litvinov, a few weeks ago, no longer finds it necessary on the floor of the Council to object to Mussolini’s Ethiopian outrage. As usual, pacifism turns out to be not merely ineffectual against war, but in practise part of the ideological preparation for war. Litvinov has become more eloquent than the Pope in calling for “disarmament”—and rather less effective.
Naturally, the socialists are not disturbed at the pacifist charms of their bureaucratic rivals. They are old hands at the pacifist game.
The only fight against war is the revolutionary struggle for socialism. This shameful, weak-kneed, blear-eyed, sentimental pacifism of the two parties is, precisely, a major method of blunting the revolutionary struggle, deceiving the working class, and ultimately of handing them over helpless to the bourgeois state when war does actually come. A pacifist position, however disguised, when encountered in a working class party is invariably a symbol of wholesale political degeneration. It was so in the case of social democracy, which was so enlightenedly pacifist before 1914. It is so now. Pacifism is the hypocritical face of social-patriotism. And, as before, it will prove the bridge to capitulation.
The second error in the use of the slogan, “Against War and Fascism!” is even more deadly; and in its case we have a new development, the development that will distinguish the capitulation of working class officialdom in the next war from its capitulation in 1914. The same tricks will not work twice in exactly the same manner. There must be at least a change of costume.
The reason goes as follows: Fascism, especially Hitlerism, means war. Therefore, the fight against war is the fight against Fascism, and especially against Hitlerism, the worst form of Fascism. The success of Fascism means the destruction of all democratic rights. The destruction of democratic rights means the crushing of the organizations of the working class, and thus defeat for the revolutionary movement. But Fascism, especially Hitlerism, can succeed only by war, and, since Fascism means war, will inevitably undertake war.
What then follows? What follows is the betrayal of the working class of France, England, and the United States. For, on the basis of the above chain of reasoning, to support the democratic nations in a war against Hitler is to defend democratic rights against Fascism; thus to defend the organizations of the working class; and thereby the revolution. The wheel completes its circle. Defense of the national state—that is, defense of, the interests of the imperialist bourgeoisie of England, France, and the United States—becomes, through the position of the socialists and the Stalinists, a revolutionary duty!
Let no one imagine that this analysis is a mere fantasy. This is the necessary and inescapable consequence of the cumulative corruption of Marxian principle in the hands of the leaders of the Second and Third Internationals. Once more we shall find that the working class officials make the most effective recruiting sergeants for the bourgeoisie.
The moral fallacy in this position is easy enough to understand when once examined from the point of view of Marxism. The statement, “Fascism means war” is incomplete. It is not fascism that means war. Rather is it the continued existence of capitalism that means both Fascism and war ... Fascism means war only in the sense that it marks outwardly a great intensification of the inner conflicts of capitalism, and is thus an indication of the more rapid drive of the whole capitalist system toward the highest expression of these conflicts—imperialist war. But in the linked chain of causes that make war an inevitable concomitant of the continued existence of capitalism, the democratic nations have as integral a part as the Fascist nations. From the point of view of the working class, there can be no “friendly”, no “peace-loving” capitalist states. Every capitalist state, democratic as well as Fascist, represents one or another form of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie over the working class, and is thus the implacable enemy of the working class. To defend the democratic rights of the working class is one thing. But this has nothing in common with the defense of the “democratic” capitalist state. The former is a primary duty of every working class party; the latter is the occupation of traitors. The latter will be put forward as the only way to protect the working class against war and Fascism; in practice, it will give the working class both war and Fascism, for the bourgeoisie of the democratic countries will not overcome the necessity for a resort to Fascism in the decline of capitalism merely by success in the next war.
The business of the working class within any country is never under any circumstances to defend “the government”—that is, the political executive of the class enemy—but always to fight for its overthrow. This holds above all in the case of war, for war undertaken by the capitalist government is at once both the most frightful blow that can be directed by the bourgeoisie against the working class, and likewise one of the signal opportunities for doing away with the bourgeois state. The duty of the French (or British or American) Marxist in the case of war is not to suspend the struggle against the class enemy, but to redouble its vigor and intransigence. It is a fine revolutionary policy that goes actively along in “normal” times and is abandoned in the “exceptional” instances of war and insurrection. These “exceptions” are exactly what the whole revolutionary policy should be designed to prepare for. As I stated at the beginning of this article, these are the supreme tests of revolutionary integrity. Failure to meet these tests is the proof not merely of a “deviation” on particular points, but of the complete degeneration of the entire policy.
Under the slogan, “Against War and Fascism!!” along the lines I have traced, social democracy and Stalinism have already completed the full ideological preparation for the sell-out to the next war. The speeches of Leon Blum are only the complements of the statements of Stalin, Radek and Litvinov. Every Moscow broadside about the “peace-loving nations”, the “sincere friends of peace” (Laval, Flandin, Simon, Benes, Roosevelt...!) in contrast to the “Fascist war-mongers” only serves to cement the structure more firmly.
  
3.
The second formally “correct” slogan which is being manipulated to prepare for capitulation to the next war is the familiar “Defend the Soviet Union!” Here we are at the very heart of Stalinism.
Defend the Soviet Union? Naturally. An elementary duty of every worker? Of course. A first principle of any revolutionary program since 1918? What pretender, even, to Marxism would deny it? And it is just because this slogan, in the abstract, is so unquestionable, so entirely correct, that its misuse by Stalinism is so completely deceptive and disastrous.
What does the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union!” mean to a Marxist? The essence can be summed up quickly. It means: “Extend the October revolution.” It means to strengthen the economic and political organizations of the world proletariat, to carry the class struggle on a world basis to ever higher levels, to drive toward workers’ power. It means to put all faith in the working class. It means to achieve working class victory in the capitalist nations. And it means these things quite openly and realistically. For these are the only possible defense of the Soviet Union.
To Stalinism, however, the slogan means: support the program of national Bolshevism; no word of criticism of Stalin and his bureaucratic associates; put all faith in diplomatic deals with bourgeois powers; adopt an attitude of philistine cynicism toward the world proletariat; reduce the working class parties to branches of the foreign office of the Soviet state. And it means: do not carry on genuinely revolutionary activities within your own country, because this would upset “peace”; permit the working class of Germany and Austria to be crushed under Fascism rather than risk one ounce of cement at Dnieprostroy or one tractor at Stalingrad. And, lastly, it means: support the war policy of your democratic government, and offer the working class to the coming imperialist war in all nations where the bourgeois finds its imperialist aims best served by a temporary alliance with the Soviet bureaucracy.
Yes, we shall see the workers of France, England, and the United States rallied to the flag by the Stalinist officials. “Defend the Soviet Union! Enlist in the army, and—fight against war and Hitlerism! Defend the Soviet Union!” And the workers will sign up while the band, no doubt, plays The Internationale. Finance capital will smile grimly to itself; it has a long training in cynicism. And finance capital will be willing to accept the services of Stalinism and Stalinist-deceived workers, and of the Red Army, as well as of any others, to use as levers for the re-allotment of colonies, oil wells, copper mines, and spheres of influence. Bullets have a way of piercing through ideologies without making fine distinctions.
This infamous development under the veil of the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union!” has been going on steadily for many years, since approximately the time of the Anglo-Russian Committee. It reaches maturity in the Franco-Soviet military pact, and the statements that accompanied the initialling of the pact and the collateral memoranda. Here, displayed before the world, is the full blown flower of Stalinism. And, alas, it is only the working class—the class that is too trustful, too straightforward—that is any longer deceived. The bourgeoisie knows clearly enough the significance of the pact, and its correspondents and editorial writers have gloated over it with appropriate enthusiasm. Stalin here has announced openly what was actually accomplished some time ago: the liquidation of the last vestiges of international revolutionary policy by the Communist International and its sections. To the French bourgeoisie he promises protection from revolution within, in return for a crumb or two of paper protection of his own bureaucratic regime from external aggression by Germany. To the French bourgeoisie he declares: build your military machine as strongly as you wish; and if you use it to suppress the rights of the French working class, to maintain the power of the bourgeois state, to further your imperialist ambitions, if, even, you find it necessary to impose Fascism in order to carry on, I will keep the communist party from unduly interfering, I will see that its leaders while away their time in dickers with the socialist officials and harmless patter about democratic rights and immediate demands, I will guarantee that they do not undertake the struggle for power; only, in return, let me remain safe in the Kremlin.
A specious argument in excuse of the present foreign policy of Stalinism has lately been growing in popularity among certain “friends” of the Soviet Union who, in spite of chronic political blindness, are a trifle disturbed over such open and extravagant excesses as entry into the League of Nations and the Franco-Soviet pact. This argument runs somewhat as follows: We will grant that, formally considered, Stalin has departed from true Marxism. However, this was partly forced on him by the historical contradictions involved by the existence of the Soviet Union in an otherwise bourgeois world. Partly, it is true, the Soviet difficulties result from Stalin’s errors. Nevertheless, we are faced with a situation, not a theory, and we must be realistic. The Soviet Union is the greatest achievement of the working class, and the major bulwark of the revolution. Its immediate difficulties compel Stalin to make such moves as entering the League and signing the French pact. We will have to swallow our principles for the time being, and digest it. When the situation improves, we will make the necessary corrections.
This argument is false to the core.
In the first place, the situation is not going to improve. Day by day it sharpens, and every additional hour on the false path, every new step away from principled policy, makes correction that much more difficult.
In the second place, even if this reasoning were true, it would in no way provide an “excuse” for Stalinism. If a pilot, by one false calculation after another, brings the ship into dangerous shoals and heads square for the reefs, the intelligent conclusion is scarcely, “Well, he has made mistakes, but here we are and we will have to let him go to the end.” Rather is it, “This man has gone far enough, and has proved his incompetence. We need a new pilot, and a revised plan of action not merely to go forward, but even to escape complete disaster on the rocks.” If a stockbroker has lost nine-tenths of a man’s fortune, a reasonable man, rather than turning over the remainder to follow that has gone before, finds a new broker. Perhaps the new broker will have to depart from the rules of “sound finance” because of the debacle caused by his predecessor. But at least the investor will have some chance of a new direction. No. We condemn Stalinism for what it has done, for where it has led the Soviet Union. But this is not merely a matter of raking up dead ashes. What Stalinism has done is the evidence that demonstrates beyond any possible doubt what it will do—proves that Stalinism, which has brought the Soviet Union to the edge of the abyss, will end by plunging it into the abyss itself.
But, finally and conclusively, it is not merely the past policies of Stalinism that are disastrous. It is the present policies. And they are disastrous not merely for the working class of bourgeois nations, but for the Soviet Union itself. Granted that heroic measures are needed to save the Soviet Union in the present historical situation, the policies of Stalin are the guarantors of its defeat. To state that the strengthening of the world proletariat and the extension of the October revolution are the only means of defending the Soviet Union is to do more than repeat high-sounding phrases. For any other method of defending the Soviet Union means in the end its overthrow.
It should be remembered that the overthrow of the Soviet Union, from the point of view of the working class, does not necessarily mean the dismembering of the Soviet Republics and their conquest by imperialist nations. This is what Stalin would have us believe to be the sole meaning. This does indeed threaten in part—as for example in Hitler’s plans for a Nazi-dominated Ukraine. But there is a deeper meaning: not conquest of the Soviet Union by foreign powers, but the revival of class rule within the Soviet republics, that is, the definitive overthrow of the working class regime. This is the most fundamental danger to the Soviet Union. And not only does Stalinism take no steps against this danger; it is Stalinism itself and its policies which are directly leading to the overthrow of the working class regime within the Soviet Union. Indeed, the present stage in the development of Stalinism is transitional in this process. The present bureaucratic, nationalistic officialdom, resting primarily on the apparatus and the army, is already an immense distance from the dictatorship of the proletariat as Lenin understood it. And this internal development is only the correlative of the external policy that attempts to defend the Soviet borders by alliance with finance capital. The betrayal of the workers in France, England and the United States to their governments during the next war will be merely the reverse side of the betrayal of the workers of the Soviet Union, in the suppression of the Russian revolution itself by the completion of the process of undermining the workers’ regime.

In brief summary, let it be asked: “What is the answer? What is the conclusion to be drawn?” The conclusion is inescapable. Foreshadowed by the events in the British general strike, the events of the Chinese revolution, the policy of the “Third Period,” demonstrated by the triumph of Hitler in Germany and the defeat of the workers in Austria, it is now exposed by the approach of the war crisis in letters too gigantic for any Marxist to avoid: The Third International, as thoroughly as the Second International, is rotten through and through, decayed and irrecoverable, preparing systematically for the new August 4, the new bloody sacrifice of the working class. The only possible answer is the rallying of all revolutionists under the banners of the world revolution, in the struggle for workers’ power, in the rejection of all truce with the class enemy under whatever disguise, and the concentration of attack on the enemy at home. But this means and can only mean decisive and final break with social democracy and with Stalinism. The only road is the road of the Fourth International.
John WEST



The new stage in the Roosevelt relief program began daring the first weeks of the last session of Congress, and has now reached its culmination. The publicity agents of the Administration explained their idea as follows:
At the beginning of 1935 there were approximately 5,000,000 persons receiving direct relief (the dole), at least part of which came from the Federal Treasury. Direct Federal relief was to be eliminated. 1,500,000 of these 5,000,000 could be classified as “unemployable” because of illness, old age, or some similar reason. These were to be transferred entirely to the relief rolls of the states and municipalities, and cut off from Federal relief. The remaining 3,500,000 were to be given temporary work at a “security wage” by the Works Progress Administration. This temporary work was to continue for the most part until some time during 1936. By then, the majority of the “employables” would be re-employed by reviving private industry. The rest would be transferred to “heavy” and more permanent public-works projects along the lines of the FWA.
 
Program Not Fulfilled
To accomplish this program $4,880,000,000 was appropriated by Congress. $880,000,000 was to be used to continue direct relief until the WPA program was fully running, and the unemployables sent back to the states and cities. The original announcements promised that the WPA would be .at maximum operation by July 1, and that at that time the full 3,500,000 would be on its payroll.
Naturally, none of this program has been fulfilled. The July 1 date was successively advanced until it became December 1. The $880,000,000 for direct relief grew into a billion and a half. The WPA was to “put 3,500,000 to work”; but actually more than 500,000 were merely transferred to it from the already operating COC, and even with these the December 1 figure is considerably below the full 3,500,000. How much below it is not yet possible to say, since the publicity from Administrator Hopkins’ office is not noted for accuracy.
Nevertheless, Hopkins has announced that the program is “essentially completed,” without, of .course, offering any explanation of what happened to delay completion from July to December. He has “officially” cut off direct Federal relief grants to the States and through them to the cities. Meanwhile, however, he made some additional allocations to the states, to aid them in “completing the transition to the new program” – though this is a little confusing when we remember that he has also at the same time announced that the transition to the new program is completed.
What are we to make of all this?
And what is the prospect for next year? Is this program going to be fulfilled? It is necessary to answer these questions.
 
Unemployment Permanent
In the first place, we must always bear in mind that unemployment, and wide-spread unemployment, is not a temporary but a permanent feature of the remaining years of capitalism. “Private” industry is not going to reabsorb the great body of the unemployed. According to the most favorable estimates (in all probability, much too favorable to be true), a maximum of 5,000,000 workers have been re-employed since the low point of employment in March, 1933. This leaves a minimum of 11,000,000 unemployed at the present time. Moreover, these figures take no account of workers on part-time who are not making during a year even a bare subsistence wage, or of the “new” workers coming from the schools, high schools and colleges. It also leaves out of account the highly seasonal character of employment in many of the great industries such as auto mobiles and textiles. The unemployment figures may be reduced still further by the continuation of the present upcurve in the business cycle; but they will remain at an enormous figure.
Many of these unemployed still manage to live from savings, assistance from relatives, charity, or odd dollars that they pick up here and there. But these sources have been drying up, and “prosperity” is not returning to an extent sufficient to revive them. Of the rest of the unemployed, it is and will continue to be impossible that they can all or even a major part be taken care of by any “made work” or “relief work” or “public works” plan.
 
Direct Relief Still Primary
Direct relief – the dole – will continue as a permanent feature of declining capitalism. In the chaotic, anarchic conditions of capitalism in its death throes, no rational social planning is possible. It is a futile illusion of middle class image-makers to suppose that the dole can be eliminated, an illusion similar to the older dream that a “cooperative commonwealth” can be built up alongside of and within capitalist society.
Important conclusions follow from these facts. Above all, they demonstrate that the problem of direct relief remains and will remain a central issue for the organized unemployed. The programs of the unemployed organizations must continue to have direct relief demands as a primary focus, and must avoid any perspective in terms of the illusory dream that the dole will shortly be eliminated. Moreover, it must be understood by the unemployed organizations that direct relief will continue to be in large part a Federal institution. Mass pressure against Congress and the Administration must be built up to demand not merely a continuation but an increase in direct Federal relief; and these demands must be coupled with the demand to finance the appropriations out of direct taxes in the form of inheritance, corporation, and income levies directed at the higher brackets.
But direct relief is likewise a problem for the “relief workers” themselves, in a double sense. In the first place, the low wage level of relief work (e.g., the WPA) makes supplementary relief in many cases imperative. Secondly, such institutions as the WPA are temporary in character. The projects extend over comparatively short periods of time, and when they are completed the relief workers are again thrown out of. jobs. Thus the unemployed organizations proper must take the lead in promoting the organization of the relief workers, and must closely integrate the relief work demands with the unemployed demands in general.
 
WPA – Attack on Relief Standards
In fact, one of the primary purposes of the WPA must be- understood as an indirect attack on relief standards. This must be resisted at every point: by fighting against the wage levels of the WPA itself, by preventing lowering of direct relief in shifting the unemployed from one roll to another, by demanding supplementary relief, by insisting on immediate transference to adequate relief when a project ends, etc.
However, from another point of view, not less important, the WPA program constitutes a major attack on general wage levels, particularly the union levels in the building trades. And in this direction, the WPA, and relief work generally, become a direct problem for the trade unions, as, from the other direction, the WPA is a problem for the unemployed organizations. Thus the trade unions must be brought’ into the struggle for the organizing arid strengthening of the relief workers, and. for the lifting of WPA and other relief wages to union levels.
As has already been pointed out, however, the WPA, like any other given form of relief work, is temporary by its very nature. The struggles centering around the WPA, the present feature-point of the Administration unemployed program, must therefore be made part of the broader struggle for the advancement of the position of the unemployed, for higher direct relief, for unemployment and social insurance, and for large scale public works. This last point is of especial importance in looking forward to the next period, and has been seriously neglected by the labor movement generally. It is true that genuine public works cannot be handled in a scientific and large-scale manner by a capitalist state. But sufficient pressure can accomplish at least something in this field. At present, the public works program of the government has receded into the background along with the advance of WPA. The housing program, about which there has been such constant ballyhoo, still remains almost entirely on paper, scattered in confusion among more than a dozen governmental agencies.
The demand for a large scale public works program must be brought forward sharply and forced upon the next Congress. This demand must distinguish public works clearly from temporary relief work, and above all must fight against the conception of “security wages.” Its central feature should be low-rental housing directly subsidized by the Federal government. Such a demand, supported primarily by independent class action, will do much to expose the demagogy, hollowness and wholly reactionary character of the Roosevelt relief program, and can play a prominent part in a genuine advance for the entire unemployed movement, and through it for the working class as a whole.


 MAX EASTMAN has a deceptive, though not unusual, critical method. When he wishes to make a point, he makes it by attacking what he alleges to be the ideas of some one else. But this is only appearance. Actually he builds up a straw opponent, and then goes on cheerfully to tear this straw man to pieces. Naturally he succeeds, for he is careful to build his straw man out of confused and contradictory materials, and consequently has little difficulty in the job of demolition. Most often he labels his straw man, “Marx” or “Marxism”; though other labels—for example, “Sidney Hook”—are not infrequent. It is not impossible for such a method to yield certain correct results; but the method itself is hardly the manner in which to increase our understanding of the alleged opponents. Specifically, it has contributed only to misconceptions, some of them exceedingly serious, about Marx and Marxism.
I do not intend here to discuss Eastman’s position in general. This would require, for example, an analysis of his outmoded, nineteenth-century notion of “science”, and his failure to grasp the meaning of the historical approach. My immediate purpose is more restricted; namely, to examine the leading contentions of his article, Marxism: Science or Philosophy? which appeared in the August issue of The New International.
This article makes two chief points: First, “that Marx himself did not wish to be a philosopher,” that “he did not want any philosophy at all”, that he aimed at “rooting up all philosophy forever”. Second (and more important), Eastman contends that “Marx planted the seed of a new philosophy in the very labor of rooting up all philosophy forever.” The heart of this philosophy of Marx’s own, what in fact proves Marxism to be a “philosophy” and not a “science”, is “the conception that reality itself is a purposive process, and that the highest state of mind a human being can attain is one in which he conceives himself as cooperating with, or participating in, the forward and upward going of that reality towards high ends.” Marx reads “his own ideal program of action into a world conceived as inherently purposive.” (The quotations in this paragraph are all from Eastman’s article.)  
I. To prove that Marx did not want to be a philosopher, that he wanted to get rid of all philosophy forever, Eastman quotes at length from Die deutsche Ideologie. He believes that the quotations establish his point. This becomes part of the stuff of his straw man; Eastman can now go on to show how naive Marx was, how he failed to understand the implications of his own rejection of philosophy, and how Marx himself fell into the trap of philosophical speculation which he had pretended to lay bare.
But, surely, no one who takes Marx’s method seriously can fail to approach such a problem as this concretely, that is, in its actual historical context. A Marxist cannot merely understand “Marx’s rejection of philosophy” in the abstract; he must ask what this rejection means in the concrete historical and biographical context in which it is made. If Marx did reject “philosophy”, he was not simply expressing distaste for a certain word; he was rejecting what the word referred to within the given context. If we approach the question from this point of view, the meaning of Marx’s “rejection of philosophy” becomes clear by a study of precisely those passages from which Eastman quotes.
Die deutsche Ideologie, like the somewhat earlier The Holy Family, was part of Marx’s break with Hegelianism. First of all, then, the rejection of philosophy stated in Die deutsche Ideologie means precisely—the rejection of Hegelianism. But Hegelianism was, in common with the major tradition of German philosophy, a form of philosophic idealism. More broadly, then, the rejection of philosophy means—the rejection of idealism. This is indeed what Marx himself makes clear: “In direct opposition to German philosophy which came down from heaven to earth, we here intend to rise from earth to heaven ...”
But more than this is meant. Marx meant also the rejection of any philosophy which proceeded merely “deductively”, which believed that “truth” about the nature of reality could be obtained merely by correct reasoning from supposedly certain “first principles” known to the mind. Such a procedure characterized not merely the idealist philosophies, but likewise many earlier forms of materialism (e.g., the materialisms of the French Enlightenment). In contrast to this deductive method, Marx insists that we must “start from really acting people”, that we must discover their “empirically ascertained life-process, which is bound up with material conditions”.
But, third, the most distinctive point in this “rejection of philosophy” (for the two former are by no means peculiar to Marxism) is contained in the following sentences, quoted by Eastman: “In this way, morals, religion, metaphysics, and other forms of ideology, lose their apparent independence ... When you begin to describe reality, then an independent philosophy loses its reason for being” (the italics are in Eastman’s version). What Marx is here insisting upon, of course—and this is his central point—is that, contrary to the views of his predecessors, philosophy can be understood only historically, only in the light of the historical and social context in which the philosophy appears. He is attacking the idea of the supra-temporal character of philosophy, of its isolation from the actual world of space and time, of its absoluteness or eternity. Philosophy, like morals, like religion and economics, must be understood concretely, historically.
Does this mean a rejection of “philosophy” in the abstract, of the very meaning and possibility of philosophy of any kind? Clearly, put in this manner, the problem is a purely verbal one. If we confine our definition of the word, “philosophy”, to what Marx here concretely rejects, then he has rejected philosophy altogether. But no such restriction is necessary or particularly useful. If, for example, we include within the meaning of philosophy the analysis and criticism of the fundamental terms, concepts, postulates, and methods of the sciences and near-sciences—a use of the word shared by many contemporary philosophers—Marx’s rejection obviously does not apply. Marx himself was very much concerned with such analysis and criticism. The basis of his empirical studies in, for example, economics, politics and history, is bound up with such “philosophic” analysis. Consider the analysis of “value” and of “labour power” in the first part of Capital. Now this analysis, it is true, cannot be separated from the empirical study to which it is relevant; but it is nevertheless possible to regard it as differing sufficiently from the empirical study proper to deserve a separate name: the analysis of fundamental concepts and methods is—though always to be checked by empirical results—nevertheless presupposed in the very possibility of interpreting the empirical results. The relationship between them is, in a proper sense of the word, dialectical.
This distinction between the meaning of philosophy which Marx rejected and one meaning which he both accepted and contributed to can be enforced by a more recent example. Einstein is a scientist, and in addition a philosopher; but he is a philosopher both in the sense which Marx rejected and in that which he accepted. In his early treatises, Einstein, in part, reached certain scientific results: e.g., certain generalizations dealing with masses at high relative velocities, and with certain data of “field physics”. But to reach these results, Einstein was forced also to make a critical analysis of the fundamental concepts and presuppositions of Newtonian physics—e.g., of the concepts of “simultaneity”, “space”, “ether”, of the supposition that “absolute velocity” had a meaning. This analysis was not purely “scientific” in any usual sense of the word. It called for no new experiments or observations. What was necessary was a new schema in terms of which empirical results already obtained could be made intelligible; and this involved a revision of the root terms and postulates of Newtonian physics. If we choose to call such a criticism “science”, there is no reason to quarrel. It is more useful to use another word to distinguish such criticism from the more strictly empirical inductive aspect of science. But whatever name we use, Marx accepted and notably contributed to such criticism.
But Einstein also “philosophizes” in another sense. He writes essays stating his belief in a loose, semi-mystical kind of idealism, or even pantheism. In spite of Einstein’s own conviction to the contrary, this idealism has no logical relation whatever to his science (or to his “philosophy” in the first sense), and is no better than any other confused, sentimental wish-thinking. It is philosophy of this latter type, and the very possibility of such a philosophy which Marx rejects.
There are other and important functions of philosophy (whether or not we use the word) which Marx accepted, and to most of which he himself made contributions. But there is no need to go into details in the present connection. The important point is to avoid juggling with words, and to understand precisely what Marx did mean, in Die deutsche Ideologie and elsewhere, when he “rejected philosophy”. We shall then be better able to defend the necessary and acceptable tasks of “philosophy” against the naive positivism of the Eastmans as well as against the day dreams of the idealists, and to clarify our understanding of the full import of Marx’s own method.  
II. Eastman, however, believes that Marx, though trying to get rid of philosophy altogether, fell victim to it not only in the “acceptable” senses which I have discussed, but also in the “bad” sense—a sense which is clearly incompatible with the allegations of Marxism. Eastman claims, as we have seen, that Marx treats reality as a purposive process, that he “reads his own ideal program of action into a world conceived as inherently purposive”.
If this claim is true, Eastman is quite correct in contending that Marx’s abandonment of philosophy is hollow, and that Marx retained the heart of Hegelianism while turning it “the other side up”. The view that the world is purposive is a view of idealism, and, for that matter, usually of religious forms of idealism.
Eastman writes as if Marx had been well-intentioned but exceedingly naive with respect to this problem. The first thing to notice is that both Marx and Engels were keenly aware of it, and make frequent references to it—though not usually in Eastman’s terminology. Indeed, their distinction between “utopian” and “scientific” socialism centers around this very point. This is, however, obscured by the habit of commentators to suppose that by calling socialism “scientific” Marx and Engels meant that history, political-economy, etc., are scientific in the same sense and according to the same methods as, for example, physics and chemistry. This latter notion is, of course, preposterous, and is held by some positivists, not by Marxists. What above all Marx and Engels meant by calling their socialism scientific was that it studied historical and social processes as non-purposive; that they were resolved to discover the general laws of historical development (especially of capitalist society) as these operated independently of the ideals, wishes and subjective purposes of human beings.
“Its [scientific socialism’s] task was no longer to manufacture a system of society as perfect as possible, but to examine the historico-economic succession of events from which these classes and their antagonisms had of necessity sprung, and to discover in the economic conditions thus created the means of ending the conflict.” (Engels, Socialism, Utopian and Scientific)
Indeed, Engels’ whole essay is an attack upon those who do what Eastman accuses Marx of doing—who read their own ideal program into the world. It is precisely this which, according to Engels, defines them as “Utopian”.
Again:
“In the social production of their subsistence men enter into determined and necessary relations with each other which are independent of their wills—production-relations which correspond to a definite stage of development of their material productive forces ... The mode of production of the material subsistence conditions the social, political and spiritual life-process in general ...” (Marx, Introduction to Critique of Political Economy—My italics.)
These are, of course, “standard quotations”. What it is necessary to clarify, however, is a certain ambiguity in stating that the social relations into which men enter (corresponding to the development of material productive forces) are “independent of their wills”. Marx does not mean that the “wills”—purposes, preferences, ideals, etc.—of men have no role whatever in the historical process (as they do not, for example, in the activities of electrons). This would be manifestly absurd. Men’s wills and purposes do in fact enter in as an integral part of the historical process. As Marx puts it, “The production of ideas and conceptions, of consciousness is, to begin with, directly interwoven with the material activity and the material intercourse of men.” This is sufficiently obvious. For example, in the early nineteenth century, many of the former artisans and peasants were faced, by the onrush of capitalist economy, with the choice of working for wages or starving. That they should have “willed” or “purposed” to work was an essential prerequisite for the development of capitalist production. However, they might have willed otherwise. Not only is this a bare logical possibility: some did will otherwise, some willed to starve. Similarly, individual capitalists, after accumulating a certain amount of money not only might have but did in some cases “will” to hoard their money, rather than to put it back into production or to loan it at interest.
What Marx means is, then, not that the process of development goes on independently of “will” altogether; but that the course of development is independent of this or that “willing” or “purposing” of particular individuals—that individual peculiarities in “willing” will not affect the general result, and will cancel out in the long run. And he means, secondly, that the wills, purposes, and ideals held by individuals or groups of individuals do not, under any circumstances, play an “independent” role divorced from material social conditions in terms of which they operate.
This distinction is not without importance. Part of Eastman’s confusion, and all of his belief that the Theses on Feuerbach support his argument, are the result of a failure to understand it. Because Eastman observes rightly that Marx finds purposes and ideals entering integrally into the historical process, he concludes that Marx “reads purposes and ideals into the historical process”. But such a conclusion would be justified only if History were a science in the same sense that physics is a science, and if its subject-matter were of the same nature. When we discuss the behavior of atoms, we have little temptation to read purpose or will into the world of atoms, because our subject-matter specifically excludes any form of purpose or will. But when we discuss history, which involves as “its first premise” (according to Die deutsche Ideologie) “the existence of living human individuals”, we could hardly do so adequately without taking some account of the thoughts, wills, purposes and ideals which the living human individuals have.
What Marx did, then, was not to read ideals and purposes into history, but to discover them (and other forms and manifestations of consciousness) as objectively part of the historical process. Part of his task was to explain how ideals and purposes and consciousness in general (including systematized forms of consciousness such as morals, philosophy and religion) entered into the historical process, what concretely was the relationship between the forms of consciousness and the productive relations, and between them in turn and the technique of production. In doing so he overthrew both idealism and vulgar materialism. He denied the idealist contention that consciousness in any sense “determined existence” or played an independent non-historical rôle; and he denied equally the vulgar materialist conception of a single reality consisting of mechanical atoms in a statically determined interrelationship. In Marx’s view, “which conforms to real life, one proceeds from the really living individuals themselves and regards consciousness [not as something “unreal” as did the vulgar materialists but] only as their consciousness”.  
III. But, Eastman might point out, Marx claims to discover a “direction” in history. Is this not a reading of ideals into the world, a belief that history is purposive, and moving forward to a realization of the ideal? Certainly this would be a valid criticism of most if not all of the bourgeois doctrines of Progress which flourished so popularly during the nineteenth century.
We must ask ourselves what Marx meant by saying that history has a direction. We discover that it was not for him a “moral” notion at all—though we might on occasion draw moral conclusions from it. Marx saw a direction to history in observable, formulable material conditions. This direction is best indicated in the development of the means of production, and is roughly measurable in terms of the output of goods per time-unit of labor. This “direction” is surely not a reading of Marx’s ideals into the world. It is empirical fact which we can confirm by the concrete study of history. It is possible to regard this fact as morally either good or bad, and it is at the present time regarded in both ways by various individuals. If we—as Marx and Marxists generally do—regard it as “good” in the sense that it provides a chief material condition for making possible general material well-being, and thereby providing the basis for great cultural advances for humanity as a whole, we are not in any sense reading our ideal program into the world. We are doing rather the opposite: we are, in a sense, basing our ideal program on the actualities of the real world and the real historical process. It is the contemporary medievalists or the southern agrarians or the liberal meliorists who read their ideal programs into the world: for they formulate their ideals (back to the thirteenth century or to Jefferson, or on to cooperative capitalism) with no relation to historical actualities. Their ideals are not merely “morally wrong” (which is a meaningless statement, in any case, in the abstract), but impossible. In their supposition that these ideals are possible is to be discovered their “reading of their ideal program into the world”.
Marx not merely pointed to a “direction” in past history. He likewise, up to a certain point, predicted the direction of history in the future. Is it on this basis that Eastman can conclude that Marx viewed history as purposive, that he read his ideals into the world? Did Marx, as Eastman would seem to suggest, begin by “willing” the further development of capitalism, the intensification of its contradictions, its overthrow, and the victory of socialism, begin by believing in these developments as “ideals”; and then, by a gigantic process of rationalization, and by reading them into the historical process, pretending to discover them in history as “objective” laws of future historical change?
Eastman, unfortunately, sees this question as primarily a psychological one. As such it has a purely biographical interest. It may be—it is for the biographer to answer—that Marx was driven to the long years in the British Museum by an inescapable psychic drive to justify to himself his own pre-conceived “ideals”, to “make” history conform to him, and not his knowledge to history. But this is not a relevant question to the economist, the historian, or the revolutionist. These latter must ask, not what was Marx’s inner psychic urge, but—was he correct in his conclusions? Can Eastman deny that Marx was, in general at least, correct in predicting that the development of the means of production (in terms of greater output per time-unit of labor, etc.) would be carried further? or that this development would be increasingly hindered and even sent backwards (at least relatively backwards) by the continued maintenance of the capitalist social relations? or that working class associations and parties would develop? or that some at least of these organizations would have as their aim, in theory and practise, the overthrow of capitalist society and the enforcement of new social relations which would permit the less restricted development of the means of production? Eastman can hardly deny the objective truth—in general, at least—of these predictions. They have already been confirmed in actuality. The question of Marx’s psychological process, consequently, is irrelevant. If it is true that these developments corresponded with Marx’s “ideals”, this is of only accidental importance. Once again, Marx was discovering the objective course of historical development, independent of his own or of any individual ideals or purposes. If it happens to be a fact—as it demonstrably is—that history develops in certain more or less lawful ways, in certain more or less definite directions, and if we state those laws and that direction, we are no more considering history as “purposive” than we would be considering a brick “purposive” when we predict that it will fall if we drop it from a high place. There is a difference, of course, in the two cases, as we have already seen: the purposes and wills of men are part of the historical process, whereas they are not part of the activities of the brick; but the purposes and wills are themselves subject to the general laws.  
IV. However, Eastman is not yet fully answered. Marx, he will maintain, does not merely predict such developments and such a direction as have been mentioned. He states in addition that the victory of socialism is “inevitable”. What does this mean? It means, Eastman will claim, that Marx believed that the process of history itself guarantees the realization of Marx’s own subjective ideal (namely, socialism)—in other words, that the world (nature, history ...) is purposive. Thus, in the doctrine that “socialism is inevitable” Eastman finds convincing demonstration that Marx “read his own ideal program of action into a world conceived as inherently purposive”.
It is not my intention at this time to go fully into the alleged doctrine of “the inevitability of socialism”. I wish to do so only sufficiently to show that Eastman cannot justify his criticism of Marx as an “unwitting philosopher” by an appeal to it.
That Marx wrote, on certain occasions, in certain contexts, that socialism is inevitable, is unquestionably true. For example, in the Communist Manifesto, he wrote that the fall of the bourgeoisie “and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable”. But does it therefore follow that Marx was reading a guarantee, a purpose, into history?
This question is not so clear as it might at first sight seem to be. The reason for this is the extreme ambiguity of the word “inevitability” itself. What do we mean when we say that something is inevitable? A number of clearly distinguishable meanings are possible:
 Sometimes we mean “logically inevitable”, as in the proposition, “It is inevitable that the angles of any plane triangle should equal 180 degrees.” This is, however, a purely formal meaning, and not relevant to the present question, where we refer to an actual future event. Socialism is obviously not logically inevitable, for there are innumerable alternatives which involve no contradiction. Often we mean only “highly probable”, as in the proposition, “If you don’t take your umbrella, you’ll inevitably get wet” (as we might say if the weather looked very threatening). But Marx clearly meant more, or at least something different than, this. Mathematicians express “inevitability” as equivalent to “having a probability of 1”. In mathematics itself this meaning, like the logical meaning, is also purely formal, depending merely upon the definition of the problem. However, in its factual application it is perhaps this meaning which Marx had in mind. He may have meant that the future victory of socialism has, as a matter of objective fact, a probability of 1—in other words, that this victory is objectively certain. At any rate, many alleged Marxists have understood the statement in this way, and the controversies concerning it have—though confusedly—centered on this meaning. But there are other possible meanings of “inevitable”. It is used with a directive meaning, as when a general might say to his soldiers, “Go forth and battle bravely—your victory is inevitable.” The logical content of his exhortation is: “if you battle bravely enough, then you will win.” But putting it in this form might weaken its effect in rousing the soldiers, which in turn may be a necessary condition of their winning. There is a closely allied meaning of “inevitable”—what might be called a moral or psychological meaning. A boxer might say that “he will inevitably beat his opponent” and mean concretely (a) that it is possible for him to win, and (b) that he is going to put his entire determination and will into seeing that he does win. Analogously, a revolutionist might mean by saying that socialism is inevitable that he is resolved to stick by his principles and to fight for them whatever happens. Thus the Bolshevik-Leninists in the Soviet Union do indeed remain “inevitably” true to the revolution, when they accept exile, torture, or even death rather than capitulation. Finally, there is the teleological, idealist, or religious meaning, which Eastman attributes to Marx. In this light, “socialism is inevitable” because a “something” (God’s Will, the logical unfolding of the Absolute, or simply “the historic process itself”) guarantees the outcome. Such a view of history is characteristic of idealists, and especially of theologians. Such people all regard the outcome of history as inevitable, because it is assured by Reality itself. In the end the Kingdom of God or the Perfect State will come to this world, or all will be perfectly consummated in a World Hereafter.  Now we have already noted that the first and second meanings of “inevitable” are inadequate to explain what Marx believed. The third and fourth (what I have called the “directive” and the “moral” or “psychological”) are, I feel, clearly part of what Marx meant. He meant what all revolutionists mean: to exhort the proletariat to take up battle and to win; and to express his own resolve not to give up the struggle. But more than this is meant.
The question, then, is seen to center around the third and sixth meanings, and we may re-phrase the problem as follows: Marx said that he rejected the sixth (“i.e., the idealist) meaning. But did he believe the third: namely, that the victory of socialism has a probability of 1? And if he did believe this, does it then follow that he was therefore unconsciously—in spite of what he said—resting on the sixth meaning? That is what Eastman would maintain. He would say that there are in fact no sufficient objective grounds, no adequate evidence, for assigning a 1 probability to the victory of socialism; and, consequently, the belief that it has such a probability (that is, is certain) can flow only from a conscious or unconscious belief in the purposive character of the world, only from reading our ideals into history and thus “discovering” in history the guarantee of their fulfillment.
In the first place, I wish to point out that it does not follow that the assignment of a probability of 1 to a future event necessarily involves a belief in the world as purposive. For example, I might say that “If I drop this brick, there is a probability of 1 that (it is inevitable that) it will fall to the ground” or that “It is inevitable that I will die” without at all assigning a purpose to nature which guarantees these outcomes. Perhaps I will be mistaken. Perhaps, even, I never have sufficient objective grounds for assigning a probability of 1 to any future event. But nevertheless, I will then be merely mistaken, not reading ideals and purposes into nature. This seems to me clear in the two instances I have just cited. And theoretically it seems to me also clear in the case of the belief that socialism is inevitable. Perhaps this belief is in error; but merely asserting it does not seem to entail the reading of an ideal or purpose into nature, any more than in the case of the operation of the laws of gravity or of the processes of biological dissolution.
However, even if there is no necessary connection in theory, it must be admitted that most persons who have believed in the inevitability of some certain historical outcome have in fact been guilty, consciously or unconsciously, of reading ideals into nature—have been, that is, idealists or theologians under the skin. Does this hold also in the case of Marx?
To answer, we must first summarize briefly the objective grounds on which Marx (and Marxists) base their contention that socialism is likely (leaving aside, at present, the question of whether it is certain—i.e., has a probability of 1). These include: (1) The chief long term material conditions for socialism—the centralization of industry, the high technical level of production, the large-scale “socialization” of labor engaged in production, etc.—are not merely probable but already present. (2) The more immediate conditions for the overthrow of capitalism—serious economic dislocations, financial chaos, general social unrest, etc.—from time to time arise in contemporary society. (3) The continuance of the capitalist social relations, by their very nature, means necessarily increasing inability to utilize the productive forces, means actual sabotage of the productive forces, and means further, as a consequence, wide-spread hunger, war, social chaos, etc. (4) The victory of socialism, and the establishment of its type of social relations is the only way in which the continued utilization and development of the means of production can be carried out.
Now these four factors (and other similar ones which might be added) are, though necessary conditions for socialism, not yet sufficient for the victory of socialism. We sometimes speak as if the machines, “strangled” by the social relations (the property relations), would rise up and smash them. But, of course, this is only metaphor. The only “means of production” which can rise up is the working class; to achieve the victory of socialism, living men must achieve it; and this means concretely that the working class must overthrow the bourgeoisie. We must, therefore, add a fifth set of factors, of a somewhat different kind from the first four: the existence of a sufficient number of persons who both desire to change the material conditions of capitalist society and to establish a socialist society in its place; and, in addition, who possess sufficient courage, resolution, vigour, and political wisdom to be able to do so against the opposition of those who are resolved to maintain society on its capitalist basis. In the concrete, this fifth factor is roughly equivalent to the active existence of an adequate revolutionary party.
Our problem now becomes: Will this fifth factor be present? Or rather, what is the probability that it will be present? The other four factors are either actually present, or are essential aspects of the nature of capitalism. No reasonable doubt as to them can be entertained. But to conclude that the victory of socialism has a probability of 1, we shall have to present conclusive evidence that this fifth factor has a probability of 1, since without it socialism will not conquer.
The evidence in favor of the fifth factor is drawn chiefly from history. Whenever, in the past, the means of production have no longer been capable of further development under the given social relations, a class of men, usually with the aid of other classes or groups, has in the long run taken social power and altered the social relations to permit further development of the means of production. Sufficient resentment, courage, and intelligence has been generated in this class to enable it to overthrow the class whose social position depended on the outmoded social relations. We may, on the basis of this evidence, conclude that there is a likelihood that this will happen in the case of a transition from capitalism to socialism. Supplementary evidence may be drawn from social psychology and from contemporary history. It seems unlikely, from what we know about how men in society behave, that they will fail, in the end, to take the only solution which will permit the development of the means of production and prevent a relapse of mankind to barbarism. We observe, furthermore, that since the time of Marx the active revolutionary movement has had a continuous existence, and that revolutionary parties or groups have existed or do exist in nearly all countries.
Now this evidence seems to me sufficient to establish what might be called a “likelihood” for the fifth factor; but I see no way in which this likelihood can be translated into a definite probability quotient. Certainly it does not have a probability of 1. The belief that it does would be the sheerest kind of rationalization. This is conclusively shown by a single fact alone: by the fundamental difference between the change from capitalism to socialism and any previous changes in social systems. Previously society has changed always from one form of class exploitation to another; the change to socialism would, however, be a change from class society to a classless society. For this reason, only a loose and rough analogy can be drawn from the past to apply to the change to socialism. This analogy is far too inaccurate to establish anything approaching a probability of 1 for the victory of socialism. It may even be that in the course of the present and approaching intra-capitalist struggles and struggles against capitalism, men will, with modern destructive techniques (which also have no counterpart in the past) destroy each other completely; or at any rate destroy every vestige of civilization. If the latter, historical development would no doubt begin again; and milleniums from now the problem of the victory of socialism would once again face men; and once again it would not have a probability of 1.
This, then, is what seems to me to be the case: The chief material social and economic conditions for the victory of socialism are given in contemporary society; the political and psychological conditions are sufficiently assured to give the objective opportunity for actually achieving the victory of socialism. But whether the opportunity will be taken, whether victory will be achieved, cannot be predicted with certainty beforehand. This is a contingent factor, depending above all on the revolutionary party. I conclude, thus, that the victory of socialism, objectively considered, has a certain probability—is even likely; but that this probability is less than 1.
I believe that this is what Marx meant on those few occasions when he wrote that “socialism is inevitable”. Only such an interpretation can make intelligible his own practical activity, or the powerful influence of his own writings in shaping the revolutionary movement. And this is clearly the attitude of all great revolutionary leaders, if we look not at their words in the abstract, in isolation, but in their concrete context, especially in the context of their lives and activities. The revolutionary leaders have been distinguished, first, by a firm, cold, impersonal estimate of material conditions, and, second, by acting correctly, intelligently, decisively in the right way at the right moment. How else can we understand Lenin’s polemics against those who after the War thought that European capitalism would fall over without a “push”; or Trotsky’s attack today (in France), as always, on those who expect a revolutionary situation to develop to maturity “of itself”?
“There is no crisis which can be, by itself, fatal to capitalism. The oscillations of the business cycle only create a situation in which it will be easier, or more difficult, for the proletariat to overthrow capitalism. The transition from a bourgeois society to socialist society presupposes the activity of living men who are the makers of their own history ... If ... the party of the working class, in spite of favorable conditions, reveals itself incapable of leading the proletariat to the seizure of power, the life of society will continue necessarily upon a capitalist foundation—until a new crisis, a new war, perhaps until the complete disintegration of European civilization.” (Trotsky, paraphrasing Marx and Lenin, in Whither France?)
It is true, however, that the “inevitability of socialism” is not interpreted in this way by many alleged Marxists. Many do regard it as a “guarantee” that socialism will conquer—as meaning that socialism has a probability of 1. Historically, we discover that such a view has always been the expression of forces which have slipped away from the revolutionary struggle for power to non-revolutionary or anti-revolutionary activities. We find insistence on “inevitability” in this latter sense characteristic of the theoretical views of, for example, the following:
 Social-democratic gradualism. In this case, from the late nineteenth century on, belief in the inevitability of socialism has proved a satisfying rationalization of the repudiation of the struggle for power. Why not peaceful, gradual development, if socialism is inevitable anyway? There can be no answer to this question if its premise is granted. The gradualists are correct: The Leninists have no justification for their call to the masses to break with reformism and take the road of bitter struggle, if victory is guaranteed in advance. The masses would be quite right in replying: “Go talk to someone else. We have enough troubles as it is. The meek will be rewarded equally with the brave—your ‘historic process’ will take care of that; and it is a lot less trouble to be meek.” Stalinism. The Stalinist theoreticians, with their so-called philosophy of dialectical materialism—which is only a disguised form of monistic objective idealism—likewise make a great point of the “inevitability” of socialism, even proving that anyone who doesn’t believe in its inevitability is thereby demonstrated to retain typical “petty-bourgeois vacillations”. And the Stalinist acceptance of the dogma is no accident. All the workers of the world need do now is to preserve peace and the status quo, and allow socialism to be built quietly in the Soviet Union. The struggle for state power may be put aside for this period; the defeats in Germany, or Spain, or France, are only minor episodes; because, of course, victory is guaranteed in advance when the proper time comes—when Stalin finishes up socialism in Russia and starts out for new lands to conquer. Once again, the theoretic attack on Stalinism must include a denial that victory is, either in the long run or in a short time, guaranteed; it must insist that victory must be won, must be seized. Sectarianism. Insistence on the inevitability of socialism (in the sense that it has a probability of 1) has also characterized most types of sectarianism throughout the history of the movement. In this case, the doctrine becomes, the philosophic justification for failing to go to the masses, for the substitution of purest revolutionary phrase-mongering for revolutionary activity. In the long run, the sectarian reasons, the masses will come to us, for our ideas are true and their victory is inevitable. We need only keep our theses and our resolutions pure. Thus, as in the case of the gradualists and the Stalinists, the sectarians likewise reveal the non-revolutionary character of their position, which is, as in the other two cases, rationalized and made philosophically respectable by the doctrine of inevitability.  To the extent that Eastman’s attack is directed against this conception of inevitability, he renders a great service. I agree with him that the belief that the victory of socialism has a probability of 1, that history itself objectively “guarantees” its victory (for this is what the belief amounts to) is in essence a form of philosophic idealism, a reading of one’s own ideals into the world, and closely allied to a religious attitude. As such, it has nothing in common with the genuinely Marxist attitude, which indissolubly combines scientific objectivity with the intransigent struggle for power. I believe that in attributing the former attitude to Marx himself, Eastman is mistaken, and that his mistake flows from taking Marx’s words in isolation, out of their context in Marx’s writings and the larger context of Marx’s activities. But this is after all a minor matter. If Eastman chooses to make a correct and gravely important point by building up a straw-man-Marx, he must be criticized for historical inaccuracy, and for the confusions such a method leads to. But to the extent that his criticism is directed in essence not against Marx but against the non-revolutionary falsifiers of living Marxism, we must not merely accept but drive home his lesson.
 



(Ed. Note: This is the last in Comrade West’s series of four articles on war.)
* * *
The firm understanding that the fight against war is the fight for workers’ power and a socialist society is the key to all the “anti-war” activities of Marxists. It is the Marxist, participating actively and constantly in the class struggle, who is carrying on the only genuine and effective fight against war. All the fine phrases and noble sentiments and even the deep sincerity of pacifists are powerless against war, when not actually of aid to the war-makers.
The knowledge that this is true is hard for many, even for some Marxists, to accept. Surely, they feel, there is something important in common between us and the non-revolutionary millions from both the working class and the middle class who oppose war. At least we agree in our opposition to imperialist war, in our realization of its barbarous cruelty and horror, and in our earnest wish to put an end to it. Can we not all unite on this basis, leaving other differences aside? Thus we may not only have greater forces to defend ourselves against war and its destruction, but we will come into closer contact with these others and win them gradually to our side on other questions.
Unfortunately, this feeling is mistaken. Whatever the appearances, Marxists have in fact nothing in common with these “war-opposers”. The reason for this is mat the war-opposers do not really oppose war at all. They do not, because they do not oppose the causes of war, and are not willing to take steps to remove these causes – that is, take revolutionary steps Their “opposition to war”, there-lore, is in the last analysis only a screen to satisfy their consciences.
 
An Entry to the Minds of Pacifists
However, this is not the whole story There is one advantage which even a vague feeling of opposition to war, so long as it is sincerely held, gives, and this is of great importance to the growth of the revolutionary movement. It provides what might be called a psychological meeting point between Marxists and non-Marxists. in the resolve to end imperialist war, pacifists and Marxists share in common an idea. This gives Marxists, if they make proper use of it, an entry to the minds of pacifists. It gives them an audience, a chance to say: “You believe you are opposed to war. Very well, we will take you at your word. If you are opposed to war, you must want to get rid of the causes of war. We will show you what the causes are ...” And Marxists can go on to demonstrate how real opposition to war must lead to a revolutionary position.
Many persons have come to a revolutionary position after starting with a feeling against war. And many more will do so, if Marxists make an intelligent and clear approach to them. The logic of an anti-war stand, if carried out, must lead to the revolutionary movement. Too much should not be expected: economic interest, the powerful propaganda on the other side, will, in the majority of cases, prevent pacifists from accepting the full logical conclusion. But not in all cases. And Marxists cannot afford to neglect any avenue of approach.
 
War Issue Base for Agitation
Thus the “war issue” is correctly a powerful base for Marxist education and agitation. This is particularly true in approaching intellectuals, professionals and others from the middle class, whose alliance with the revolutionary movement often follows more from psychological and moral considerations than from immediate economic interest. A factory worker who wants security and a better standard of living can be shown how only a workers’ state can provide them. A teacher or writer honestly against war can be shown how only socialism will eliminate it.
It is, therefore, correct and necessary for Marxists to participate in “Conferences against War” Their business at such conferences is, of course, not to form permanent “alliances against war”, not to tell pacifists that “we are all engaged in a common fight”, but to present openly and unequivocally the Marxist, analysis of war and the fight against war, and to show why all other analyses are wrong. It is likewise important to speak and write about the Marxist position on war as widely as possible, before both working class and middle class audiences. For example, this is often an excellent opening for the statement of the revolutionary position before meetings of trade union or unemployed league members.
 
Making Marxist Position Clear
The Marxist position, moreover, should not be left in the abstract. It is the duty of Marxists at all times to expose concretely the war plans and maneuvers of the imperialist governments. Immediate analyses of treaties, “conversations”, armaments, “war games”, exchange and tariff struggles, border encounters, arms limitation conferences, naval races, etc., must be given by the Marxist, press, in order to make clear to the working class the exact progress of the war danger, and to pierce through the fogs of the “peace talk” of the capitalist statesmen.
Such agitational and educational efforts are all part of the fight against war. Nevertheless, none of them includes anything in the nature of a “united front against war’’. Even a conference against war participated in by several parties and organizations is not a united front. A united front is constituted when several parties or other groups set up machinery to carry out certain specific activities in common.
We have already seen that there is no such thing as a “programmatic” united front, either against war or on any other matter.
It is moreover true that no united front of any kind can be constituted against war in general. This follows from the fact that only the revolutionary party is actually against the whole social institution of war – and it cannot have a united front with itself.
 
Application of the United Front
Is any sort of united front possible in the fight against war? The truth is that the application of the united front is more limited in the fight against war than in any other phase of the revolutionary struggle. It could not be otherwise. The fight against war is too deadly and sharp. In the face of it only the firmest Marxist position can stand up. The last war proved this beyond question. Before the war crisis, not. only the bourgeois “internationalists” and the pacifist organizations but the great Social-Democracy itself collapsed. Any compromise whatever with the capitalist state – and only the Marxist position does not compromise – means weakening when the state is confronted with a war situation.
However, there remain certain possibilities for united front activities, and these should not be neglected. For example: If a revolutionary crisis arises in Cuba, the question of United States intervention will be immediately raised. It is quite feasible that a broad united front, including both, working class and middle class organizations, should be formed to fight intervention. Or, in the case of a war between Japan and the Soviet Union, a united front, might well struggle to prevent the sending of munitions and supplies to Japan. There would be dangers, however, even in such a united front. It might be utilized to support entrance of the U.S. government into the war, against Japan. Since the U.S. would enter only for its own imperialist ends, and could not properly defend the Soviet Union, Marxists would be required to oppose the U.S. government in such an eventuality as implacably as in any other war. The defense of the Soviet Union can come only from the working masses, not from the capitalist state.
United front agreements might be properly formed on other occasions to support colonial struggles, whether of U.S. colonies or of others – to prevent U.S. capitalists from aiding the imperialist home countries. But in a major war crisis any united front would inevitably be a narrow one. At the start of a major war crisis, the capitalist state is at its strongest, seeming to rise above internal conflicts and sweep the whole nation into its embrace, as at the entry of the U.S. government into the last war. The strength and very existence of the state are bound up with the war, and an act against the war becomes an act directly against the state. The act against war is almost automatically a revolutionary act. And only the Marxist party is consciously prepared to advocate a revolutionary act.
This is the reason for the deceptiveness of the slogan, “a general strike at the outbreak of war,” put forward by socialists and even pacifists. A general strike at the outbreak of a major war would be a revolutionary strike; only those who are prepared to carry it through to the revolutionary transfer of power to the workers can genuinely advocate it. It pre-supposes, furthermore, a tremendously advanced working class, ripe for power, and without this would either evaporate or go quickly down in the uselessly spilled blood of the strikers. The imperialist state, staking its existence on its greatest gamble – imperialist war – is scarcely going to give up and accept defeat from abroad because of pressure at home – unless the pressure at home is a revolutionary force which is itself prepared to defeat and overthrow the state.
But though the united front is thus strictly limited in the fight against war, narrowly understood, the analysis of war shows that actually every successfully carried through united front is an advance in the flght against war. This is the answer to those who say that we must have an approach to the middle class and to middle’ class minded workers; and conclude therefrom that we must, build pacifist Leagues to publish pacifist literature and make pacifist, speeches. By no means. Marxists approach all groups with their own Marxist program intact. Marxists join them, where it advances the cause of the workers, in common action.
United fronts to defend civil liberties, to protect workers’ rights, to resist vigilantes, to free class war prisoners and defeat lynchings by courts or mobs, to force through a workers’ security program, to build an effective non-partisan labor defense league – these are united fronts broad enough to include all groups who are honest in their protests against the excesses of capitalism and their desires for a better social order.
These, moreover, provide in action approaches to the middle class and to the working masses, without at the same time capitulating to the illusions of a middle class program. And these, properly understood, like every advance in the workers’ movement toward power, are real and genuine actions in the fight against war.
 






(Ed. Note: This is the third in Comrade West’s series of four articles on war. The last, The United Front and War, will appear in the next issue of the New Militant.)



* * *
During the past year and a half, the American League Against. War and Fascism (which is the counterpart of leagues organized in many other countries) has been presented to the American public as the means for fighting against and preventing war and fascism. Its success in enlisting popular support has not been conspicuous. Nevertheless, in a number of cities the League has made progress. After a temporary lapse in its activities, it has re-opened a vigorous campaign. What attitude are Marxists to take toward the League? It is essential to be clear on this, not merely so far as the League itself is concerned, but, with further reference to any organization of this type.
There are two different kinds of argument advanced in support of the League. The first, which is the position of the League itself and of its sponsor, the Communist Party, is that the League actually constitutes the most effective means for fighting war (in these articles I am not concerned with the fight against fascism). The second argument is put forward by those who maintain that the League, while not, in the final analysis an effective means for fighting war, should be supported because through it an “approach to the middle classes” is possible. On the anti-war issue, it is maintained, revolutionists can unite with members of the middle class and can, through this means of approach, gradually win them to alliance with the revolutionary movement.
Both of these arguments are profoundly and disastrously mistaken.
The argument usually heard against the League is that the League is dominated in a mechanical and sectarian manner by the Communist Party. Though this argument has some force, it is far from the root of the matter. Even if mechanically dominated by the Communist Party, Marxists would have to support and build the League if it actually were an effective instrument against war. We must analyse further.
 
The Fallacies of the League
To begin with, certain organizational features of the League must be kept in mind: (1) It is a permanent organization; (2) It permits and encourages individual membership; (3) It not merely advocates certain actions to be taken against war, but puts forward a program against war; (4) This program is in part political – e.g. it advocates, in a confused way, the abolition of “the profit system”.
A book would be needed to make clear all of the errors in the conception of the League. However, with these organizational features in mind, I shall outline certain of the chief fallacies.
1. The League, in spite of the pretentious language of its publications, is a pacifist organization.
Its fundamentally pacifist character can be seen at, once in the fact that the League attempts to isolate the struggle against war, to treat it as a “special” or “independent” struggle, apart from the revolutionary struggle for the overthrow of capitalism and the establishment of a workers’ state. While it is true that in certain circumstances, united actions against war, involving various social groups, are possible, it is not and cannot be true that Marxists can under any circumstances unite in program against war with any other groups or individuals. We have already seen that there is only one program, for the struggle against war – the revolutionary program for the overthrow of capitalism; and to this program only Marxists can subscribe.
In addition to theory, the agitation and activities of the League make perfectly clear its pacifist nature. We find the same old pacifist hokum – loud yelps for “disarmament”, support of the “munitions inquiries”, “anti-war pledges”, calls for “congressional investigations”, and the rest. Broken down ministers and fake liberals find themselves immediately at home in the League, and are pushed as its most prominent members and speakers. Fight, the magazine of the League, publishes just the kind of pictures and articles that get across with the Women’s Club Peace Societies.
And like all pacifist organizations, the League is actually aiding the development toward war. It obscures the analysis of the causes of war, diverts the real struggle against war into harmless channels, provides a salve for middle class consciences troubled by the horrors of war, and prepares to leave the working class helpless – both ideologically and organizationally – when a war situation arises.
At that, time, the League, built upon the sands of vague pacifist sentiment instead of class organization, will be blown away by one puff from the capitalist state. Its preachers and liberals will take the stump for the government, recruiting the masses to the new war “to end all wars” or “defend the shores of our sacred land” or whatever it may be.
2. The League is a horrible parody of the united front as Marxists understand the united front.
The united front, properly understood, is a tactic whereby working class and at times certain middle class organizations, differing in program, nevertheless unite on certain specific actions upon which all are agreed, while retaining their full organizational and programmatic independence. There is no such thing as a permanent united front, nor a “united front in program”. How could there be? There is nothing in common between the Marxist program against war or on any other important issue, and the program of any other group or individual. The one possibility of “union” is on specific actions. Nor can a Marxist party join in a permanent united front, which would necessarily mean giving up organizational independence.
3. The League involves a complete misunderstanding of the relation of the working class to the middle class.
It does not represent a united front with middle class groups and individuals, but a capitulation to the middle class. The program, activities, and agitation of the League are precisely the program, activities, and agitation of middle class pacifism, and at a vast political distance from Marxism. In any correct united front with middle class individuals and groups, the working class goes ahead on the basis of specific actions immediately acceptable to both, but keeping its program intact, and demonstrating through the united front – not that an amalgamation, i.e. a compromise, can be reached between a middle class and a working class program, but that only the working class program, the revolutionary program, is able to solve also the middle class problems. In the League, the working class program against war surrenders to the middle class program. And, in addition, working class members are subordinated to middle class members.
4. The League, because of the kind of activities it engages in, and because of the political implications of its program, becomes a substitute for the revolutionary political party.
The political jargon of its program is the usual reformist twaddle, exactly in line with paragraphs from the platforms of Progressive Parties, Utopian Societies, Labor Parties, etc. Becoming an individual member of the League and building it is just like building any kind of reformist political organization.
 
Revolutionary Party Is First Task
War will be defeated only by the revolutionary struggle of the workers; and this struggle will succeed only under the leadership of the revolutionary political party. The business of a Marxist is certainly not to build up a reformist group – whose historical role, we ought to know by now, is to make smooth the road to war and reaction – but to build the revolutionary party. This is the only political organization a Marxist has any right to join or support. And to build the revolutionary party is his first and greatest task.
5. The League encourages a crowning confusion by linking automatically together “war and fascism”.
While it is true in a sense that “fascism means war”, it is a complete illusion to suppose that fascism is the cause of war. By emphasizing the relation between fascism and war, as the League does, it suggests that the war danger from non-fascist nations is remote. But it is capitalism that causes war. Fascism means war only in the tense that the triumph of fascism marks a deepening of capitalist contradictions which likewise indicates the nearer approach of war as an attempted solution. By linking fascism and war, the League plays into, the hands of the bourgeois propaganda that declares Hitler and Mussolini to be the war-makers, and “democratic” England, France, and the United States the defenders of peace. Thus is prepared the sell-out of the workers of England, France and the United States to the next war of their peaceful democratic governments.
Furthermore, this association of fascism and war fails to distinguish the great, differences between the tactics of the struggle against war and the struggle against fascism. This it is not the business of these articles to elaborate, but it is sufficiently indicated by the fact that fascism is incompatible with and involves the destruction of not only the revolutionary party but of all reformist parties, all independent trade unions, etc.; whereas war, as the last war proved conclusively, is entirely compatible with the continued existence of reformist parties and the trade unions.
Much more could be said about the confusions, errors, and deceits of the League. There is space now only to ask and briefly answer one final question: Where and why did an organization of this kind arise?
 
The Policy of Stalinism
The answer is not a matter of conjecture. We know the record. The Leagues (here and in other countries) are the conception of the foreign office of the Soviet Union. The American League was first proposed in this country by the representative of the Communist International, to a group of non-party individuals – even before it had been presented to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the U.S. Browder himself, when he was first told about it, before he had had a little chat with the C.I. representative, rejected it as “pacifist”. The League follows directly from the whole policy of Stalinism. The building of socialism in one country demands peace; peace will be secured by treaties and deals with capitalist governments, by joining the League of Nations, and, quite naturally, by pacifist propaganda.
Squarely opposed is the Marxist conception: The Workers’ State will be defended by the strengthening of the revolutionary movement in the capitalist countries. This will prevent intervention in the Soviet Union, because the capitalist states will not be able to risk intervention if a strong revolutionary movement can, with the aid of the Red Army, turn the war of intervention into a class war for the overthrow of the capitalist, state. And, when the revolutionary movement is sufficiently developed, it will take the offensive.
The Soviet Union is finally defended by attacking. The real building of socialism will be accomplished in the only way it can be accomplished – by the extension of the revolution. This is the only mode of “defense”. In any other direction lies disaster, and the world-wide triumph of reaction.
 






(Ed. Note: This is the second in Comrade West’s series of four articles. The remaining two – The League Against War and Fascism and The United Front and War – will follow in the next two issues of the New Militant.)



* * *
Even a brief study of the nature and causes of modern war proves that war is an essential part of capitalism. The inner conflicts of capitalism lead and must lead to war. All Marxists, and in fact many pseudo-Marxists or even liberals, accept this conclusion.
Nevertheless, there have been the most serious misconceptions in following out the consequences of this conclusion so far as they apply to the struggle against war.
The most serious mistake made in the attempted struggle against war comes from the wide-spread belief that this struggle is somehow “independent” of the class struggle in general, that a broad union of all sorts of persons from every social class and group can be formed around the issue of fighting war, since – so the reasoning goes – these persons may he all equally opposed to war whatever their differences on other points. War is thus lifted from its social base, considered apart, from its causes and conditions, as if it were a mystic abstraction instead of a concrete historical institution. Acting on this belief, attempts are made to build up all kinds of permanent Peace Societies, Anti-War Organizations, Leagues Against War, etc.
 
To End War We Must Remove Cause
This kind of attitude, is about as effective as it would be for doctors to treat the high fever in acute appendicitis by putting the patient in an ice-box. The only way actually to get rid of the high fever is to remove the cause of the fever – that is, to take out the diseased appendix. The same thing is true for war: the only way to get rid of war is to remove the cause of war.
Putting screens around the rotting supports of a building will not improve its foundations. It will, in fact, do just the opposite – it will divert people’s attention from the need for new foundations, and therefore make it all the more likely that the building will collapse.
War is not the cause of the troubles of society. The opposite is true. War is a symptom and result, of the irreconcilable troubles and conflicts of the present form of society, that is to say, of capitalism. The only way to tight; against war is to fight against the causes of war. Since the causes of war are part of the inner nature of capitalism, it follows that the only way to fight, against war is to fight against: capitalism. But the only true fight against capitalism is the revolutionary struggle for workers’ power.
It therefore follows that the only possible struggle AGAINST war is the struggle FOR the workers’ revolution.
Marxists must be absolutely clear on this point. There is no “separate” or “special” struggle against war. The struggle against war cannot be divorced from the day-to-day struggles of the workers so far as, in their historical implications, these lead toward workers’ power. No one can uphold capitalism – whether directly, as an open adherent of the capitalists, or indirectly, from any shade of liberal or reformist position – and fight against war, because capitalism means war. Only a revolutionist can fight against war, because only a revolutionist takes the road to the overthrow of capitalism.
To suppose, therefore, that revolutionists can work out a common program “against war” with non-revolutionists is a disastrous illusion.
Any organization based upon such a program is not merely powerless to prevent war; in practise it acts to promote war, both because it serves in its own way to uphold the system that breeds war, and because it diverts the attention of its members from the real fight against war. There is only one program against war: the program for revolution – the program of the revolutionary party of the workers.
 
Socialized Economy Will End Contradictions
The workers’ revolution can and will eliminate war because, by overthrowing capitalist economy and supplanting capitalism with a socialist economy, it will remove the causes of war. Under socialism there will no longer exist the basic contradictions that lead to war. The expansion of the means of production, under the ownership and control of society as a whole, will proceed in accordance with a rational plan adjusted to the needs of the members of society. Socialism will remove the limits on consumption, and hence permit the scientific and controlled development of production. Thus, under socialism, war will disappear because the causes of war will have been removed.
 
Peace Plans and Pacifism
Since this is the basic nature of the struggle against war, the attitude of a Marxist toward any “official” bourgeois “peace plans” is self-evident. The World Court, the Washington Treaty, the Kellogg Pact, the League of Nations, whatever their pretensions, are actually expressions of the irreconcilability of the imperialist conflicts.
Far from being instruments of peace, they are, in fact, part of the preparation for imperialist war, stamping grounds where the great powers can jockey for the most advantageous position for the start of open conflict. If at times they seem to settle a war situation “peacefully”, this is only because the interest of the dominant powers is against an immediate outbreak. Postponement serves only to assure a greater conflagration when the time comes. They serve, in point of fact, as additional means whereby the great powers can carry out their imperialist aims.
This is above all true of the League of Nations, which was formed to preserve the Versailles Settlement (that is, formed as an instrument of aggression against, and subjugation of. the defeated nations) and as a pact of imperialist unity against the post-war revolutionary drive of the workers, and which is utilized now to maintain French hegemony on Continental Europe and the world position of France and England. How meaningless it is, is well enough illustrated by the withdrawal of Germany and Japan at the first real issue.
The League will keep peace as long as peace is to the interests of the powers that control the League. It is into this den of imperialist robbers (as Lenin called it) that Stalinism has led the Workers’ State!
But if Marxists must separate their position sharply from official bourgeois peace plans, they must distinguish themselves no less clearly from all forms of pacifism. The revolutionary struggle against war – the struggle for workers’ power – is at an opposite pole from pacifism. A Marxist is against any and every war undertaken by the capitalist state of course, just as the Marxist is the implacable enemy of the capitalist state – the political representative of the class enemy – on every occasion.
But it is the business of the Marxist, upon the outbreak of imperialist war, to work to turn that war into a class war, a war of the masses under the leadership of the working class for the overthrow of the capitalist state and the establishment of the rule of the working class.
Likewise, it is the business of the Marxist to support actively the revolts of colonies against their imperialist oppressors, and the uprisings of all oppressed and exploited races and nations, since these are directed against the power of the imperialist states – just as he supports strikes and any other manifestations directed against the capitalist class or its government. War is not an abstraction; wars are a social institution, concrete historical phenomena. The final aim of Marxists includes the elimination of wars of all kinds. But they know that this can be accomplished only through one particular kind of war – the class war – since only through the class war can capitalism be overthrown and the causes of war thereby removed. This requirement is due not to the wishes of Marxists but to the actual historical situation.
 
Pacifism Aids War
Marxists must, therefore, expose and seek to prevent all kinds and forms of pacifism – all theories and organizations, that is, based on a mere “anti-war” program.
Pacifism is not merely powerless against war – since it is not based on genuine social organization nor a clear analysis of the causes of war. In practice it aids war: by spreading illusions about the nature of war and the fight against it; by shifting the energies of honest opponents of war to a fictitious fight against it; by sugar-coating the realities of capitalist society and thus making them – including war – more palatable; by subordinating the working class to middle class individuals and ideas; by preparing the betrayal of the masses in the next war, when outstanding pacifist leaders will decide in the crisis that, this war is different – is for democracy, culture, God, or what not – and call for support of the government.
No, the pacifist way is not the way to fight war. In the struggle against war, properly understood, every militant demonstration, every broad mass labor defense fight, every well-led strike, every step in the workers’ advance to power, is worth a thousand Peace Leagues.
 



In 1932 Roosevelt was swept stormily into office on a broad wave of middle-class bewilderment, working class and farmer resentment, and bourgeois fear. The curve of the business cycle was close to its very bottom, on the downswing of the mightiest depression the United States had yet experienced. Finance-capital itself was worried. The “orthodox” solutions, administered governmentally by Hoover, had got nowhere. The curve continued down. The middle classes, fluttering tremulously, saw no out. Faced with increasing impoverishment, proletarianization, and outright unemployment, they were losing all confidence in their former gods, the big industrialists and bankers. The farmers Were crushed by mortgages, taxes, and low prices. The workers were decimated by unemployment without adequate relief, by sharply decreased wages and part-time jobs. The entire population was looking for a savior.
Roosevelt pranced into the arena, with the banner of the New Bra flung high. He offered himself to the people as their needed savior. His powerful demagogy rolled out denunciations of the Tories and the money-changers. A new type of life was to be brought to America-freed from the domination of greed and private selfishness. The Forgotten Man was to become the basis of the new social order.
 
Savior of Capitalism
Now it is true that Roosevelt came into office in a sense as a savior: precisely as the savior of the capitalist order in the United States, as a stop-gap to tide over U.S. capitalism in a dark hour, as a channel to turn aside mass discontent from any development toward genuine social change. But, naturally, to accomplish these ends, Roosevelt could not appear in his actual economic role. The psychological and political requirements had also to be met. And to meet them, his program had to embody the half-formed dreams especially of the middle classes, and even, though to a lesser extent, of labor. This, then, was the material of the New Deal: in economic substance, a series of mostly temporary measures designed to help pull the business cycle out of the hole; in psychological and political form, a group of vague but enspiriting generalities constructed to rally behind the Administration all who were bewildered, confused, and resentful.
There was, thus, little systematic opposition to the New Deal in its first period. Big business was scared, and needed the help of the Administration. The middle classes were full of hope. The farmers were encouraged by preparations for commodity inflation and direct governmental subsidy. Labor, not thinking in terms of class issues, was willing to follow its official leaders in welcoming the savior.
The New Deal did its work. It is of course impossible to estimate exactly how great a part the New Deal policies played, over and above the normal economic developments, in getting the business cycle out of the basement. But on any account the part was considerable – was, indeed, unprecedented for this country. Without Roosevelt’s handling of the banks at the outset, it is probable that the “banking holiday” would have precipitated a most severe financial crisis. The inflationary measures helped the farmers and exporters directly and immediately, loosened up purchasing, and helped check bankruptcies. The NRA provisions aided the big corporations in putting some halt to the chaotic and destructive price-cutting, which was endangering the entire price and credit structure. The outlay of government funds through unemployment relief, the AAA, the various work relief agencies, loans of all kinds, etc., undoubtedly did a fair amount of the “pump priming” which the Administration promised. Section 7a, and and a judicious combination of government arbitration boards with tear gas, managed to choke off two potentially major strike waves, and to “keep labor in its place.”
 
The New “Prosperity”
Two minor upturns in the business cycle, during 1933 and 1934, have now been followed by a more considerable rise beginning in the early spring of this year. The dominant internal factor at present is the continuance of this new drift toward “prosperity.” It is a very peculiar prosperity indeed. Hardly a dent has been made in unemployment, particularly if we take into account the youth who have come to working age during the past six years. Though factory payrolls are considerably increased, real wages of factory workers generally are still far below the 1928 level, and in many industries close to the crisis low. The professional workers and recent college graduates have an enormous percentage of unemployment and a great lowering of living conditions where employed. The farm laborers, sharecroppers, and poor farmers continue in desperate straits. But the stock market has been steadily booming. Bonuses for executives have come back. A large number of independent as well as landlord and capitalist farmers have more money with the help of mortgage moratoriums, AAA benefits, and a combination of high prices and good crops during the current season (a combination resulting in part from inflation, in part from last year’s drought). Chemicals, autos, munitions, steel, agricultural equipment, are forging ahead. Above all, corporation profits have monted amazingly, each week bringing out new records since 1931 or 1930, and in some instances for all time.
 
Big Business Clamps Down
But what this means, from the point of view of finance-capital, is that the New Deal has served its purpose. With profits again rolling in, no need for any more nonsense about the Forgotten Man and a new social order. And no more extravagant governmental spending, with its necessary threat of either uncontrolled inflation or increased taxation.’ And no more playing around with “concessions” to the workers and the unemployed. And an end to this talk about Tories and money-changers, these slanderous attacks on American ideals, on the utilities and the banks and the Stock Exchange. Time to get down to real business again. It is all well and good to maneuver and talk and even accept certain devious methods and uncomfortable restrictions when things are on the edge of the abyss. But now that we have again picked up the scent of profits, away with this doll-playing and back to the high-road of true Americanism.
Thus has big business reasoned more and more openly during the past year and a half. And in the light of this reasoning, the campaign against the New Deal has taken form. The Chambers of Commerce throughout the land ring again with the old slogans. The editorials in the powerful newspapers denounce, deplore, and pile up the phrases about the Stalin, Hitler, Mussolini and anti-Christ in the White House. Finance-capital comes again out of Its lair; its limbs rejuvenated with the blood of profits, it roars once more with its lion voice. It smashes head on into the New Deal legislation through its courts; and where the courts have not acted, it goes its own way in open defiance.
And what a sham the battle is at heart! Who is this redoubtable enemy of theirs? What is his reply? We read it day by day. Roosevelt promises a “breathing spell.” He sends out Roper to glorify capitalism. He promises the bankers fullest cooperation. He pleads with big business, through the Administration press agents and the pro-Administration newspapers: “What have you boys against me? Haven’t I brought back your profits, kept labor in check, done all you asked of me?” He promises to stop the dole, to reduce the deficit next year to $500,000,000 and the year after to bring the budget into balance. He is the injured servant, who has given his all to his master, only to be thrust out into the cold.
Meanwhile, in a half-hearted way, he continues his play for middle-class support by talking about the utilities and social security and new taxes in higher brackets; and now by appealing to pacifist illusions in neutrality measures. But, alas, the middle classes no longer listen so readily. The middle classes always jump toward what looks at the moment like the winning side. With finance-capital again roaring, their depressed confidence again revives. It looks to them as if the big shots were right after all; and in any case only they seem to know their own minds. Ironically, every step forward toward “prosperity” loses for Roosevelt middle class support. If you can have the old-fashioned prosperity again, reasons the middle class, let’s let it be run by its authentic representative, by the bankers and the old-fashioned Grand Old Party. Besides, what has Roosevelt done that he promised? No, we will reborn to the former gods, and sign up at the Chamber of Commerce.
A thankless task, indeed, this job of political dish-washer for finance-capital.
But times do not exactly return, and 1935 is not nor can be 1929. The Chambers of Commerce overplay their hand. The farmers remain in the majority behind Roosevelt. The industrialists in the unionized industries stay with him. The middle class liberals have given up the Tories for good. And labor and the unemployed, for all their disillusionment. With the shattered New Deal, are not now willing to go back quite as far as the rugged individualists, whose only tangible promises are a balanced budget, a smashing of independent unionism, and a cutting of relief. Thus Roosevelt can in all probability still be re-elected next year, unless major economic and social alterations meanwhile intervene.
But Roosevelt’s victory taken in itself would not be the significant social symptom which it might seem – would not, for example, at all be a “vindication for the New Deal.” The real cleavages begin to take form beneath the public surface.
The masses have learned far more from three years of Roosevelt than from the depths of the Hoover crisis. Labor and the unemployed are beginning to realize more clearly than ever before in U.S. history that the 1936 choice, between finance-capital open and undisguised and finance-capital with a decoration of appealing phrases, is for them no choice at all. They begin to understand that the present upturn in business will necessarily be short-lived, and will in any case and however far it goes be of little benefit to them. They begin to move toward consciousness of class issues.
 
Growing Sentiment for Class Action
Already this us apparent in the “third-party” sentiment, in the strength of local Farmer-Labor organizations (as in Minnesota), in the Labor party demands appearing within the A.F. of L., and especially in the growing sentiment among the rank and file workers everywhere to settle issues by direct class action, without parliamentary intervention – a sentiment clearly reflected in the stormy A.F. of L. convention. Roosevelt seems to have retained enough of his demagogy to head this off from national expression in the 1936 campaign, but this can prove only a temporary diversion.
In the meantime, the energies of the far-sighted among the bourgeoisie itself, and of the reformists and betrayers within the working class, are being bent to make sure that this awakening consciousness of class needs and class issues is directed into safe channels. Labor fakers, Socialists, Stalinists, Lovestoneites and liberals alike try to move it toward a “sane” third party, toward a Labor or Farmer-Labor or People’s Party. Thus would it be able to avoid direct attack against capital. The central effort of the revolutionists must be to give this consciousness its authentic expression, to lead it toward the sole historical embodiment of its genuine meaning and the actual needs which it reflects: the revolutionary program and the revolutionary party.




The Nature and Causes of Modern War

The Struggle Against War

The League Against War and Fascism

The United Front and War
 







(Ed. Note: This is the first of a series of four articles by Comrade West on the problems of the revolutionary fight against war. The remaining three will be entitled: The Struggle Against War, The League Against War and Fascism, and The United Front and War. Do not miss them!)



* * *
An integral part of the great aim of the revolutionary movement is the elimination of war. It has become almost commonplace to realize that modern war threatens not merely suffering and death to vast millions, but the actual destruction of human civilization, the thrusting of mankind back into barbarism. No one who, with the lessons of the last war in mind, has followed the recent developments in military technique, can doubt this to be literally true.
In the face of this prospect, it is the revolutionary movement alone that has a solution to offer. From the open war-glorification by Fascism to the futile gesturings of pacifism, all other forces in modern society are not merely powerless to prevent war but in fact aid in preparing war. The responsibility for the struggle against war rests wholly on the revolutionary movement.
The first step in the struggle against war is a clear understanding of the nature and causes of war. A mere pious horror at the dreadfulness of war – which is shared by the great majority of men – is useless, and worse than useless.
 
At the Bottom of War
The driving force of the capitalist mode of production is the necessity for the continual accumulation and expansion of capital. This necessity is inescapable. Capitalists must constantly attempt to expand capital, in order to maintain profits. But this attempt comes up against (indeed it is merely the reverse side of) the equally inescapable tendency under capitalism for the general rate of profits to fall. The fall in the rate of profits demands capital expansion, in order to retain an equal or greater total amount of profits; the expansion, however, in its turn involves an increased tendency of the rate of profits to fall, and, consequently, the still further need for capital expansion.
The necessity for the expansion of capital leads to the mighty development of the means of production, to the huge new machines and great factories and mines and railroads, the enormous corporations, the ever-growing monopolies. The expansion is, however, by its nature unregulated and chaotic, for two chief reasons, the first of which is dependent on the second:

It is carried out on a competitive basis, not in accord with a rational and inclusive plan.
 
It is developed with no relation to the needs of a consumer market.

From the point of view of capitalism, the “market” is only the means for transforming commodity-values back into capital-values for further use in the accumulation of capital. The market is therefore necessarily limited not by the potential needs of consumers (which are nearly boundless), but by the conditions of capitalist production itself – by the possibility of using the surplus value realized from the sale of commodities to produce more surplus value.
The tendency to uncontrolled expansion exceeds the limits; the capitalist created market can no longer “absorb” the products of the expanded capital equipment; expansion becomes over-expansion. The over-expansion is temporarily “corrected” by the periodic crisis, during which capital (i.e. the value of the means of production) is destroyed through falling price levels, bankruptcies and material deterioration. The point is reached where capital accumulation can once more proceed “normally”; the tendencies re-assert themselves on a new and still more violent scale, and the next crisis is rapidly prepared for.
Capitalism thus faces: (1) A chronic necessity for the accumulation of capital, i.e. for the recapitalizing of all present values and for new capital investments; (2) a periodic inability to find markets through which commodities turned out by the capital equipment can, by their sale to consumers, be re-converted into capital. During the decline of capitalism, this second periodic condition likewise tends more and more to become chronic, thus bringing about a lowering of the scale of capitalist operations. The necessity for capital expansion, however, continues in an even sharper form at the more restricted level.
These two conditions explain the fundamental basis of modern (imperialist) war.
 
Driven to Imperialist Expansion
Capitalists of every major capitalist nation are faced with the following situation: In order to sustain the system which sustains them, they must find continuous outlets for capital investment and re-investment; but the internal market, provided by the capitalist mode of production within any single nation, is not, sufficient to re-convert into capital values the values of commodities turned out even by existing capital equipment, much less of new. Consequently, the capitalists of each nation are forced to seek outlets for capital investment (and likewise consumer markets) beyond the national borders.
If we glance even for a moment at the history of the United States since the War, we can see this tendency everywhere manifesting itself.
International Tel. & Tel. builds and operates telephone and telegraph systems in Spain, Latin America, South America, and the Near East. General Electric buys heavily into the electrical industries not only of “backward” countries but of Germany, France and England. New York banks and investment bouses exploit the copper mines of Africa and the silver mines of Peru. The Standard Fruit Co. owns and operates the great orchards of Mexico; United Fruit, the orchards of Central America. The American Sugar Refining Co. expands it refineries in Cuba. Curtiss-Wright builds an airplane factory in China. Standard Oil and Texas Co. build oil refineries and operate filling stations all through the Far East, as well as in Bolivia, Venezuela and Mexico. The auto companies build plants in Canada and even (Ford) in England and Germany.
 
Capitalists Vie on World-Wide Scale
But the capitalists of England, Germany, France, Italy, and Japan are driven by the same scourge.
Since the world is limited in extent, since the areas available for new forms of capital expansion and exploitation are growingly restricted, conflict is not only likely but inevitable. The grandiose battle of the capitalists of the imperialist powers is fought on a world-wide scale. Into the colonies, mandates, “subject nations”, “spheres of influence”, flow the surplus capital funds, imperiously demanding to be set to work at making profits.
The political arms of the capitalists – the governments of their respective countries – are extended watchfully over the new investments.
They are ever ready to unseat a Central American government, threaten a native prince, wipe out “red bandits”, stop or start a revolution, send a flotilla of warships or a regiment of marines, resent an “insult to the flag”, if necessary set two countries – Bolivia and Paraguay for example – flying at each other’s throats to settle the dispute of Standard Oil and Shell over rights to an oil field.
To expose the foundation clearly, there must be added to this basic drive of capital for accumulation the closely related struggle for sources of raw materials, for control of shipping, for the ability to manufacture in countries where the standard of living is lower than in the home country, and the determination of the home capitalists to keep the home market for their own purposes by tariff’s, quotas, and exchange restrictions.
 
Capitalist Society Continually at War
The truth of the matter is this: In the stage of imperialism, capitalist society is continuously at war. This is the essence of imperialism. It is not a question of one war starting, then stopping, to be followed in a decade or two by a new war. It is war all the time, changing only in the form it takes, in the degree of violence.
The economic wars of capital expansion, of tariff and exchange and armament, and competitive exploitation roach a point where the attempt is made to find a political solution of the economic and social contradictions through war open and undisguised: imperialist-inspired wars between subject nations; wars of subjugation by imperialist nations against subject peoples and the converse wars of these peoples against their imperialist oppressors; the world-wide war of the imperialist nations among themselves. But, though producing a “boom” by loosening the bonds on capital expansion, by destruction of existing values, and by credit expansion, the open wars, far from solving the contradictions, only express their depth, and prepare for still more bitter conflict to come.
 
The Revolutionary War of the Workers
And throughout this bloody chaos is fought the war that gives historical meaning to the whole mad spectacle: the revolutionary war of the working class against its exploiters. This war, which, after generations of preparation, began on a world scale with the October revolution, continues within every country in a thousand varying forms, from strikes to armed uprisings to preparations for intervention in the Soviet Union, and will continue until the final issue is decided.
The disguises that war wears – appearing as due to “national” or “cultural” differences, as following from an assassination or an insult to the flag – must not be allowed to hide the fundamental conflicts which are the true source of modern war. Though these other factors may provide the final push that sets open war going or may modify the character of a war, there is nothing in their own nature that must necessarily lead to war. They are the tools of the forces making for war, not the cause of these forces. Nor should we be misled by those who tell us that the present tendency toward “economic nationalism” means the end of imperialism and consequently of imperialist war. The lessening of foreign trade and foreign investment during the crisis, far from removing the imperialist contradictions, only exaggerates them, only increases the relative importance of whatever foreign capital expansion and trade remains and makes ever sharper the struggle to capture and control it.
The general conclusion is inescapable: Modern war is neither accidental nor due to the evil of human nature nor decreed by God. War is of the very essence of imperialist-capitalism, as much a part of capitalism as wage labor. To speak of capitalism without war is like speaking of a human being without lungs. The fate of the one is inextricably hound to the fate of the other.
 



THERE IS A peculiar character to the contradictions of the Roosevelt administration that deserves more careful study than has yet been given. I do not refer to the central contradictions of a declining capitalism, present to a more or less acute extent everywhere. What interests me here, rather, are the distinctive features of the form these central contradictions are taking within the United States. It is easy enough, and indeed true enough, to say that “the Roosevelt program is in essence the program of monopoly capitalism”. Nevertheless, this is not particularly illuminating. The description applies equally well to the programs of most governments – including Fascist governments – in the late stages of capitalism. We must ask why the Roosevelt program takes the special forms we have seen and will see.
The Roosevelt contradictions come to light along a number of approaches. For example, the administration has been frequently attacked from the extreme Right – especially during the first year and a half – as “socialistic” or even “communistic”. These attacks cannot be merely dismissed as verbal smoke-screens laid down to fool the masses. They have been seriously made by reasonably intelligent critics. And there can be no doubt of the very real opposition to Roosevelt on the part of many leading bankers and industrialists. There must be, in the Roosevelt program, some basis for these attacks, however confused they may essentially be. Marxism cannot be content to answer political questions by a scornful shrug of doctrinary shoulders.
Parallel to these attacks have come others equally violent from certain quarters of the Left, calling Roosevelt a “Fascist”. Here, also, dismissal is not enough. In the Roosevelt program we must find the double foundation for these contradictory charges.
The personnel of the administration is a second striking expression of the contradictions. Roosevelt has drawn into the staff of the New Deal men whose political background varies to an extent that makes it extraordinary that they should form parts of a single organized administration. It is of course true that no Marxist is among them – naturally the real Left cannot be represented. However, the gap that separates the Tugwells or Wallaces from the arch-reactionary Johnsons or Ropers or Clay Williamses is wide and genuine. Moreover, none of these men is mere window-dressing. Each, and each type, has an active role to play.
The most open contradictions of all are to be found in the unprecedented contrast between the surface and the substance of the Roosevelt program. This contrast is always present in class society, but at no other time has it been so striking. The contrast is not merely between the promises and their fulfillment (this is to be always expected) but throughout, between intentions and results, between statutes and the enforcement of statutes, activities and the results of activities. The New Deal becomes an aggravated form of the Old Deal. Labor’s “charter of freedom” becomes the major strike-breaker. Plans to help the forgotten man oppress him further. Help for the “little man” in business strengthens monopoly. Codes to protect the consumer leave him more naked than before. Curbing the bankers finally completes the subordination of small banks to the financial center. A design for peace and cessation of imperialist aggression builds up the greatest military machine and the most intensive imperialist exploitation.
None of these matters is new to capitalism; all of them are found frequently enough at other times and in other places. It is the exaggerated character of the obvious contrasts that is peculiar to the Roosevelt administration.
The underlying explanation may be found in a double paradox. First: the Roosevelt administration, upon coming to power, was confronted simultaneously with the seemingly contradictory tasks of social democracy and the preparation for Fascism; or putting forward a social democratic program and actually laying the groundwork for a transition to Fascism. To put this in another way: psychologically and to some extent politically, the task of the administration was social democratic; whereas economically the preparation for Fascism was demanded. Or in still a third way: the United States, considered abstractly, from a merely “internal” point of view, was over-ready for social democratic developments; but considered actually, as an integrated part of the world system, it had to make the turn toward Fascism.
The second paradox is bound up with the first. In the case of neither of these tendencies – the social democratic and the Fascist – did the administration have the distinctive and appropriate social base; Roosevelt was neither a working class supported social democratic president, nor a middle class supported pre-Fascist. It is this that has made possible the reconciliation of the two terms of the first paradox. If the class lines of Roosevelt’s mass base were more clearly drawn, he could not have bridged the contradictions in his policies. He would have been much more definitely one thing or the other. But this is merely to say that the United States would have been another country at another time.
These two paradoxes require further elucidation to be meaningful.
There is, of course, no “normal” development of capitalism, except in broadest outline. The idea of a normal development is an abstraction, useful for analysis, but in the specific case of any given capitalist nation modified in a thousand ways by the peculiarities of local conditions. From this abstract point of view, the United States has diverged from the normal in not having had a large and strong labor movement, nor a social democratic movement of any importance during the years when these grew in Europe. The major reasons for this have been fairly adequately covered: the “fresh start” possible in the New World, which had no feudal aristocracy to shake off; the vast store of raw materials; the enormous internal frontier; the hegemony over much of two continents; etc. The war brought in an additional factor preserving the “abnormality” of the career of United States capitalism. Through the war the world market almost automatically opened up to United States industry on an unprecedented scale. Together with the financial manoeuvres involved – both in foreign loans and the internal installment system of buying – this laid the basis of the post-war “prosperity” on a relatively primitive competitive scheme, without the social democratic checks of a growingly sated capitalist economy.
But the war and post-war developments, while giving the last grandiose spurt to the “unique” career of United States capitalism, likewise eliminated the uniqueness, and destroyed forever the myth that the United States was a special case. The war plunged the United States headlong into the world maelstrom, not merely in that United States citizens died on the European battlefields, but much more fundamentally in that the United States economic and financial structures became irrevocably entangled with the world structure. What meaning could isolation have with a financial set-up leaning on something like twenty billions of foreign loans, and with the great United States corporations intertwined with enterprises in every country of the world? Thus the fate of United States capitalism became not merely ultimately but immediately bound up with the fate of world capitalism. At the same time, such internal factors as the chaotic over-expansion of capital equipment, the growing disproportion of income and ownership, the leaky banking system, the fantastic capital debt arrangements, were exaggerating the country’s economic instability.
Then the crisis began gradually to open United States eyes, a generation or so behind time. The masses began to realize more clearly that all was not well, that the chances of good wages and a rise in the world were not favorable enough to be worth taking. They began to wish for protection against predatory capital. Reform was necessary: reform of the bankers who had brought them to ruin, of advertizers who misled them, of governmental bodies that cheated them, of monopolies that exploited them. Control was necessary: of natural resources, of wasteful competition, of the monetary system, of agriculture. Security was necessary: from old-age, accident, above all from unemployment. Organization was necessary: of benevolent trade unions that could be successful in bargaining collectively with employers. Taxes were necessary: to soak the rich, re-distribute wealth, pay for reforms and new projects. State intervention was necessary: to plan the national economy, curb individualists, and work toward a more cooperative society. Public works were necessary: rehabilitation, roads, housing, government utilities, public services.
At the same time many capitalists saw more clearly that something had to be done to save the profit system from an entire disintegration.
Here, then, was the Roosevelt problem, and his program was the design to meet it. The half-felt mass demands for reform, security, control, public works, are – in spite of many backward glances and merely liberal elements – generally social democratic in character. The Roosevelt program had to give adequate psychological and some actual satisfaction to these.
But the iron demands of United States economy, bound to the world decline of capitalism, decreed that in actuality none of these demands could be met on a large scale, that the Roosevelt program must in fact prepare for the corporative society and a Fascist political structure.
Embodied, then, in the administration speeches, commission reports, even in the laws it passed, has been the curious, perverted, upside-down form of American social democracy. And this, moreover, is the only kind of social democracy the United States will know. For social democracy has no fresh role to play in the period of the rapid decline of capitalism, and there is little chance for a major genuine social democratic development in this country, in spite of the occasional quivers of life from the American Socialist party corpse. The large scale development of social democracy depends upon the ability to win concessions from capitalism, and upon a comparatively slow rate of social change. Neither of these conditions is present during the decline of capitalism.
And embodied, secondly, in the practises of the administration is the preparation for Fascism. Some of this has already been carried to considerable length. For example, the concentration of governmental power in the Executive. This is shown not merely by the great multiplication of functions carried on by governmental bodies dependent on the President, but even more strikingly by the increase of so-called “permissive legislation”, which is in effect the turning over by Congress to the Executive of the most cherished legislative powers (tariff, coinage, budgetary expenditures, public works, etc.). Again, there is the much more open intervention of government in business, the establishment of labor camps (C.C.C., forced relief work), more open and consistent state intervention in labor disputes, and closer government control over foreign exchange.
Naturally, however, words alone would not satisfy the mass discontent, and the administration has, here and there, had to insert even some social democratic substance. In all cases, however, these have been either of no basic importance, or have operated actually in the Fascist direction. It is well known by now how the raising of minimum hourly wages has decreased the earnings of the working class as a whole, by the advanced price level, by lowering the higher scales of wages, increasing the speed-up, and causing more part-time employment. The partial elimination of child labor in certain industries, unaccomplished by higher annual real wages, has done little more than to lower family incomes below the subsistence level. Some individual capitalists, it is true, have been inconvenienced, but the spectacular investigations have seldom led to indictments and never to important convictions or changes in the practises investigated (the Securities and Exchange Commission, for example, has even milder regulations than the New York Stock Exchange itself, after all the Pecora ballyhoo). The subsistence homestead projects are miserable flops. The home renovation program has amounted to nothing more than newspaper headlines. The Home Owners’ Loan Corporation has benefitted primarily the holders of doubtful mortgages, who now have their interest guaranteed by the government. The farmers – though chiefly the landlord and capitalist farmers – are the only considerable group (except for the finance-capitalists themselves) that has gained appreciably, and this amounts to very little in relation to the entire national economy (perhaps $500,000,000 after allowances for the rise in prices of manufactured goods).
To sustain popular feeling, the administration has had to rely chiefly on: (1) demagogic attacks on Tories: (2) the masterful handling of patronage by Farley; (3) vast promises for the future; (4) carefully located expenditures of government funds for public works, where these will do the most psychological good; (5) playing off of one group against the other by both promises and threats; (6) keeping taxes down in spite of the increased governmental expenditures (a proportionate rise in taxes would quickly alienate the middle classes); (7) big-time muck-raking investigations (banking. Stock Exchange, advertizing, munitions).
Such a procedure, of course, cannot go on forever. Government finances cannot stand it, for one thing. Nor can this particular brand of demagogy get across indefinitely – it stales. Roosevelt is undoubtedly aware of this. So is everyone else, and even the capitalist critics ask, “Will he turn definitely in the end to the Right or the Left?” Of course, in the end he can turn only to the Right (the turn consists only in being less ambiguously to the Right, not in any real alteration of direction). Declining capitalism is unable to offer the substance of his reforms, no matter how sincerely Roosevelt might will it. The turn, in fact, made its appearance in September 1934, and became clearer with the speech to the bankers’ convention, and the repudiation of the June interview that promised social reforms on a wide scale with the new Congress. But the old game still goes on. Roosevelt will do his best, must do his best, to maintain his present double role until after the 1916 election.

What, then, may be expected from the new Congress? In addition to the background already outlined, which will condition its activities, two further factors must be kept in mind. First, the relation of Roosevelt to his new Congress is almost the reverse of his relation to his first Congress. Then, at the beginning of his administration, by a sweeping popular overthrow, he had been placed in power on the crest of rising mass sentiment. He was the Great Leader whose duty it was to guide a timid Congress into the untried country of the New Deal – new at least in the real sense of being a new step in the advance of United States capitalism to its final collapse. Now, however, Roosevelt is two years removed from direct contact with mass sentiment. Moreover, his unfulfilled promises are drifting back home to roost – in the end, citizens take jobs, security, protection, seriously. It is the members of Congress who, just assembling from the tribulations of November’s elections, reflect more directly the mass sentiment. They come from localities demanding additional public works expenditures, more relief, bonus payments, changed labor legislation, mortgage moratoriums, inflation, or what not. Therefore Roosevelt, from having played the Great Leader, must now play the Great Brake; he must calm the wilder members of Congress, shunt aside and compromise “radical” demands, and in general make sure that no accidentally passed “Left” legislation hinder the fundamental “Right” direction.
Second, certain industrial and banking corporations have achieved a temporary relative stability during Roosevelt’s first two years, with a reasonable level of profits rolling in. These are consequently anxious to go back to the pre-1929 days, and to take their chances in rugged competition unconfused by the complex intricacies of the New Deal. Their wishes cannot be granted. The pre-1929 days have gone not to return. Individual capitalists have got to be taught that they must occasionally give up a few sweetmeats as individuals to preserve the basic interests of their class as a whole, and its position. And the state – in the days of monopoly capitalism most directly representative of the class as a whole – will be their teacher. However, their reactionary opposition is a useful weapon for Roosevelt both against difficult groups in Congress, and to build up favorable popular sentiment. As against them, Roosevelt can be very Left indeed, and can point to them as the bogeyman who will gobble up Congress and the masses if they don’t toe the line.
In general, then, we may be sure that, while the underlying socio-economic drift continues toward a Right solidification, the legislation actually passed by the new Congress will be on no basic question unambiguously one thing or the other. It cannot be openly reactionary without antagonizing the masses in a manner for which Roosevelt is not prepared; it cannot be in reality Left without injuring seriously the position of the bourgeoisie, which position demands now the steady movement to the Right.
I shall apply this general scheme to certain specific problems that will be before the New Congress.
As for “labor legislation”, the A.F. of L. and other labor groups are making a drive for legislation to outlaw company unions, enforce the majority principle, guarantee free union elections, etc. From the other side, the Chamber of Commerce, the National Association of Manufacturers, and others want in effect to make the company union the universal American form, and to eliminate all traces of the majority principle. Neither of these plans, however, is now possible. The first would immediately be blocked in the courts as unconstitutional. The American masses, politically immature and confused as they are, are not ready for the second, nor is there a Fascist apparatus to enforce it. Section 73 will indeed have to be “clarified”. But this will be done by the new Congress in an ingeniously ambiguous manner that will enable William Green to hail a victory for labor, will prompt a series of editorials in the New York Herald-Tribune protesting again the undermining of American liberties, and will leave the real issue of unionization to be fought out as it is being now – with independent vs. company unions decided by the relative militancy and determination of the workers involved. Coupled with this clarification of Section 73 will be a modified form of the Wagner Bill, setting up additional means for the peaceful arbitration of industrial disputes, and ironing out certain confusions of jurisdiction among the various labor boards: that is, providing new and more impressive means for labor bureaucrats to tangle up strikers, new ways of sabotaging strikes. The country is not yet ready, however, for compulsory arbitration.
The widespread sentiment for insurances of various kinds, unemployment, old age, sickness, accident, will issue this session in a hodgepodge Federal-State Unemployment Insurance Measure. Far from being a liberal or labor victory, however, this will be a distinct defeat. It will be placed some distance in the future to start operation, and will thus serve to divert present agitation from sounder insurance plans. More dangerous, it will serve further to divide the interests of employed and unemployed (since it will not apply to the now unemployed, even where and when it is put into effect); and it will act as an additional strike-breaker, since its provisions will permit interpretation by the courts to rule strikers as losing any insurance benefits under the law.
One of the bitterest fights in the new Congress will be over the bonus. A majority in both Houses is in favor of immediate payment. If such a measure passed, Roosevelt would be forced to veto it, and would have a hard time to prevent passage over his veto. However, Roosevelt does not want to veto legislation of this kind, supported as it is by a powerful organization of voters. It seems probable that administration forces will arrange a compromise measure providing cancellation of interest owed on present loans against bonus certificates, more liberal loan provisions, and perhaps full payment for veterans in extreme need or even a general system of installment payments.
The present NRA expires on June 16. Some interests wish to let it die altogether, but this is part of the vain wish to get back to ’29. Perhaps with a different name, probably still as an ostensibly “temporary” measure, the NRA principles will be extended. There will be changes, however, including the elimination of price – and production – control provisions in most codes except those governing industries making use of natural resources.
The subsidies to agriculture will have to continue, since withdrawing them would have disastrous political consequences for Roosevelt, consequences he is not now in a position to handle. Production control will continue prominent in tobacco, cotton, etc.; but the drought and government destruction have made this matter simpler in the grains and live stock.
The advocates of various forms of inflation will be active throughout the session. These will be partly balanced by the powerful sound-money lobbies of the bankers, the Chamber of Commerce, the American Liberty League, etc. In the end, however, the inflation question will have to be solved by further “permissive legislation”, providing a legislative base for further inflationary steps, but leaving the taking of them to Roosevelt’s discretion. Perhaps some moves toward re-monetization of silver will be taken by Congress itself, but these will be of minor importance. The proposed Government Central Bank will not get out of committee.
No great changes will be made in taxation. There will be a few increases in higher bracket income and inheritance, taxes and perhaps some form of taxation of excess corporate surpluses, both of these for publicity rather than revenue purposes. The special taxes expiring during the next six months (e.g., bank check, gasoline, telegraph, automobiles) will most of them be continued, and a few added. But Roosevelt is resolved to put off that evil day, nevertheless fast approaching, when the middle classes will be forced to feel the full weight of capitalist decline.
Munitions and war legislation will be played up for all they are worth. Some sort of “regulations” will no doubt be voted, and probably something along the lines of the “take the profits out of war” talk. But nationalization of the munitions industry is for the present out of the question. Beneath the ballyhoo, the real job of war preparation will go on; and whatever government regulation is voted will actually help prepare for the War Department’s mobilization scheme, already laid down in fundamentals sixteen years ago. The collapse of the Washington Treaty will be used to carry on the expansion programs of army and navy, especially in aviation and mechanization.
The Left guns of the President are going to concentrate on utilities and housing. Here he will continue the social democratic surface, and we may expect a message to Congress on each, a Fireside Talk, and the best products of the presidential publicity agents. Much noise and even increased governmental activities in these fields are to be expected. After all, it will take the government utility “yardsticks” some long time to threaten seriously the gigantic privately owned utilities plants; there are some projects (Boulder, Muscle Shoals, Grand Coulee) which are not in any event profitable for private enterprise; and, lastly, the utilities can richly take a jolt to their profits, for their protected rate position has enabled them to do better than corporations deserved during the crisis. In the power field, the administration can be a trifle socially-minded with no harm – indeed, with considerable aid – to the system.
As for housing, it is connected with the whole problem of public works, and these in turn with relief. Here, too, bitter struggles will be solved in the end by permissive legislation. The balanced budget plans of the White Sulphur Springs conference, stripping away public works and relief, would mean the loss of the 1936 elections for Roosevelt, and nationwide riots. The ten billion dollar annual program of the liberal planners would upset government credit, and the bankers. Therefore, the new formula will be used: fairly large appropriations through several agencies, but only a fraction of them mandatory, the rest left to presidential discretion. Presidential discretion will mean, à la Hopkins, enough dole and work relief to prevent too violent outbursts on the part of the unemployed, plus enough haphazard housing and other public works to assure an adequate amount of publicity. There will evidently be an effort to increase the proportion of work relief as against the dole. This cannot, however, be done on a really large scale, and the result will be chiefly to drop some hundreds of thousands from all relief during the various transfers back and forth.

This, then, is the general character of the probable (internal) legislation of the new Congress. Meanwhile, below the ambiguous parliamentary surface, the real issues of 1936 will be fought out. The real question – “Will the workers’ movement organize its forces fast enough to compensate for the consolidating lines of the Right, and will the relative weight of the working class be heavier at the end than at the beginning of 1931?” – will be decided not in Washington, but in the open field of the class struggle.
John WEST
 



IN THEIR analysis of current political events, Marxists are susceptible to a dangerous error. This error consists in supposing that their position coincides concretely and immediately with the interests of the working class. Reasoning from this supposition, they evaluate incorrectly what is actually going on, and devise wholly unsuitable tactics to meet the real situation. The truth is that the Marxian position coincides with the interests of the working class neither concretely nor immediately, but abstractly and historically. The only final proof of the actual coincidence will come if the working class makes the Marxist position its own, if it identifies its interests with the Marxian directives. Every day proves the importance of this distinction. For example, in the Sacramento criminal syndicalism trial, Leo Gallagher, reasoning abstractly that it is a contest between the capitalist state and the working class, conducts the defense as if this were the case as actually present to the consciousness of workers. He moves in a vacuum, and the effect of his presentation is on the whole to prejudice not merely the jury (thereby injuring the chances of the defendants) but the working masses of California as well. What he ought to do, on the other hand, is to conduct the defense so that the historical reality of the class opposition embodied in the trial will become concretely and immediately real in the consciousness of workers. When this is done, the class struggle is advanced a stage, though the text books remain unchanged.
This confusion vitiates nine-tenths of the comment given by alleged Marxian publications to the acts of the government. Each act that comes along is a “great blow at the working class”; the class analysis of the state shows that it is the business of the government to strike great blows at the working class; therefore this act, whatever it may be, must be such a blow; and we are inclined to leave it at that. However true this may be historically, it is far from true on the surface or in the minds of most persons. Marxists must show just why and how it is true, and must convince, not themselves – for it is to each other that they normally talk – but others. The Roosevelt social security program, now before Congress, is an admirable example. It is, of course, a blow at the working class. But it takes more than dogmatic jargon to prove this to a middle class suburbanite, who thinks it a big step toward socialism; or to a worker who believes he will get the security of unemployment insurance out of it; or, above all, to an unemployed worker on four dollar a week relief who is going to be raised to fifty a month.
Let us, in the first place, outline the program itself, to be able to keep its main features clearly in mind. The program is confused, and chaotically thrown together. The Administration apparently counts on being able to iron it out in practise, if Congress grants the Executive control that is demanded. Nevertheless, the central matters are established.
The most grandiose section deals with unemployment relief policy. Here the Administration declares that it intends to eliminate the federal dole. Of the 5,000,000 now on federal relief, 1,500,000 are to be sent back to state or local agencies as “unemployable”. The 3,500,000 remaining are to be given jobs at $50 a month on public works. Four billion dollars are to be appropriated to pay for the public works, with an additional $880,000,000 to cover relief needs during the transfer from dole to public works. The public works are to include a great variety of projects, from slum clearance and subsistence homesteads to reforestation and improvement of rivers and harbors. The money is to be raised on credit, with no increase in taxation. The whole scheme is to be administered by the Executive, with permissive legislation from Congress giving the Executive complete control.
The next major part of the program deals with unemployment insurance. Here we discover that nothing at all is to begin until 1936, and that the plan will not get genuinely started for several years after that. The plan is supposed to work on a combined federal-state basis, though in effect in the hands of the states. A federal tax on industrial pay-rolls, 1% at the beginning and increasing to 3% “as business improves” and is better able to carry the burden, is to be returned to each state that enacts its own unemployment bill. Thus each state has a wide leeway in setting up its own plan, details for which are not prescribed by the federal program. Benefits under the program are to be paid after an interval of ten weeks from the loss of job are to continue at an extremely low rate (a maximum of $12 or $15 a week) for only a couple of months; and are to be paid only to workers who can’t get jobs. This last provision, of great significance, is similar to a provision in the public works program that bars from relief work all who can get jobs elsewhere.
Next comes old age insurance. This is in two parts. The first deals with “the immediate problem” of the indigent old. Here it is proposed that the states enact old age pension laws providing what they like up to a maximum of $15 a month and that the federal government will contribute an equal amount to that paid by the states. The second is a long-time plan providing for the building up of old age pension reserves for each worker by equal contributions from the worker and the employer.
The program includes also certain paragraphs about sickness and accident insurance, and maternity and child welfare. It does not propose to do anything much about these now, but states that they are excellent ideas. For maternity and child welfare, an initial appropriation of $1,000,000 is proposed. The Senate, with a generous gesture, has raised this to $1,500,000.
It should be noticed that the program, as it is shaping up, excludes farm, domestic and professional workers from the provisions of the unemployment insurance and old age insurance plans.

Why does Roosevelt put forward this particular scheme at this particular time? There are a number of alternatives that he might have chosen: to slide along on the current basis; to abandon public works in favor of outright direct dole, as the Chamber of Commerce seems to want; to push the Lundeen Bill, or something of its character. Roosevelt’s scheme is neither the least “expensive” in budgetary terms, nor the most; it does not entirely satisfy any group either in Congress or the country. Let us answer the question first from the Administration point of view, before attempting to trace somewhat deeper the social meaning and effects.
The program, to begin with, carries on its surface the social democratic marks that Roosevelt finds it necessary to attach to his acts during these first years of his regime. We shall have no dole, but a real chance for the unemployed to rehabilitate themselves with actual jobs on constructive public enterprises. We shall lay the foundations for the great social reforms that will give security and peace of mind to the working masses of the country.
The social democratic surface is emphasized by the way in which maternity and child welfare are dragged in with the rest. There is nothing of them there but the name; there is not even a suggestion as to when or how they are to start operation; but the name is important. Old age insurance is shoved into a distant future, with hardly more than a gesture for the present; and unemployment insurance, too, is far enough away to be vague and safe. But they all appear, along with the public works. And if we look at them as a whole, we see that these are the slogans of generations of social democracy.
Anyone who read the issue of the New Leader the weekend after the program was announced will realize how true this is. In full headlines, the socialist party hailed the Roosevelt program as a great victory for socialism. Here, they said, is the acceptance “in principle” of all we have stood for. Patience now, they suggest to their readers, and the practical working out of the principles will follow, handed kindly down from the White House. The impression is confirmed by talking to middle class wiseacres, who see their beliefs in a socialist Washington substantiated, and sell their odd lot holdings on the stock market.
And this manoeuvre is still able to carry along the feelings of the majority of the people. The minds of the masses move slowly to self-consciousness. Marxists should not be deceived by their own analyses. Their audience is still decimally small, and Roosevelt’s program is a large enough straw for the moment.
But the relation of Roosevelt to Congress and to the rest of the country is altered from two years ago. This program is presented at the beginning of the session not to lead Congress to action, but to prevent it from action. And only a program of this kind would do the job. There has been too much talk of Townsend Plans, Share-Our-Wealth, Social Security, Utopia, and what not. The program had to be dressed up in reformist clothing to get through. A minimum dole would not get by the many Congressmen who have learned in their constituencies how popular it is to spend lots of public money in the neighborhood. These had to be checked, and Roosevelt moved fast to check them, putting them on the defensive. And such is the political backwardness of the masses, so generally absent is a class point of view that could judge the real social meaning of the program, that Roosevelt can get away with it.
Another idea lurks in the program, contributed by the remnants of the Brain Trust. They still hope that a public works program of this kind will revive business in the old way, both directly by providing a market for certain supplies used in the work, and indirectly through “cumulative reemployment”. This latter idea has been developed into a theory, according to which putting one man to work, through the materials he uses up and the additional commodities he can buy, actually brings about reemployment for anywhere from one to three others. The truth is that probably about one-tenth of a man is cumulatively reemployed; but public works does always mean sounder profits for the companies that sell the supplies and materials. And this is not forgotten.
Much more important, however, is the ability of the program to lower general wage scales. The tendency of wage scales under capitalism, unless sustained by unions, to seek the lowest level is inescapable. This is particularly important in the present case. Many construction projects under the public works plan will employ workers whose “normal” prevailing wages are among the highest. These – various branches of the building and construction industries – are, moreover, the backbone of the AF of L. Thus at one and the same time the government, through the $50 monthly wage of the program, hits at the prevailing wage levels and at organized labor. Roosevelt’s contention that the McCarran amendment to substitute prevailing wages for the $50 a month would “take the heart out of the whole program”, is understandable.
Lastly, the part this program plays in Farley’s patronage structure should not be underemphasized. Farley has been building his party machine more skillfully and ruthlessly than perhaps anyone has done before in American history. And here will be $4,880,000,000 to reward friends and punish enemies.

It may be asked whether the program is workable even from the point of view of the Administration, and it may very readily be answered that it is not. In the first place, it will not go through Congress unscathed. Amendments of a dozen varieties are being proposed, and many of them energetically pushed by one faction or another. The Senate is having a great deal of trouble over the McCarran amendment to provide prevailing wages in the place of the $50 a month provision for jobs on public works. There are complaints about the unlimited authority that the program turns over to the President. I believe, however, that in the end the program will go through with its major lines substantially unchanged. The character of the opposition to it is too inchoate to agree on a clear-cut substitute. This is brought out with particular clarity in connection with the McCarran amendment, which is chiefly supported by the die-hard Republicans – supported, of course, not because they are in favor of the higher wages, but because they want a chance to vote against the President. The result of the opposition will be merely to make more confused a bill that was sufficiently chaotic to begin with.
There are also certain questions of constitutionality which will effectively interfere with smooth working. These arise especially in connection with the unemployment insurance scheme: the payroll tax, by which this is to be financed, may be found an invasion of the federal government into intra-state business. This possibility will allow employers to prevent even these meager unemployment insurance plans from getting into operation without long court battles.
More significant is the absurdity of the whole conception of handling relief. The Administration reasons: there are now 5,000,000 persons getting federal relief (representing in their families 20,000,000 persons; 1,500,000 will be returned to local relief rolls as unemployable; 3,500,000 will be put to work on the government projects. To this it may be replied, first, that local relief rolls cannot carry the 1,500,000 without federal aid. Second, 3,500,000 cannot be put to work at once when there is no coordinated plan of public works to take care of them. This second point the Administration seems to recognize by insisting on a two-year limit to the appropriation instead of the one-year limit within which it is theoretically supposed to be used. To these must be added an additional consideration. There are at least 12,000,000 unemployed, that is 7,000,000 more than are now receiving federal relief. These 7,000,000 now live from savings, loans, help from relatives, occasional local relief, temporary jobs, etc. These means are gradually being exhausted. There must be inevitably expected an increase in relief applications even if there is some upturn in employment. The Administration program makes no provision for this whatsoever. We may conclude in general that the Administration statement that jobs on public works can be substituted for the dole is necessarily false. The necessity for the dole will, in fact, remain so long as capitalism lasts.

It is necessary to enquire further into the actual social meaning and effects of the Administration program.
To begin with, it means a hardening in the distribution of cash payments. In some cases the $50 a month paid on the public works jobs will be less than what is now received by families in the form of rent vouchers, cash relief, electricity and gas payments, etc. The indirect effect will be more widespread. The “principles” of returning unemployables to local relief rolls and giving jobs to all others, though they cannot work to that end in practise, will provide the basis for a general slashing of relief payments, will, in the administrative changes involved, give an opportunity to bleak down relief levels that have become more or less standardized in many localities.
Second, the program will aid in lowering the general level of wages, particularly in industries where the prevailing level is higher than the average. The effect of the low wages to be paid on public works in bringing this about has already been stated. The unemployment and old age insurance plans also, however, contribute to the same effect. The contributions by the employee under the old age insurance plan will be a form of wage-cut, disguised, but none the less real in diminishing the pay envelope. The pay-roll taxes called for by the unemployment insurance plan will be compensated for by the employers by drives to lower wages and raise prices proportionately, the latter as well as the former acting to reduce real wages.
Third, both the public works and the unemployment and old age insurance plans work as strike breakers. The unemployed worker will be immediately confronted with the following situation: if he doesn’t take a public works job, he will be cut off from relief; but if any job in “private industry” is open – as such jobs become open, for example, in strikes – he will run the risk by not taking it of losing the public works job also; thus, with no relief to turn to, he will have the de facto choice between strikebreaking and starvation. Under the unemployment and old age insurance plans, the worker will of course run the risk of cutting himself off from all possible “benefits” by striking.
But the most significant general aspect of the whole program is the rapid stride forward it makes in the consolidation of bourgeois rule which, under Roosevelt, is preparing the United States for the comparatively smooth transition to Fascism. This can be brought out in a number of ways. For example: Under Fascism, the government must represent as fully as possible the class interest of the big capitalists as a whole, rather than the interests of any particular section or group of the capitalists. This contrasts with the situation often possible under laissez-faire economy and parliamentary democracy, when the government, while representing the capitalist class in general, may nevertheless at a given moment be in a special sense the organ of a particular section (industrialists, bankers, those needing a big tariff, those needing a smaller tariff, etc.). The decline of capitalism does not permit the degree of internecine warfare among capitalists themselves that was formerly allowable. It may be remarked in passing that this is the reason why large sections of the bourgeoisie oppose Fascism up to the last moment, and why Fascism takes occasional measures against the immediate interests of any or even all groups of the bourgeoisie. The ability of the totalitarian state to act thus, as agent of the big bourgeoisie as a whole and independent in large measure of the intra-bourgeois quarrels, is based in part upon shifts in the economic foundation of the state apparatus. It means, for one thing, that the state becomes increasingly and more directly involved in the basic economic structure of the country. Thus, we discover, that through the RFC the US government has tied itself to the banking system, especially the large banks (by the purchase of preferred stocks in the banks – often against the desires of the banks concerned, by loans against frozen assets, etc.), to the railroads, insurance companies, etc. Roosevelt is now engaged in entangling the government with the utility system, by the big government built dams, the TVA, and the rest. The government entered ship and airplane building, and ocean transport some time ago, on a large scale at the time of the war. Now, with this new relief program, the government becomes more outstandingly than ever the greatest employer of labor, the dominant “monopoly trust” of the country, and intertwines itself with the thousand and one businesses implicated in the public works projects.
The political trend of the new program is analogous. The whole plan is to be turned over to the Executive, to be arranged, allotted, administered by what amounts to Executive decree, with no legislative check. The legislative branch of the state continues its withdrawal toward totalitarian obscurity. Parliamentarism, the political luxury of ascendant capitalism, moves further toward its decline.
Lastly, there should be noticed a feature of the program that has been strangely ignored by both the capitalist and the working class press. The program quite openly establishes the principle of forced labor. The unemployed worker will not be given a “choice” between relief and the $50 a month job on public works. He will take the job or starve. And he will take the job that is assigned to him, whatever it may be, and however little fitted he may be for it. From this to labor camps is not so long a step.

A question remains which I cannot take up at length in this article. What kind of workers’ security program should Marxists oppose to the plan of the Administration? This is by no means an easy question to answer. We must start with the recognition that only a workers’ state can solve the problem of unemployment and security in general; and with the additional recognition that capitalism in decline is increasingly powerless to grant concessions to the working class. We must also keep in mind that, for Marxists, a social security program is not a mere piece of legislation to be filed in Congress; but a class slogan to promote independent working class mass activity in its support, and to seek immediate gains only as part of the broader aim of weakening the structure of capitalism and organizing the working class forces in a revolutionary direction.
This suggests at once a major criticism of the Lundeen bill, which is offered as a working class answer to the Roosevelt program. The fight for this bill has been almost entirely reformist and parliamentary in character, and thus, even if it were passed (which it will not be), it would not represent an important victory for the working class. Even from a parliamentary standpoint, there are serious objections to the Lundeen bill. It of course avoids most of the directly anti-working class aspects of the Roosevelt program. But it is an odd and confused mixture. In some of its provisions it is openly unconstitutional (not necessarily bad, since mass pressure could enforce a lenient interpretation of the Constitution); whereas in others it leans over backwards to remain within the Constitution. It offers a plan of raising the money by taxation, to avoid inflation, which would not raise the necessary money. The kinds of taxation are correct enough in principle, but the bill should not pretend to provide money that any statistician can prove it does not. And, lastly, the bill is incomplete, since it takes no notice of necessary parts of a workers’ security program without which unemployment insurance at the present time would mean little.
The immediate requirements for a rounded workers’ security program are included in the plan recently adopted by the National Unemployed League. In outline, these are as follows:

Adequate cash relief. No plan from now until the end of capitalism will mean anything if this is not a first and paramount provision.
 
A coordinated plan of public works. These should include above all workers’ housing projects, which provide the two-fold need of giving work, and something worth while to workers when they are completed. The fight for public works should include the fight to make jobs on them pay not merely the prevailing wage, but where the prevailing wage is low, to pay more, and thus to make public works a means of lifting instead of lowering the general wage rates. A minimum of $30 weekly and a maximum of 30 hours a week should be demanded on all public works projects. The public works program should not be left to Executive discretion, but should be made mandatory. An initial appropriation of ten billion dollars to be spent within one year should be the beginning. This should be financed through the help of taxes on the higher incomes, on inheritances, on corporate profits and surpluses. Though these taxes would not cover the entire amount, they would be sufficient to prevent inflation by providing both for the interest on bond offerings and an adequate sinking fund.
 
The universal 30-hour week. The 30-hour week is an integral part of any security program at the present time, and the fight for it should be altered from resolutions and occasional speeches to vigorous working class action. The fight for it must, of course, be accompanied by the fight to prevent a compensating speedup, and a further struggle not merely to permit no reduction in wages, but to raise the minimum wage generally, as on the public works projects, to the $30 level.
 
Adequate unemployment insurance. The unemployment insurance should be federal, not state, and should be financed in the same general manner as the public works program, with no employee contributions whatever.
 
An immediate credit of five billion dollars to the Soviet Union, to be spent in this country for the purchase of goods manufactured here. This credit, while proving one of the most effective means for defending the Soviet Union at present in the power of the American masses, would at the same time be a far more genuine stimulus to reemployment, particularly in the basic industries, than any of the cloudy schemes of the Administration.

John WEST
 



In 1928, the Sixth Congress of the Communist International met to record the triumph of Stalin over the Marxist opposition, to consolidate the abandonment of internationalism, and to prepare for the utilization of the C.I. in the years ahead more and more directly in the reactionary interests of the Stalinist bureaucracy and against the interests of the world proletariat. Seven long years of disaster have demonstrated in the laboratory of history the role of the C.I. under Stalin: the structure which once stood dynamically at the head of the revolutionary movement has become solidified as the organizer of defeat, the agent of betrayal.
When an instrument which the working class has forged in the heart of its struggles, to serve its needs, abandons its progressive function and turns against the class that formed it, the working class cannot merely cast it off as a snake casts off its old skin in the new Spring. The instrument remains, and remains not as something dead and abandoned, but actively, as a weapon turned against its maker. Veiled with the glitter of former triumphs, it becomes a will-o’-the-wisp to turn aside great sections of the working class from the Marxist road, to confuse, blind, and sterilize them. Just so the Comintern. If it were merely dead, it could be forgotten. But it is not dead. It remains, with all its corrupting power still hidden to many by the coating of early glories, a tremendous obstacle on the path of the working class. The Seventh Congress meets, not to chant the death of the C.I., but in a desperate effort to patch up the rotting structure and thus to raise the barrier still higher across the path. This is the real meaning of the Seventh Congress: it meets, not to organize victory, but to consolidate its position as an obstacle, to attempt to prepare the last stages of the sacrifice of the international working class to Stalinism.
 
The Flowers of Stalinism
It is, therefore, not surprising to note, in the reports of the Congress, the incredibly low political level of the “discussions.” No effort whatever is made, or could be made, at serious political analysis. No opposition on any question is present. No criticism of the past – even such a past – is suggested, beyond mild scoldings about “sectarianism” or “over-zealousness” in the application of the C.I. line. Not one lesson is drawn from the world shaking events of the past seven years. Not one negative vote is recorded against the official resolutions. Any vitality still remaining in the delegates is devoted to 20-minute ovations for the “great leader and teacher of the world proletariat” and frequent singing of the Internationale. But it must not be supposed that this takes away from the significance of the Congress. Rather does it make clear the significance. It is only in such a soil that, the flowers of Stalinism can bloom.
* * *
The key to the significance of the present Congress can be given in three quotations from the proceedings:

“The victory of socialism on a world scale in a brief historic period is assured if peace is maintained, thus making possible new victories of socialism’ in the U.S.S.R.” (Pieck, quoted N. Y. Times, July 29)
 
“... Now the working masses are not choosing between the proletarian dictatorship and bourgeois democracy but between bourgeois democracy and fascism” (Dimitroff, quoted Daily Worker, Aug. 15)
 
“In the present situation how should the toiling masses of Czechoslovakia fight for peace against fascism? They must fight with all means at their disposal for the preservation and deepening of friendly relations between Czechoslovakia and the U.S.S.R., for the carrying into practice the mutual assistance pact between Czechoslovakia and the S.U.” (Sverma, quoted Daily Worker, Aug. 19).
 

The Poison Spreads
The political content of these quotations must be carefully understood. They are theoretical acknowledgments of progressive steps in the degeneration of the Comintern which have already been taken in practice. Launched on the tracks of “socialism in one country,” the C.I. could not leave it at that. For the poisoning of one cardinal point of Marxian principle – in this case, revolutionary internationalism – meant that the poison would spread throughout the system. In the end no point can be left untainted. The abandonment of internationalism is not a minor “deviation” which can be merely “corrected.” It is a repudiation of Marxism. And it involves successively the repudiation of every other cardinal principle of Marxism. These quotations mark major stages in the spread of the poison.
Quotation (1) states briefly the theory of socialism in one country, the keystone of the arch of Stalinism. What follows? Peace must be preserved. What then follows? The sections of the C.I. must be converted into peace propaganda agencies each sacrificing the interests of its national proletariat to the construction of socialism in the S.U. What follows? The interests of the Chinese, German, Austrian, French ... workers must be betrayed to Soviet nationalism. The cause of the proletariat will be advanced and the S.U. defended not, as Lenin demanded, by the overthrow of bourgeois states, by the drive of the international revolution, but by (a) “the independent construction of socialism in the S.U.” along with (b) the preservation of the status quo throughout the rest of the world in order to permit this socialist construction. That means, the preservation of the bourgeois governments, in their present relationships, in power, for only such preservation can maintain peace. Not international revolution, but pacifism and diplomacy, the classic “balance of power” methods of bourgeois politics, will protect the S.U. and the construction of socialism.
 
The Inevitable Conclusions
Quotation (2) draws the correct conclusion: Granted the basic line of socialism in one country, which prevents international revolution, for the sake of maintaining the status quo, the choice of the proletariat in this era is not between proletarian dictatorship and bourgeois democracy, but between bourgeois democracy and fascism. Therefore, the working class is led to support of bourgeois democratic governments, if only these governments “promise” to support the “peace policy” of the S.U. In other words, abandonment of internationalism logically leads to abandonment of the Marxian theory of the state, which holds that the bourgeois state is under all circumstances the political instrument of the bourgeoisie and consequently on all occasions the irreconcilable enemy of the proletariat and its party.
But with things as they are, peace may not be preserved even at this price. Again, therefore, with iron logic, the necessary conclusion is drawn in quotation (3). To “carry into practice the mutual assistance pact between Czechoslovakia and the S.U.” means precisely to support the bourgeois government of Czechoslovakia in war against Germany; and, since imperialist powers – notably Czechoslovakia’s ally – France – will be involved in such a war, to support likewise French imperialism. Thus, abandonment of the Marxian theory of the state leads, just, as inevitably as it led Social Democracy prior to the last war, to an abandonment of the Marxian position on war, to social-patriotism, and preparations for the betrayal of the proletariat of France and all other nations which happen to be, for their own purposes, in alliance with the S.U., to the war makers.
* * *
I wish in the remainder of this article to demonstrate further the extent to which the C.I. has abandoned the Marxist theory of the state and has accepted the Social-Democratic theory best stated by Kautsky. No question of principle can be more important: only by the clear and constant recognition of the class nature of the state, of the fact that the bourgeois state, in every form is its mortal enemy and must be destroyed, can a revolutionary party sustain a correct strategy in the class struggle. Any watering down whatever of this principle means, necessarily, betrayal.
 
Two Sources of Degeneration
We can trace consequences of the C.I. degeneration on this point from two directions:
1. “Defense of the democratic rights of the workers and toiling masses” is, under all circumstances, a correct revolutionary slogan; and leadership in such defense is an elementary duty of the revolutionary party. But how defend these rights, for example, when they are threatened by the oncoming of Fascism? The Marxist answers: They can be defended only by the offensive revolutionary struggle for workers’ power, only by the class organization of the workers, the fighting proletarian united front, the building of the workers’ militia, the overthrow of bourgeois rule.
For this correct slogan and the correct method of carrying into practice, the C.I. Congress substitutes – “The defense of bourgeois democracy against fascism” (cf. Pieck, “we defend parliamentarism and democracy against fascism” Daily Worker, July 27; Gorkitch, “Real united front work has recently begun (in Jugoslavia). Its aims must be to establish a united anti-fascist people’s government which will support the Macek government if it takes the necessary firm steps against fascism.” (Daily Worker, Aug. 14) But this means, in effect, support of the class enemy – for a bourgeois democratic government is, like a fascist government, simply one form of bourgeois class dictatorship. To support the class enemy under any circumstances means always to weaken one’s own forces, to disarm the proletariat bolh materially and ideologically. It means to do precisely what the Social Democracy did in Germany, where its support of the democratic Weimar government prepared the way for Hitler. Bourgeois Democracy and Fascism It is of course true that the question of what “kind” of bourgeois dictatorship – democratic or fascist – is not indifferent to the proletariat (as Pieck stated in his opening address). But what the proletariat is interested in keeping or gaining is not bourgeois democracy as against fascism, but certain of the rights which the proletariat still has under democracy and loses under fascism. However, the democratic rights themselves, when threatened by Fascism in the era of the decline of capitalism, can be kept only by a revolutionary struggle, only, that is, by the overthrow of bourgeois class rule in whatever form it appears, and the establishment of workers’ rule. Bourgeois democracy, left to itself, “defended” by the proletariat, necessarily is transformed by finance-capital to fascism; and thus the defense of bourgeois democracy, far from protecting democratic rights, is the sure way to guarantee the victory of fascism, and the concomitant loss of actual democratic rights. The only defense of democratic” rights in the present era is the revolutionary struggle for socialism.
Thus the C. I. doctrine can serve only to weaken, disarm, and disorient the proletariat, to prevent the real struggle against fascism.
2. The United Front is of course an indispensable tactic in the revolutionary struggle. But the United Front must be aggressive, militant, fighting, an instrument by which the revolutionary party gains leadership over the masses, joins the working masses in common action, with no sacrifice of program or principle. On occasion, the United Front can even include, as subordinate allies under working class leadership, sections of other glasses. But the C.I., after sabotaging throughout the Third Period every kind of United Front, now reverses itself to sanction a United Front policy even more disastrous than no policy a,t all. “The proletarian United front and the antifascist People’s Front are closely connected with each other by living dialectics,” says Dimitroff, “and the development is from one to the other.” This theme is repeated in 50 speeches at the Congress – e.g. Lenski: “The immediate perspective in Poland is the broadest People’s Front becoming a decisive factor in the maturing revolutionary crisis ...”
What is this People’s Front, which is to include “all anti-fascist elements”? It is the logical development of the C.I. conception of a proletarian United Front as carried out, for example, in France. The United Front is, for the C.I., to be purely negative and defensive in character – against war and fascism, in defense of – bourgeois democracy against fascism. The united front represents not a fighting structure for common struggle in action, but a capitulation to social-democratic reformism. Consequently it is only natural that the United Front can “broaden out” into a People’s Front including Daladier and the others, whose “anti-fascist” character is shown in their rapid efforts to hide whenever they smell a fascist.
 
The “People’s Government”
3. To complete the picture: The defense of democracy and the People’s Front both, again quite logically, lead to – support of or entry into a “People’s government” or a “united anti-Fascist government.” Upton Sinclair himself would feel at home at many of the sessions of the Seventh Congress. A government of the new Labor Party in the U.S.; affiliation with the British Labor Party in Great Britain (cf. speeches of Foster, Browder, Dutt, Pollitt); Florin “favors the slogan: Give us a government of the anti-fascist People’s Front” (Daily Worker, Aug. 7); Gorkitch will support the Macek government; and Dimitroff, “great helmsman of the Comintern,” sums up “the new realism”: “... a renunciation of the formation or support of the government of the united front or People’s Front would be impermissible pedantism.” Dimitroff’s dialectics go further. In fascist countries, “where a bourgeois-democratic revolution develops, a people’s front government can become the government of a democratic dictatorship of workers and peasants.” And the latter, no doubt, a workers’ dictatorship, and so to socialism in two countries. And the whole process, mind you, by dialectic evolution, without the painful tasks of revolutionary class struggle.
What wonder, then, that we shall be asked to support the next imperialist war? Do not Dimitroff and the others prove to us that support of democratic France and England and Czechoslovakia is the high road to socialism?
And what wonder, then, that so often during the Congress there is mention of organic unity with the Social Democracy? Kautsky himself went no further from Lenin on the key question of the state, on the key slogan, “Class against class”; and it was here that there arose the dividing line that called for the formation of the new party and the new international – the Leninist International. The Seventh Congress turns back, back to Kautsky and his fellow renegades. There is no longer any real obstacle in basic principle to keep Social Democracy and Stalinism apart.
John WEST



IT WILL BE remembered that a short time before his capitulation to the ruling Soviet machine, Christian Rakovsky made an attempt to flee from his virtual imprisonment in Barnaul and to make his escape across the border. His attempt was finally thwarted by frontier guards, and he was wounded in the encounter. Brought to Moscow to be treated medically, he finally surrendered to the bureaucracy, his spirit completely broken.
Now, however, we are able to announce the first successful escape effected from a Stalinist, prison by a Bolshevik-Leninist. Since 1928, the locksmith, Tarov, has been kept to the notorious Verkhne-Uralsk solitary confinement prison. Despite the greatest difficulties and hardships to which the Left wing opponents of Stalin are subjected, and the special persecution for which they are singled out, Tarov has maintained an unyielding position for seven years. Now comes the report that he has succeeded in escaping from the USSR at the Eastern frontier and that he is now located in one of the countries of Asia.
The conditions under which the rude and disloyal Stalin regime keeps its Bolshevik-Leninist prisoners and exiles are almost beyond description. There are more of these Left wing Marxists in prison and Siberia today under the present Soviet bureaucracy than there were Bolsheviks under the czarist regime! In Tarov’s prison alone there were confined close to five hundred Bolshevik-Leninists, who were dispersed to various other penitentiaries after a heroic hunger strike. They carried it on in protest against the iniquitous conditions of life imposed upon them – conditions which bear absolutely no resemblance to the inspired stories of “model prisons”.
The prisons and places of exile, some of which are located in the most god-forsaken wastes of the Arctic, are filled not only with Bolshevik-Leninists of the early period following their expulsion from the party, that is, from 1928 to 1929, but with opponents of the same persuasion who have been seized in quite recent times. From the Stalinist press itself one can regularly cull reports of the “discovery of a new Trotskyist nest” in this factory or that party or youth nucleus. Old Bolsheviks who have spent all their life in the service of the proletarian revolution, rub shoulders in prison and exile with young revolutionists on whom the internationalist teachings of Marx and Lenin have not been lost. And as a general rule, the treatment accorded them is brutal in the extreme, for Stalin aims at the complete physical annihilation of the only political current that can challenge his destructive course from a Marxian standpoint.
When the full story of the persecution of the Bolshevik-Leninists is told, it will make horrifying reading and offer additional confirmation of the correctness of Lenin’s biting characterization of Stalin. A good deal of this story can be told by comrade Tarov, who has in his possession a wealth of detailed data not only about the general situation in the Soviet Union and its communist party, but specifically about the conditions under which the prisoners and exiles live and suffer.
The foreign representation of the Russian Bolshevik-Leninists has sent out a world-wide appeal to all revolutionists arid Left wing organizations to come to the assistance of the prisoners and exiles. Special efforts are being exerted to make it possible for Tarov to leave the very uncertain environment of Asia and transfer his residence to some country in Europe. For this purpose a fund is being raised, which will be judiciously divided between taking care of the Tarov case and making the prison and exile conditions of the Russian Bolshevik-Leninists somewhat easier. Difficult though it is, ways can nevertheless be found to provide these intransigent fighters for Marxian internationalism with funds for themselves and their hard-hit families.
The editors urge all readers of The New International to contribute generously and swiftly to this movement of international proletarian solidarity. In this country, all funds contributed should be sent to A.J. Muste, Secretary, 55 East 11th Street, New York City. Moneys marked for this fund will be set aside and transferred to the agency responsible for administering and distributing it.
An elementary duty faces us. The Russian comrades have given evidence of a heroism, courage, determination and steadfastness which inspires us with the conviction that their cause will triumph. Their duty – heavy and replete with the demand for sacrifice – they are discharging with resolute fearlessness. Let us see to it that we discharge ours.



 


Max SHACHTMAN
John WEST






THE SIGNING of the Wagner Bill, after a three year Congressional struggle, focuses a series of problems important to American Marxists, and illuminates the present phase in the development of class conflicts in this country. Moreover, it poses once again, in a new form, puzzling aspects in the general theory of the nature and functioning of the state. Careful analysis is deserved.
It is necessary, first of all, to review certain facts:

For nearly three years the Wagner Bill pursued a weary course through the Congressional committees and sub-committees. In March of this year it was but little more advanced than when first introduced. Then came the Supreme Court decision in the Schechter Case, invalidating the NRA. Shortly thereafter the Wagner Bill sped through both Houses like a good horse which has rounded the turn into the stretch, was passed by overwhelming majorities had no organized opposition, and was signed by the president with a flourish of a new gold pen.
 
Since its introduction, labor has been unevenly but deeply divided against itself in its attitude toward the Wagner Bill. This was dramatically brought out in the May Day parades of last spring. In the same parade, one contingent, marching with featured placards demanding and hailing the Wagner Bill, would be followed by another concentrating its slogans on violent denunciation of the Bill. The bourgeois press justifiably recorded its pleasure in this cross purpose.
 
By far the most ardent supporters of the Bill, from any camp, have been the officials of the American Federation of Labor. They campaigned for it by constant public propaganda, and by determined lobbying in Congress. They have greeted it, since its enactment, as the “Magna Charta of Labor”, and have held victory mass meetings in many large cities. All those who opposed the meetings were termed saboteurs.
 
The socialist party is divided on the question of the Bill: the Old Guard supporting it as ardently as the AF of L officials, the Center shilly-shallying as usual, and the Left trying to formulate some kind of opposition that will not commit them too much. The communist party is outspokenly opposed to “the strikebreaking Wagner Bill”, and demands that it be “smashed”.
 
The great majority of the bourgeoisie is, from all indications, against the Bill, and strongly against it. This was statistically revealed by the trade magazine Newsdom, which conducted a survey of more than a thousand of the leading newspapers of the country. Newsdom found them 80% opposed; and of the remaining 20%, less than half unequivocally in favor.
 
Meanwhile, though the Bill has now been law for several months, it has not yet played a prominent part in any labor dispute, in spite of the fact that a number of disputes have offered what would seem to be ideal opportunities.
 

I.
In recent years spokesmen of the communist party seem to depend more and more upon what might be called a “theory of deceptions” to explain away difficult historical problems. With the help of this theory, the Franco-Soviet Pact and the accompanying memoranda were passed off with a gesture. The Soviet Union once more had “deceived” the bourgeoisie. Dull-witted Laval was no match for Machiavelli-Stalin. This is reminiscent of the way in which the CI deceived Chiang Kai-Shek. Or, again, the whole Labor party business is being conducted with the aid of the theory of deceptions. The masses, unwilling to follow the communist party, will be deceived into following it when it loses its own name and reappears as the leadership of a respectable mass-class party of workers and farmers. Indeed, some effort is made to use the theory to lead workers to believe that the CI is still the leader of the world revolution.
This theory comes in handy whenever there seems to be a peculiarity in the behavior of the bourgeoisie. And it is by this theory that the communist party explains bourgeois opposition to the Wagner Bill. The capitalists and their newspapers are “really” in favor of the Bill; they “pretend” to be opposed in order to make it easier to deceive the workers. In this naïve and mechanical fashion the Stalinists hope to save the face of the Marxian theory of the state; but they succeed only in making clear their own failure to understand the theory in its dynamic application.
There is a conflict, and a “real” conflict on the question of the Wagner Bill, both between sections of the bourgeoisie, and between the majority of the bourgeoisie and the Roosevelt Administration. Politics is not a masquerade, nor a melodramatic plot. Conflicts of this kind are not to be explained away in the childish terms of maneuvers and “deception”.
Since there is a real conflict, an apparent contradiction follows: the state, the instrument of the bourgeoisie, whose role it is to maintain the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, operates in this case against the will of the bourgeoisie. However, such a conflict and “contradiction” is both possible and at the same time entirely consistent with the Marxian theory of the state. Moreover, this is not a minor matter. Such conflicts, and they cannot be avoided, are a source of weakness in the bourgeoisie, and therefore of decisive importance to the workers in their struggle against the bourgeoisie as a whole. They constitute gaps in the bourgeois line of defense, thus permitting the workers to drive successful salients.
We are confronted with two different types of conflict: (1) a conflict between one section of the bourgeoisie proper (the majority, opposed to the Wagner Bill) and another (a minority, in favor of it); (2) a conflict between the bourgeoisie, speaking as a whole through its majority, and the “government” (strictly, the executive branch and a majority of the legislative branch of the government).
The first type of conflict is familiar throughout the history of capitalist society. It follows from the competitive nature of capitalist economy, from the differing stages of development of various branches of industry, from geographical distribution of raw materials (whether or not a given natural resource is found within the national boundaries), etc. These conflicts are exemplified, for example, in the high and low tariff battles in American history, the struggles over banking and monetary legislation, and the differing farm programs. The bourgeoisie does not, of course, constitute a “homogeneous” class, any more than does the proletariat. Capitalist economy functions in such a manner that all members, even the big bourgeoisie, cannot uniformly prosper. A high price for rails means more profit for the steel companies but less for the railroads. And such conflicts, taking shape in the economic battles of the market, are the objective basis for the existence of two or more bourgeois political parties, and of groups and factions within these parties contending for leadership.
These conflicts, it is true, all take place necessarily within the basic framework of the capitalist structure of society. However bitter the struggle between opposing groups becomes – and it is often extremely bitter – no side directs itself against the foundation stones of capitalism itself. The struggle revolves always within an orbit fixed by the fundamental social relations of capitalism.. It is in this sense that the class conflict between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie differs not merely in degree but in kind from any possible intra-bourgeois conflict. And this difference in kind is exactly the point that all shades of reformism are so concerned to obscure.
Nevertheless, the intra-bourgeois conflicts should never be passed over as mere shadow-boxing. They are of the utmost importance in estimating the precise stage of historical development, and in assessing the strength of the position of the class enemy. Moreover, they disclose a great historical weakness of capitalism which gives promise to the revolutionary movement. It is not differing opinions and ideas that cause these conflicts, but the material nature of capitalist society. They are inherent in capitalism. Both nationally and internationally capitalism is by its nature divided against itself, is continuously engaged in poisoning its own nest; and in the advance of history the pressure of its inner conflicts increases always rather than lessens. The proletariat, however, though likewise far from homogeneous, is placed in a position where it is driven together, rather than further apart, by the advance of history; and socialism, the historical answer to the problems of the proletariat, requires objectively the solution of difficulties by cooperative endeavor, not by internecine struggle. Thus, potentially, the proletarian united front, correctly achieved, is far stronger, because more firmly based, than any possible bourgeois united front, which is always rotten at the material core.
To return to the Wagner Bill, the bourgeois support which the Bill receives is a real support, and is to be discovered primarily in the industries already considerably unionized by the AF of L.
To take a concrete example: the big clothing manufacturers support the Bill strongly. Their factories are for the most part closed shops in the hands of the ACW. They have discovered that they can work harmoniously with Hillman – that, in fact, the troublesome personnel difficulties, layoffs, etc., are much easier when Hillman is there to help them. But their businesses are threatened by the non-unionized sweatshops. They want the sweatshops either eliminated or put on the same labor basis as their own plants. Therefore they supported the NRA genuinely, and for all it was worth; and with the NRA dead, they turn to the Wagner Bill.
 
II.
The majority of the bourgeoisie is opposed to the Wagner Bill. In this opposition they are in conflict with the Administration and with the majority of Congress. This conflict is more interesting and much less usual than the first type. How can it be?
Often such a conflict simply announces the fact that the political relationships in the Administration and in Congress, established some years previously, no longer express the relationship of forces within the bourgeoisie. Thus such a conflict heralds an overturn in the next Presidential elections, and a re-alignment of the parties in Congress. To some extent this is true in the present instance, as is shown even more clearly in the opposition to the Utilities Holding Company Bill and the new Tax Bill. However, there is more to it than this – particularly when it is kept in mind that Roosevelt will in all probability be reflected.
When we say that in class society the state is the political instrument of class domination, we do not mean anything so simple as that US laws are written in the offices of Morgan & Co. – though that may at times be the case. Fundamentally we mean that, on the whole, the state functions in practise to uphold and if possible strengthen existing social relations, above all existing property relations; and that the state acts to suppress any serious threat to these relations. Now in certain countries at certain times the government has been in fact the personal servant of a small, closely united clique of the ruling class (e.g., bankers, railroad owners, big landlords or what not). But in large, industrially advanced nations, especially during the decline of capitalism, this is not ordinarily the case. To an increasing extent, of which Fascism is the most extreme example, the state tends to represent the interests of the big bourgeoisie as a whole, rather than the interests of any single group or clique of the bourgeoisie.
But to speak of “the big bourgeoisie as a whole” is ambiguous, since the bourgeoisie, like any other class, is composed of individual men. What this means, then, is that the state tends to represent the basic historical interests of the bourgeoisie – i.e., the maintenance of existing property relations – rather than the immediate interests (and conscious wills) of any individual capitalist or group of capitalists. This leads to somewhat surprising conclusions. Because of this role, which the state must play, the state may well be in conflict with the immediate interests and conscious wills (the conscious will, in the case of most individuals, is fixed on immediate interest) not merely of a minority of the bourgeoisie – which would be expected on any account – but even of a majority; in fact, theoretically, even of all individual members of the bourgeoisie taken as individuals. At the same time, historically, the state could nevertheless be serving the fundamental interests of “the bourgeoisie as a whole”.
There is no assurance whatever that the interests and desires of a given capitalist at a given moment will correspond with the historical interests of his class. For example: it is rumored that Ford is soon to start mass production of a Diesel engine for automobiles. Whether or not true, it is clear that the economic dislocations this would cause, when done in Ford’s “individualist” manner, might well be against the best interests of US capitalism; whereas, granted the proper technical basis, it would certainly be for the best interests of Ford. Again, it is obviously against the individual interests of entrepreneurs when their businesses are driven bankrupt by a trust; but it is often a necessary part of the development of capitalism as a whole.
More pertinently: The x steel company may rightly feel that it can handle its own labor problems by itself, with intra-company propaganda, spies, barbed wire, employee picnics, deputies and machine guns. But, since its management will reason primarily with reference to their own plants, they will underemphasize (a) the effect of such methods on labor elsewhere; (b) the problems of other industries; (c) the effect on their own workers of labor disputes not handled so “well” by other plants. Thus, the management of x company will oppose the Wagner Bill even though not only others but perhaps they themselves may, in the long run, need it.
There is no difficulty either in logic or in dialectics (which is, of course, never inconsistent with logic) in the possibility of such a situation – namely, where the interest of the whole differs from the summation of the interests of the parts. A coach in any sport knows the difference between a good team and a team made up of good players; and knows, too, that the interest of the team as such may be against the immediate interests even of every player in it.
Now, an able and healthy “government” is, in many respects, in the best position to estimate the historical interests of the dominant class as a whole. This is true because the government is not tied down to the viewpoint of any particular industry or group of industries; because, in the modern advanced nation, its activities put it into intimate contact with every industry, and, further, because it is composed of individuals skilled in the broad knowledge of social movements.
There are additional bases for conflict between the government and a majority of the bourgeoisie. Chief among them is the fact that the “state”, as concretized in a given institutional set-up and a given personnel, though always the political instrument of class domination in the historical sense above outlined, is not a “pure” instrument, even in that sense. The government, instrument with respect to the dominant class, has yet a life of its own, has its own interests as well as, and at times in opposition to, the interests of its master. True enough, the peculiar interests of the government as such cannot come into fundamental conflict with the interests of the dominant class (that is why a workers’ economy can be built only by a workers’ state, taking power over the destruction of the old state), but the conflicts can be nevertheless genuine.
Modern governments are gigantic bureaucracies, comprising hundreds of thousands of individuals. These too have a voice and a will, and do not want to lose their salaries. Modern government is itself the largest of giant modern industries. And modern administrations, in democratic nations at any rate, must be elected in order that they and their followers shall remain in office. Moreover, unless it makes widespread and constant use of open force – and perhaps not even then – a government cannot continue long in power without holding the support or at least the sufferance of a substantial majority of the population.
These conditions define special problems and interests of the government in fulfilling its role within class society. These problems and interests are more immediate and therefore more conscious for the politicians than for the active capitalists; they occupy a place, for the politicians, above and in addition to the general problems of renewing prosperity and profits. The bourgeois politician has a complicated double task, with reference to the masses: he must first of all maintain the support or sufferance of the masses for capitalism; but, secondly, he must maintain it for himself and his followers as the approved political agents of capitalism. In both divisions of his task he may well run into conflict with the majority of the bourgeoisie. In the second, sources of conflict are sufficiently obvious: the politician will want government money for his followers, the capitalist, “economy in government”; the politician will wish to reward his friends, whereas the given capitalist may have different friends; the politician will want to plan the order of his governmental acts to guarantee reelection, whereas this may interfere with the most desirable order from the standpoint of the capitalist; the politician may even wish to make a bid for a large bloc of votes (e.g., a large construction program or the TVA) when this directly injures the profits of certain capitalists.
But even in his first task, that of maintaining mass support or sufferance for capitalism, the politician may run into serious conflict with many or most capitalists – even, that is, when the politician is protecting the historical class interests of the capitalists. This results from the different perspective toward his class duty forced on the politician by his special tasks. The capitalist normally underestimates the role and importance of the masses; the politician must make the needed corrections. The typical capitalist accepts with regret the necessity for the politician. He chafes under the requirement of elaborate state machinery, expensive governmental apparatus, the time “wasted” in political machinations, the need to make occasional “concessions” to the politician or through him to the masses. The early capitalist ideal is a kind of political vacuum, where the search for profits can proceed “naturally”, without “interference”.
With increasing complaint, during the advance, maturity, and decline of capitalism, the capitalist sees the role of his politician become ever larger, and watches the monster state spread its dark wings over all the nooks and crannies of society. Unwillingly he accepts “governmental regulation”, “public ownership”, “federal control”; and, at the last, unwillingly indeed he turns to Fascism. For Fascism, historically required to uphold bourgeois society during the decline of capitalism, is nevertheless the grossest form of the conflict I have been studying. Fascism exacts material and moral sacrifices, often grievous ones, from all or almost all individual capitalists, in order to ensure the class domination of the capitalists as a whole. The fate of capitalist society is a dead end, forced upon even those who accept it, unwillingly adopted as a “judgment of history” by those who do not understand the historical process which enmeshes them.
The normal American capitalist, enjoying an upturn in profits, at present feels confident that he can handle his own workers, settle his own “labor troubles”; he is not worried over the troubles of others, and, since he is not running for office and is not trained in the ways of the masses, he underestimates such factors as “mass discontent”. Why, thinks he, should we make concessions to labor when I can handle labor without concessions? Above all, why make concessions to the AF of L, which proves its impotence every day? No Labor Boards for me. I will defeat them by lobbying in Congress, with the help of my press; and, if that fails, I will disregard their findings, and smash them in the courts.
But his political servants, in these matters, are wiser than their master. Yes, they can agree, we will “handle labor”, but what is a government for if not to handle labor in the most effective manned? If labor got the idea clearly that the state was its enemy, not its representative, where would we all be then? No, we will handle labor by tangling it up, ideologically as well as practically, in the state apparatus. And besides, we want to keep labor votes for 1936.
The AF of L? True, its bureaucracy is “impotent” so far as the threats and thunderings go. But the AF of L has also a membership, and the membership includes many fighting workers ready to struggle at the drop of a hat, if given the lead. What do you rugged individualists wish? Do you want us to discredit the AF of L officials by refusing their “demands” and denying them a platform in Congress and the White House? If that happened, if we showed workers openly where the government stands with respect to labor, what then would be left for the AF of L membership but to repudiate the ways of their leaders and set out to gain their ends in direct class struggle? Reflect, gentlemen capitalists: How did we break the 1934 auto strike? the general textile strike? How have we been handling the threatened coal strike? No. Labor laws, government boards, arbitration committees, these too have their uses; and the National Guard is not always more effective. Section 73 is gone. For a time, then, the Wagner Bill must take its place. When the courts throw it out, or the workers become disillusioned by it, we will find an adequate substitute. Meanwhile, do not fear that its nominal provisions will be enforced. We will take care that it is used to break strikes, not to make them, that it transfers labor struggles from plant gates to arbitration boards or the courts, that it aids the AF of L officials in their drive against militants. And in any case, you have your tear gas, your deputies, your injunctions, and always the National Guard in the background.
 
III.
In the January New International I pointed out that Roosevelt’s task with his new Congress, the reverse of his task with his first Congress, was the complex one of acting in effect as a brake on Congress while at the same time continuing to give the appearance of liberal leadership and “social-mindedness”. The Administration had to give the nation the form of a Leftward movement and the substance of reaction. Only so could both the economic and the political requirements of the situation be met. Roosevelt has performed his task with brilliance and with as much success as such a task could meet: his gradual loss of prestige could not have been prevented, since the gap between words and deeds must gradually become obvious, apparent in the “inconsistencies”, “changes of mind”, etc. – themselves no accidents but forced on him by the nature of his task – which the opposition now makes so much of. Roosevelt delayed the bonus in a bitter fight. In a rapid offensive he sabotaged social security plans by introducing his own pretense of a Social Security Bill – thereby retaining public “leadership” of the social security movement. He struck at relief and, more important, at wage standards, by the skillfully ballyhooed WPA program. Then, after avoiding the rocks of all genuine or half-genuine “Left” legislation, he managed to regain at least part of his “Left” prestige by a series of clever moves during the last months of the session. His championing of the Wagner Bill, the Utilities Bill, the absurd Tax Bill, permits him to keep something of his standing as the bulwark against the Tories, the banks, the industrialists, the die-hards, and the courts; and provides him with campaign issues in plenty.
In this way Roosevelt seems to have headed off the third party moves to his Left, forcing the liberals, Farmer-Laborites, Progressives, however unwillingly, to stay with him, and consolidating a reactionary opposition to his Right. This opposition he feels confident of defeating; and, unless a business upturn increases and broadens between now and November, 1936, he is justified in his confidence. It is a narrow tightrope he is walking, but for Roosevelt there is no other. There is a biting irony in the fact that on the same day (August 9) Roosevelt received his Social Security Bill, promising comfort to all, from Congress, and ordered relief cut off from the striking New York WPA workers – the form and the substance again jarred each other. But, while the masses continue to believe that their choice is between Roosevelt and the reactionary opposition to his Right, he can still afford the contradiction.
In sustaining this belief the Wagner Bill plays its essential part. Roosevelt, so reads the Bill and so echo Green and Lewis, offers the workers full and free unionism. If the industrialists and courts smash the Bill, it is not Roosevelt who is to blame. Look at the record: he fights alongside, against the common enemy.
 
IV.
The Wagner Bill shows, more clearly than it has been shown before, how integral a part of bourgeois class domination the AF of L bureaucracy has become. The relationship is mutual: the government is necessary to the AF of L bureaucracy, and the bureaucracy is necessary to the (present form of) government. The governmental labor machinery and the AF of L bureaucracy, operating integrally together, have become the chief means for preventing the development of independent working class activity and independent working class consciousness. This is what Roosevelt and Green understand, and what the majority of industrialists and bankers do not so clearly understand. The AF of L bureaucracy maintains its prestige only with the help of its parliamentary and semi-parliamentary activities, with the help of governmental “favors” and “concessions” – sections 73, Wagner Bills, Guffey Bills. But, equally, the government maintains its prestige with large sections of the working class only because the AF of L lends the government a pseudo-labor covering. In the links of this interrelationship lie the dangers and possibilities for both sides.
If a break occurs between the government and the bureaucracy, for whatever reason, only one result is possible: the bureaucracy, having lost the liaison upon which its leadership depends, will lose its hold on its own rank and file (whether or not it loses nominal office), and the membership will go more and more directly to independent class business, breaking with increasing rapidity, in idea and in act, from class collaboration through the government. And, likewise, the government will be faced with a working class rapidly awakening to class consciousness under the spectacle of an openly hostile state. Since these results would follow from a break, we may conclude that, until the time for Fascism is much nearer, such a break is most unlikely, no matter what the provocation.
The objective role and function of the AF of L bureaucracy in the present stage must be understood in this light.
The naive conclusion is – a new Federation of Labor. If the AF of L is as you say, then it is no good to the working class, is in fact a major enemy, and we should start a new Federation. But this naive conclusion by no means necessarily follows, and certainly does not at the present time. It is not the AF of L in the abstract, but its bureaucracy which is allied with the enemy, which is indeed in the front rank of the enemy’s forces. The government needs the bureaucracy; but the bureaucracy can do no good to the government unless it has a rank and file. Therein lies the weakness from the point of view of the bureaucracy, the government, and the government’s master. The bureaucracy cannot alienate its rank and file too widely, for it would thus prepare itself for the dust pile, being of no further use to the government. But, on the other hand, it must smother the upsurge of its rank and file, or else equally fail to serve the needs and purposes that lead the government to make use of it. In this way, the bureaucracy is caught in a squeeze pressed ever tighter by the progress of events: it is required both to keep control over its rank and file and to use that control to strangle class struggle. The deepening of the internal contradictions of American capitalism, however, poses a dilemma to the bureaucracy in carrying out this necessary double aim: to keep control, some apparent response must be made to the Leftward movement; but to use that control to smother struggle, more and more openly brutal and high-handed reactionary methods must be employed.
The interrelationship between the government and the bureaucracy, and the dilemma faced by the bureaucracy, far from being without possibilities, enables a conscious Left wing within the AF of L to utilize the AF of L structure for the broadest and most intense struggles, every one of which squeezes the bureaucracy tighter, undermining its position and its relations with the government. Such tactics exploit to the full what prestige the AF of L has and avoid the “illegality”, both within and outside the labor movement, of operations by an independent Federation. The last two years have demonstrated in embryo the possibilities there are in this strategy; to reach maturity an organized Left wing, itself led by members of the revolutionary party, is required.
 
V.
From many points of view, the Wagner Bill, even if it is kept in the background or crushed in the courts upon its first application, is one of the two or three most important acts of legislation of the late Congress. It is so because it characterizes so exactly the present stage of the development of the Roosevelt Administration and of the opposition to it, and because it concerns so directly the working class – much more directly than, for example, the nebulous Social Security Act.
It is not necessary to examine at length its probable working out in practise. This is sufficiently obvious. The first attempt to invoke it to gain union recognition, majority rule, or any of the other “rights” which it nominally guarantees, will be blocked in the courts. The Bill may be sustained finally, by virtue of the clause restricting its application to industries engaged in interstate commerce – though thus greatly narrowed in even nominal range – but in any case it will be effectively prevented from doing any “protecting”.
Meanwhile, Marxists must be vigilant with respect to it. An attitude of simple denunciation of the Bill as a strike-breaker is not sufficient, and would serve only to confuse union workers and to isolate the Marxists. It must be connected with the lessons of Section 7a, which might be summarized: Take anything it offers, but never depend on it; depend only on independent class activity. To the extent that this approach – an approach which says to the workers, in effect, “Act as if the ‘rights’ denied by the Wagner Bill were actually yours, but do not count on the Wagner Bill to get them for you”, rather than the simple denunciation, is made clear, two great gains are possible. First, the Left wing can force a recruiting drive of large proportions during the Autumn and Winter, a drive which the bureaucracy, unpressed, will never undertake; and, second, the workers will learn in experience, in action, the real significance of the Bill itself, a lesson that abstract analysis will never effectively teach and which will be a decisive step toward the central lesson, the lesson in the nature of the state.
In this process Marxists must be on guard, naturally, against the dangers of the Bill. Two of these are familiar, though none the less dangerous on that account; the third is a comparatively new departure and particularly difficult for that reason.
First, the Bill will of course be used to remove labor disputes from open class struggle to arbitration boards and the courts. In this it will have the support of the AF of L bureaucracy, and this must be resisted at each step.
Second, the Wagner Bill is one more notch in the general preparation for compulsory arbitration. This must always be remembered.
Third, the new departure: A late amendment to the Bill authorizes the Board or Boards set up under its provisions to determine whether a craft, plant, concern, or industry shall be taken as the unit of collective bargaining. It is hardly necessary to point out the potential dangers of this amendment. It can readily be used to aid Green in resisting the developments toward industrial unionism. It can prevent the building of industry-wide unions. It can become a most effective wedge dividing the workers in different plants of the same concern from each other, thereby permitting what in actuality would be scab settlements in single plants, and reducing the effectiveness of union locals almost to that of company unions. The settlements of the lumber strike, though not invoking the Wagner Bill itself, employed some of these methods: the agreements were made in each case with plant locals. This amendment and the principle which underlies it must be fought openly and vigorously from the start.

The passing of the Wagner Bill was neither a victory for labor, as Green hails it, nor a defeat, as the Daily Worker insists. Its significance depends on what is done with it. Properly utilized it can play its part in a notable advance.
John WEST



No one need envy V.J. Jerome his new specialty. After several years as Browder’s commissar in Hollywood, where he was so conspicuously successful in winning strip-tease artists, humorists and glamour girls to the cause of peace and democracy, Kremlin style, Jerome has now a much less luscious assignment.
He has become the ace trouble-shooter of 13th Street. Whenever a crack or dent appears in the party’s ideological armor, Jerome is dispatched post-haste to rivet it together again. He operates under the label, Questions from the People, run when occasion demands on the editorial page of the Daily Worker. The questions are worth keeping track of. They show that even the ten ton steel plate of Stalinism cannot prevent heretical ideas from now and then driving toward the surface.
A few months ago, Jerome was hard at work on the refugee problem. Even the most loyal party members couldn’t help wondering why no refugees from anywhere were being admitted into the land of the final triumph of socialism; and Jerome’s acrobatics in explaining would have got him a place on almost any vaudeville circuit. A while back he had a few points of Spain that badly needed cleaning.
 
We’re in the Army Now
How Jerome must long for the day when his party will hold state power, and anyone who even breathes out of key can be answered with a rifle or an automatic! It’s so much easier, more efficient, that way. But here it’s still one trouble after another: refugees, then Spain, and last week the question. “What is the position of the Communist Party of Great Britain on conscription?”
A very good question indeed, and one that certainly needs answering. And how revealing of the degeneracy of a pretendedly Marxist party that such a question could even be raised in its ranks! Could a man with a single drop of Marxist blood in his veins seriously debate whether he would have any attitude other than unbreakable opposition to conscription – the slave-driver’s whip whereby imperialism drives the unwilling masses to their death on the battlefields of wars to make the world safe for profits?
An issue long ago settled for Marxists; but not so easy for Stalinism. Stalinism is prepared to support one coalition of imperialist powers in war against another. And the terrible logic of politics decrees that if you support the war, you must support the means taken to fight the war. In the democratic countries as ip the fascist, the masses do not want to fight in the very popular, very democratic wars of imperialism. And, consequently, every imperialist nation, either today or tomorrow when the war begins, must introduce conscription. Therefore, in the end, Stalinism must “accept” conscription in every nation where it supports the war. Not merely are the Stalinists recruiting agents for the war. They are and must be prepared to be jailers and judges and executioners of “draft evaders” – that is, of workers who try to keep their heads off the chopping block of imperialism.
But there seems to be a contradiction. Jerome explains that the Stalinists are against the present British conscription measure. Have I been unjust and slanderous? Are the Stalinists suddenly returning to virtue?
The contradiction does not even penetrate the surface. All that Jerome really says is that the Stalinists are not now ready to support the present conscription bill.
Why not? Because support of conscription is the blackest treachery to the workers? How absurd! “Communists,” Jerome explains in his first sentence, “are not opposed to conscription in principle.”
The reason for the present pseudo-opposition is two-fold: On the one hand, the present British government hasn’t yet come through with what Stalin wants of it, “chief of which is the formation of a genuine anti-aggression pact with the Soviet Union.” Chamberlain – no mention of course of British imperialism and the British ruling class for which Chamberlain authentically speaks – hasn’t been playing ball. Therefore a conscription bill introduced by Chamberlain must be (temporarily, for bargaining purposes) opposed. But let a new government be formed – speaking, naturally, for the same imperialism and the same ruling class – with just the tiniest change in foreign policy, and then support of the conscription bill will become the duty of every man and woman except counter-revolutionary Trotskyists. Or let Chamberlain get together with the Kremlin (though this chance is circumspectly not referred to by Jerome) and in a twinkling his conscription bills will change their spots.
On the other hand, the Stalinist must go slow from a different motive: the English workers are overwhelmingly against conscription, so much so that even the Labor Party has to pretend to be politely against it. The Labor Party and Stalinist bureaucrats must for the moment put up a front of opposition – though never enough to interfere with Chamberlain’s plans – in order to prevent the workers from seeing them in their true light and walking out on them.
The opposition of the workers to the war cannot be broken in an instant, even at Stalin’s orders. It must be worn down step by step, by carefully planned stages. Half betrayal today makes more readily possible full betrayal tomorrow.
In writing of England, did Jerome remember France? There is universal conscription in France. The Stalinists do not oppose it, but support it most warmly as they do all other “defense measures”. And who is at the head of the French government? Is it not Daladier, Chamberlain’s Munich comrade?
May I suggest the next question for Jerome to deal with: “What is the position of the Communist Party of France on conscription?”
 



Perhaps the best comment on the Administration’s new “lending program” was provided by the stock market. There the passions which seek release in Chamber of Commerce speeches and N.A.M. publicity releases are sobered by the immediately controlling aim of making money. On the day the program was announced and on the two following days, the stock market did – nothing. The average stock prices changed scarcely at all, and trading was at an old dray house’s pace.
This may seem odd, for the “enemies” and “friends” of the program will have a lot to say about it in the weeks to come. To the latter it will publicly prove that Rooseveltism is still on the march into the land of honey and almonds; the former will find one more convincing piece of evidence that Roosevelt is running business into the ground. Beneath both varieties of ballyhoo. the stock market tells the truth: that the program doesn’t amount to much of a damn, one way or the other.
 
Little Drops of Water
According to the headlines, the new scheme calls for a sum of $3,860,000,000. However, this amount is only to be “authorized.” The proposal is to spend at most $870,000,000 during the next fiscal year. The anticipated national income for the current year is around $68,000,000,000. The total of the Roosevelt plan, therefore, would amount to 11/3% of the national income. Salvation can hardly be bought at so cheap a price.
As a matter of fact, examination shows that. in spite of the headlines, there is really nothing “new” in the program. It amounts to little more than a bookkeeping change from the practises of the past six years. For example, P.W.A. has been lending and spending billions of dollars on many kinds of construction projects. Roosevelt’s budget provided nothing for P.W.A. in the next fiscal year; Congress has, so far, ear-marked $125,000,000 of W.P.A. funds for P.W.A., but even that may not stand. Much of what is included in the “new” program is simply a modest substitute tor P.W.A., to be handled under the recently created Federal Works Agency.
Other sections of the program will merely continue the already functioning activities handled under Rural Resettlement, Rural Electrification, and Home Owners Loan Corporation. The last section will make $500,000,000 available for loans to foreign nations, chiefly, no doubt, in furtherance of the administration’s aggressive Pan-American policy.
Far from being a bold step in advance, the program does no more than carry on old devices which have already shown their hopelessness in the past; and in most cases it does so not on a greater but on a much lesser scale than during several previous years of Roosevelt’s regime.
The most advertised change is also nothing new. The administration is under pressure to reduce the rate of increase of the national debt. The new appropriations will not be handled directly by the Treasury, but by special agencies created by Congress which will do their own financing; their obligations, however, to be guaranteed by the Treasury. Thus these obligations will not have to appear on the books of the Treasury as additions to the national debt. However, this has been done frequently in the past; and even now there are more than $7,000,000,000 of such obligations outstanding.
 
The Meaning of the New Program
The new program shows once more the beginning and end of New Deal wisdom. It flows from the theory that was once called “pump priming” and is now known as “compensatory spending.” According to this theory, when private enterprise has a “temporary” slump, the government steps in with heavy spending to get business out of the hole; then private enterprise catches up, and a new wave of prosperity follows.
In line with this theory the government has, since 1933, undertaken compensatory spending which can be roughly measured by the increase in the national debt – $23,500,000,000 – plus the seven or more billions in obligations of the special agencies: a total of more than thirty billion dollars.
One thing was correct about this theory: without this compensatory spending, U.S. capitalist economy would have folded up. But a much more important side of the theory was wholly wrong: in spite of all these thirty billions of pump priming and compensatory spending, private enterprise has not “caught on”; on the contrary, private enterprise continues in disastrous shape, in fundamentals getting steadily sicker year by year. With all the patches, they just can’t seem to get Humpty Dumpty together again.
The latest spending program is a confession of, failure. The talk of the money being loaned exclusively for “self-liquidating” projects is a farce: if they were genuinely self-liquidating (i.e., profit-making), there is plenty of idle capital which would finance them through private channels. The Rooseveltians are hoping that they can whip up a brief flurry of fictitious prosperity which would get them through election year. But even for such a purpose, the new program is so small and timid that its effect will be hardly noticeable.
But from the program the War Deal will get one important weapon, and it may be that this was the reason for all the rest: half a billion more dollars for the State Department to use in lining up additional Latin American dictators for the war. The Johnson Act, which was once supposed to protect the United States from those financial entanglements which played such a role in swinging the country into the last war, is being suavely and effectively superseded by the maneuvers of the Roosevelt war machine.
 



On June 1 the Administration completed a very shrewd partisan maneuver by forcing a record vote in the House of Representatives on the Townsend Plan. There are probably less than a dozen Congressmen who really favor the Townsend Plan. However, in many sections of the country, especially in New England and the Middle West, the Republicans found it convenient and even necessary to make an opportunistic bid last autumn for the support of Townsend’s followers. During the election campaign, Republican candidates pledged themselves, openly or by implication, to the Plan.
The expectation of the Republicans was doubt less that a day of reckoning on the pledge could be indefinitely postponed. The Plan could, in accordance with a usual custom, be buried in Committee. Or, at worst, if it came to the floor, the cowardly method of avoiding a record vote, now common in the House, could be employed.
But here was an opportunity made to order for all sections of the Democratic Party, constituting a majority. The Republicans have been trying to make big propaganda on the issue of “economy”. They are also, many of them, pledged to the huge “extravagance” of the Townsend Plan. Very well. Force a record vote on the Plan. Then the Republicans are in a perfect dilemma: if they vote against the Plan, they have broken their pledges and lose the Townsendite support; if they vote for it, they explode their own economy issue.
The parliamentary jockeying went on for weeks. The record vote was forced; and, since the dilemma was genuine, there is no doubt that by it the Republicans were thrown for a loss.
 
The Times Is Morally Indignant
The Plan received 97 affirmative votes, including one-third of the Republican votes in the House. The New York Times the next morning devoted its lead editorial to the outcome. “The Townsend Plan Bill,” the Times begins, “has been defeated in the House by a vote of 302 to 97, and the country is doubtless expected to breathe easier.” The Times dismisses the Plan itself with an economic flourish:
“The Townsend Plan is utterly fantastic. It would call for an astronomical expenditure by the Federal Government in the neighborhood of $20,000,000,000 a year. If any attempt were made to raise such a sum by taxation it would lead to economic chaos.”
But this economic argument is, as often, not decisive for the Times. It is to a moral argument against the Plan that the Times makes its final appeal. The point is well worth pondering:
“Even if the plan were workable it would impose a monstrously unfair distribution of income. It would place crushing taxes on our population with its average per capita income of about $550 a year in order that less than one-tenth of that population should receive per capita incomes of $2,400 a year.”
The injustice of such income arrangements is, apparently, self-evident to the editors of the Times.
 
Let Not the Right Hand ...
But the editors of the Times failed, perhaps, to read carefully the contents of their own paper that morning. If they had turned to a page preced ing that on which their editorial appeared, they would have found an instructive news report dealing with incomes for the year 1937.
There they would have discovered that for the year 1937 forty-nine individuals in the United States reported to the Treasury Department net incomes in excess of one million dollars. When it is recalled that the net income figure is arrived at after a hundred and one deductions for taxes, contributions, exemptions, credits, pseudo-losses and all the other devices thought up by high-priced lawyers, the excess over one million dollars must be very considerable indeed. One individual, even with all deductions, reported a net income of over five million dollars for that year.
Now, if we apply the very same reasoning that the Times used in proving the Townsend Plan unjust, we seem to be led inexorably to a remarkable conclusion.
The million-dollar-plus incomes are admittedly possible because of capitalism, or what the Times sometimes calls the “system of free enterprise”. So, using the argument of the editorial, we are compelled to say:
“Even if capitalism were workable it would impose a monstrously unfair distribution of income. It would place crushing burdens on our population with its average per capita income of about $550 a year in order that less than .00004% of that population should receive per capita incomes of $1,000,000 plus a year.”
 
And As for Economics
So much for the moral argument. But the economic argument which the Times uses against the Townsend Plan applies no less fully against the system which the Times so solicitously defends. Could any system be more “utterly fantastic” than one which destroys food which people need to eat, throws millions who want to work out of jobs, shuts factories while goods are everywhere needed, suppresses inventions and new techniques, plunges all mankind into wars from which no one but a handful of super-financiers benefits?
The Times estimates that the Townsend Plan would cost the Federal Government $20,000,000,000 a year. But according to the government’s own figures, capitalism costs the people at least five times this, at least $100,000,000,000 a year: this figure being the difference between the actual output of goods and services and that which the productive plant of the country is immediately capable of.
The editors of the Times had better be more careful of the arguments they use. They might suggest ideas that would be most awkward for, among others, the editors themselves.
 



According to the provisions of the Constitution, it is the function exclusively of the legislative arm of the Federal government – that is, of Congress – to appropriate money. The executive arm of the government – that is, the President and his subordinates – has charge of spending the money, but cannot appropriate it. It is part of the Constitutional task of the executive, however, to prepare and submit to Congress the governmental budget, which includes, the proposals of the executive for appropriations. From a Constitutional point of view, Congress may vote the budget as submitted, or may modify it in any way it chooses. The budget is calculated on the basis of a “fiscal year” beginning July 1st of each calendar year and ending June 30th of the subsequent calendar year.
About two months ago, President Roosevelt, in a special message, submitted to Congress his proposed total Federal relief budget for the fiscal year beginning July 1st, 1939. It is absolutely essential that every worker, especially every unemployed worker, should understand that this relief budget was the product solely of Roosevelt and his appointed subordinates in the executive branch of the government, Congress had nothing whatever to do with it. Congress does not enter into the picture until after the budget is proposed. For everything in, or out of, the original budget, Roosevelt and Roosevelt alone is responsible.
 
Who Leads the Drive Against the Unemployed?
In his relief budget, Roosevelt proposed a total relief appropriation for the year beginning July 1st of $1,760,000,000. About $300,000,000 of this was to go to comparatively minor, though important, undertakings such as NYA. For the major and decisive federal relief activity, W.P.A., Roosevelt proposed exactly $1,477,000,000. Remember: this is Roosevelt’s figure, not the figure of Congress. This sum, proposed by Roosevelt, is more than $800,000,000 less than W.P.A. was allotted during the fiscal year now ending. It permits a maximum average of around 2,000,000 on W.P.A. rolls during the next year, as against an average of around 3,000,000 during the current year.
There is now going on in Congress a complicated fight over the relief bill. Some of the issues in this fight are of considerable significance to the unemployed – chief among them, perhaps, provisions that would automatically drop anyone, who had been on the rolls continuously for eighteen months or more and anyone who had “subversive ideas” about the government – but most of them are trivial.
There is no important fight at all on the point which is so basic that it completely overshadows all the rest: on the size of the W.P.A. appropriation.
In the House of Representatives, not one single member, either in committee or on the floor, has proposed the cut of a single dollar in the President’s figure.
How can this be? What has happened to the “champions of economy”, to the bitter enemies of the President, to all the Tories and right-wingers? The answer is simple: the President took the leadership in the drive against the unemployed. He proposed a cut in W.P.A. far more drastic than any of his so-called Tory opponents would have dared to propose. He took their breath away. With such a slash already contained in Roosevelt’s budget, there was, on the basic question, nothing further for even the bitterest reactionary to suggest.
 
How Can the Unemployed Fight?
What I have explained is so simple that a small child can understand it. It is not an “interpretation” or “guess” on my part; it is a clear direct fact. No one has to take my word for it. It is part of the public record.
But open and simple as this truth is, it is being deliberately hidden from the workers of this country. It is being hidden by the Stalinists and by the labor officialdoms. They hide it because in their politics they are committed to support of Roosevelt. They must therefore lie to the workers, attempt to make the workers believe that not Roosevelt but Congress or Republicans or “conservative Democrats” are alone responsible for the drive against the unemployed, and that Roosevelt is the friend of the unemployed.
No lie could be baser, more treacherous.
Not only does this lie hide a truth which every worker has a right and duty to know. This lie prevents the unemployed from struggling against the relief cuts. It is because the workers still believe this lie that there has been up to the present no effective struggle against the cuts; and there will not be until the workers stop believing the lie.
You cannot fight against the cuts when you put your reliance on the man who is chiefly responsible for making them, who is the leader in proposing them and carrying them through. Isn’t that the most obvious common sense?
The unemployed have lost the first big round. By all signs, the W.P.A. slash is going through at Roosevelt’s figure. It would have been another story if there had been a widespread, militant, mass-action fight by the unemployed. Roosevelt and Congress are in the last analysis contemptible cowards; they dare to put through the slash only because they do not have to face real resistance.
But the matter will not be closed when the bill is signed. A Roosevelt cut has the same effect on the food supply of the unemployed as a Tory cut You can’t eat pink slips, even when they are signed by Roosevelt’s administrators.
What of the next round? Will the lie of Browder and Lewis continue to strangle the unemployed? Or are the unemployed ready to cast off that lie, once and for all?
 



The other night I saw a Philadelphia friend of mine who is a “radical New Dealer.” He is one of the bright young men who believe, they say, in “the ultimate goal of socialism,” but as “realistic” politicians convince themselves (and try to convince others) that the practical and progressive step today is to support “Roosevelt against reaction.” He is a little discouraged lately, and he is anxious to find someone to blame for the fact that all is not so rosy as he expected six years ago.
He told me about a textile worker who lives in the house next to him. This neighbor had had a job in a Philadelphia plant for many years. The plant was unionized, and wages were comparatively good. Suddenly, last September, the company shut the Philadelphia plant, and moved its equipment to non-union, low-wage territory down South. The Philadelphia employees were left behind, without jobs or prospects of jobs.
“In November, two months later,” my friend went on, “my neighbor voted for Judge James and the whole Republican ticket.” He had got to his point, and found his scapegoat. “How are we going to get anywhere in this country,” he concluded, “when the workers are dumb enough to act like that?”
 
Just Who Is Stupid?
Offhand it might seem that my friend had a point. For a worker to think that he is going to solve his problems by voting the ticket of the ultra-reactionary Republican Party, after all these years, “does look at first like almost hopeless stupidity. But reflection on this little incident led me to a conclusion very different from that of my friend.
Pennsylvania had for four years been under the control of George Earle, darling of the New Deal and close intimate of Roosevelt. In last year’s Spring Primaries, the U.M.U. had run Tom Kennedy for the gubernatorial candidacy, against the Earle machine. In the Primaries campaign, which was bitterly fought, Kennedy and his supporters had denounced Earle from one end of the State to the other, and “every charge they made against the machine was justified a dozen times over. The workers, especially the C.I.O. workers, rallied to Kennedy, but he was defeated.
For some months thereafter the C.I.O. officials did nothing. Then, shortly before the election, they told the workers to vote for – the very same Earle machine which they had denounced that Spring, the same machine that had been running the State into the ground for four years, the machine under which the textile worker’s job had disappeared.
What, then, was my friend’s neighbor to decide? What possible basis did he have for accepting this new advice, contradicting everything that had been told him before, as well as his own experience? It seems to me that his decision not to vote for the Earle machine was both correct and intelligent, with no trace of stupidity but on the contrary a firm grasp of realities.
What positive was left for him to do? There was only one other party in the field, the Republican Party. He was not a syndicalist or indifferent, he wanted to exercise his rights as a citizen, and therefore the only act within his power was to vote for James and the rest of the Republicans.
Granted that his vote was directly counter to his own interests, as he perhaps understands now, with James’ signature just fixed under the new union-smashing labor act. But who was to blame here? Who was at fault that this workers’ revolt against the status quo (for that is what it amounted to) was turned into the blind rut of Republicanism? It was not his fault: he, as an individual, had no other choice.
The blame lies at the door of people like my friend, but above all of the trade-union officialdom. It is they who stultified and sterilized this textile worker’s wish and need for political expression. If, after Kennedy’s Primary defeat, they had done what every event called for – put up a union slate, a labor ticket for the elections, there is not the slightest doubt that this worker’s vote would not have reluctantly padded the Republican column.
 
And Who Is Lagging?
There are rising indications that throughout the country the workers themselves are ready for a new kind of politics: for working-class politics, for union tickets and a labor party. This was shown in November by the success of McLevy in Connecticut, in spite of sabotage by the Stalinists and the officials of both C.I.O. and A.F.L. It is being shown today in Minneapolis, where, in the face of a late start and the overwhelming Farmer-Labor collapse in November, the workers have impressively rallied to Eide and the rest of the unions’ ticket.
The complaint is made that the American workers do not learn, that they are politically stupid. But this complaint is ordinarily merely the excuse for passivity, opportunism or betrayal on the part of the complainer. The American workers have learned, during the last decade, a large part of the lesson. They now observe the collapse of New Dealism; and more and more of them are prepared to break not only with New Dealism but with bourgeois politics as a whole – if only they can find an alternate path. The Lewises, Greens and Browders have as a principal function to hide and block that alternate path: the path of independent working-class political action.
Conditions are again ripe, after a year or more’s hibernation, for blasting away the obstacles. A Presidential year approaches as the War Deal consolidates its hold and social reaction drives deeper. In the months ahead, the slogans for labor politics are certain to meet with an ever-widening response, if they are put forward boldly and clearly, and carried direct into the camp of the enemy.
 



II
The History of the War Referendum
ACCORDING to the provisions of the Constitution of the United States, the power to declare war against a foreign nation is vested in Congress. The President may not declare war; he may recommend its declaration, but it must be voted by a majority in a joint session of both Houses of Congress.
It is true, of course, that this technical separation of powers is not so decisive as it might seem. The Constitution designates the President as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of the nation. Directly and through the subordinate Executive departments, he is in charge of the nation's diplomacy, in the case of the actual signing of treaties subject to confirmation by the Senate. Through this military and diplomatic control, a President may, in spite of the Constitutional limitation, have a share in the war-making power equal to or even greater than that of Congress.
We have been taught since childhood that, in theory at least, Congress is the “representative” of the people. When Congress declares war against a foreign nation, it is supposed to be acting as such a representative, to be expressing the “will of the people.”
 
People Are Dragged into War
Whatever may be the truth about this in general, history and experience have made clear that in the case of declaring war Congress cannot at all be relied upon to act as the genuine representative of the people. Experience has already shown that the people can be, and probably have been, dragged into wars against their will.
This seems to have been true of the war fought by the United States against Mexico in the middle of the last century. There is not the slightest evidence that the majority of the people of the country favored this ruthless war of aggression. Nevertheless, Congress declared war and called upon the people to support it. In doing so Congress acted not as representative of the people, but of those special industrial, agricultural and financial interests which had something to gain from the Mexican War.
The same conclusion is even clearer in the case of the aggressive, imperialist war fought against Spain at the beginning of this century. The Spanish War was deliberately cooked up by a small handful of big capitalists and bankers, publicists and politicians. The opinions and sentiments of the great majority of the people were contemptuously flouted. The War itself was the occasion for some of the most shameless graft in history. Young workers and farmers were sent out to die from yellow fever and dysentery in order to give a few bankers and industrial privateers control over the sugar and fruit plantations of Cuba and Hawaii and the Philippines.
The Mexican and Spanish wars were, in a sense, minor undertakings in the history of the United States. The lesson they teach, however, is hammered in by the experience of the Great War of 1914-18. The story of this country's entry into the last war has been studied in great detail during the past twenty years. Much of the material is contained in publicly available records of Congressional committees. Thorough and competent historians have completed the analysis.
 
The Necessary Conclusion
There is no doubt about the conclusions which must be drawn. The needs and wishes of the people were never consulted in connection with the decision to enter the last war. The gigantic loans made to the Allied Powers, the profits of bankers and big corporations, the maneuvers of a small group of financiers, diplomats and politicians, decided the issue, not the will of the people. Once again, in April 1917, Congress declared war not as the representative of the people, but at the will of and as spokesman for the Morgans and Whitneys and DuPonts and Rockefellers.
We thus reach two conclusions about the problem of war as it faces the United States: (1) war is now a totalitarian enterprise, affecting everyone; (2) the method provided in the Constitution cannot be relied upon to carry out the will of the people on the question of war.
Increasing numbers of people in this country have reached these conclusions. At the same time it is clear to all of us that a new world war threatens to break out at any moment. All nations are directing their chief energies to preparation for it. Last year more than seventeen billion dollars were spent on armaments. Tens of millions of men are under arms throughout the world. Every few months a new crisis occurs, each one bringing the world to the very edge of general war.
In the United States, as elsewhere, the armaments are built up. The government intervenes constantly in the various danger spots. Whatever laws are on the books, banks and corporations become entangled through credits and supplies with warring or potentially warring nations. The pattern of the last war seems to be repeating itself. The people do not want war; but more and more fear that the war is coming and that the people of the United States will be dragged into it against their will.
An understanding of the totalitarian character of modern war, a realization that on the question of war Congress cannot be relied on to carry out the will of the people, a fear that the people are going to be dragged into a war which they do not want: these are the sources that have led to a search for some means of protection against the war and the war-makers, and have brought so many in this country to favor the plan for a popular referendum on war.
The proposal for a popular referendum is an extremely simple one. The Constitution would be amended so that war could be declared by the United States government only through a direct vote of the people, a direct popular referendum.
To an ordinary human being, this proposal seems most reasonable, modest and democratic. It is the people and all the people who must fight and suffer from war (they do not fight and suffer by representation). Should not the people themselves, then, decide whether a war is worth fighting and suffering for? The United States is supposed to be a democracy. What could be more democratic than to decide the most important of all questions, the question of war, by a direct vote of the people?
This is, indeed, what the people of the United States think. Authoritative surveys, such as the “Gallup poll,” show that an overwhelming majority, two-thirds at the very least, favor the war referendum. In a democracy, you would think that such a majority would get what it wants.
Why not? What has happened to the war referendum proposal?
(Continued to next issue: The Opposition to the Ludlow Referendum)
 



IV
The Referendum and the Fight Against War
The basic reason why the great majority of the people are in favor of the war referendum is because they are afraid a war is coming and they do not want a war. The bulk of the people – the workers and farmers and teachers and professionals and small shopkeepers – know that they have nothing to gain and everything, from their lives to all of their liberties, to lose from a war. They are looking for some way to stop the war, or at least put a big obstacle in its path. They believe that the popular referendum is the way in which the war can be stopped, since everyone knows that if the people had a free chance to decide, they would vote against participation in any war which is now or is likely to be on the horizon of the United States.
 
A Democratic Demand
Revolutionary socialists, and their party, the Socialist Workers Party, do not think that a popular referendum can, in and by itself, stop war. We believe that modern wars spring from causes which are deep within the present capitalist system of society; and that to get rid of war permanently we shall have to remove those causes by overthrowing capitalism and building in its place a free socialist society.
The Sixty Families and their agents who administer the government for them will go to war whatever laws are on the statute books. In an article attacking the Ludlow bill, Walter Lippman once gave this cynically away: “If an American President,” he wrote, “wants to go to war, he can go no matter what the Ludlow amendment says.”
Nevertheless, we, as revolutionary socialists, fully and firmly support the demand for a popular referendum on war. We stand with the great majority of the people against the war-mongers and the war-makers. The proposal for a war referendum is truly democratic, and revolutionary socialists favor every genuinely democratic process. The question of the war must be brought into the light of day! The people, in endorsing the war referendum, give expression to their hatred of the war and their wish to struggle against it. We share that hatred, and take our place in that struggle.
The fight for the war referendum, whatever its limitations, is unquestionably one powerful means of fighting against the war. This is shown plainly by the nature of the opposition to the referendum. The movement for the referendum finds itself at every stage in the sharpest conflict with the war-mongers. If there is still disagreement about the best means for fighting war, we can learn from the experience of common struggle.
 
Upon Whom Shall We Rely?
One lesson can already be drawn from the experiences of the movement for the war referendum. That lesson is that the “official” leaders of the movement, the Ludlow s and LaFollettes, cannot be relied upon. They give lip service in speeches and at election time, but they have already shown in practice that they cannot be counted on to carry the struggle through.
In the first place, they have not rallied the people behind them in a great popular wave that would sweep over the heads of the opposition. They jockey around in the offices or committee rooms of Washington, and permit the war-mongers to file their bills away in dusty pigeon-holes. For such a cause as the war referendum, there is no hope in legalistic by-play at the top; strength can come only from the surging voice of the people.
In the second place, they have tacked so many modifications onto the simple, clear demand for the referendum that they have warped it beyond recognition. With all of Latin America, all United States possessions (including, no doubt all consulates and embassies, which are technically possessions, in every country) excluded not merely if invaded but even at the immediate “threat” of invasion, a clever statesman could find a way of maintaining that the referendum could never apply.
In order to bring the proposal back to its clear original form, and to put it on the most solid foundation, three changes in the current versions are necessary:

It should call for a direct, popular, referendum vote in the case of any and all wars. This is the only safeguard. History has shown that diplomats in each and every country are always able to claim that any war into which their nation enters is a “defensive” war. Calling a war defensive is only a way of trying to make it look respectable. The people who should decide whether to fight a war, are also the ones to decide whether or not a given war is defensive.
 
The referendum decision should be required not merely prior to any declaration of war, but prior to the use of any of the armed forces of the United States in any armed conflict whatsoever. Nowadays wars are sometimes not “declared”, but undeclared wars can be just as destructive as any others. The point is for the people to decide not only the partly formal question of the declaration of war, but the concrete question of the war itself, which means armed conflict.
 
In the war referendum, the right to vote should be given to all of the age of 18 and over. Those who are 18 and over are called upon to die in the war, are drafted. If they are old enough to fight in the war, they are old enough to vote on the question of entering it.

The people want the war referendum. That is the unchallenged fact. What must be done is for the people themselves to take the fight for the referendum into their own hands. Nothing has been or will be done by waiting for Congressmen and Senators. The issue of the referendum must be brought into every trade union, farm organization and farmers’ cooperative, every fraternal society and club and youth group. Rallies, petitions, speeches, meetings, canvassings must gather the already vast but unorganized support of the referendum into a powerful, united force. Before the assembled might of the people, the secret diplomats, the star-chamber heroes, the war-mongers and their fellow conspirators, will be routed into the open and compelled to give their accounting.
Let the people decide!
(The end)
 



The new army appropriation bill which went into effect July 1 provides for the expansion of the regular army by 112,000 men. During the past two months the War Department has been formulating its plans for getting its hands on these 112,000.
There are already several hundred recruiting stations established in the continental United States including a major station at each of the army posts. You would perhaps think that this would be almost enough to solve the War Department’s problem. The problem, it seems, is more difficult than it looks.
 
Super-Ballyhoo for War
According to the, program already announced, 387 new recruiting stations are to be opened up. In addition there will be 18 traveling stations, each including a big sound truck and a substantial staff. The War Department has itself explained that all the most modern devices of big business advertising are to be used: posters, speeches, the radio, magazine articles, and high pressure publicity releases.
What is the trouble here?
There are approximately 135,000,000 people in this country. 112,000 are wanted for the army. This comes to considerably less than 1/10 of 1%. Among the 135,000,000 are 15,000,000 or so unemployed including at least 7,000,000 youth. The unemployed with or without relief jobs live at a minimum subsistence level.
Now, war mongers from Roosevelt to Browder to Anthony Eden tell us daily that the war ahead, the mighty crusade against Hitler’s Germany, is the most popular war in history. Everybody would and will support it, they say, because it will be the liberating war for people and freedom and democracy.
 
The Lie of a Popular War
If the war ahead is so wonderfully popular, why all this trouble for the War Department in the recruiting campaign? You would certainly think that the young workers and farmers of the country should be flocking to the colors at the mere announcement that the rolls are open. You would especially think so in the case of the unemployed who can at least get a certain kind of security and enough food in the army. But the fact is that for this miserable handful of 112,000 all of the biggest publicity guns in the arsenal have to be trotted out.
In this circumstance, the truth becomes abundantly clear: it is a vicious, and deliberate lie that the war ahead is a popular war. The masses of the people here and in every country fear the war and hate the war.
It is exactly the same in Great Britain. And the big pressure campaign for recruiting began immediately after the Munich crisis. All the dispatches in the newspapers kept telling us that they didn’t have enough application blanks for the thousands of young men who wanted to join, but the truth came out when Chamberlain introduced and drove through his conscription bill. Why conscription, for this so marvelously popular war? And even in the new European crisis over Czechoslovakia, all they wanted was a mere 200,000. They could not find even a fraction of 200,000 so they have to drive them with police guns and bayonets.
The war mongers find it very necessary to try to make their war appear popular. They think that in this way they will discourage the opponents of war by making them feel that nearly everyone is for it, and so what is the use of keeping up isolated resistance. That is why, every other day, the headlines declare that “England Is Ready,” “France Is United to Resist Hitler.” But these are lies, just as it is a lie when the papers tell us that the people of this country are ready to fight the war of the Sixty Families. The facts prove them to be lies.
If his war is popular, why does Roosevelt fear the war referendum? Why does he, the democrat of Democrats, fear to let the people vote on war?
 



I
Totalitarian War
IN PAST civilizations, war was usually the business of a restricted class or caste of the population. The great majority not only took no part in the fighting, but, in point of fact, their lives were very little affected, even indirectly, by the conduct and outcome of wars and battles.
In feudal times, for example, most of the people were serfs and vileins, who lived attached to the land where they were born. They gained their sustenance from locally self-sufficient agriculture and simple handicrafts, with scarcely any trade or commerce. They were required to turn over a certain percentage of their crops to their feudal lord, and usually also to work for a certain number of days each year on jobs assigned to them by their lord or his bailiffs. They were not, however, subject to any kind of military service.
With the exception of one or two of the Crusades, wars were fought exclusively by members of the feudal nobility itself, assisted by their personal servants who acted, however, in non-military capacities. Fighting was considered, you might say, to be a “privilege” and prerogative of the nobility. In these feudal wars, not many persons, even of the nobility, were killed. Most weapons were crude, suited not for mass slaughter but for individual, hand-to-hand combat; and fairly adequate protective devices, such as armor and shields, were worn.
The results of these wars, moreover, did not greatly affect the conditions of life of the great majority. Sometimes a chivalric army would commandeer all the crops of a given district, or even lay it waste by fire and pillage. But, since the armies were small and slow-moving, the roads few and poor and scattered, this did not happen often in any particular place. And the question of who won the war was of hardly any concern to the average serf. His duties and obligations were the same whether Baron X or Count Y was his lord.
Even in the first centuries of modern times, the situation did not greatly change. In fifteenth century Italy, for instance, where the first stage of modern civilization reached its height, the powerful cities usually conducted wars by hiring mercenary armies. Most of the citizenry kept busy at its industrial and commercial tasks, and the major inconvenience of war was only an added drain on the treasury.
 
Everybody Involved Now
Today, everything is changed. The world-wide division of labor, the development of a world economy, rapid transportation and communication, more or less universal education, have transformed war from the sport of nobles or the profession of mercenaries into a mass enterprise involving every single member of the population. Directly or indirectly, everyone is part of the war machine.
In the first place, in our day, vast numbers of the population are directly concerned in the fighting of a war. The war armies are not restricted groups of professionals but mass armies made up of millions of individuals. Most of these millions are drafted or conscripted from the broad ranks of workers and peasants and farmers. In the battles of modern wars, great masses of people are killed or wounded. In the war of 1914–18 at least thirteen million were killed, and about thirty million more were wounded.
But with the growth of new methods of fighting, such as airplane bombing and gas attacks, many persons who are not soldiers are killed and wounded in modern battles. A bomb or a gas shell does its work as quickly on old women or children as on men with uniforms.
In modern war, moreover, death and wounds and disease are not confined to the battlefields. Scarcity of food, disruption of medical service, dislocation of hygienic and sanitary measures, all extend the casualty lists traceable to the war by untold millions.
These factors, however, all of them directly bound up with war in its fighting aspect, by no means complete the picture. The war of 1914–18 taught us that in modern war, the entire population and all activities must be assembled into the war machine. The army is no longer just the soldiers in uniform; everyone belongs to the army. Every factory, mine and mill and farm go on a war basis. Education and movies and religion and art are harnessed to war propaganda. All organizations, such as political parties and unions and clubs and fraternal societies, either line up for the war or are illegalized. No “individual freedom” is tolerated. Everyone must think and talk and act for the war, or be subject to the most severe penalties.
 
Includes All Humanity
In short, war has become, in our day, totalitarian. War is no longer a matter for some sections of the population, and some types of activities. War dominates and controls the total life and activities of the totality of the population. The governments and general staffs of every nation recognize this to be the case. That is why the war plans of all governments include the organization of the whole country and the entire population along totalitarian lines. In the case of the United States, as elsewhere, these plans are fully prepared. Many of them are included in the famous document known as the “Industrial Mobilization Plan,” the provisions of which are scheduled to go into effect on “M”-Day – the day that war begins.
The problem of modern war is, thus, a problem for every human being. With the destiny of each one of us at stake, it would seem wise and proper for us to try to decide ourselves what to do, and not to turn ourselves blindly over to the hands of others.
(Continued in next issue: The History of the Ludlow War Referendum)
 



III
The Opposition to the War Referendum
SEVERAL years ago, Representative Ludlow of Indiana put the war referendum plan into a resolution which he introduced in the House of Representatives; and last year his resolution came up for a test vote in the House. From association with his name, the plan is often referred to as the “Ludlow amendment.” It should be noticed that Ludlow’s original bill did not embody the plan in its simple and direct form. He attached a proviso: the popular referendum was not to be held if the mainland of the United States were invaded.
Ludlow has re-introduced his resolution, with several more provisos, at the present session of Congress; and a similar resolution has been sponsored in the Senate by a group of Senators headed by LaFollette of Wisconsin. In both of the current resolutions, the referendum would not operate if either the mainland of the United States or any of its territories and possessions or any part of Latin America were invaded or immediately threatened by invasion. In other words, the present Ludlow and LaFollette resolutions provide for a referendum only in the case of a war conducted by the United States in Europe, Asia or Africa. Congress would otherwise retain the present Constitutional right to declare war.
 
What Is Behind the Opposition?
It might be supposed that these sweeping provisos – about which I shall have something to say in the next section – would remove all the “objections” to the plan. Does not everyone from Roosevelt down assure us that the United States will never go to war for “aggressive” purposes, that the young men of this country will never again be sent to fight abroad, that the armament of the United States is being built up for purely defensive purposes? What possible objection can they have when the people ask to vote, not on all wars, but just on those obviously and blatantly aggressive wars which they say the United States will never fight?
Nevertheless, the fight against the war referendum plan, in any and all of its forms, has from the beginning been as powerful and bitter as the strength of its opponents can bring to bear. Through every channel of public opinion, speech and newspaper and magazine and pulpit, the attack has been conducted.
What lies behind this fierce opposition to this plan, approved of by more than two-thirds of the people? The people have the right to know.
Among the sharp opponents of the war referendum, we discover: the heads of the Democratic Party, including Roosevelt and his Secretary of State, Cordell Hull; the heads of the Republican Party, including Herbert Hoover, Alfred M. Landon, and the influential Henry L. Stimson, Hoover’s Secretary of State; the Liberty League, and the American Legion officials; all of the most powerful newspapers, particularly the most reactionary newspapers such as the New York Herald-Tribune and the New York Times, and the Chicago Tribune; all of the most widely read of the big-shot columnists, especially Walter Lippman, General Hugh S. Johnson, and Dorothy Thompson; and the Communist Party.
For the most part, the attacks on the war referendum plan are in a tone of hysterical frenzy; all supporters of the plan are denounced as “unpatriotic” and it is suggested that they are influenced by paid propaganda agents of foreign nations: the lack of real arguments is covered by heavy flag-waving and big adjectives.
 
Arguments Hold No Water
When we examine the arguments which some of the opponents try sometimes to put forward, they boil down to three: (1) the referendum would be contrary to “our representative theory of government” established by the Constitution; (2) holding a referendum would show other nations that “the country is divided”; (3) the requirement of a referendum before entering a war would “hamper” the government in its foreign policy.
Each of these arguments is a complete absurdity from the point of view of genuine democracy.
Granted that the United States has a representative form of government. But what is the government supposed to represent? The will of the people, presumably. No question could be more important than that of war. If those who claim to be representatives of the people believed that the nation should enter a war, then a popular vote on the issue could only help to prove whether they were in truth representatives. If a freely conducted popular vote went against the war which they proposed, that would prove that they did not really represent the will of the people; if it went in favor of the war, they would be strengthened as the genuine representatives.
Similarly in the case of the other two arguments. If the people are in fact divided on the question of the war, do they not have the right to say so ? What if in a division, a majority were against the war? Do the “representatives” want to fight the war in any case, against the will of the majority? The argument against the referendum on the grounds that it will disclose a division of opinion indicates indeed that those who will be for the war when the time comes intend to suppress all contrary opinion. The same argument of course applies to anyone who will express opposition of any kind to the war, quite apart from a referendum. Again, the referendum could hamper U.S. diplomacy only if the diplomatic maneuvers were going in a direction contrary to the will of the people. If the diplomacy were in line with the will of the people, the referendum would strengthen and reinforce the diplomacy.
Under the barrage of the opposition, on January 10th, 1938, the House of Representatives voted down the Ludlow motion. Earlier in that same week, the Gallup poll had shown that 72% of the people favored the bill! Could there have been a more striking demonstration that on the question of war the Congressmen are not the “representatives of the people”, that the people are correct in distrusting the President and Congress, that the President and Congress do not express the people’s will!
Lurking behind the fake arguments which the opponents of the referendum use on the surface, we can find the real meaning of their fierce opposition. By their attitude they are proving that in reality they are against democracy and democratic processes of government, and that their aim is to drag the people of this country into a war of imperialist aggression and conquest for the sake of profits. What other real reason could they possibly have? If they actually believed in true democracy, if they were fully and sincerely against any war except perhaps a war of honest defense, they could only welcome the plan for a people’s referendum.
It is because they are planning a war for the benefit of the banks and the big corporations, for the Sixty Families, that they oppose the referendum so bitterly. They dare not let their plans see the light of day; they dare not submit them to the verdict of the people. They plot behind the backs of the people with secret diplomacy, closed-door meetings, secret treaties and military agreements. And, when they are ready, they prepare to whip the people into line and to plunge them into mass slaughter. In the eyes of Roosevelt and Stimson and Browder and Lippman and Hoover, war is not an issue for the people to decide. It is for the people, like slaves and cattle, to obey the orders of the masters, to suffer and to die in order to make the world safe for the Sixty Families.
(Continued in next issue: The Referendum and the Fight Against War)
 



I
Totalitarian War

II
The History of the War Referendum

III
The Opposition to the War Referendum

IV
The Referendum and the Fight Against War
 



The new law which abolishes the prevailing wage on W.P.A. construction projects by decreeing that all W.P.A. employees must work a full 130 hours monthly for the subsistence relief wage is part of a long-term, deliberate plan to smash the wage levels in the construction industries. Like any other similar plan, directed toward a particular industry, this means the attempt to decrease the share of the workers in the total national income, and to increase the relative share drawn by the bosses.
This plan has, also, a political as well as an economic aim. Its author, once more, is none other than Franklin D. Roosevelt. Roosevelt has been preparing for the present smashing blow by several years of skillful publicity and build-up. He and his aides have been regularly making speeches, the latest of his own only a few weeks back, on the problem of what is wrong with housing. Beneath layers of rhetoric, the answer always seems to be: wages are too high.
Right now, the Monopoly Committee is conducting hearings on the housing and construction industry. Time and again the experts and witnesses come back to the theme: wages are too high.
The real political purpose is clear. The New Deal’s housing program, to which has been devoted huge mountains of ballyhoo, is an utter flop. Roosevelt needs a scapegoat, and he is trying to find one in the construction workers.
 
Why Can’t Houses Be Built?
The government itself recognizes that at least one-third of the nation lives in sub-normal housing, unfit from the points of view both of hygiene and comfort. Nevertheless, nothing is done about it. The scattered and advertised projects of the Roosevelt administration are not enough to make up for the additional housing that each year falls below the level of decency.
Is there any truth that high hourly wages are actually to blame?
It is true that hourly wages – though not at all annual wages – are comparatively high in the building trades, and this naturally enters into the cost of housing. But consider:
The cost of financing a $5,000 house or $5,000 unit of an apartment dwelling, figuring in primarily interest and the other secondary bank charges, runs anywhere from about $3,000 to $7,500. The financing charges, that is, reach up to one and a half or more times the initial cost of the house itself! And for this enormous sum, the banks, with their monopoly of credit, do absolutely nothing in terms of socially productive work. All of this money is directly or indirectly sweated out of the labor that goes into building the house and that of the person who inhabits it.
Labor receives in wages a mere 20% to 40% of the initial cost. Who, then, deserves to receive major blame in this comparison?
But the financing charges are only a small part of the story. The profits of the great building materials corporations (U. S. Gypsum, Johns-Manville, American Radiator, etc.) have continued in the millions virtually all through the crisis. Inflated land prices line the pockets of real estate operators and speculators. In every building operation, contractors and sub-contractors take their big slice of profits. An ever greater percentage of real estate taxes, reflected in the cost of housing and rent, go to interest payment on bonds held by the big banks and the Sixty Families and to other uses of no conceivable benefit to the people.
In a true analysis, made in the light of social functions performed, labor, which gets no profit and asks no interest, is the least burdensome item in the costs of housing.
The truth is that not labor but a decadent capitalism stands irremediably blocking the road to an adequate, or even one-tenth adequate, housing program. Among all the fakes of the dead New Deal, none has been more hopeless or more hypocritical than its housing plans.
 
Will Roosevelt Succeed?
The new regulation, which went into effect July 1st, amounts in effect to a cut of from one-third to two-thirds in the hourly wage rate. As I write this column, the workers concerned are replying to Roosevelt’s move in their own proper language: a militant and rapidly spreading strike. All the machinery of Roosevelt’s relief administration is being brought into line to smash the strike.
Roosevelt, however, counts on a special factor to aid him. The hourly rates for these skilled workers have been in the past far higher than those for the other W.P.A. workers. Roosevelt thinks that he can exploit this as an apparent “injustice,” and drive a wedge between the two sections of W.P.A. workers.
There is an injustice, it is true. But the injustice lies not in the fact that the construction workers have a high rate – it is after all low enough – but in the miserable, starvation rate at which the bulk of the W.P.A. workers are paid. This has been, unfortunately, too often forgotten by the construction workers who have been too narrowly concerned with their own craft interests. A lasting victory in the present battle needs the fused strength of all of the relief workers. And this requires broadening the fight to include the burning demands for the lifting of the wage rate of the lower W.P.A. brackets.
If the construction workers inscribe on their own banner the demand for Thirty-Thirty – $30 minimum weekly wage, 30-hours maximum weekly hours – for all workers, they will find allies in the millions to back them in their own defense pf the living standards of the American working class.
 



There is no doubt that Roosevelt’s blunt “You cannot strike against the government,” with which he accepted full responsibility for the present smashing attack on the unemployed, came as a stunning shock to millions of workers. There would have been no such shock if the same statement had been made, and attitude taken, by, say, Vice-President Garner or Senators Glass or Adams or Representative Woodrum or Republican Senators Taft or Vandenberg.
How can it be that Roosevelt, labor’s dear friend, the Roosevelt of the rosy first years of the Wagner Act and of ever-expanding relief funds, “turns traitor”?
This question is mysterious only when it is not understood exactly who Roosevelt is. If we want to explain why Roosevelt acts as he does, we must forget his flashing smile, his charming radio voice, his sweet promises, and even his personal morality and psychology. Roosevelt, in his public capacity, is the chief executive of the capitalist state, the chairman of the executive committee of United States imperialism. In minor matters he has a little leeway for expressing his personality; but on major issues he has got to fulfill his function.
The requirements of United States imperialism, of the Sixty Families who control that imperialism, imperatively demand a cutting down of social concessions granted to the masses of the people, beginning with relief funds and soon to extend to wage and living standards more generally. In such a situation, Roosevelt has no choice but to obey orders.
 
The Two-Party System Obscures
Certain peculiarities of the United States Constitution and of the “two-party system” make it harder to see what has happened than would be the case in France or England. In this country, the President is, in fact as well as name, the chief executive of the government. He is, however, elected independently of Congress, and continues to hold office for his full term no matter what his political relation to Congress may be.
In France (as in England), however, the actual chief executive (Premier in France and Prime Minister in England) is a “responsible” officer of the Chamber of Deputies or of Parliament. He is elected not by the people or by an electoral college, but by the Chamber. If the political relations in the Chamber (or Parliament) change sharply, the Premier is compelled to resign (unless a new general-election is called), and a new Premier is appointed, who in turn names a new Cabinet.
Thus, in France or England, a sharp shift to right or left in governmental policy is ordinarily indicated quite plainly by the change of the man who holds the chief executive post, by a different Premier or Prime Minister. At the same time, at least in France, a new “majority”, made up of a different grouping of the numerous parties, is constituted in the Chamber.
The same outward development cannot take place in the same way in the United States. But of course the same fundamental political process nevertheless goes on in the United States as in the other countries.
 
The New Deal in France
France also had its own kind of New Deal, similar in many key respects to the New Deal in this country. This was administered by Leon Blum as Premier, with his Popular Front majority in the Chamber of Deputies. It lasted for a little less than two years, beginning in the Spring of 1936.
But French imperialism faced the same basic problems as United States imperialism. On the one side, it had to get seriously ready for imperialist war against Germany; on the other, it found that the social concessions made through the Blum government were cutting too deeply into profits, It had to change over from its New Deal to a War Deal, which would be also a deal of social reaction. The political side of this change was accomplished in the early Spring of 1938. A crisis was precipitated in the Chamber of Deputies, and Blum resigned. After a short, interim government, Daladier was made Premier of the War Deal government, which still continues in office. Of course Daladier’s cards were not shown all at once. Indeed, both the Socialist and Communist parties voted in favor of him as Premier. But after a few months came the crises of Munich, the decree laws and the November general strike, and the true character of the Daladier government became clear. At the bidding of his masters, he has been piling up armaments for the war, and at the same time hammering away at the wages, living standards and liberties of the workers. The mystery of Roosevelt, then, is done away with if we realize that there are two Roosevelts: the first a Blum-Roosevelt; the second a Daladier-Roosevelt. Because of the Constitutional set-up in this country, and the two-party system, the same man has had to perform the two functions. In France, the transformation of New Deal into War Deal was shown openly by the shift from Blum to Daladier as Premiers. In this country, Roosevelt has to be both Jekyll and Hyde.
But the first and chief error is, after all, not that of misunderstanding Roosevelt today. It lies in the illusion that any capitalist politician, any capitalist deal – whether New Deal or War Deal, any capitalist government, can function in the interests of the workers and the masses of the people. They are all, in their own way, smiling or grim, left-sounding or right-sounding, at the service, first, last and all the time, of the bosses. They are all the sworn enemies of the workers.
 



The attempt to abolish the prevailing wage system on the W.P.A. projects, and to substitute for it what the administration so sweetly calls the “security wage,” is neither the beginning nor the end of the drive against the unemployed.
This drive began on the day following last November’s elections. It was initiated directly and exclusively by Franklin D. Roosevelt, at a time when Congress was not even in session. Its first stage was carried through during November and December, when, at Roosevelt’s orders, 300,000 men were dropped from the W.P.A. rolls.
The second stage consisted in the reorganization of the administrative personnel of the W.P.A. Harry Hopkins, who was associated with the New Deal epoch, which was being buried, was shifted to the Department of Commerce. At the head of W.P.A. was placed F.C. Harrington. Harrington was and is a Colonel in the regular Army. He neither resigned nor took a leave of absence from the Army when he entered the W.P.A. He continues on the Army payroll. His W.P.A. job is a military assignment ordered by his commander-in-chief.
The shift from Hopkins to Harrington is thus an open symbol of the transformation of the New Deal into the War Deal.
 
Links in the Chain
The next step in the drive against the unemployed was the dropping, again at Roosevelt’s exclusive orders, of 50,000 non-citizens from the W.P.A. rolls. The fourth, undertaken jointly by Roosevelt and Congress, was the cutting of the rolls by an additional 400,000, to 500,000 during April, May and June.
The fifth great step was the W.P.A. appropriation proposed for the fiscal year beginning July 1. The figure of $1,477,000,000 was again set on the sole and exclusive responsibility of Franklin D. Roosevelt. No Congressman proposed less; indeed, no Congressman would have dared to propose so little.
The total money appropriated is far and away the major factor in the relief situation. Roosevelt’s figure, $800,000,000 lower than last year, compels the adoption of harsh new regulations whether these are invented by himself or by Congress.
The sixth step was the substitution of the security wage for the prevailing wage. Who is responsible for this phase of the savage attack on the wage and living standard of the American workers? Once more, the record gives the unmistakable answer.
As far back as 1935, in one of his press conferences, Roosevelt declared his opposition to the prevailing wage and his perspective of eliminating it from relief projects. He has never swerved in his intention.
During the hearings on the current relief bill, the demand for the abolition of the prevailing wage did not come in the first instance from Congressmen. It was put forward from the witness stand by Roosevelt’s appointee and military subordinate, Colonel Harrington. Like all military men, Harrington acts under the orders and discipline of his commander.
Any doubts about the origin have been removed during the past week by Roosevelt himself, who has backed Harrington to the limit, and taken the public and avowed lead in the effort to smash the strike.
 
Preparations for Things to Come
The seventh step was the announcement that those away from jobs for five days would be dropped from the rolls; the eighth, that striking W.P.A. workers are not eligible for home relief; the ninth, Roosevelt’s proclamation that “You can’t strike against the government.”
These three steps – all of them taken by decree and not by parliamentary law – are closely bound together. On the one side, they amount in effect to the institution of forced labor at the government’s terms.
On the other side, they are a forecast of the method of organization not merely for relief work but for all industry in wartime. Since, during war, all industry will be part of the government’s war machine, the principles now being enunciated will compel all persons to work at the tasks, wages and conditions assigned to them, and will prohibit all protests and strikes against these tasks, wages and conditions.
Not for nothing is a military officer now running W.P.A.
The tenth and eleventh and twelfth steps are now nearly ready to be taken. Under the “eighteen months provisions,” all W.P.A. employees who have been on the rolls for a continuous period of eighteen months or longer must be dropped. This means concretely that on July 31 and August 31, Harrington plans to cut off a minimum of 650,000.
In theory, these 650,000 will be eligible for re-employment after a month of patriotic starvation. However, the eleventh step demands that the total on the rolls be cut to a maximum of 2,000,000 – around 600,000 less than on July 1.
The twelfth step is ingenious. It is called a readjustment of geographical wage differentials. At present, W.P.A. wage rates in the South are comparable to India or China – in many instances about $3.50 per week. Under the hypocritical pretense of making wage differentials equal no more than variations in the cost of living, Roosevelt plans to slash WPA wages in the North and all industrial areas. He hopes that a minute rise in the Southern wage will buy off Southern workers from solidarity with their northern brothers, just as, in the case of the prevailing wage, he adjusts his blow to try to divide the skilled from the unskilled workers.
* * *
And I have been criticized, even by Marxists, for noting that the New Deal is dead ...
 



The Federal Reserve Board index figure of industrial production is
currently reported as 125. In this simple number is concentrated the
agony of American capitalism.
This number means that industrial production in this country is
now running at the highest rate in history. We have not merely
returned to, but surpassed, the Golden Age of 1929! The average
production rate for 1929 was only 119.
But where, then, is the rosy hue that colored the land in 1929?
Today, with production at its new height, there are still at least
10,000,000 unemployed, and millions upon millions more sub-humanly
housed, half-starved, ill-clothed. 1929 is back, and more than back,
and it has the taste of ashes in the mouth.
 
What Makes the Difference?
What accounts for this great gulf between 1929 and 1939? There
seem to be four chief causes:
Each year there is a net increase of approximately 600,000 men in
the labor market. All other things being equal, therefore,
production, in order to maintain employment stability, would have to
expand sufficiently each year to be able to absorb these 600,000.
Under the pressure of crisis, technological advances and new
methods of speed-up have during the past decade enormously increased
the man-hour output of labor. In such industries as steel, where the
changes are especially striking, this means not only that fewer men
are required to keep the plants going but that increases in
the rate of production do not require corresponding increases in the
number of workers employed. To run at 35% or 40% of capacity, the
steel mills require far fewer men than in 1929. To run, as at
present, at 95% of capacity (which, by the way, is considerably more
than 100% of 1929 capacity), requires a still smaller fraction of
workers than at 40%, so that the proportionate dislocation is even
greater.
A third factor is the ever-rising debt load, both public and
private, which weighs down upon the whole economy, and helps prevent
expanding wages and profits from being fruitfully reflected in the
consumer market. This effect was exaggerated in this past decade
because of the devices which were employed to forestall wide-scale
bankruptcies and reorganizations which, in previous crises, though
they smashed up individual enterprises, acted as health-giving
surgery for the economic structure as a whole.
Finally, the disproportions among the various sectors of the
economy have become deepened and more awkward during this decade. The
general health of the economy depends not merely on the vigor of this
or that sector or even upon the average level of the economy as a
whole, but also upon a proper balance between industry and
agriculture, capital goods and consumer goods, internal trade and
foreign trade, etc. Monopoly control, far from being able to maintain
such a balance, introduces its own kind of planning into some sectors
of industry only at the cost of a more violent anarchy in the economy
taken in its entirety.
 
What of the War Boom?
Only a comparatively small part of the present rise in production
is directly traceable to war business. Much of the increase
has been due, to domestic orders given in anticipation of a coming
boom and as a guarantee that future war orders will not interfere
with the fulfillment of domestic requirements. Within the past few
months the curve of production has risen considerably above the curve
of consumption, which, interpreted, means that inventories are piling
up.
War orders, not merely from Britain and France, but also from the
home government, will undoubtedly increase in the days to come. But
it is clear that they will not be sufficient to bring about a general
prosperity even of the 1929 variety, and in particular that they will
not, by many millions, be able to absorb the unemployed. Indeed, with
the increased inventories and the lagging behind of consumer
purchasing power, it is not unlikely that after the first of the
year, even with increased war orders, production will decline.
I am, in fact, convinced that much of the talk we have been
hearing about a “war boom” has its source in deliberate
propaganda designed to win the masses of the people over to the
Roosevelt war measures. I believe, for instance, that many workers
were led to an acceptance of the lifting of the arms embargo by at
least the half-formed thought that, at any rate, there would be
plenty of jobs available.
The business men do not spread these illusions among themselves.
In their own committees and publications they are very skeptical
about the extent of the war boom, and make clear its probably limited
character. They have noticed, among other things, that in England
unemployment has increased since the start of the war, in
spite of the entry of hundreds of thousands of young men into the
army.
 
There Is No Cure
A general conclusion that forces itself upon us is that capitalist
economy is even sicker than we think. The New Deal, as a set of
primarily internal measures, was unable to cure U.S. capitalism. But
even the drastic, present and projected, “external measures”
of the War Deal cannot bring health back.
From a moral point of view, it has been a terrible enough comment
on capitalism always that it could keep going only by periodic wars,
that war was an integral phase of its life cycle. But capitalism has
now reached a point where even war cannot repair the ravaged
organism. Peace or war: the choice is now only of alternate roads to
death.
This is known, we may assume, to the rulers of the capitalist
world, and is not the least of those causes which make this “the
strangest of all wars.”
 



The Relief Crisis
The relief crisis in Cleveland, rapidly coming to a head also in
other Ohio cities, serves to remind us in a very grim and dramatic
manner that the war is not an isolated symptom of the frightful decay
of capitalist civilization, and that the United States is in no way
immune from the international spread of that decay. 16,000 persons,
with no resources and no chance for any job, public or private, have
been cut entirely off home relief. They and many tens of thousands
more are subsisting on a diet, provided by the Federal Surplus
Commodities Corporation which is demonstrably unable to maintain a
minimum health level, in many cases not even life itself.
The Mayor of Cleveland, the Governor of Ohio and the Federal
government are engaged in a vigorous game of three-cornered
buck-passing, each trying to get rid of the responsibility. It can
hardly make much difference to the unemployed under whose auspices
they are condemned to starve and freeze.
The fact of the matter, of course, is that during the past year,
at the bidding of big business, a combined drive against the
unemployed has been pushed steadily forward by federal, State and
local governments, Republican and Democratic parties alike.
At the head of this drive stands Franklin Roosevelt, who, a little
more than a year ago, began the rapid transformation of the New Deal
into the War Deal.
 
Plans for the Next Congress
There is nothing to be astonished at in the Cleveland crisis. It
is just one more blow in a long and linked series which is by no
means ended. It ties up plainly with the way in which, last November
and December, Roosevelt dropped 300,000 from the WPA rolls, and, in
March of this year, threw 50,000 foreign-born residents into the
streets. It is bound closely to this year’s WPA appropriation
figure, which, at Roosevelt’s demand, is a billion dollars less
than last year. It is related directly to Roosevelt’s slashing
of WPA rolls by 1,700,000 between November 1, 1938 and September 1,
1939 (they have risen only slightly from the low point of 1,600,000
which they reached in September). It is comparable, plainly, to the
dropping of all WPA workers who had been on the rolls more than
eighteen months, to the elimination of the theater projects and most
of the arts and cultural projects, to the smashing of the wage scales
on the building projects.
And, when anyone actively resists the process, we know already
what happens: the current Minneapolis trials, prepared by the F.B.I.
and directed by Roosevelt’s favorite, Frank Murphy, are samples
of the answers that the administration gives to its serious critics.
According to Murphy and the Minneapolis judge, unwillingness on the
part of the unemployed to starve and freeze constitutes: conspiracy.
Let no one imagine that what is happening in Ohio will suggest to
Roosevelt that he has perhaps gone “too far” and that
more adequate appropriations for the unemployed should be restricted.
He hasn’t started yet. The present plan of the administration
is to recommend to the next session of Congress a total WPA
appropriation of one billion dollars – a further cut, from the
figure of this year’s budget, of approximately half a billion
dollars.
The size of the WPA and other public works appropriations is
necessarily related to the home relief conditions in the cities,
since less public works money means more home relief needed; and the
bankers who control the city and State finances are not prepared to
meet the additional financial strains.
 
Relief, WPA and the War
The cartoonists of the boss press are fond of showing us that the
slogan of Goering and the other Nazis is ‘Guns, not butter”.
That is what Nazism means, they tell us: you get armaments and war
instead of food. They say this today in order to ask us to fight in
their war tomorrow.
But the cartoonists, like Roosevelt, seem to be suffering from
severe cases of far-sightedness. They can distinguish events much
more clearly at 4,000 miles than in their own front yards.
And their far-sightedness seems to affect not merely their eyes
but their feelings. Their horror, sympathy and indignation are most
easily and immensely aroused at the plight of Marshal Mannerheim –
murderer of tens of thousands of Finnish workers and peasants –
and the plight of Polish colonels and landlords – inventors of
modern pogroms (not to mention Chinese cities bombed by planes and
ammunition constructed in their factories), but they have only G-men
and cops for the conspirators in Minneapolis and Cleveland who want,
of all things, a little food, and medicine for their children.
And while quietly preparing the new WPA bill with the half-billion
cut, the administration announces – not so quietly – that
at the least half a billion will have to be added to the armament
appropriations. Somehow, when you stop to think about it, it’s
not so easy to see just exactly where this whole policy differs from
the Goering guns-not-butter principle.
Doubtless we should sympathize with Roosevelt: with all the mighty
events in Europe and Asia to keep him busy, he probably has no time
left to worry about a dozen million unemployed and their families at
home. But the unemployed themselves, not having jobs to waste their
energies on, can profitably devote some time to the question of how
they are going to continue living.
In reply to Roosevelt’s weekly declarations to the world
about democracy and humanity, the unemployed might well issue
statements of their own on such subjects as “A job and a decent
living for every worker”, “All war funds to the
unemployed”, “A thirty dollar weekly minimum income for
every worker, employed or unemployed”, “Expropriate the
Sixty Families, and use the money for a gigantic scheme of public
works” ... And if the statements did not receive the notice
that Roosevelt is granted in the press, militant action under the
banner of such statements will be sure to do so.
Nor will such action by the unemployed be separated from the
struggle against the war itself. The fight against the war is the
fight against the war-makers and their whole rotten system. The War
Deal plans to reduce the unemployed to an outlaw, coolie caste.
Successful resistance to these plans by the unemployed will be their
heaviest blow at the war.
 



The CIO’s Legislative Program for 1940, which was
made public this week, deserves careful study. However inadequate we
may think it, however much we may disagree with part or all of it,
its contrast to the Platform of American Industry (the
manifesto of the National Association of Manufacturers that I
discussed last week) is immediately apparent and in all respects
favorable to the CIO. The CIO document says something, and
what it says is relevant to the concrete realities of present-day
life. The N.A.M. said nothing; its platform is a meaningless jumble
of abstract rhetoric. There is little doubt that the CIO deliberately
intends to have its program appear in the public eye as the direct
challenger of that of the bosses.
 
The C.I.O. States the Problems
John L. Lewis has many times proved himself a sensitive reflector
of the moods of the workers in this country. This, indeed, is the
source of his great strength and superiority as a labor leader. (That
he ruthlessly exploits and perverts these moods for reactionary ends
is another matter.) He is the shrewdest of opportunists, riding on
the crest of proletarian mass sentiment. It was in this way that he
took triumphant leadership of the industrial union movement, leaving
behind in his wake the case-hardened old fogies.
The new CIO Legislative Program gives witness once again to Lewis’
sensitivity. In clear and open fashion, the Program states,
and states correctly, the really major problems facing the American
working class. Every worker will find himself in agreement on the
statement of problems. There is no twaddle about “Hull’s
trade treaties” or “balanced budgets” or “municipal
corruption,” with which the boss press is now filled in an
effort to confuse the people, but: the war, jobs, and democratic
rights.
“The Congress of Industrial Organizations urges for
the serious consideration by the Federal Congress a legislative
program based upon certain fundamental objectives; (1) The United
States must keep out of involvement in the foreign wars; (2) The
attention of this country and the energies of our Government,
industrial and labor leaders of this country, must be directed toward
the immediate solving of the problem of unemployment; (3) The
democratic rights and institutions of this country must be preserved
and maintained; and (4) There must be continued assurance and
protection of the rights of labor to organize and bargain
collectively as the cornerstone for the preservation and extension of
any economic and social program.”
These points are elaborated in the body of the program. In
addition there are sections on the Wagner Act, the Fair Labor
Standards Act, Social Security, Health, Housing and Taxation. So far
as they go, no exception can be taken to what is advocated in these
sections. The demands, it is true, do not in any case go far enough
if we judge them in terms of the needs of the masses, but their
direction is undoubtedly right. As a matter of fact, they are more
adequate and enlightened than I remember in any comparable CIO or AFL
document in recent years.
In passing, it is worth observing that the old CIO policy of
calling for “no amendment” to the Wagner Act, as the
means of fighting against reactionary attempts at amendment, has been
changed to a counterattack. The CIO now demands amendments of its own
directed toward strengthening the Act in labor’s interests by
providing criminal penalties for employers’ offenses against
the Act, prohibition of government contracts to firms violating the
Act, and prohibition of the splitting up of industrial unions.
 
What Is Left Out
From what I have said so far, it might seem that I ought to urge
support and acceptance of the Program as a suitable platform
for the Socialist Workers Party. Indeed, I do believe that most of
its specific proposals ought to be supported by the S.W.P. and by all
workers.
But a Program has a history; and must be judged by what it
omits as well as by what it says. If we examine this CIO Program
from a more extended point of view, we must add new conclusions.
The Program, for example, says nothing about whom labor
must fight against in order to achieve its objectives; nor how to
carry on the fight for them; nor also most important – what the
record of Lewis has been in the past fights for similar objectives.
The Program advocates a minimum of 3.000,000 jobs in public
works plus public jobs for all youth who are out of work and out of
school. In the past also Lewis has been for jobs; but he persuaded
the workers to fight for them by putting all faith in Roosevelt, who
was the man who cut the jobs.
The Program advocates keeping out of war. In the past, too,
Lewis has spoken against getting into the war; but he has been and
remains a part of the Roosevelt machine which is itself the chief
war-making apparatus.
The Program demands democratic rights for labor. But in the
past Lewis has got the workers to support the candidates of the
Republican and Democratic parties, who, once in office, are the ones
who smash those rights.
The Program advocates decent housing, medical service,
social security. But it says not one word against the rotted system
of private property and private profits which, so long as it
continues, guarantees that the workers will never have decent housing
or medical service or social security.
This is the record, and this is why the Program, from the
point of view of Lewis and his fellow-bureaucrats, is a fake,
designed not to organize the workers for a real struggle toward the
objectives of peace, jobs and freedom, but to head off such a
struggle and to keep them tied to things as they are.
This does not mean that the Program should be just
forgotten (as Lewis will forget it when the time for voting comes).
It means that if its progressive aims are to be realized, the
workers, and especially the CIO members, should take the struggle for
those aims out of the hands of Lewis, and fight in closed, militant
and independent class ranks.
 



Anthropologists have carried out many interesting studies of a
widespread historical phenomenon which they sometimes call “cultural
lag.” A cultural lag occurs, to take a simple instance, when a
set of ideas, relevant to a particular social context, persist as
beliefs in the minds and words of men when that context has
disappeared. In the new context, the ideas are a carry-over from an
earlier cultural situation.
No group in society is altogether exempt from such cultural lags.
As I read, last week, the reports of the proceedings of the annual
“Congress of American Industry,” sponsored by the
National Association of Manufacturers, I regretted that no
anthropologist has as yet taken as his subject for examination this
authoritative group of American businessmen, to place in his textbook
alongside the examples he gives from the life of primitive tribes.
These men, so “practical,” ruthless and flexible in
their business conduct, are in a true sense of the word primitive in
their entire ideology. Their system of general ideas continues to be
merely a re-hash of the concepts of the “classical economics”
of a century ago, referring to the early stages of industrial
capitalism, without the slightest significant relation to
contemporary society. Not a single one of them is capable of giving
any scientific or philosophic illumination to the problems of today,
not even to their own problems. Their ideas are as outmoded as would
be a chemist’s who talked about “phlogiston” or an
electro-physicist who argued about an “electrical fluid.”
Their ideal is, in their own words, that of “normal economic
processes, unhampered by artificial restraints”: the ideal,
that is, of the immediate followers of Ricardo.
 
The Wisdom of our Masters
This year’s Congress of American Industry adopted, with a
unanimous flourish, a grandiose Platform of the Congress of
American Industry, the Magna Charta, presumably, of the N.A.M.
Few recorded documents have ever been emptier.
There is no lack, of course, of self-confidence:
“It must be made clear to the public that
industry’s enlightened self-interest is linked inextricably
with the welfare of all of these other elements and with the welfare
of the nation of the whole.”
Nor any absence of tried and trusted phrases:
“Industrial management must continue to do all in
its power to keep alive the faith of the public in the traditional
American principles of free enterprise, as the guarantor of
individual opportunity and security.”
But, incredible as it might seem, the entire platform does not
mention in a single word or phrase either unemployment or the war!
Nor, indeed, is there any concrete analysis of anything.
Yet, from another point of view, this Platform is not
without a purpose, and this purpose at the same time explains why it
cannot be other than stupid.
Eight requisites for achieving the “goal” of industry
are listed. The first two of the requisites are as follows:
“1. Maintenance of individual initiative and free
enterprise ...
“2. Recognition of the social value of the profit
motive as a powerful incentive to all productive effort and of the
economic need for profits in industry sufficient to maintain and
expand existing enterprise.”
These are the polite words in which businessmen refer to
capitalism. Placing these two requisites as first in achieving their
goal means simply: for us, capitalist private property rights come
first, and everything else is subordinated to them, everything else
will be sacrificed to them.
With this as their central purpose, they could not possibly go on
to any scientific analysis of the economy. If they did, they would
only be able to prove that unemployment, starvation, misery, war,
national and international chaos are what follow from their purpose;
they would have to expose themselves to the public, and – what
is painful for many of them – also to themselves. Therefore,
they can only fall back on vague generalities and the slogans of Adam
Smith.
The cultural lag in the ideas of these men symbolizes accurately
the fact that the men themselves and the purposes which they try to
fulfill in the world have come into insurmountable conflict with any
sane and decent plan for the re-organization of society in the
interests of mankind as a whole.
 
The N.A.M. and Washington
There is another notable feature of the Platform and, for
the most part, of the speeches at the Congress. As compared with
former years, the tone is extremely mild. From 1935 until last year
there were always a number of bitter attacks on the Roosevelt
administration and its policies. This year, the administration was
hardly mentioned, and objections to its policies took the form
usually of friendly advice rather than sharp criticism.
There seem to be two chief reasons for this important change. In
the first place, these men, so stupid in general ideas but shrewd in
practical affairs, know that the New Deal is buried. They do not,
like Dubinsky or Hillman or the New Leader, bury their heads
in a dream of the past, when it comes to a problem of dollars and
cents. They are well satisfied with the Roosevelt reaction of the
last year, so far as it has gone to date. Naturally they still have
their demands: one of the planks in their platform is their way of
calling for abolition of the closed shop. But the bogeyman of
Roosevelt as a “serious threat to business,” which
haunted some of them, is by now dispelled.
And, secondly, they are, in their own way, worried about the war.
Their fears were expressed by Ernest T. Weir, who has spoken
similarly on several occasions during recent months. Dimly they grasp
their terrible dilemma: that they, the rulers of America, cannot live
without plunging the nation into the war; and yet that they may not
find themselves and their system still living when the war is over.
They do not know how to solve this dilemma, which is in fact
insoluble. And many of them are beginning to believe that they will
have to turn the war-job over to Roosevelt, who seems so confident
that he can handle it.
 



TO THE EDITORS
Sirs:
One of the distinguishing characteristics of the Trotskyist press has been its scrupulous avoidance of character assassination, personal vilification or libel in its disputes with serious political opponents. Unlike the Stalinist publications, The New International and the Socialist Appeal have, in the past, always attempted to conduct their polemics on the plane of intellectual decency. Unhappily, this is no longer true.
In your January issue, Professor James Burnham and Max Shachtman in their article Intellectuals in Retreat (to which I shall reply elsewhere) have been guilty of a disgraceful and libellous personal characterization to myself. In this article your authors declare: “We understand that Harrison’s ringing break with Marxism [sic!] in the New Leader followed negotiations for a well deserved appointment in the Federal Housing Administration.” The method of presentation employed in this gratuitous remark is obviously evasive and cowardly, typical of the sort of under-handed innuendo which frequently appears in the Daily Worker. Standing by itself it is doubtful if this statement is actionable. However, elsewhere in their article your authors continue on the same tack: “But then, it [my disassociation from the Trotskyist movement] had to be delivered openly if the unemployment crisis in the United States was to be solved, at least so far as Mr. Harrison is concerned.” No intelligent reader (and your readers are intelligent) in the light of these remarks and the general frame of reference to myself throughout the entire article can fail to arrive at the following conclusions. First, that because I was unemployed or threatened with unemployment I wrote the New Leader articles in the hope that as a result I would secure a position with the Federal Government; second, that the United States Housing Authority negotiated to bribe me as payment for these articles; third, that the opinions set forth in these articles do not represent my honest opinions and convictions and that consequently I am an author whose political and social opinions are for sale to the highest bidder and hence without value.
The remarks of your authors referred to above are deliberate and wilful lies, utterly without basis in fact and were inserted in their article for the apparent purpose of discrediting me with my readers. And because it is imperative to my reputation as a writer that these wilfully damaging remarks be corrected, I offer the following facts concerning my career in low-rent public housing.

For nearly five years I have participated in the low-rent housing movement in America in an official capacity. From the beginning of 1934 until the end of 1938 I was director of public relations for the New York City Housing Authority. I am the author of brochures on this subject which are considered as authoritative and are used as supplementary text material in many universities and colleges throughout the country. I am so well known in this field and my services as a writer and lecturer on the subject are so much in demand that my colleagues in housing (who, unfortunately, do not read The New International) would be vastly amused at the suggestion that I would be offered a housing position in payment for an attack on an obscure political party.
 
Messers Burnham and Shachtman for years have been aware of my official standing in housing. On more than one occasion Mr. Shachtman has called upon me for personal advice on the question. On several occasions during the past three years I have lectured on the subject at New York University, where Professor Burnham teaches. On the basis of this it is evident that both your authors were aware that I have long been engaged in this field and that, consequently, no political writing of any sort is required for me to secure a position in the professional field in which I specialize.
 
I was in no danger of unemployment at the time that the New Leader articles were written, as a matter of fact I had received an offer to go with the United States Housing Authority almost immediately after its inception in November 1937. As a matter of fact I served as a special consultant to it on more than one occasion during the summer of 1938. My work is well known and favorably received by the heads of the USHA. Employees of this agency are either Civil Service or chosen for their achievements in this highly technical and specialized field. The assertion that the United States Housing Authority would make a deal with one of its employees or future employees calling for an attack upon Trotskyism is not only libellous but absurd. The staff of the USHA includes persons of all political shadings and even includes two Trotskyists.
 
I resigned from the New York City Housing Authority on a question involving procedure. My acceptance of the USHA offer actually involved a loss in income of nearly $2,000 per year; this hardly can be construed as “payment” for services rendered.

Information regarding appointments and salaries of Government employees are public property and are available even to writers of The New International; if Burnham and Shachtman were interested in the truth the information above could easily have been verified. Instead, however, they preferred to publish a malicious and libellous statement. In view of the foregoing I have no other alternative but to make the following demands upon you. These demands, of course, are made without prejudice to future action on my part. They are as follows: (a) that this letter be published in full in the February, 1939, issue of The New International and that it be as prominently displayed as the offending article containing the statements referred to above, and, (b) that the editors publish a full and complete retraction, and, (c) that Professor Burnham and Mr. Shachtman, in the same issue publish a public apology. Unless this is done, and unless I receive a satisfactory reply to this letter from you within one week from today, I shall be compelled to take legal action.



 


Very truly yours,
Charles Yale HARRISON
 WASHINGTON, D.C., Jan. 18, 1939
  




A Reply
Charles Yale Harrison,
 Public Relations Counsel,
 United States Housing Authority,
 Washington, D. C.
Sir:
We are glad to print your letter in accordance with our tradition of granting all the necessary space for reply to all opponents against whom we polemize and not in accordance with the rather more widely practiced tradition to which you appeal—that of calling the cops in the attempt to silence revolutionists.
We imagine that some of our readers may be interested in these selected details from your financial autobiography. More of them, we feel, would have wished to read your replies to the not unimportant historical and political questions raised in our article.
Like you, we regret your temporary wage-cut, but take cheer. Experience in these matters has shown that your present employers, like their prototypes everywhere, know how to reward renegades. We feel sure that your achievements in ballyhooing the phoney Roosevelt housing program in order to grease the ways for the war policy of the Fourth New Deal, will not go unnoticed.
You write that you are “the author of brochures on this subject [housing] which are considered as authoritative”. It is a pity that you did not provide our readers with a full bibliography. They would have been interested in a number of your previously-expressed opinions of the social role of housing programs under capitalism, especially of the New Deal program in this country.
You naturally believe that in your attack on revolutionary Marxism you would get further in a courtroom than in the columns of the labor press. We on our part prefer the latter but would not find ourselves at all dismayed at the need of inquiring into these matters further under juridical auspices.



 


James BURNHAM
Max SHACHTMAN



 



About three weeks ago a special attack bomber, newly developed by the Douglas Aircraft Company, crashed during a test flight in California. The incident would scarcely have been noticed had not astonished onlookers pulled from the burning wreckage the injured body of a man who turned out to be Paul Chemidlin, representative of a French governmental air mission assigned to purchase military planes in this country. Chemidlin’s presence in this country, and his purpose, were a closely guarded Administration secret.
During the same week, a test pilot reported that in a Curtiss-Wright pursuit plane he had achieved the incredible speed of 600 miles per hour. Very few of the news dispatches that carried this story mentioned that this plane was one of several hundred on order by the French government.
 
Secret White House Conferences
William Bullitt, Ambassador to France, and Joseph Kennedy, Ambassador to Great Britain, left their posts a couple of months ago and have since been in this country. When they first arrived, they went at once to Warm Springs, Georgia, to report to the President. No news of this conference was released: the conference was secret. They later attended several discussions at the White House, and testified before Congressional Committees. Both the discussions and the testimony were secret.
The Military Affairs Committee of the Senate has been meeting almost continuously since Congress opened. A stream of General Staff officers, diplomats. War and State Department representatives has appeared before it. All of the key sessions have been secret.
The members of the Military Affairs Committee were summoned to the White House on Tuesday, January 31. For more than an hour they met with the President. They were told to regard everything spoken at that meeting as – secret. When reports nonetheless leaked out as to what had transpired, these were three days later brazenly denied by Roosevelt; but along with the denial there was not a single word about what had actually been said at the Tuesday conference.
Last year a number of authoritative British representatives came to this country to visit the White House, including Runciman (subsequently hero of the rape of Czechoslovakia), Montagu Norman (head of the Bank of England), Anthony Eden, and several military attaches. No news of what transpired at any of these meetings has ever been published. They were all secret.
* * *
When the Bolsheviks took power in November 1917, one of their first official acts was to publish to the world all of the secret treaties, alliances and agreements of the Tsarist regime. They made remarkably instructive reading for the workers of all the warring nations.
Those documents showed the true nature of “wars for democracy.” They told what “democracy” means to imperialists. The undercover, double-crossing deals for colonies, mandates, spheres of influence, rights of exploitation, were duly listed. The phrases about “civilization” and “freedom” were omitted: those were reserved for the public speeches.
Men who have nothing to hide do not need secrecy. The Bolsheviks told, and tell, the truth to the masses because they have nothing to hide from the masses. Their aims, their full aims, are entirely open, for every worker to know and to judge.
 
Workers Must Demand Full Accounting
But imperialism can never tell the truth. For public consumption it offers only the multitudinous lies of its demagogues. Its real aims and plans are mentioned only behind the locked doors of secret chambers. Imperialism cannot tell the truth openly because if it did the masses would recognize their real enemy and would turn their anger away from the scapegoats conveniently provided and direct it against that enemy, against their own imperialist government.
All conspiracies are nourished in secrecy. The great conspiracy of the Roosevelt government through which it hopes to dragoon the people once more into a war for the salvation of the Sixty Families is no exception. The secrets will remain until the workers themselves bring the imperialist conspirators to their full accounting.
 



While we draw up our final accounting of the Civil war in Spain, resolved that no bitter lesson of the staggering defeat shall be left unlearned, we must not forget to leave open a column for the record of Franklin Roosevelt. Roosevelt, you will have noticed from the papers, is soon to be leading us on the crusade to wipe fascism off the face of the earth. Before we put ourselves wholly into his hands, it would be circumspect to know as much as we can about our leader.
 
“A State of War” ... China and Spain
Shortly after the Spanish civil war began, Roosevelt, acting under the authority granted to the President under the provisions of the Neutrality Act, clamped down a governmental embargo on the shipments of munitions to either side. This step was in no way required by the Neutrality Act. The Neutrality Act states that an embargo must be applied when “a state of war exists”; but it leaves to the President the definition of just when that may be. It might seem absurd to argue over whether a “state of war” existed in Spain; but parliamentary language is often an absurdity.
The proof that responsibility for the embargo rests directly on Roosevelt, that his action was not required by the Neutrality Act, is furnished, of course, by the fact that so far as he is concerned no state of war has to this day existed in China, and consequently no embargo has been imposed on the Far Eastern combatants.
The effect of the embargo on Spain is notoriously known. It cut munition shipments to the Loyalists virtually to a smuggled minimum, since no nations except Mexico and occasionally on a small scale France would carry out their trans-shipment from the United States. When it was discovered that a few airplanes and machine guns were reaching Madrid through Mexico, suits were immediately instituted against the shippers in this country.
 
But the Embargo Did Not Hurt Franco
Trans-shipments to Franco, in contrast, were an everyday occurrence. Boat after boat sailed away from U.S. ports, paid a legalizing courtesy call to a Portuguese, Channel or North Sea harbor, and discharged their loads in Franco territory. Especially numerous were the neat black bombs which, taking off from Baltimore, ended their journeys among the mangled bodies of the women and children of Valencia or Madrid or Barcelona.
When the volunteers began leaving this country on a large scale to join the International Brigade, the comment of Roosevelt’s State Department was a declaration that all American citizens fighting in a “foreign army” would have their passports cancelled and would lose their citizenship, and that non-citizens would not be permitted to return. Only the pressure of mass opinion compelled this threat to lapse into passivity.
 
American Consuls Protected ... Property
During the war the U.S. consular officials have remained on the job. Their chief assignment has been to keep a careful eye on American property – International Telephone & Telegraph’s monopoly, the plants of General Motors ... They have made clear to the Loyalists that whoever was to win the war, the U.S. corporations intended to guard their own; and thus they contributed to the sabotage and elimination of workers’ ownership and control, the weakening of which so irretrievably undermined the anti-fascist struggle.
In short, with respect to the Spanish civil war Roosevelt has played exactly the same part as Chamberlain and Blum-Daladier. He is merely one other sworn member of the gang. Through his telegraphic and diplomatic intervention, Roosevelt was as fully present at Munich as if he also had sat around the green table, and he participated as directly in the bloody deal. In the same way he was a member with full if not formalized rights in the infamous Non-intervention Committee through which imperialism did its strangling and choking of the Spanish workers and peasants. Wherein did his policy differ from that of Chamberlain? Only in the slightly different brand of demagogy used to put it across.
 
Roosevelt Did Not Betray His Own Interests
Was Roosevelt, then, one of the “betrayers” of the Spanish workers? Let us not be naive, or hypocritical. A man can betray only his own cause; when he helps defeat the enemy he is not a betrayer but a good soldier. And Roosevelt’s cause is not the cause of the Spanish workers.
To Roosevelt, “the defense of democracy” quite correctly means, when translated into more concrete language, the defense of the interests of U.S. imperialism. Faced with the actual choice in Spain, U.S. imperialism – like every other imperialism – and Roosevelt as its governmental director preferred the victory of Franco as the lesser evil. They did so because, in spite of what Browder and Norman Thomas and The Nation tried to tell them, they knew that the only alternative to a Franco victory was not a victory for the bourgeois-democratic government of Negrin but the victory of the Spanish proletarian revolution. And anything, anything whatever, is for imperialism, for any imperialism, preferable to the proletarian revolution.
As always in serious matters, not words or ideals, but the class criterion proved to be decisive.
 



During the past year, Stalinism has become the chief agent of Yankee imperialism among the Latin American masses. Committed to advocacy and support of Roosevelt’s coming war, Stalinism is thereby committed also to the steps needed for the preparation of the war. Primary among these is the firm alignment of Latin America as a base both for materiel and man power.
In order to accomplish this, the people of Latin America must be persuaded that the United States is their friend and protector, and that their enemies are neither at home nor in North America, but across the wide sea, in Tokyo and Rome and above all in Berlin. This is the ‘Good Neighbor’ doctrine, as put forth identically by Roosevelt and the Stalinists.
It was in the light of this doctrine that the Stalinist press covered the Lima conference. The doctrine itself has been further elaborated at the recently concluded conventions of the Communist parties of Cuba and Mexico.
 
Browder Invents a New Theory
The doctrine, however, is rather a stiff dose for the masses in Latin America to swallow straight. In their own lives and on their own backs they learn a contrary truth: that Yankee imperialism is their main enemy. They have felt its lash swung by United States marines and plantation owners and gun-boats and overseers and Yankee-controlled puppet tyrants, It is not so easy to persuade them that overnight their main enemy has lost all of its spots.
The Stalinists have evidently noticed this persistent fly in their social-imperialist ointment, and, not being able to get rid of it, are trying out a new device to prevent its being noticed. This device is nothing short of a brand new theory of imperialism, a great and comforting improvement on the old-fashioned views of Marx and Luxemburg and Lenin.
Browder and Laborde announced the theory at the convention of the Mexican Communist party. It goes something like this: The Roosevelt government is not merely non-imperialist, but anti-imperialist. It is the representative of the “democratic aspirations of the American masses.” Yankee imperialism has not, however, completely disappeared. It is now administered by the monopoly corporations and Wall Street, and by the political opponents of Roosevelt – the Republicans, conservative Democrats and other varieties of Tories.
 
The Beauties of the New Theory
This new theory is a very neat job indeed. The trouble that the Stalinists have had convincing the Latin American masses that they were no longer oppressed by Yankee imperialism ends. The Stalinists can now say: Of course you are still persecuted by Yankee imperialism. But that imperialism has nothing to do with Roosevelt and his government. It is the imperialism of Wall Street and the Republicans – Tories, of the enemies of Roosevelt.
The way to fight Yankee imperialism, therefore – is to get behind Roosevelt! What a wonderful irony! To support Roosevelt’s coming war is – to fight imperialism, including Yankee imperialism. To be against the war is – to line up in the camp of imperialism.
The awkwardness about the habit of telling lies is that one lie is always tending to contradict another. Lying theories are not exempt from the general rule: one is always refuting another. Let us recall:
In the 1936 elections, as explained by the very welt known Stalinist theory, the New Deal was the army of progress, the Republicans, led by Alfred M. Landon. the troops of reaction. This has continued to be the lineup: New Deal progress versus Republican-Tory reaction.
 
One Lie Plus One Lie Equals Two Lies
Up to date, the most grandiose public expression of Roosevelt’s Good Neighbor policy was the Lima. Conference. According to the new theory of imperialism, it would follow that the Lima Conference would have been fought tooth and nail by the Republicans-Tories and by Wall Street, since the theory declares that the conference was anti-imperialist, hence directed square against the imperialist interests of Wall Street and the Republican-Tories.
But, alas for Stalinism, even the fanciest lies cannot wholly do away with facts.
Without a single exception, every spokesman for Wall Street and the monopoly corporations and the Republicans-Tories came out one hundred percent for the Lima conference. Their praise and rejoicing rang: through the columns of the press and the radio mikes. No anti-New Deal snarl or curse marred the touching unanimity.
Especially noteworthy were the lengthy declarations of Henry L. Stimson, who is – oh, painful memory – the ex-Secretary of State of that well known progressive leader, Herbert Hoover.
And the leading delegate to the conference was (did you remember, Browder, while speaking in Mexico?) none other than Alfred M. Landon.
 



Senator Robert Taft, whose hat is well out in the ring for the Republican Presidential candidacy in 1940, last week repeated the familiar charge that Roosevelt is playing up the foreign situation in order to hide the failure of the New Deal at home. This charge, as an editorial in the Appeal pointed out at the time, is unquestionably true; but it is true in a sense far more profound than that intended by the Republican Senator.
Taft’s differences with Roosevelt are 99% superficial, at bottom little more than a dispute over which set of office-holders shall draw down public pay. But the internal failure of the New Deal is not at all superficial. It represents not the ineffectiveness of the Democratic Party but the chronic, incurable malady of American capitalism. After all, Hoover had three and a half full years after 1929 to demonstrate that the Republicans are every bit as ineffectual as the Democrats. For Roosevelt to concentrate on the “foreign situation” – that is, the war crisis, is no doubt from one point of view a clever party political maneuver. But it is a maneuver that corresponds not merely to factional needs but to the imperative requirements of the American bourgeoisie.
American capitalism is not working. During the past decade, nearly every sort of internal repair job has been tried, and the machine is more creaky and halting than ever. The only chance that the bourgeoisie now sees is an external device – is the war.
Moreover, Roosevelt is succeeding in his maneuver. He is actually turning the eyes of the people away from internal conditions; and no bourgeois opponent is hampering him to any degree, since they all fundamentally share his perspective.
 
A Few Facts and Figures
In the latter half of 1937; the business cycle turned downward. This was most alarming to the bourgeoisie, since the upturn preceding had been brief and had failed by a long shot to equal the 1928–29 level. And the rate of drop in 1937 was twice as fast as the rate in 1929.
The economists and publicists took refuge in magic. They thought they could wish the renewed crisis away by calling it a “recession” instead of a “depression”.
They figured that it would last only a couple of months, and would be followed at once by a much longer; steadier upward movement. Instead, the curve kept going down for almost a year.
With a sigh of relief they watched it turn up again last Spring. Now the predictions were all for a number of years of expansion.
In December the Federal Reserve Board index figure, the key number for the government economists, based upon a weighted analysis of production, prices, purchases, credit turnover, etc., reached 104. The almost universal expectation was that the 1939 average would be well over this level: the government experts themselves predicted a slight fall in January and February, with a rise from then on to a level of from 108–112 in December 1939.
Nothing of the sort has happened. The estimate for the April figure is 94, a drop of nearly 10% from December.
Other important indices show the same trend. The Times index, which is derived from the extremely interesting theory of R. Dana Skinner and based chiefly upon the rate of money and credit turnover, has since the beginning of the year dropped about the same percentage as the F.R.B. index. The Herald-Tribune index has gone from 85 to 73. Stock prices have dropped sharply (from a high for the year, in the Times average, of 107 to a current 92).
 
Money on the Unemployed Rolls
The state of health of capitalism is revealed most directly by the amount of “new” financing (as opposed to refunding operations) that takes place, and particularly by the amount of such new financing that goes into capital goods. Never since 1930 has new financing risen to even half of the 1926–29 average and it has for the most part been held to a sixth or a seventh. The credit lies yawning and idle in the great banks and can be used only to buy the government bonds which try to fill in the empty gap left by the absent new enterprise.
Production, purchases and even employment, though declining, are still running substantially, higher than the extremely low levels of the corresponding weeks last year. But new financing is averaging considerably less than even the impoverished rate of 1939. So far, the average in 1939 has been only $27,000,000 monthly as against $36,000,000 during the same months last year. And, though the statistics have not yet been compiled, the percentage of this meager sum going into capital goods is apparently very low.
All this is happening in spite of the fact that the renewed program of government expenditures, voted last year after the period of curtailment, is just now getting into full effect on the market. The pump no longer primes.
 
Just Around the Corner
In short, as every serious business man knows, the situation on the internal front is hopeless.
Therefore every serious businessman is lifting his eyes from the internal front. During recent weeks, all the “business services” have been returning again and again to the theme: how to get your business ready for the war.
The Tax Research Institute of America, to take a single example, is pushing its new encyclopedia, Adjusting: Your Business (for the war) by direct mail advertising on most handsome engraved stationery.
“How will your business be ‘utilized’ for wartime needs?
“To enable your business to function during a war emergency, the Institute has prepared an analysis to show you precisely what to do.
“This analysis of business during wartime will be ready next week, and it will help you prepare right now for problems such as these –
“... (2) how can government contracts be secured during wartime?
“(3) what will happen to labor costs, wage demands, unionization, strikes, and collective bargaining? ...
“Few executives realize that the Industrial Mobilization Plan is ready, to go into operation almost overnight, if a war is declared ...”
 



Civil and democratic rights are not at all a luxury for labor, nor valuable merely for their own sake. They are essential to labor’s very existence, to the workers’ ability even to get enough food to live on. Without them labor cannot fight; and, as things are, without fighting labor is reduced to the status of miserable slaves.
The key task of fascism is to abolish democratic rights, especially the rights of labor: the right to organize, to strike, to picket, to demonstrate, to speak and write freely. When these rights are gone, it is a child’s job for the bosses to drive down wages and to lift hours.
Every worker has, therefore, good cause for alarm at the concerted and growing attack on democratic rights which has been taking place in this country during the past six months. Far from receding in the days to come, there is every reason to believe that this attack will become more intense, growing bolder with every partial success.
 
Legal Straightjackets for Labor
Through a referendum vote in the November elections, a new labor law, backed by the Associated Farmers, passed in the State of Oregon; and a similar law was narrowly defeated in California. This law, which has not yet been firmly enforced, would make genuine unionism virtually impossible. A long list of prohibitions so restrict the right to strike, to organize, picket and boycott that the unions would be unable to get to first base.
A few weeks ago, Minnesota passed an elaborate law, incorporating many of the clauses of the Oregon statute. Special features of the Minnesota law, such as those forbidding “interference with transportation” are aimed directly at the Drivers’ Union, backbone of the Minnesota labor movement. A modified form of compulsory arbitration is introduced, and strikes cannot be called until after a whole series of notices and delays totalling at least a month. Mass picketing is illegalized.
A similar law has recently been put on the books in Wisconsin. Laws along the same lines, moreover, have been introduced this year into the legislatures of more than a dozen additional States. Others are scheduled, and many threaten to pass before the year is out.
 
The Courts Do Their Bit
As always, the courts, servile hirelings of the bosses, are well up in the front of the drive against the rights of labor. The year has been dotted with brazen decisions from one side of the country to another.
The Supreme Court itself set the fashion in the notorious Fansteel case. The illegality of sit-downs was made unambiguous. The doctrine was laid down that a worker who is framed up on any charge whatever – no matter how trivial – has no legal redress against his boss, however many crimes the boss may have committed against the worker.
In Philadelphia, the fantastic decision in the Apex Hosiery case, rendered under the anti-trust laws, attempts to find a means for wiping out unions financially whenever they conduct a militant strike.
In California, Illinois, New York and elsewhere, court decisions have struck at secondary picketing and boycotts, at the presence on the picket line of anyone not an employee of the shop being picketed, at mass picketing, at the closed shop.
 
Congress Joins the Parade
A number of remarkable bills directed against democratic rights have been introduced into this session of Congress, and several of them have already passed at least one House. Many are concerned with aliens – including among aliens all who have not been granted their final citizenship papers. One of these, which has been approved by the House of Representatives, makes any alien subject to immediate deportation who advocates “any change” in the present form of government. Not “overthrow” or “violent change” or “fundamental change” but any change whatever.
Another, now being debated, would establish concentration camps for aliens convicted of any criminal charge – and convicting an alien of a criminal charge is a cinch when you set your mind to it.
A third bill, with a good chance of being enacted at this session, makes a crime of any attempt to influence the army or navy. Under this bill all antiwar propaganda – since it might conceivably come to the attention of a soldier or sailor – would be technically illegal.
The President has already deprived all aliens of the right to W.P.A. jobs. A number of Congressmen wish to prohibit the granting of any kind of relief to anyone, citizen or alien, who belongs to an organization advocating a change in the form of government.
A strong bloc of Congressmen are pushing an amendment to the Wagner Act which would illegalize the closed shop, and others which would, under the name of “undue coercion”, prohibit militant union organization and action.
 
The Future of Democratic Rights
The attack which has started against democratic rights is in its first and mildest stage. Under the pressure of the ever-deepening economic crisis and the swiftly approaching war, it will advance more swiftly and brutally. This we know in advance, and it need not surprise us.
But what is in the highest degree alarming is the almost complete passivity of the labor movement in the face of the attack. If labor does not swing soon into action it will be an accomplice in its own destruction. And the time to act is now; tomorrow the infant may have grown to a giant too great to cope with.
 



The speech on the 1940 elections delivered by Earl Browder to the Ninth National Convention of the Young Communist League, and immediately issued as a pamphlet, carries the very impressive title, How the People Can Win. Nowhere, however, is it specified what it is that the people can win, nor what people are going to win it, whatever it may be.
The speech was reported in the general press as advocating the re-election of Roosevelt. This is not strictly accurate. Week by week, the Stalinists grow more modest in the “demands” that they put to the American ruling class. The ruling class doesn’t like socialism, so they give up socialism. A labor party might stir up class divisions, so they abandon the labor party. A popular front is rather advanced for the United States, so Roosevelt and his special brand of “democratic front” will do as a substitute. But even Roosevelt is a bit leftish for these days, so the Stalinists will be content with whatever the “New Deal wing” of the Democratic Party has to offer.
 
Browder as Democratic Elder
A candid reading of Browder’s speech might easily suggest that Browder is making a bid for a place on the Democratic Party’s national committee. More than half of it is devoted to explaining how the Democratic Party can win the 1940 election. Jim Farley is doubtless studying it carefully between stops on his tour. Jim, after all. Is hardly more than an amateur in these questions; and, besides, does not have the benefit of the private Kremlin cables.
“The progressive and democratic majority” in this country, which put Roosevelt into office, “is a coalition between the Democratic Party and the independent radical one-third of the electorate”. The Democratic Party can win the next elections if it continues this coalition through defeating the Garner-Glass-Wheeler combination in the convention. “The radical one-third of the voters,” for whom Browder so authoritatively speaks, “find it necessary, therefore, to wish for and work for victory for the Roosevelt wing in the Democratic Convention”.
Here, then, is set the task of the Stalinists and all other men of good will for the next period: to wish for and work for victory for the Roosevelt wing in the Democratic Convention. You can see now why any attack against the Roosevelt relief slashes is obviously the work of the U.S. Fifth Column.
 
Looking the Gift Horse Over
But what is it that “the people” are going to. win by dutifully returning the Democratic Party to office? and what have they won by keeping it there during the past six years? Search most minutely, and you will have a hard time finding any answer to these seemingly appropriate questions in Browder’s speech.
The people, one would imagine, want to end unemployment and to get jobs. But not a word does Browder say about unemployment and jobs, not a single word. Can it be that “the people” to whom Browder is talking already have their jobs?
Browder can hardly, at this date, pretend that the New Deal has ended unemployment. Nor does he feel called upon to claim that it is going to. Browder’s policy is firm: it is not going to be affected by a little item like ten or fifteen million unemployed.
You might think that “the people” would be interested in the campaign against the democratic rights of labor that is now advancing on a national scale. But there is no mention of it in Browder’s speech. Indeed there is no mention of any economic or social issue, save for a housing program which Browder discusses not to advocate but only to argue that such programs help and do not hurt capitalism.
In fact, the outstanding point of Browder’s speech is not his brazen, shameless acceptance of outright capitalist politics, but the appearance in this speech of the sharpest criticisms in several years of Roosevelt and New Dealism. That these criticisms directly contradict his conclusions does not, of course, bother so old a hand at dialectics as Browder.
He goes out of his way to stress the “retreats ‘ of the New Deal, which “unquestionably weaken and demoralize the mass support of the New Deal, and open the way for reactionary demagogy”. He objects to “the weakening and partial withdrawal of governmental intervention in economy, the retreat made by the New Deal under the pressure of monopoly capital’s attack”. These are strong words from Elder Statesman Browder, not heard for many a moon.
 
Browder Names His Price
But the tone gets really sharp in discussing foreign policy:
“We cannot fail to note and criticize those mistakes, weaknesses and inconsistencies in the Administration’s execution of these policies in practical life. Gravest of these was the unforgivably stupid and criminal surrender to the Chamberlain ‘non-intervention’ policy toward Spain, brought to a climax by the indecent haste with which Franco was handed unconditional recognition ... Thus did the Roosevelt Administration gratuitously smear itself with complicity in the fascist aggression and destruction of democracy in Spain ...; by this act the Administration weakened and undermined its own prestige and moral authority ...”
Thus does Browder echo Stalin’s speech to the Soviet Party Congress, criticizing democratic imperialisms to cover up overtures to Hitler; thus does he attempt to safety-valve growing discontent among his own following with the pro-Roosevelt policy; and thus does he reveal the real crux of his own proposals.
“Thus, it becomes a necessity of American national security to ... create a solid foundation for the inevitable cooperation between the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.”
This is what it all boils down to; the rest is so much hogwash. Give the Kremlin an alliance, says Browder, keep a pro-Soviet orientation in the State Department, and forget the rest; forget unemployment and wages and democratic liberties. Never mind the candidate or even the party. Give me that, and only that. On that basis, I’ll go along.
 



Last week, the Senate, by the overwhelming vote of 62 to 14, passed the new Agriculture Appropriation Bill at a total of $1,218,000,000. This, sum raises the figure first proposed by the Administration and already acted on by the House nearly $400,000,000. The Bill now goes to conference. There is every reason to believe that the figure voted by the Senate will be accepted by the House with only slight if any modifications; and that the Bill will then be signed by the President.
Only $290,000,000 of this vast sum is allotted to : the administration of the multitudinous activities of the Department of Agriculture. $928,000,000 is to be used for what Senator Frazier – a warm advocate of the Bill – openly called a “dole” for the farmers. This dole wears various disguises. $500,000,000 goes to the conveniently named “conservation” program. Under this, farmers are paid benefits for transferring acreage from basic crops to certain soil-conserving crops (a verbal variant of’ other Rooseveltian “scarcity plans” which were outlawed by the Supreme Court).
$203,000,000 will go to finance the Federal Surplus Commodities Corporation. This agency tries to keep up the prices of agricultural commodities through market manipulations, withdrawing surpluses from the market, and subsidizing exports. The remaining $225,000,000 will be used for what are called “parity” payments: a form of direct gift to farmers cooperating with the Administration’s program.
This $1,218,000,000 is the largest sum ever voted by the government for agriculture. In the light of the howls for economy by business and many Congressmen, and in contrast with the slashing of relief appropriations, the agricultural appropriation deserves reflection.
 
The New Deal Confesses Failure
No one at all acquainted with agriculture in this country will deny that the majority of farmers are in need of aid. Among the lower strata of farmers – share croppers and poorer tenants – conditions are so appalling that by comparison the life of a permanently unemployed city worker seems like indecent luxury. A considerable percentage of even the owner-farmers work their 12 to 14 daily hours for little more than enough food to live on: mortgages, taxes, low farm prices guarantee that they have no cash in their pockets from beginning to end of the year.
What is most obvious about the present agriculture bill is its revelation of the entire failure of the New Deal to solve the crisis in agriculture. Congress is now preparing the seventh budget of the Roosevelt regime. There have been six agriculture bills in six years and seemingly endless billions of dollars to try out New Deal “experiments”. And all of the experiments and all of the billions have solved nothing.
All of the acreage withdrawal and “conservation” have not been able to raise prices for farm commodities. Mortgages, debts, interest, back taxes, continue to pile up for the bulk of the farmers. Many of the big farmers have, it is true (it is mainly to them that the benefits and subsidies go) prospered under the Wallace dispensation, but share croppers and small tenants remain on a sub-animal standard of living.
The present bill really admits the failure. Senator Frazier is right in calling the appropriation (apart from the $290,000,000 for administration) a dole; and a dole is not a program – in any field of economy – but the recognition of the absence of a program. The parity and conservation payments and the subsidies do not touch a single one of the causes of the agricultural crisis – in fact, they do not pretend to. They hand around a certain amount of cash (some of it, of course, to those who need it) and that is all. Whiskey may make you forget cancer for a while, but it is not going to cure it.
 
The Farmers as Red Riding Hood
But why is it that Congress, which is so brave about slashing W.P.A. to ribbons, dishes out – Republicans and Democrats alike, with no serious objection from their big business masters – the largest sum on record to the farmers? There is here a little object lesson in the nature of the class struggle.
W.P.A. funds go chiefly to unemployed workers, that is to the proletariat. The farmers are the largest and most important section of the middle classes. Big business knows that its rule will be threatened only by the proletariat; and by the proletariat only when the latter succeeds in winning influence over a considerable part of the middle classes, especially the farmers. Confronted with permanent and deepening economic crises, big business, in order to preserve its rule and its profits, is compelled to strike out first and most of all against the proletariat: by reducing its standard of living and by weakening its powers of organized resistance.
For big business to succeed, a base of popular support is needed. Through this agricultural appropriation, it is hoped to drive a deeper wedge between the workers and the farmers, to prevent the farmers from joining with the workers in a common struggle against big business and its government. The appropriation is a bribe to the farmers, in return for which big business demands that the farmers enlist in the union-busting, wage and relief smashing drive against the proletariat. Not for nothing is the chief reactionary organization in the Far West, financed and controlled by big business, called Associated Farmers.
This, I think, is the fundamental reason – perhaps only half-consciously understood by most Congressmen – for the seeming paradox of cuts in relief to workers and raises in relief to farmers. There is of course a more immediate electoral reason also: Both major parties believe that the farmers’ vote will decide the 1940 election. The proletariat, in part from the very same cause that makes it in the end more decisive, is slower to move than the middle classes. Both old parties apparently believe that the proletariat will remain more or less static during the next year and a half; the majority of the proletariat is evidently (with guarantees from Lewis and Browder) conceded to the Democratic Party. The Republicans will have to take an overpowering percentage of the farmers to win; and neither party consequently wishes to risk farmer displeasure, for all the public talk of economy and unbalanced budgets.
This party jockeying is, however, subordinate to the more basic class perspectives. Indeed, the meaning of this action on agriculture provides an analogue to the scheme of fascism: big business utilizing the middle classes as the mass base in the drive to smash the workers.
 



Any lingering doubts about the real meaning of Roosevelt’s Neutrality Act, which honest men may have held on the basis of Roosevelt’s own message to the Special Session and the Congressional debate which followed, should have been thoroughly cleared up during these few days since the Act’s passage. Anyone in his right mind should now be able to see that Roosevelt’s message was brazen demagogy, and the debate, on both sides, shameless hypocrisy from beginning to end.
Roosevelt and the Congressmen told us beforehand that they were trying to work out the best program for “keeping the United States out of the war.” After the Act became law, not a single commentator tried to keep up the pretense any longer. All of the discussion centered on the questions of how exactly the Act would affect the war, how many hundreds of millions of war orders it would bring, and how world shipping would be reorganized in accordance with it.
In all of the European capitals the passing of the Act was recognized and proclaimed as a smashing victory for England and France. Paris and London didn’t make any bones about it: they told their people how the Act brought the weight of the United States into their side of the scales.
 
What the Act Provides
The Act is supposed to establish elaborate restrictions which will prevent this country from becoming “involved.” As finally amended and passed, the important restrictions boil down to little more than this: travel by U.S. citizens and ships to a small zone in the north of Europe is prohibited. Citizens, if they are of the right sort, can always get special permission. This leaves about ninety U.S. ships, heretofore in the north European trade, to suffer handicap. But even these ninety ships will be able to take care of things as some will be transferred to foreign registrations so that the prohibition will not apply to them. Others will take the place of British and French ships normally sailing in unrestricted zones, which will be transferred to the north Atlantic routes.
There a so many loopholes in the alleged provisions against granting credit that they will serve chiefly to make the war commerce as safe and profitable as possible for U.S. corporations.
The original plan to prohibit U.S. ships from all belligerent ports was dropped. With the exception of the small “danger zone,” they can go anywhere and carry anything except arms. There is no restriction on shipment into Canada.
There are no restrictions of any sort on what U.S. business is permitted to sell to the belligerents. An amendment that would have prohibited the export of poison gas and flame-throwers was howled down in the Senate by a four to one vote. This vote was a rather ironic comment on the moral indignation of our democratic rulers over “inhuman methods of warfare.”
 
One Foot In
With the passing of this Act, the United States has one foot solidly in the war. From now on, that foot will be pulling and straining to drag the other after it.
United States industry becomes part of the armory of Britain and France. Indeed, this is just the way in which the London papers put it.
But the Act is not an isolated event. It fits in exactly with the other moves of the Administration since the war began. The armed forces of the United States are also, in their own way, already in the war. The declaration that the belligerent, Canada, would be defended by the United States against its enemy in effect places a U.S.-manned Maginot Line around Canada. Just as the French Maginot Line, even when no shooting is going on, affects the military balance, so does the declaration on Canada.
Roosevelt’s neutrality is no more genuine than would be that of the biggest bully on the block who, at the beginning of a street fight, would say:
“I am not going to do any hitting, yet. But I am going to supply one of the gangs, with all the rocks and bricks they need. And I am going to keep an eye on my special favorites: they can throw rocks at the other side as much as they want, but if they get any in return, you’ll hear from me.”
 
How Will the Act Affect the War?
It is generally conceded that at the beginning of the war German aviation was superior to both England and France combined, and Germany’s factories were turning planes out at a faster rate than her enemies. This relation would be reversed if and when the flow across the ocean of U.S. planes – which are probably the best in the world – got into full stride.
The experiences of Spain and Poland, and of Ethiopia and China in a less conclusive way, do not show that superiority in the air alone can win a modern war; but they seem to indicate that air superiority is a vital and perhaps necessary factor in winning a victory which is clinched by other means. At the very least, decisive superiority in the air seems able to paralyze transportation and reconnaissance to such an extent as to weaken vastly the ground forces. Whether planes can win out against sea power is not yet established.
Germany is of course fully aware of the alteration in the balance of air power which the U.S. action can bring.
It seems to me to follow, therefore, that within the next week or two – month or two at the longest – Germany will be compelled to “begin the war in earnest.” This need not mean a mass campaign on the western front. But it would mean actions designed to gain and preserve superiority in the air: air bombardments of strategically important objectives (airfields, factories – especially those connected with plane manufacture – docks, key railroad junctions, etc.), and a big-time campaign on and under the sea.
I consequently expect such moves in the very near future. I do not see how they can be avoided. If they do not occur, only one explanation seems to me possible: that, below the diplomatic surface, really serious negotiations are under way between England and Germany, and that Hitler believes these negotiations are going to get results.
 



The dead end which imperialism has reached is shown with striking clarity by the inability of any of the warring powers to state its “war aims.” All the rhetoric of all the propagandists is unable to hide the fact that they cannot tell the people of the world, in simple and concrete terms, what they are fighting
Germany, in line with its “peace offensive,” declared that there was nothing to fight about. What this meant, of course, was that Germany wanted to preserve its conquests while it got ready for new ones. The older Nazi talk about “re-uniting the German race” no longer makes sense, with Czechs and Poles and Slovaks now under Nazi rule.
Chamberlain has been trying to get by with the expressed goal of “wiping out Hitlerism.” This was good for a speech or two, but it wears thin with repetition. Everyone is compelled to ask: what will take the place of Hitlerism? What will guarantee against worse than Hitlerism? Who will do the wiping out and how?
The moral weakness in this inability to state war aims is already being widely felt in the belligerent countries. A clamor is arising – especially, it seems, in England – for something more definite in the way of a perspective and goal. A modest enough request, surely: if we are to die, we should at least be told what we are dying for.
Here and there, publicists, journalists and even statesmen are trying to put some sort of goal into words.
 
The Federal States of Europe
It is of very great interest to observe that, in almost every case, when imaginations get going they reach out toward the notion of a “federated Europe.” Even before the war began, Clarence Streit’s essay along these lines (Union Now) gained considerable popularity and a society has been formed to propagate his plan. In recent weeks, several British writers have presented their varieties of similar schemes.
In his Armistice Day address at Swarthmore College, no less a figure than the Marquess of Lothian, new British Ambassador to Washington, came out for the same slogan. True enough, Lord Lothian is hardly yet a fiery crusader. Nobody, he remarked, had offered any practical scheme of Federation” and a “large-scale European federation” was not yet in sight; but, according to the Times, the Ambassador foresaw the eventual application to Europe of the federal principle tried first on the American Continent a century and a half ago.
True enough, also, Lord Lothian found that “one necessary preliminary is the defeat of totalitarian imperialism.” The British are always careful not to clutter up their wars with ideals; ideals are always a matter for an indefinite future.
But we cannot dismiss this spreading talk about a federated Europe as mere casual daydreaming. There is more to it than that, and we shall find it cropping up more and more prominently. We must be sure to understand what is at issue.
 
The Paralysis of Nationalism
It is a fact that the political organization of Europe into its madhouse of “sovereign” nations makes impossible a free secure and expanding life for the peoples of Europe. And, when today we listen to the Lord Lothians, let us remember that it was the victors of Versailles who fastened on Europe these political lines, without regard to the economic, social or cultural needs of the peoples.
National states, the political form under which a young and vigorous capitalism pushed through the structure of feudalism, have become a most terrible obstacle to mankind. What an overpowering burden it is to Europe: these thousands of customs houses; the blood-sucking tariffs; the dozens of swarming bureaucracies; the border lines of billions of dollars worth of forts, with all the national armies and guns and planes to accompany them; the passports and identity cards and work cards. No rational organization of economic and human resources as a whole is even conceivable under such circumstances. And immeasurable human energies are squandered daily, even in peace-time, to sustain this mad national structure.
And, though these things are most conspicuously true of Europe, they hold for the entire world. Under the conditions of modern science, technique and production, the national state everywhere paralyzes the progress of mankind.
 
But Whose Federation?
This is why we, as socialists, agree a thousand times with the perspective of a federated Europe – we go much further, and call for a federated world.
But the question does not end with the bare concept of a federation. We must ask: who will do the federating?
It is not at all improbable that, whoever wins the war, some sort of federal plan for Europe will be set up. Too many persons have come to realize the impossibility of the nationalist structure; that structure has been proved too dangerously unstable.
But: whose federation?
Hitler, in his own way, has proved himself something of a federalist. If he has the chance, he will, undoubtedly show great talents along federal lines. He has already constructed a federation out of Germany, the Saar, Austria, Czechoslovakia, western Poland. It was, among other things, precisely the insane Versailles-born national structure that permitted him to do so.
And Hitler’s federation of Europe would mean, exactly, the reduction of the national states of Europe to Nazi provinces.
Lord Lothian is now looking forward to a federation. It would differ from Hitler’s only in having it’s capital at London (or possibly Paris) instead of Berlin, and in the reduction of the national states to provinces of Anglo-British instead of German imperialism.
For Lord Lothian and for Hitler, a federated Europe means merely a new name for an advanced type of imperialist tyranny.
If federation is to mean freedom and peace and progress for the peoples of Europe, there is only one basis on which it can be constructed: on the basis of socialism. And there is only one force that can set up such a federation: the workers and peasants of Europe struggling against their imperialist governments and against their war. In that struggle German workers fight not against but alongside of the workers of France and England.
A federated Europe? Yes: this is what we call for as the solution to the war. And we sum up that goal in our great slogan: For a Socialist United States of Europe!
 



It is very difficult to be sure just what has been happening in Prague. The reports sent to this country give the impression of a rather surprising candor. In general, Germany has been permitting the foreign correspondents to send out far more news than have France or Britain. So far the Nazis have not instituted “pre-censorship” of dispatches. This, of course, need not mean very much: “post-censorship,” with its threat of expulsion if the correspondent’s dispatches displease the regime, can be just as effective as pre-censorship; and several American correspondents have, in fact, been recently expelled.
We cannot be sure just how widespread the disturbances have been in Prague itself, nor whether they have extended to other Czech cities. We cannot trust the account of the extent of repressions. Most important, perhaps, of all, we do not know what slogans have been put forward.
Nevertheless, it seems possible to piece a few facts together.
 
The Uneasy Protectorate
The open demonstrations and clashes apparently began a couple of weeks ago, during the celebration of the Czech “independence day.” Prior to this, however, there were indications that trouble was brewing, and the clashes were not unexpected.
The high point was reached in the student riots at the University. What set these off remains obscure. One story is that they began when a Nazi professor in one of the classes insulted the students. A considerable battle seems to have taken place at the University.
There is no reason to believe that the puppet Czech “government-in-exile” had any direct connection with the demonstrations. This is shown by the statement of Jan Masaryk repudiating the actions as “ill-advised” and “premature.”
The Nazis do not seem to have been prepared for disturbances on a scale that these in Prague reached. The dispatches suggest hesitations and shifts in policy. Up to now, they have been trying to utilize the Czech protectorate regime under Hacha, which they set up, and a primarily Czech police force as the main instrument of their rule – supplemented, naturally, by concentration camps and the Gestapo. There were obvious advantages in this policy: it was easier to keep the Czech people divided when Czech cops were used to beat up Czech dissidents, and when a Czech “government” proclaimed the laws and regulations decided on in Berlin.
In the first demonstrations, the Czech police were assigned to “keep order,” and all along Hacha has been calling for quiet. But by the time of the University clash, it had become clear that the Czech police could not do the job, and that many Czechs, especially the students, were not listening to Hacha. In some instances, the police seem to have been going actively over to the side of the demonstrators, as is indicated by the fact that several Czech policemen were shot in the repressions.
It became necessary to send in thousands of Gestapo agents and heavily armed detachments of S.S. men, their equipment including, according to reports, field artillery.
Statements now issuing from Berlin say that the protectorate status may soon be altered in favor of some form of more open, direct and complete Nazi rule.
 
What Is Foreshadowed?
Enough has happened to show that the Czech people have not accepted Nazism, and that they are ready to fight against it. What a commentary these brave students and the others who were with them provide on the cowardly capitulators of the Benes regime who now, as eager servants of the British, presume to call themselves the government of Czechoslovakia!
That the demonstrations began among the students and youth is in accordance with the usual pattern. The most volatile element in the society, their moods change more swiftly. While the broad masses of workers and peasants remain passive, the youth can accomplish only sporadic flare-ups, but their actions are symptoms of what is going on beneath the surface, and symbols of deepening revolt to come.
But what is to come will depend also on the perspective and direction which the movement takes.
Benes states his views from London: the actions in Prague, and others like them, he found, will greatly aid the “democracies” in their prosecution of the war.
What would be the effect if the line of Benes were to be accepted by the Czechs? It would doom them to a terrible failure, and at the same time strengthen Hitler.
If Hitler can present plausible evidence to show to the German people that the Czech anti-Nazi movement is actually inspired by the imperialist enemy-states, whose sole aim is to crush Germany in their own imperialist interests, and is working for the victory of the enemy-states, then the Czechs will appear to the German people as no more than another division in the opposing imperialist armies. In compensation for some undoubted practical difficulties, Hitler would be able to draw the German people closer around himself and his regime. He can say: look, even the Czech workers are your enemies, in the service of the sated imperialists of London and Paris; you have only me to rely upon. And there could be no effective answer to him, for what he would say would be true,
Already Hitler is exploiting these possibilities, and playing up the Prague events as directed from London. The remarks of the traitor, Benes, and the general propaganda of the imperialist democrats about German revolt for the benefit of London and Paris, are what enable Hitler to get away, with his demagogy.
This is why the Czech anti-Nazi movement, if it is to be successful and in the interests of the Czech people, must orient itself on a firmly internationalist perspective, against both war camps. In that light, the German workers, and the workers of France and Britain as well, will be their allies in the struggle against the common enemy.
 



During the past two months both Houses of Congress have passed, and Roosevelt has signed, a regular Naval appropriations bill totalling over $600,000,000. There has also been passed and signed a $350,000,000 bill for the increase of the Army air force.
At the present time, joint committees of the two Houses are ironing out certain minor conflicts in two other bills, both of which are assured of passage within the next week or two: the regular Army appropriation, reaching more than $500,000,000; and a bill making available approximately $50,000,000 for the expansion and construction of naval bases.
Two further bills are also being prepared in committees: one allotting about $50,000,000 in “educational orders” for war supplies; another for from $50,000,000 to $100,000,000 to buy up and store essential military supplies which must be brought in from abroad.
These that I have listed add up to $1,600,000,000.
 
The Good Provider
But this is by no means the total to be spent on armaments during the next year. A number of military and naval items – for example, construction of military posts and encampments, airplane landing fields, Coast Guard, military roads, etc. – are carried in the budget under a variety of non-military headings: Treasury Department, C.C.C., W.P.A., and others. Such expenditures would add another several hundred millions.
Then there must be taken into account the sums appropriated during previous sessions of Congress which are now being used for the construction of hundreds of warships and airplanes. The present session will undoubtedly make a number of “deficiency appropriations” before it adjourns.
The grand total for armaments, directly for armaments, to be spent during the next fiscal year will be far more than $2,000,000,000. Indeed, since it is certain that a later session of Congress will add vastly to this sum before the next fiscal year is over, it is hard to place any limit on what will be spent. Three, four bilions, even more, are entirely probable.
They are generous fellows, these Congressmen and this President. No one can charge that when they really take something seriously they stint on pennies. The instruments of death must be of the best quality. No battleship but the fastest and strongest will do; no machine gun but the most rapidly death-dealing; no gas but the most horrible in its effects.
And what a happy family they are when they get together to vote armaments! Nearly everyone of the armament bills has carried unanimously; Democrats and Republicans, New Dealers and Old Dealers, President and Congress, Marcantonio and Ham Fish and Carter Glass, all joining hands.
Nor has their innocent pleasure been marred by any jarring notes from “business.” Every section of business, every one of its newspapers and magazines, have remained discreetly silent or loudly praising while these billions have been voted.
 
The Picture’s Other Side
During these same last two months, 88,000 men have been dropped from the W.P.A. rolls. That means about 400,000 persons who have been left with no means to get adequate food or warmth or housing or medical care.
The order has gone out to drop several hundred thousand more this week, twice as many next month, about the same number in June.
Congress is debating whether to advance $100,000,000 or $150,000,000 more to W.P.A. The $50,000,000 difference can be translated into terms of food or hunger for a million or so persons. In the House of Representatives, where the lower figure carried, no one even dreamed of suggesting anything higher than $150,000,000. But $150,000,000 means dropping an average of at least 150,000 a month from the rolls.
Many members of Congress have explained that they consider it an outrage to vote a single additional dollar to W.P.A. In this opinion, “business” finds itself largely in agreement.
 
Appeasement for Whom and for What?
A naive observer from Mars or a South Sea Island might be a little puzzled if he should study this record of the last two months of Congress.
He might ask himself: Why is it that so many billions can be unanimously voted for one purpose, and then such haggling and bitterness over a measly fifty or a hundred million for another? He would discover, to his surprise, that the fifty million which divided the House on the W.P.A. deficiency bill is just half the price of a single battleship.
But he would soon be enlightened. Any Congressmen or any businessman could easily explain this confusion.
Don’t you realize, he would be told, that the government debt is so high and the yearly deficits are so large that we are headed straight for bankruptcy? Don’t you understand that business is getting nowhere because it is strangled with so many taxes? Don’t you see, then, that the only way in which the country can be saved from destruction is through a rigorous program of economy and more economy? W.P.A. has got to be cut to the bone or we’ll go to pieces in no time.
And if our visitor replied: So that’s how it is? I didn’t understand about economy. Now I would suggest that if you need some real savings you could get even further by lopping a billion or two from these armament bills ...
But, naturally, our Congressman or businessman would not be going to carry this type of conversation further. He would turn away, muttering: So, on Mars or the South Seas they don’t even know the difference between economy and patriotism! He’s an alien, by his own admission, and I’ll see that he is deported, as he ought to be, for spreading subversive doctrines.
 



The present session of Congress is giving us a new, and very revealing chance to test out the theory of Labor’s Non-Partisan League, John L. Lewis and the Stalinists as to how labor should intervene in politics. The results of the test are just the same as followed before in the history of this country and in the thousands of examples that could be drawn from other nations.
The advance of the L.N-P.L. policy over the older “reward your friends and punish your enemies” theory made famous by Gompers is to be found in the effort to build up an independent political organization comprising primarily workers and especially organized workers. At the same time, however, much of the Gompers theory has in other respects been retained.
The leadership of L.N-P.L. has resisted and fought any attempt to transform the League into a fully independent political party, that is, into a Labor party. They have restricted it, on the whole, to a labor appendage to the New Deal.
The tactic of L.N-P.L. has been to throw organized labor support to candidates on old party tickets who are held to be “progressive” and “friends of labor.” This has usually, though not always, meant supporting the candidates of the Roosevelt wing of the Democratic party.
Such candidates are not, of course, labor candidates. They are capitalist candidates, running as representatives of and on the ticket of a capitalist party, a boss party. The tactic of L.N-P.L. means, therefore, the organizing of labor support for certain selected boss candidates.
 
Ingratitude’s Sharp Tooth
The L.N-P.L. tactic is advertised by the League’s officials as the only “realistic” method of labor politics. How, then, does it work out, from the point of view of the interests of labor? Let us judge it by results.
The results were clear enough long before the present year started. In 1936, the tactic led to support for Martin Davey in his campaign for the governorship of Ohio. The tactic was “successful” and Davey was elected. He rewarded labor, a few months later, by calling out his troops to smash the Little Steel strike.
Exactly the same thing happened in Iowa. Kraschel was elected governor with the help of L.N-P.L., and last year proved his friendship for labor by smashing the Maytag strike.
These sobering experiences did not, however, discourage the realistic officials who direct the destinies of L.N-P.L. Last November they went right ahead with the same theory and the same tactic.
In Illinois, for example, they swung labor behind Scott Lucas, the bright young Roosevelt candidate for the Senatorship. Victory! Lucas was elected by a big majority, and took his seat in the august Senate chamber.
From that day until this, Lucas has in debate and vote lined up on the most reactionary side of every measure that has come before Congress. In his very first month, he played an important role in keeping the W.P.A. deficiency appropriation down to $725,000,000. Needless to say, he is a prominent member of the economy bloc whenever it is a question of cutting off funds that might benefit labor or the unemployed.
An even more impressive example is that of Alben W. Barkley, Senator from Kentucky. Barkley is leader of the Democratic party’s forces in the Senate. He is Roosevelt’s own man, and got the post of leader only through Roosevelt’s insistence. He was up for election last Fall, and was dutifully given L.N-P.L. support. He won hands down.
Last week it was Barkley himself, in person, who arranged the deal in the Senate Appropriations Committee whereby the $100,000,000 figure for W.P.A. – the figure that means starvation for hundreds of thousands of persons – was reported out to the floor of the Senate.
 
How Can Such Things Be?
Is there some mystery here? Why are “labor’s friends” always stabbing labor in the back? Is everybody nowadays a “traitor”?
No, there is no mystery. The explanation of these incidents – and they could be multiplied indefinitely – is simple: in politics, class interests come first. In fair weather, when things are going smoothly, everybody can be friendly. Promises are cheap enough. But when the situation gets hot, when class lines are drawn sharp by a strike or a war or a revolution or a showdown between business appeasement and adequate relief, then a politician has got to fall into step with the class which he represents. This does not make him a traitor: he would be a traitor if he did anything else.
These “friends of labor” are political representatives of boss parties and through those parties of the boss class. It doesn’t make any difference who supports them at the polls or how much they promise. In every crucial issue they are and have got to be loyal to their class. And being loyal to their own class, the boss class, means striking blows at labor.
They are not traitors to labor. The traitors to labor are the Lewises and Browders who tell labor to support these representatives of the enemy and hide from the workers the results which follow and will always follow from this tactic.
Labor will advance its own interests in politics only when it forges its own party. The only real labor representatives in politics will be those from labor’s own party and labor’s own ranks
 



Several months ago President Roosevelt announced a little surprise for the youth of the country. Entirely at the government’s expense, indeed with cash allowances from the government during part of the process, 20,000 boys from the high schools and colleges were to be trained as airplane pilots.
For a day or two, the plan got big headlines in the general press. There was, however, surprisingly little comment on so startling an enterprise. One or two of the columnists and scattered editorial writers thought the whole idea fantastic and absurd. Where, they asked, would the planes come from that these 20,000 boys were supposed to learn how to fly? And where were the flying schools and training fields that could handle them?
Since that first, rather mild flurry, nothing much has been heard of the President’s plan. It has slipped pretty well from public sight. Nevertheless, it is going steadily forward. Already thousands of students have been directly or indirectly enrolled. For the most part, up to now, they are being sent through already established flying schools, with government subsidies paying for their tuitions.
I want to explain what lies back of this plan. You will not find this explanation in any of the publicity which has been released in connection with it. You will not, in fact, so far as I am aware, find this explanation anywhere in print.
 
The Replacement Ratio for Personnel and Materiel
Everyone knows that all of the great powers have on hand large numbers of military aircraft and of trained personnel to handle them – pilots, bombers, radio operators, observers, etc. Speculation as to the exact comparative size of the various fleets is frequently allowed to occupy the public mind; it was very prominent, for example, during the Munich crisis, and was generally supposed to have been a decisive factor in compelling Chamberlain to adopt his appeasement tactic.
Nevertheless, in the colder and more deliberate calculations of the general staffs of the powers, the total figure of planes now on hand and personnel now on active duty in the air forces is allotted only secondary importance. Far more decisive, to their minds, is the rate at which any given nation can produce planes and trained men for the fighting service.
A moment’s reflection will show why this is the case. A large force of planes can, at the outset of the war, strike two or three heavy lightning blows against the enemy nation. The notion, popular a few years ago, that such lightning thrusts can win a modern war in a few weeks has been abandoned, and was at no time held by the most responsible military strategists. The new war, like the last one, will be a mass war, and of indefinitely long duration.
In the air, consequently, the long-run advantage will be held not by the nations which have most planes and pilots in active service at the outset, but by those which can produce planes and trained men fastest, in order to acquire during the course of the war itself a, differential superiority, over the enemy, and especially to be able to replace the planes and men that are shot down. 5,000 planes, adequately manned, today will mean little or nothing unless there can be at least the same number, properly manned, after a year and two and three years.
Each of the general staffs has, therefore, worked out in advance the expected figure at which planes and men will have to be replaced after the war starts. This figure, which is sometimes referred to as “the replacement ratio for personnel and materiel,” thus expresses the prediction of the general staffs as to the rate at which planes and men will be destroyed. The figure is obviously just about the same for both planes and men; and for the men it means the rate at which they will be killed, since there is a negligible number of wounded in the air service.
 
What Your Odds Are
All of the European general staffs have arrived at the same figure for the replacement ratio. This figure is 50% per month.
At first glance, perhaps, this figure looks calm and mild and business-like. Let me explain what it means in terms of the odds on the life of a member of the air corps.
It means that any given member of the air corps has a 50–50 chance to live one month.
It means that he has one chance in 4,096 to live one year. In other words, the odds are 4,095 to 1 that he will not live a year.
It means that he has a chance of less than 1 in 16,000,000 to live two years. The odds are greater than 16,000,000 to 1 that he will be killed before two years are finished.
 
The Blessings of God’s Country
50% is the figure for the European general staffs. God’s country, naturally, looks out better for the welfare of her children.
I am happy to report to the youth of America that, basing itself on more strongly built planes and longer and more intensively trained pilots, the U.S. general staff has arrived at a figure of only 331/3% per month. So don’t be discouraged.
This means that you have 1 chance in 3 of lasting a month. Pity the poor foreigner!
And the odds are only approximately 1,250 to 1 that you will be killed within one year. And they are just slightly more than 1,500,000 to 1 that you will die within two years.
Surely that chance is worth taking when the President himself has promised that the war is to be fought for the very highest ideals.
 



On January 3rd, in his annual message to Congress, President Roosevelt announced the slogans under which he was asking the American workers to get ready to give their lives to the Sixty Families. They were three: For Religion; For the Sanctity of International Law; and For Democracy.
Somehow or other, now that the war crisis looks as if it might break into the open any hour, something seems to be going wrong with these slogans. Of course, even in January there were a few cynics who thought that the slogans contained just a touch of demagogy – particularly when they looked back only a month at the unusual kinds of democracy which had been represented at Lima; but today the gap between the slogans and reality seems to be spreading so wide that even a few honest men are beginning to wonder.
For example, the war nearly began two weeks ago over the Italian occupation of Albania. No one will deny that the Italian venture was an act of piracy. Nevertheless, though this has apparently been overlooked by the daily press, Albania has never been known as a model of democracy. It was ruled over by a king who, before gaining the throne, was a notorious bandit; and he ruled, after taking office, with the same bandit and gangster methods in which he had been nurtured.
Oddly enough, Zog reigned as the direct dependent of Italy. And, still more odd, this arrangement had been supervised and decided upon by Great Britain.
The religious issue, also, is a little curious in the case of Albania. Protestant England is the main objector; Catholic Italy the conqueror; and the victims are most of them Mohammedan.
International law was no doubt violated. But international law was no less rudely upset, at Versailles and after, in the creation of Albania.
 
Sweet Freedom of Polish Democracy
In the present crisis, Poland has been the focus of the chief avowed attention. Great Britain, which managed to dry its tears over the gobbling up of Manchuria, Ethiopia, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Memel, has promised to take up the sword of an avenging angel if one hair is touched on Poland’s tender little head.
There is much, perhaps, that might be said for Poland. But one thing, I am afraid, that cannot be included by even the wildest imagination is that Poland has ever tainted her governmental practices with the slightest touch of the heresy of democracy. Since the formation of modern Poland – by virtue of clauses in international law written by the guns of the victorious Allies – she has never swerved from reliance upon the firm hand of military dictatorship. The few years during which opposition parties were permitted a nominal and pathetic existence have long been ended.
And the tortured persons of her Jews will provide a comment upon Poland’s attitude toward the sacred rights of religion.
There are, indeed, few nations in the world that have a more brutal record than Poland’s in the consistent repression of democratic rights.
 
We Are All Democrats Now
As I recall, it was hardly yesterday that Chamberlain and the prelates of the Church of England were telling us that Russia was the most hideous tyranny in history, and, besides, with atheism as its state policy, was the anti-Christ. Now Russia is the most wooed of potential allies.
Atheism and tyranny are words to use when the masses sense some hope in a new social system; but arms and airplanes are more to the point when it comes near to the time to fight the war for democracy. Matters of ideology, said Chamberlain the other day when answering a questioner in the House of Commons, “do not concern us in a question of this kind.”
Greece, too, has now been brought toward the fold of democracy. Chamberlain and Daladier, with the blessing of Roosevelt, have informed the world that if Greece is threatened the war for democracy will begin.
Greece, if I recall correctly, not many years ago, after a long history of military and semi-military dictatorship, was definitively transformed into a totalitarian fascist state under General Metaxas.
 
Not to Speak of the Back Yard
Such are among the flies that are spotting the slogan-ointment, democratic brand, which our masters are spreading over the diseased face of the war into which they are taking us.
It would be downright unkind to add to these any reference to the even more extraordinary democracy which prevails in India, Indo-China, the French Sudan or even Puerto Rico. When Roosevelt is next sending communications to selected rulers of the world, and asking about intentions and pledges they are willing to give, he might include brief notes to Chamberlain, Daladier, and himself. He might enquire: What are your respective intentions as to India, Indo-China, the Sudan and Puerto Rico? Are you prepared to pledge that in such and such a time you will free them and their hundreds of millions of inhabitants from the frightful and shameful yoke under which you now oppress them?
Yes, it is harder today than in 1914 for a gang of imperialist robbers to be convincing when they talk about making the world safe for democracy – or for anything else except their own bloody profit. As the opening of the war gets close, while each clique runs madly in its last desperate scramble for allies, the camouflage drops off, and the war shows itself for what it is: a new world struggle for the re-partition of the world among the major imperialist rivals, a struggle to decide who will have first choice in the exploitation and oppression of the great masses of mankind. All the fine moral ideals, from democracy to religion to national independence, are, for the imperialists, only so much grist to the mills that turn out the cynical demagogy whereby they hope once more to delude the people.
 

am/Shachtman: Intellectuals in Retreat (Part 2)



Burnham Archive   |   Shachtman Archive   |   Intellectuals in Retreat

Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

James Burnham & Max Shachtman
Intellectuals in Retreat

II: The Formal Program of the Anti-Stalinist Intellectuals
A CAREFUL SIFTING OF the large mass of evidence constituted by the writings of our subjects enables us to sum up what we have called their “formal” program under three main heads: (1) Against dialectical materialism; (2) Against one-party dictatorship; (3) Leninism is the source of Stalinism. A fourth point crops up so frequently that, though of a different order, it almost deserves a separate heading: Against the harsh tone of revolutionary polemics. Before turning to examine each of these four separately, we wish to make certain preliminary remarks.
In the first place, we are compelled to notice that, even with the addition of the leading items on the positive side of the formal program – for Freedom, Truth and Science – this is not much of a program; nor do we think that we are being unfair or arbitrary in reducing the formal program to these elements. Even if we should grant that our subjects are 100% correct in everything they have written on all and each of these matters, we do not find that we would be very far along the road toward solving the issues of war, fascism and insecurity. In fact we can’t see that we would even have left the starting post. The mountain of intellectual and nervous energy, to say nothing of the social labor of lumberjacks, paper manufacturers, linotype operators, printers, book salesmen and the rest, seems to have brought forth a pretty mouse-like theoretical offspring.
In the second place, we want to make clear that we regard none of these subjects as taboo: there are no theoretical Sacred Cows in our eyes, and we criticize no one merely for discussing no matter what subject. But there are a variety of ways in which discussion may be carried on. Simply to claim that “we seek the truth” is not enough. Even in the highly developed physical sciences, the concept of truth, the adoption or rejection of the whole method of inquiry, must be in the end related to purposes which the inquiry is designed to serve. How much more dangerously is this the case with such less developed fields as sociology, history and politics! Historical and political inquiries do not occur in a social vacuum; they are immediately and crucially related to the political ends and aims of individuals, parties and classes, and function actively as weapons in the political struggle.
For our part, we state explicitly that we undertake historical and political inquiries for the sake of our socialist aim. This does not in the least mean that therefore we “subordinate” truth, are willing to pervert it as a “means to our end”; on the contrary, our conception of the socialist ideal teaches us that the truth is a decisive means for realizing it, is indeed a part of it. But it does mean that we refuse to argue about truth in the “abstract”, that in discussing theoretical questions in history and politics we establish a context which includes reference to the ends and aims and purposes which the given discussion, argument or inquiry serves. Truth, or rather truths, a necessary means and part of the socialist ideal, is yet short of the Godhead; it too can serve reactionary and vicious aims.
This last statement may seem surprising or shocking to those who are hypnotized by abstractions. However, it is verified daily. For example, the Dies Committee, among many lies, has also disclosed a substantial percentage of truths. Are we then to hail its work as progressive, and follow the example of cheap renegades like J.B. Matthews and Sam Baron in aiding it? Naturally not. Its truths, partial of course and intertwined with lies, are the instrument of reaction – and it is the truths, not the lies, which make the instrument effective. We, along with everyone else who is not a traitor, denounce and attack the Dies Committee, expose its reactionary purpose, demand its dissolution. We do not, of course, deny to the masses that its truths are true; that, the function of the Stalinists, would be treachery of another kind. But we insist that those truths must be acquired in another way and made to serve other ends.
On a more grandiose scale, we may make the same observations about fascism. The critique of bourgeois parliamentary democracy given by the leading fascist theoreticians is for the most part true; and this is one of the sources of the strength of fascism as a movement. Is it any the more progressive on that account? What would we say to a fascist who complained: “Why do you keep attacking us? You yourselves agree with most of what we have to say about bourgeois democracy.”
We mention these things not to suggest that the “formal program” of our subjects may in fact be true, but because in the present article we are not so much concerned with the isolated question of the factual truth or falsity of their opinions as with their nature as a political phenomenon, with the political ends and aims which their present writings and actions are serving. We could hardly expect to cover adequately the problems of dialectical materialism, party dictatorship and the origins of Stalinism in a single article. But it is not at all necessary to do this in order to complete the task we have set ourselves.
 
A Question of Tone
OUR SUBJECTS ARE FREQUENT critics of the “bad tone” that they find in the political press of the working-class parties, including conspicuously that of our own party. Indeed, they find in our sharp tone so much to condemn that it can be done only by the sharpest tone on their part. As a rule they explain: “It is not what you say to which we object, but the way in which you say it. You simply drive people from you. You don’t understand psychology.” Stubbornly, perhaps, we are not able to take this explanation seriously. We believe that where questions of tone are raised in connection with political issues, it is ninety-nine times out of a hundred not the manner of saying but what is said that is being debated.
The “question of tone” – which we also readily grant to be an important question – is obviously enough not a literary or stylistic problem. There is that problem too, but it is nothing to argue over: it is a matter of talent and technical training so that style will communicate just what is intended. We, certainly, recognize our literary lacks, and strive to overcome them.
But no one is getting embittered or passioned over the literary difficulty. In politics and out, the more basic aspect of the issue of “tone” is subordinated to content. Roughly, in general, one uses a harsh tone to those against whom one feels enmity, a friendly tone to friends, bitterness toward traitors, conciliation toward those whom one regards as misled, and so on. This follows quite automatically for many persons; their attitudes, almost without giving it a thought, govern their tone. We wish to make perfectly clear that, in so far as we are technically able, we are ourselves quite deliberate and conscious in our “tone”; we regard tone also as a political instrument.
This does not mean that we are “just like the fascists and Stalinists” in the use of tone. Not in the least. The Stalinists and fascists use “tone” demagogically, to hide the truth and to obscure their aims: as when they call revolutionary militants “fascist spies, counter-revolutionaries, mad dogs,” or themselves “socialists”. We on the contrary employ tone to clarify the truth and our aims. When we write that Norman Thomas is a political colleague and defender of the butchers of the Barcelona workers, the phrase is no doubt harsh; but the harshness is that of literal truth. When we say that Stalin is a murderer, Roosevelt a warmonger, Hillman a reactionary labor bureaucrat, we mean exactly what we say. We do not think that politics is a polite parlor game; we understand it as the struggle for power, and a very rude and brutal struggle, for all that we might wish otherwise.
Now how is it with our subjects on the question of tone? True, they do not seem to be deliberate and conscious in their political use of tone; but their use of it is nonetheless political in spite of their blinders. We discover, for example, that in the history of American radical journalism, no one has written with sharper or harsher tone than they against the Stalinists. Consider Hook, Eastman, Stolberg, Lyons on the Stalinists and Stalinism; you could not match their invective from the pages of the Fourth Internationalist press.
Nor is their tone toward us exactly suitable for the drawing room. With what casualness they assure the world that on Kronstadt we are guilty of amalgams worthy of a Vishinsky (Serge and Macdonald), that in essence and origin we are identical with Stalinism (Hook, Eastman, Lyons, Harrison, Adamic, Counts) and even with fascism (Eastman in Liberty, Harrison in the New Leader), that, like all of Bolshevism, we are ever ready to lie as a means to our end, that our secret aim is to destroy all democracy and freedom for the sake of a clique dictatorship.
But, equally interesting, we find when we turn to recent writings of our subjects that deal with social-reformists or bourgeois liberals, the harsh, sharp, bitter tone quite disappears, and all is again sweetness and light. And, similarly, we find that we are never criticized by our subjects for “tone” when we attack the Stalinists, but only when we attack social reformists and bourgeois liberals. And this little asymmetry is just what we object to.
The New Leader is “so different” from the Daily Worker; it is so bright, informative, lively, readable, to be recommended and written for; – in spite of the fact that in its somewhat politer way it spreads nine-tenths of the identical filthy lies and black reactionary proposals that smell up the sheet of the Stalinists. Norman Thomas, “so different” from Earl Browder, even if a mite confused, must be treated with white gloves – in spite of the fact that he gives political support in Spain to the stranglers of the Revolution, international allegiance to the international organization that began its sell-outs and betrayals before the Third International came into existence and has changed since 1914 only to deepen its degeneration, in spite of the fact that in this country he proved his devotion to democracy by throwing out the revolutionists in his own party by dictatorial ukase, now is selling out what is left of his party to the Social-Democratic Federation, and for a generation has an unparallelled record of sowing disorientation on every major issue that has ever arisen here or anywhere else in the world. As for tone toward the bourgeois liberals, toward even “left” bourgeois liberals like Chamberlain and Adamic – what should a serious person have but contempt and hatred for them who spend their lives trying to persuade the workers of America to accept the blessings of US imperialism?
Very revealing, tone. Over a period, the tone of political journalism reveals not the literary finesse nor psychological insight of writers, but, with surprising accuracy – the political attitudes and directions.
 
Dialectical Materialism as Whipping Boy
EASTMAN, HOOK, WILSON, Lyons, Dewey, at some length, others on our list more sporadically, have set their lances against the “theology” of dialectical materialism. We do not propose here to discuss the general theory of dialectical materialism; that would require a book, not a single section of an article. We are now interested only in certain features of our subjects’ attack on dialectical materialism.
The two authors of the present article differ thoroughly on their estimate of the general theory of dialectical materialism, one of them accepting it and the other rejecting it. This has not prevented them from working for years within a single political organization toward mutually accepted objectives, nor has this required on the part of either of them any suppression of his theoretical opinions, in private or public. There is nothing anomalous in such a situation. Though theory is doubtless always in one way or another related to practise, the relation is not invariably direct or immediate; and as we have before had occasion to remark, human beings often act inconsistently. From the point of view of each of the authors there is in the other a certain such inconsistency between “philosophical theory” and political practise, which might on some occasion lead to decisive concrete political disagreement. But it does not now, nor has anyone yet demonstrated that agreement or disagreement on the more abstract doctrines of dialectical materialism necessarily affects today’s and tomorrow’s concrete political issues – and political parties, programs and struggles are based on such concrete issues. We all may hope that as we go along or when there is more leisure, agreement may also be reached on the more abstract questions. Meanwhile there is fascism and war and unemployment.
During 1907–08, Lenin was, as is well known, carrying on a philosophical dispute with the Machists and also a sharp political fight against the Mensheviks. Gorky inclined, on the philosophic questions, toward the Machists, and apparently considered that this might prevent him from making common political cause with Lenin against the Mensheviks on the concrete questions then at issue. On February 25, 1908, Lenin wrote to Gorky as follows:
I believe I must tell you my view quite openly. A certain scrap among the Bolsheviks in the question of philosophy I now consider quite unavoidable. But to split up on that account would be stupid, in my opinion. We have formed a bloc for the carrying through of a certain tactic in the Social-Democratic Labor party. This tactic we have been and are continuing to carry through without differences of opinion (the only difference of opinion occurred in connection with the boycott of the Third Duma), but firstly it never reached such a sharp point among us even to hint at a split; secondly, it did not correspond to the difference of opinion of the materialists and the Machists, for the Machist Bazarov, for example, was, like myself, against the boycott and wrote about it (a large feuilleton in the Proletarii [the journal then under Bolshevik direction]).
To obstruct the cause of the carrying through of the tactic of the revolutionary social democracy in the Labor party because of disputes over materialism or Machism, would be, in my opinion, an inexcusable stupidity. We must be at loggerheads over philosophy in such a way that the Proletarii and the Bolsheviks, as a faction of the party, are not affected by it. And that is entirely possible.
These wise, responsible and humane words are those, of course, of the real Lenin, not the sanctimonious Pope of the Stalinist fairy tales nor the one-party tyrant who is now being imaginatively constructed by Eastman, Hook and Harrison.
Shortly after the time of the above letter, interestingly enough, one of the Mensheviks declared in the Neue Zeit that the philosophical dispute was identical with the political dispute. Proletarii made the following editorial statement:
In this connection, the editorial board of Proletarii, as the ideological representative of the Bolshevik tendency, deems it necessary to present the following declaration: “In reality this philosophical dispute is not a factional dispute and, in the opinion of the editorial board, it should not be one; any attempt to represent these differences of opinion as factional is thoroughly erroneous. Among the members of both factions there are supporters of both philosophical tendencies.”

We wish to make, in the present circumstances, the following observations:
1. Let us assume that the entire attack of our subjects on dialectical materialism is correct. Dialectical materialism is “contrary to science,” an “idealistic metaphysics,” a “theology.” Then let us ask: So what? What follows, politically? To be even more concrete: From the destructive analysis of dialectical materialism by these critics, what conclusions may be derived as to changes in any section, paragraph, line or word of the Declaration of Principles of the Socialist Workers Party, the programmatic document upon which the Fourth Internationalist movement in this country is based, in its general conceptions identical with the Fourth Internationalist program throughout the world?
Not one of these critics, in spite of the many, many pages they have spent on the subject, has yet proposed any such specific changes. Even if they object to parts of our program, they have not pretended that their objection can be deduced from their attitude on dialectical materialism; but this is what it is incumbent upon them to show if they are justified in ascribing political importance to their formal theory, and if they excuse their failure to give unequivocal support to the Fourth International by appeal to their theory. Their inability to make any such deductions would go to prove, in fact, that politically their whole formal discussion of “Marxist philosophy” is operationally meaningless, since no political conclusions follow from it. But it is not, in actuality, politically meaningless. The lack of political content in the formal doctrine is precisely the indication that this doctrine – the attitude toward dialectical materialism – is not at all what is at issue; that the whole “philosophic discussion” is in practise a smokescreen for political positions which receive no explicit expression in the formal discussion proper, but must be analyzed out from other data.
2. The “theory of the inevitability of socialism” is the chief bugaboo in this critique of dialectical materialism. Eleven years ago, in his book, Marx and Lenin, Max Eastman began his attack on this theory chiefly with the contention that it led to passivity on the part of those who believed in it, because they could permit the revolution to take care of itself. The same point was made by Hook in Toward the Understanding of Karl Marx, and more recently by Wilson and others. Once again we discover that our anti-metaphysicians are rationalist and a priori in their method of analysis, this time with charmingly ironic results.
Entirely apart from what may be the purely logical relation between a theory of inevitability and passivity, what are the empirical psychological and historical facts? Lenin and Trotsky, believing in inevitability, made a revolution. The Fourth Internationalists today and yesterday and tomorrow, a majority of whom doubtless believe in the theory of inevitability (if they are interested in the problem), spend their lives and energies in militant active political struggle. Eastman, who does not believe because it leads to passivity, announces his retirement for “deliberation”. Hook has withdrawn from direct party political activity. Wilson is so non-inevitable about politics that he advises writers not even to sign anything any more.
3. Let us assume that the belief in “the inevitability of socialism” is incorrect, that we should substitute the hypothesis that socialism is, to one or another extent, probable. Once more: what, directly and indirectly, is politically altered? But let us turn to other doctrines of our group. Having dismissed inevitability with a very airy gesture, they are now preaching, apparently – the impossibility of socialism (Eastman in his Harper’s article), and the inevitability of ... Thermidor (Stolberg in his Nation article on The Revolution Betrayed, Hook implicitly in his Southern Review article, Reflections on the Russian Revolution). If “the inevitability of socialism” is theology, then the “impossibility of socialism” and the “inevitability of Thermidor” are certainly no less theological. And, if we had to choose between theologies, we would say that the latter is surely the inferior brand: because the latter counsels the masses to despair and not to fight; and whatever the chances for socialism, we won’t get it unless the masses fight.
4. Our subjects put up in opposition to dialectical materialism as their code and method: empirical science or, some of them, scientific empiricism. Let us examine briefly their pretensions to scientific empiricism. (We have already dealt with Eastman’s utterly trivial conception and practises of what he naively imagines to be “science” – New International, June and August 1938)
Is it not of some significance that from our entire list, only the politically insignificant Hacker and Lundberg have done any extensive original research to bring to light fresh historical and political data? (Hook’s original researches have been almost entirely work of literary scholarship.) The function of the others has been almost solely one of interpretation – a far from unimportant function, but hardly one by itself to justify major claims to status as empirical scientists. Indeed, it becomes even suspicious when we observe it to be a group characteristic; when we note that this present attempt to re-interpret early Bolshevism is being accomplished with virtually no new data.
Again: scientific hypotheses are tested by the predictions that are made on their basis. We do not of course expect predictions in history or in politics to be made with the specificity or precision of those in the physical sciences, but we would like to inquire: What predictions of any kind about politics and history have our self-vaunted empiricists made to test for us their theories? We have been unable to discover a single one. In fact, we state quite soberly that so far as we can see, everything concrete and specific they know about modern politics, every reasonably concrete prediction they have made, has been learned from Trotsky and the press of the Fourth Internationalist movement.
Trotsky and the Fourth Internationalists generally, on their side, test their theories daily by specific analyses and by verifiable predictions – not mere vague predictions about a “defeat” or “victory”, but careful predictions of the process and mechanism of what will happen; not merely in connection with large-scale historical crises, but likewise in the constant traffic of unions, parties, factions, Leagues. The predictions are occasionally in error, the time sequences are sometimes mis-stated; but by and large we can with not the slightest hesitation point to the past fifteen years as a triumphant reservoir of proof for the empirical superiority of our method of political analysis as against any other in the field. Our record, in small matters and great, is not even approximated by that of any other individual or group.
The truth is that in so far as our subjects are empiricists at all in politics and history, they are not scientific but vulgar empiricists. That is, they keep their political noses rubbing in the immediate fact and refuse or fear to state generalized hypotheses summing up the accumulated data of historical and political experience. This vulgar empiricism is, moreover, directly related to their specific political judgments and their political actions (which will be dealt with in detail in Part III). They “are not sure” how entry of the POUM into the Spanish bourgeois government will work out; and therefore they refuse to characterize it politically. The infamous sham Keep America Out of War Committee “might” turn into an effective instrument against war, so they hop into it (and after a burning, very shortly out again). “You can’t tell” just what the Social Democratic Federation will do in case of war – after all some members in it say they are against collective security; so they write for the New Leader. The revolution “might” lead to Thermidor everywhere; so we will be careful not to commit ourselves too thoroughly to the revolution.
5. Let us, finally, examine some empirical gems from our anti-theologians. And let no one imagine that these are arbitrarily selected. Their attacks on dialectical materialism end up with hymns to Freedom, Truth, Morality, and to empty abstract formulas that make the Platonic Ideas look like models of careful empirical observation.
In articles and speeches, Hook has recently adopted as his motto Lord Acton’s well-known aphorism: “Power breeds corruption; absolute power breeds absolute corruption;” and Hook draws many a conclusion from this “hypothesis”. At first hearing, this pretty phrase sounds dignifiedly profound, and an audience is usually impressed. Yet let us consider. To begin with, the form of the aphorism is nothing but our old friend “inevitability” once more. And whence comes this “absolute” for an empiricist who by profession recognizes nothing as absolute? But these might be dismissed as quibbling objections? Think, then, of the completely absurd content of the aphorism, however interpreted. Power does, of course, sometimes breed corruption – certain kinds of power directed toward certain types of end. But power also breeds, and is the only breeder, of just the opposite of corruption – other powers directed toward other ends. If we went back over history and eliminated all power in order to get rid of all corruption, we would also have to get rid of all history and put man back where he started from. Hook’s implicit advice to slaves, serfs, villeins would be: do not exercize power against your masters, because then you will be corrupted (they heard exactly the same advice at the time – from the priests). His implicit advice to workers today would have to be: do not use your trade union power against the bosses, because that will corrupt you; do not use political power to overthrow the bosses’ government and set up your own government, because that will lead only to the triumph of Thermidor. In concrete meaning, this “anti-power” preaching, which is now a feature of this whole school (the quotation from Acton is merely a minor symptom), is on the one hand empirically simply ridiculous, on the other politically reactionary. In sum, it, like the doctrine of “the inevitability of Thermidor”, is just a fancy way of putting the time-honored precept of class collaboration.
“Problems of being and of universal knowledge ... should be acknowledged to exist, but not solved by the device of pretending to know what is not known.” (Eastman in Harper’s) A juicy morsel for the semantic analysis of young empiricists.
Or let us listen to Eugene Lyons, at the close of his book, summing up the lessons of his mighty experiences, coming finally to grips with the problems of the day:
The “coming struggle” – and it is not coming, it is already here – is not between communism and fascism. It is the struggle for the moral and ethical ideals [the distinction between “moral ideals” and “ethical ideals” would be a little obscure in our minds if we didn’t understand that the whole business were reduplicating bombast] which have been renounced by both these movements. (Assignment in Utopia, p. 622)
I left Russia and Europe convinced that the immediate [sic] task for those who have the urge to participate consciously in the historic processes of their lifetime – is to defend the basic concepts of freedom, humaneness, intellectual integrity, respect for life ... [And then at last the abstractions get down on the ground:] They must be defended from Bolshevik onslaughts no less than fascist or capitalist onslaughts. (Ibid., p. 623)
 
Against “One-Party Dictatorships”
THE BROAD ATTACK on “one-party dictatorship”, in which nearly all of our subjects have participated, has reached a new climax in Hook’s article, Reflections on the Russian Revolution, published in the current (Winter 1938-39) issue of the Southern Review. A full discussion of this presumptuous essay will have to wait for another occasion. Now, as with the other doctrines, we are primarily interested in the political motivation of the attack taken as a whole.
It might be expected that these empiricists, who regard the question of “one-party dictatorship” as so crucial that, in Hook’s thesis, it is by itself the cause of the degeneration of the Russian Revolution, would at least bother to be wholly unambiguous as to what they meant by “one-party dictatorship”. This, however, is not the case. Do they mean a regime in which a single party administers the apparatus of government? Sometimes the context shows that this is what they mean – which would make the United States a one-party dictatorship. Or do they mean a regime in which all parties but one are illegal? Presumably this should be consistently their meaning, and we will interpret them in this sense.
They maintain: (a) that “one-party dictatorship” is an integral and essential part of Bolshevik theory as held by Lenin, Trotsky and Stalin alike; (b) that one-party dictatorship leads to dictatorship of a clique or individual over the party and thereby to brutal totalitarian Thermidor; (c) this is the causal explanation of the Russian Thermidor: “the explanation of the present political regime in Russia is to be found in its natural evolution from party dictatorship to dictatorship of the secretariat.”
It is interesting to observe how conclusion (b) is reached. It is not in the least by an empirical examination of the facts of the Russian Revolution or analogies from other historically similar events, but almost exclusively by a purely rational deduction from “the nature of dictatorship” – e.g., the nature of the concept of dictatorship; a deduction, that is, of a Hegelian, “theological” variety (cf., Southern Review article, pp. 452f). “... The dictatorship of a political party cannot for long be effective without its own internal organization becoming dictatorial”. Why not? “The necessity [sic] of controlling the mass of the population ... compels [sic] the party to assume a military, sometimes called a monolithic, structure.” In passing, what disingenuous sophistry so casually to identify “military” with “monolithic” structure – two altogether different conceptions. “But the dictatorship of the party cannot [sic] be effectively wielded ...” etc. “To conceal this division ... the ruling group in the party must [sic] regulate ...” etc. “Now in order to exercize the proper supervision the leading group must [sic] itself be unified. Dissidents are isolated, gagged into silence, exiled, deported, and shot.” Notice again – unity of the leading group so casually identified with exiling and shooting all dissidents. “The rule of the leading group must [sic] be fortified by a mythology ...” But this process, for our empiricist, is of course only probable? Pause, dear reader: “Historical variations may appear in some points [our italics] in this evolution ...”; but the iron law of the general pattern, the necessary inevitability of the degeneration rises supreme above all minor variations! This, and all these “musts” and “compels” and “necessities” from our oh-so-empirical anti-inevitabilityists!

Notes on Morality: It would be farcical to regard Hook’s article as a scientific treatise. It is actually a moral essay, attempting to fix moral responsibility, moral praise and blame. Taken in its entirety we declare quite bluntly: it is an ideological deception serving to direct moral onus against the Bolsheviks and to alibi the crimes of the Mensheviks, SRs, Kerensky, and indeed the imperialist interventionists themselves. In a brilliant polemic against Corliss Lamont, Hook once showed how support of a big-scale frameup led to one’s commission on one’s part of minor frameups. Something dangerously like this occurs in the Southern Review article. In citing a few details, we must keep in mind that Hook’s article was written for a magazine most of whose readers are not acquainted in detail with revolutionary history and conceptions.
1. As to the scientific pretensions, a single and major example: Hook maintains that the advances in Russian economy during the past 20 years prove nothing about the comparative possibilities of socialized as against capitalist economy, because we can come to different conclusions by shifting our standard of comparison. Historically speaking, he claims, it is equally significant to compare the present Russian economy with Russian economy 20 years ago; or with US economy today. And, says Hook, the US workers are much better off. (Therefore, any unsuspecting reader might naturally conclude, US economy is “better”, more worth defending, than Russian.) The point is not dissimilar to that made by the National Chamber of Commerce, which uses the argument to reconcile the US workers to eternal misery and insecurity (cf., news dispatch published December 28 in the general press).
What conceivable historical significance, to any but a purely Platonic or theological theory of history, could there be to a static comparison between the Russian standard of living today and its development during the past 20 years to the US standard of living today (incidentally, Hook of course omits any reference to the development of US economy during these 20 years, which has sent it back to the early years of the century)? Or to that of any of the advanced capitalist powers which got an early monopoly of the imperialist field? There is a far more suitable comparison which evaluates Russian economy in terms of what was the sole historical alternative in Russia of 1917–18 to workers’ power and socialized economy: namely reduction of Russia to a semi-colonial nation. The comparison, of course, is with China. Recognizing this, as any conscientious historian of any school must do, Hook’s facile generalizations go up at once in smoke. As a matter of fact, what Hook here and throughout the article is interested in is to display the moral heinousness of Stalin’s totalitarian regime, and his “science” comes in only for decorative effect.
2. Hook’s central thesis is that one-party dictatorship is the cause of the degeneration because it was “the only controllable factor.” What in the world does he or can he mean? If he is inquiring into questions of historical causation, how does he exempt himself from discovering what causal factors brought about restrictions and finally suppression of democracy, brought about the one-party dictatorship which he is presumably investigating? Surely it was not, like an act of God’s, self-caused. But Hook is prohibited from such an analysis, not by any scientific demands (which would lead to just that analysis) but by implicit but unrecognized political aims, since that analysis would not turn out so well for the objects of his present apologies, the SRs, Mensheviks and Kerensky.
But, apart from this, taking the perspective of 1917, in what specifiable sense was the extent of democracy more “controllable” than a dozen other factors? The seizure of power by the Bolsheviks and their subsequent agitation and actions certainly exercised a causal influence, which might have been a “controlling” influence, on revolutions elsewhere. Unfortunately, the workers’ movement in Germany turned out to be under the control of the social democrats and not of the Bolsheviks – a little item that is omitted from Hook’s Reflections. Hook will hardly tell us that successful revolutions in other nations would have had no important effects on the internal Russian conditions, including the political regime. [1]
The peace negotiations with Germany, the delay in formulating an industrial plan (so disastrous in its consequences), the Polish campaign, the agricultural policy, the policy of the CI in the Balkans or China, the adoption of a perspective of national Bolshevism or of world revolution, were all not less “controllable” in Hook’s sense than the alleged position on party dictatorship.
What Hook seems really to be holding against the Bolsheviks is that they didn’t exercize their “control” over their own actions to abdicate, and abandon the state power to the only possible alternative – restoration or imperialist reduction to semi-colonial status, so that Russia might have become another China. This, of course, they might have done; and had they done so, it is also true that there would have been no Stalinism.
3. Hook “proves” that “the Bolsheviks considered the dictatorship of the proletariat to be the dictatorship of the Communist party” in the sense that this involves also the complete suppression of democracy and the illegalization of both opposition parties and inner-party factions, by a process which is a neat little lesson in the mechanism of deception.
Item 1: His first two categories of evidence (out of five) are – the accusations of the opponents of Bolshevism! Giving important weight to such evidence, we could say that Hook is quite probably a Nazi-Japanese agent, and that Roosevelt is a Communist.
Item 2: The third category of evidence – “their oppressive treatment of other working-class organizations” – has not the slightest bearing on the question until we examine specifically what the basis for and circumstances of this treatment were. All States “oppress” those who seek to overthrow them.
Item 3: The fifth category: “Most important of all, as far as this specific point is concerned, the program of the Communist International, which left no room for doubt that the Communist parties or respective countries would liquidate at the first opportunity other working-class parties.” Triumphantly, he quotes, in a footnote, the relevant passage of the program. We hope that all readers take the trouble to glance at the footnote. The quotation says absolutely nothing about liquidating other working-class parties, nor could the smartest logician possibly deduce such a conclusion from it. The passage discusses several possible types of government, ending with one which the Communist party exclusively administers. Hook italicizes the following: “Only the workers’ government, consisting of Communists, can be the true embodiment of the dictatorship of the proletariat.” What in the world has this to do with liquidating anything or anybody? This simply embodies the theory and aim of every political party of any kind which is worth its weight in salt. Every serious political party, including the Republican and Democratic parties of the US, aims at the administration of State power and asserts that it alone can administer it properly in the interests of whomever it claims to represent.
For if Hook considers his perfectly commonplace quotation from the program of the Comintern’s 4th Congress in 1922 to be such crushing proof of his argument that totalitarianism is inherent in Bolshevism, what will he say about the following (equally commonplace) quotations?:
In a real Labour revolution, which breaks out where the workers as a class have captured political power, the Communist party, which constitutes a mere sect, will no longer play any part. Victory will fall to the Social Democratic party, which is wide enough to include all the class-conscious workers, and it will be its task to employ the political power thus acquired to carry out a socialistic transformation ...
... no socialist would prefer a coalition Government, if given the choice of a Socialist Government. Only the latter type of Government can pave the way to Socialism, and proceed energetically and systematically to the socialization of the capitalist process of production. (The Labour Revolution, pp. 27, 52. Our emphasis)
Who wrote these terribly totalitarian words, according to which the “real” proletarian revolution, and the transitional period during which the way to socialism is paved, can be directed “only” by a government consisting exclusively of members of a single party? Karl Kautsky, the theoretical Pope of international social democracy! Should not, then, the rights of paternity require the re-naming of at least five contemporaries with his patronymic, i.e., Vladimir I. Kautsky, Leon D. Kautsky, Joseph V. Kautsky, Benito Kautsky, Adolf Kautsky? For according to Hook’s argumentation, Kautsky is, as much as anybody, the ideological father of totalitarian Leninism, Trotskyism, Stalinism, Fascism and Nazism.
Item 4 (the payoff): To clinch his point finally, Hook ends with a quotation from – William Z. Foster in 1932! 1932, when the process of Stalinization was complete, is used as proof for Hook’s thesis that original (Lenin’s) Bolshevism held the theory and that therefore Lenin and Stalin are one in their attitude toward democracy! Needless to say, no word of warning is included by Hook for his uninstructed Southern Review readers.
Item 5: Perhaps the most decisive test for a scientist is his scrupulous inclusion of all negative evidence. In arguing for his thesis, Hook includes not one word of mention of the negative evidence well known to him and not to the bulk of those who will read the article. Not a word of State and Revolution, Lenin’s magnificent formulation of workers’ democracy, written on the very eve of October in order to explain to the masses not merely of Russia but of the world and for the future (as a guide if the Bolsheviks should that time fail in achieving their aims) the meaning of workers’ democracy. Not a word of Lenin’s constant struggle, from the first year of the revolution until his death, against the bureaucratization of the party and state apparatus. Not a word on the great discussions over Brest-Litovsk, the Polish campaign, trade union policy. Not a word to indicate to the reader that the Bolsheviks invited the Mensheviks and SRs to form the government jointly with them, and that the Mensheviks and right wing SRs, standing on the basis of the Constituent Assembly, declined of their own will. Not a word to recall that those of the left SRs who had not meanwhile fused with the Bolsheviks voluntarily and deliberately withdrew from the government because of their disagreement with the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, and publicly announced themselves against the Soviet state power. Not a word of the fact that in 1923 Trotsky began the struggle of the Opposition on the issue of workers’ democracy nor of the continuous struggle of the Opposition against Stalin’s anti-democracy from then onward. And of course not a word of the economic and military conditions nor the actions of the opposition parties in the early years which compelled the restrictions of democracy.
Democracy, also, like truth, is not an empty abstraction. Democracy is a part, an essential part, of the socialist ideal, but it alone is not the whole of socialism. And it must always be understood in a context, with its concrete historical content. Democracy for a beleaguered regime in the midst of civil war cannot mean the same thing as democracy for an established regime at peace and prosperous. What the Bolshevik aim and ideal is, on the question of the right of other parties to free functioning, is summed up for the masses and for the Hooks of the future by two resolutions of the Central Committee of the party passed shortly after the conquest of power:
The Central Committee declares that it is excluding nobody from the Second All-Russian Soviet Congress and is entirely ready, also now, to admit those who departed and to recognize a coalition with them inside the Soviets, that, consequently, the assertions that the Bolsheviks do not want to share the power with anybody are absolutely false. (Resolution on the Question of an Agreement with the Socialist Parties, Pravda, Nov. 15, 1917)
In Russia the Soviet power has been conquered and the transfer of the government from the hands of one Soviet party into the hands of another Soviet party is possible without any revolution, by means of a simple decision of the Soviets, by means of simple reelection of the Soviets. (Declaration to All Party Members and to All the Toiling Classes of Russia, Pravda, Nov. 20, 1917.)
4. Another little bit of deception: Says Hook, to the Bolsheviks, “all who made the demand for democratically elected Soviets, including the heroic Kronstadt sailors, were regarded as counter-revolutionists.” Why is this a “deception”? To most of those who will read Hook’s article, having only general acquaintance with history, “heroic Kronstadt sailors” can only mean: those sailors who were the backbone of the revolution in 1917 and the first part of 1918. Now, Trotsky recalled that the Kronstadters of the days of the suppression of Kronstadt were not the same sailors as those of 1917–18; no one has contradicted his evidence on this point because everyone with any direct knowledge recognizes it as true. It may be argued that the neo-Kronstadtians were also “heroic” and that the suppression was incorrect ; but that is not at issue. The deception occurs through Hook’s hiding from his readers what he himself knows to be the case, and by sliding an emotive attitude directed toward one set of people in 1917 to an entirely different set in 1921. [2]
5. And another: “For every act of violence against Bolshevik leaders, there were hundreds committed against their political opponents ... All others [except those who agreed with them on specific points] were simply classified as bandits and subjected to a ruthless reign of terror.” Now notice: “It is quite true that some of the activities of the non-Bolshevik working-class parties exceeded the limits of Soviet legality, but it is even truer to say that the Bolsheviks themselves defined and changed these limits at will.” What would the average reader understand by these statements? So far as the facts alleged about the Bolsheviks go, Hook is stating merely the most irresponsible lies. But there is more than this. The Bolsheviks are murderers and slanderers. The non-Bolsheviks – “exceeded the limits of Soviet legality ...” That will call up, doubtless, pictures of an unlicensed speech, a meeting without a permit, agitation against some important military decree ... Now what did the non-Bolsheviks actually do? Mensheviks fought in the White Armies and worked directly with the imperialist interventionists; so also with the right SRs; the left SRs attempted the assassination of the leaders of the government, and publicly boasted about their armed struggle against the Soviet power, giving a political motivation. [3] Yes, just a touch beyond the limits of Soviet legality. Again the dominating political function of Hook’s moral charade comes to the surface: to direct moral indignation against Bolshevism, and to turn it away from the centrists and reformists.

What are the facts about “one-party dictatorship”? So far as the scientific problem of understanding the events in Russia goes, that is to be settled by sober investigation into the specific conditions which in Russia did in the end eventuate in the extermination of democracy, an investigation by no means yet completed, but which has been most fully made in the literature of the Fourth International. The “theory of one-party dictatorship” has nothing to do with what happened, because Bolshevism does not and did not hold such a theory; [4] to the extent that it may be suggested in some of the writings of Bolshevik leaders in the early ‘20’s, these were ad hoc generalizations from the specific Russian occurrences.
As, however, to the practise of one-party dictatorship, we must observe: (1) a difference of opinion is permissible; (2) no a priori conclusion can be reached; (3) in any case there is no necessary connection between one-party dictatorship and the evolution of Thermidor.
Let us consider: At the time of a revolution the line between parties is drawn not by complicated theories but by the barricades. A dual power arises, one power based on the old state apparatus, one on the Soviets or some similar class organizations of the workers and peasants. Fighting occurs upon the issue of which depends what power will be sovereign. It is sometimes hard to be sure about logical deductions, but it is simpler to tell one end of the rifle from the other. The parties who line up with their members’ rifles pointed at you are the enemy. In war, the enemy is by the fact of being an enemy “illegal.” Those who point their rifles in the same way you do are your comrades or at least your allies. If this includes other parties, then according to Bolshevik theory and practise such parties have equal rights with the Bolsheviks to democracy and legality.
Will there be parties other than the Bolsheviks pointing guns in the same direction – i.e., defending the same State? This cannot be settled by deduction, but only by practise. In Russia there were for a while, and then those parties were all legal; but the non-Bolshevik parties turned their guns around.
Consider what might have happened in Spain in connection with the Barcelona events. Let us assume that there had been a strong Bolshevik party also present, and that the workers had been successful in taking power. In Barcelona, the barricades drew the lines of legality. On one side were republicans, socialists and Stalinists; on the other the anarchists, POUM, and our assumed strong Bolshevik party. Now does Hook want to accord democratic rights to the republicans, socialists and Stalinists? But they have illegalized themselves by shooting in the wrong direction. Then it would seem that three parties – POUM, anarchists and Bolsheviks – would be legal, all basing themselves on the correct, the workers’ side of the barricades.
That might have happened, but our assumptions may be too artificial. If there had been a strong Bolshevik party, which had not made the fatal errors of the POUM and anarchists, had not entered or given political support to the government, it would perhaps more probably have drawn off during the preceding months all the most progressive and militant of the membership of the POUM and the anarchists (as in 1917 and 1918 the Bolsheviks did from the Mensheviks and SRs); the POUM and the anarchists would have had their proletarian ranks excised and would have remained as bureaucratic apparatuses. If that had been the case, then either at the time of the Barcelona events or subsequent to it, they might well have gone to the other side of the barricades – where in fact their truer interests would be. Then there would have been “one-party dictatorship”, only one legal party. But such a party would be under such circumstances the most democratic possible expression of the interests and will of the broadest strata of the masses, of workers’ and peasants’ democracy. Nor would there be the least necessary reason why their political monopoly would bring about suppression of inner-party democracy. The conditions of such a development as hypothetically outlined, in fact, might well tend toward a richer democracy than in a pre-revolutionary situation, granted a few good breaks. Later on, with the workers regime consolidated, with at all favorable circumstances internally and internationally, the one-party dictatorship might most naturally develop into many parties, the new parties (perhaps beginning as factions) arising on the basis of the new problems of the new economy and social structure.
These are not idle speculations, based on fancy. In Russia, immediately following the victory in the Civil War, tendencies at once appeared working toward the breakup of the Bolshevik party. These were expressed as faction struggles. The factions were, however, at least in embryo, separate political parties. They had different programs and different tactics. They carried their struggle to one or another extent outside of the framework of the party (in 1918, it will be remembered, the Bukharin faction functioned quite independently, with its own public press, officially endorsed by the Moscow region of the party). For a while we might say that the Bolshevik party was somewhat like the Trinity – “one substance and three persons”: it was from one point of view a coalition of three parties, the Stalin and Bukharin and Trotsky “parties”. In 1929, the SR Chernov, who, unlike Hook, was looking at realities and not forms, wrote an essay most significantly entitled: Russia’s Two Parties (i.e., the Stalin party and the Bukharin party).
How simply might such developments as these – granted other external developments (the success of the Chinese revolution, for example) or different internal circumstances (the advanced productive plant of the United States) – have issued in a number of freely competing parties. But even if this would not be the case, it would not prove that “one-party dictatorship” is necessarily incompatible with democracy. If we are interested not in juridical abstraction but in actualities, it is possible that the workers’ state will find in some cases that a one-party form is the most democratic political structure. Such a party would be in effect a coalition of many parties, a federated party; and full democratic expression might be given, publicly and freely, through it. (The Democratic party of the US is at this moment close to such a coalition party on a bourgeois foundation.)
But does the revolutionary party, the Bolshevik party, claim that only it can adequately represent the interests of the masses, administer the workers’ state effectively and through its leadership open the road for socialism? Does it aim to act as the “government party” and the sole such party? Certainly. And there is not the slightest incompatibility between such claims and such a purpose, and the fullest possible democracy short of the liquidation of the state – which is also part of the purpose of the revolutionary party.

Why all this fuss from our subjects about “one-party dictatorship”? If it were a “purely scientific question”, if it were actually only a study in historical causation, or the attempt to study and predict the political forms of the workers’ state, we may be sure that it would not be so passionate a point of dispute. There is such a fuss because behind the “purely scientific dispute” lurks as usual the political objective, because the scientific dispute is only the screen for the attack not on “the theory of one-party dictatorship” but on the practical objective of class dictatorship, of the workers’ state to be achieved by the overthrow of the bourgeois state, on the sole historical means available for carrying through the socialist transformation of society. This is not yet explicit in Hook, though suggested by the trend of his recent argumentation, but it rises plainly to the surface in those of his confréres who have outstripped him – in Eastman, Lyons, Harrison, and of course all of those included in our “Group II”. Let us, however, present it in the words of an old master at the “inevitable deduction”: “‘Class dictatorship’ necessarily means party dictatorship. Dictatorship by a party inevitably becomes dictatorship within the party – the dictatorship of a leader and his clique.” (Algernon Lee, New Leader, Feb. 6, 1937)
And there is a second reason, which is betrayed most naively in Hook’s article, for the fuss. Near the end he points out, what is unquestionably true, that “every working-class party considers itself to be the vanguard not only of the class but of the new society it is striving to achieve” and that all parties are sometimes or at least might be mistaken. The incidence of his argument makes clear that the only sufficient explanation for his dragging in these two flat and obvious truths is to provide a justification for failing to make a firm choice among the political parties actually on the field, to give loyalty and allegiance unambiguously to one camp or the other. The justification is of course absurd. The first point is completely irrelevant: making a claim doesn’t prove a claim; Voliva claims his flat-earth theory is correct, but that doesn’t entitle us to make no choice between it and the theory of scientific astronomy and geography. Do we balance witch doctors against John Hopkins on the basis of their claims? The second point is equally unimportant since the problem is not one of infallibility but the general course of one party as compared with that of others. What Hook is trying to do is to spin himself a theory which would enable him to be “impartially” and paternally a “friend” equally of the Social Democratic Federation and of the Socialist Workers Party – after all, they both claim [5] to be the vanguard and both make mistakes. He is trying to give a rational basis to the dream of our group that we mentioned in part I: the dream of peace, freedom, release from responsibility.
 
Lenin is the Father of Stalin
THE FINAL MAJOR CONTENTION of our subjects, the remaining plank in their “formal program”, is that Leninism is the source of Stalinism. This theory has been put forward in one form or another by Lyons, Eastman, Hook (in the Southern Review article), Stolberg, Harrison, and by all in Group II except Lundberg (who hasn’t discussed the matter). Eastman, in his recent Liberty article carries the theory to its conclusion by stating that Leninism is the source not only of Stalinism but also of fascism.
Since this theory is based exclusively on the related theory about “one-party dictatorship”, it will not require extended additional discussion. We wish to make three points:
1. As in other instances but here more grossly, our subjects do not bother at all to define what the point is that they are trying to make. At times they seem to be saying no more than that Leninism in Russia preceded in time Stalinism. Granted. Or that a continuous state power underwent the transformation from Leninism to Stalinism. Obviously. Or that Leninist politics is the “cause” (whatever they mean by historical cause, which they do not state) not only in Russia but as a general law of the subsequent transformation to Stalinism. Or that Leninism “must” under any and all circumstances result in Stalinism – which is what, as a matter of fact, they all do say, these anti-inevitabilityists. Or that there were juridical features of the party and state structure under Lenin which Stalin was able to utilize for his own purposes, in consolidating his totalitarian power. Which last, again, is known to everyone.
The ambiguity here is not unimportant. Since many of these interpretations of their vaguely worded thesis are almost self-evidently true, they are able to carry over the favorable emotive attitude which a reader grants to a recognized truth, to their general central thesis that Leninism is simply a stage in a necessary process which must eventuate in Stalinist totalitarianism.
2. As with all the rest of their formal program, the reasoning of our subjects here is entirely formalistic, a priori: Leninism means by definition one-party dictatorship – which is besides its “essential” and causally crucial doctrine; one-party dictatorship by a necessary process leads to dictatorship of a clique or Führer and the murder of all opposition; Q.E.D. Simple enough.
Let us observe what our empiricists are doing. For the sake of their a priori syllogism they are simply throwing all the events of history into the scrap heap. For instance, by making the alleged theory of one-party dictatorship the quintessence of Leninism in the most approved scholastic manner, they are committed to the conclusion that all of Lenin’s concrete policies on the hundred and one questions of colonial revolt, trade unions, united front, war, the soviet organization of society, etc., etc., are mere subordinate “accidents” of no decisive importance.
Or, second, how explain that Stalin, in order to consolidate a totalitarian power, had to abandon all the policies of Lenin (cf. Eastman, The End of Socialism in Russia!), and murder all of Lenin’s colleagues.
Or again: In any conceivable sense that Leninism is the source of Stalinism it is at least as true that it is also the source of “Trotskyism”. But for fifteen years, on a Soviet and world scale, on every major economic and social and political question, the adherents of Trotskyism have been in diametric opposition to the adherents of Stalinism, an opposition expressed equally in program and in practical human struggle. Nevertheless, the theory of our subjects commits them to the view that Trotskyism and Stalinism are fundamentally twins – a view which each of them step by step approaches and which many (Lyons, Harrison, and Hook by implication in the next to last paragraph of the Southern Review article) already express openly – that the entire struggle is at bottom nothing but a sham, motivated only by the personal bureaucratic desire for posts – the outs wanting to be in, the ins wanting to stay in. This incredibly vulgar conclusion is the only possible logical consequence of their thesis – as they indeed increasingly recognize. Vulgar as it is, we have met the theory often before, from many other sources.
3. Several of the more prominent of our subjects, including Hook outstandingly, broke with Stalinism about five years ago primarily on the issue of “social-fascism”. Memory of this will serve as an ironic, even amusing, comment on the fact that their thesis of today commits them to the theory of communo-fascism. In the early stages of their present development, it might have been thought that the new theory was only that of “Stalino-fascism”, but today they have gone from Stalino-fascism to communo-fascism. There is no way for them to avoid this without abandoning their present theses. [6]
The theory of social-fascism was based on the theoretical premise summed up in Stalin’s famous aphorism to the effect that social democracy and fascism are not antipodes but twins. The third-period Stalinist tactics toward reformists and reformist organizations followed naturally from this premise. But this premise is exactly that now formulated by our subjects with respect first to Stalinism and now to communism in general. Isolating totalitarian dictatorship as the determinative feature, the “essence” of a social regime, they first identify Stalinism with fascism. (Already in this first step, Stalinism and fascism have been proved to be not antipodes but twins.) They then trace Stalinism back to Leninism as its root, source, or cause, and thus, since Trotskyism is also the child of Leninism, communism in its Leninist and Trotskyist form as well as in its Stalinist perversion is shown to be the twin of fascism. The implicit logic becomes fully expressed in Eastman’s Liberty article where he says quite bluntly that Leninism is the source both of Stalinism and of fascism:
To some it may seem almost fantastic to say that the communist parties are thus becoming fascist parties. Fascism originated, out of communism in exactly this way. Mussolini was a revolutionary socialist. He learned all he knew from the Bolsheviks ... Mussolini learned it from Lenin, Hitler learned it from Mussolini. In origin that is what fascism is.
Our empiricists once more reveal themselves to be moralistic Platonists under the skin. Leninism, Stalinism, Trotskyism, fascism, all “participate” in and derive their reality from the Platonic Idea of Dictatorship; and therefore they are all “essentially”, in the Realm of Being, “the same thing”. A lot of trouble is thereby saved. No more need for careful analysis of modes of economy, class relationships, social origins, concrete conflicting interests. All such matters are only a part of the World of Becoming, with no more than a secondary, shadow reality. All we require is a formal syllogism of two to reach Q.E.D.s.
The practical political consequences, if their theory is taken seriously, will, of course, have to be just the same as those of the theory of social-fascism except that the communist and Stalinist movements will be substituted for reformism. To begin with, for example, they must abandon altogether the defense of the Soviet Union; there is no possible justification in their present theory for the policy of defense of the Soviet Union. We suspect that Hook, Eastman and Lyons have been aware of this consequence for some time. So far as we know, none of them has yet declared himself publicly on the issue – which is so obviously raised by their writings of the last year. Whence this silence? Are not these the moralists who so diligently proclaim their devotion to Truth and so zealously attack the a-moralism of the Bolsheviks? Can it be part of their morality to hide or obscure the practical meaning of their theories from the masses?
We take this occasion, therefore, to demand from Hook, Eastman and Lyons unambiguous declarations on the question of defense of the Soviet Union from attack by Hitler or Japan – or for that matter by England – declarations motivated by the theories which they are now putting publicly forward.
But, of course, much more than this follows. It follows that one must be equally against both communism and fascism, against dictatorships whether of the left or of the right; it follows that communism and fascism are the Siamese twin main danger; it follows, in fact, as it did from the theory of ‘social-fascism, that a united front with any communist organization is as impermissible as a united front with a fascist organization. Of course, our subjects do not as yet draw out all of these conclusions, even in their own minds. But that is because they are as we have mentioned before irresponsible politicians; if they take their program seriously they will have to draw them in time, or else abandon their program. Toward the end of his Southern Review article, Hook writes as fellows: “They [political parties] may offer a program and leadership, but just as soon as they reach out for a monopoly of political power, education, and propaganda behind the back of representative political institutions of the producers and consumers [and this is just what Hook in the preceding section of his article claims to have proved that all communist parties whether Leninist, Trotskyist or Stalinist, do], it is time to build barricades against them.” (Our italics.) Hook will doubtless explain that he means the italicized phrase in a merely metaphorical sense – i.e., barricades of education and propaganda. But the particular metaphor chosen, as so often with metaphors, reveals more than the author consciously intends: for from Hook’s present theory, if taken seriously, the statement follows with entire literalness.
 
In Summary
IT IS TIME TO SUMMARIZE briefly certain general features of what we have called “the formal program”. It is, taken at its face value and as a whole: stale, abstract, negative, and preoccupied with the past.
1, Our subjects take great pride in believing that they are contributing something “fresh”, that they are “reevaluating in the light of new experiences”, that they “are not dogmatists who refuse to reexamine their ‘basic assumption’”, etc. What a pathetic self-deception! None of them has brought to light any new facts, given any new understanding of the present or future. As Freud put it once in a polemic: “They are now disputing things which they, themselves, formerly defended and what is more, this dispute is not based on new observations, which might have taught them something fresh, but rather on a different interpretation which makes them see things in a different light than before”. In this case, the “different interpretation” is different political aims which for justification require the violent re-arrangement of the past. New experience and events are “teaching” them and not the dogmatists? All that they say in their formal program can be found long, long ago in the pages of Kautsky and put far more brilliantly, consistently and openly.
2. The abstract and formal character of their program has already been demonstrated, and is besides sufficiently obvious. They are occupied with a realm distantly removed from hard, cold events: with “method”, with “nature dialectic”, the concept of the inevitability of socialism, the essential nature of one-party dictatorship ..., with Truth and Freedom and Morality in caps.
3. And entirely negative also: Against dialectical materialism, against one-party dictatorship, against Stalinism ... But what for? For Truth, for Freedom, for Morality ...
4. And, where actual events are referred to in a decisive manner, we discover that these are always events of the past: Kronstadt, how Kerensky was overthrown, the outlawing of party factions in 1920, the illegalization of the opposition parties ... What of the present, and the future?
These pervasive features of the “formal program” as developed by them all – stale, abstract, negative, concerned with the past – are sufficient indication by themselves that this formal program, taken at its face value, is not the actual political program of this group in the sense of that set of ideas and directives, explicit or implicit, which actually indicates the direction and aims of their intervention in the political arena. These features show us that the formal program functions not to express clearly and unembiguously the group’s political nature, but to veil and obscure its political nature. It is a flank movement, to direct attention away from the main strategic manoeuvre.
However, specific analysis of even the formal program has already disclosed the actual politics to which it is indirectly related: An attack on revolutionary Marxism, on Bolshevism, and a growing rapprochement with reformism of both social-democratic and bourgeois varieties. It is politics of a group tendency in motion from revolutionary Marxism toward reformism: that is, of a centrist tendency.
We shall now proceed to establish this same conclusion by reference in some detail to the concrete political acts of our subjects.
 
Part 3


am/Shachtman: Intellectuals in Retreat (Part 1)



Burnham Archive   |   Shachtman Archive   |   Intellectuals in Retreat

Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

James Burnham & Max Shachtman
Intellectuals in Retreat

WE ARE, IN THIS ARTICLE, writing particularly about the following persons:
Group I: Max Eastman, Sidney Hook, Charles Yale Harrison, James Rorty, Edmund Wilson, Philip Rahv, Benjamin Stolberg, James Farrell, Louis Hacker, and others.
Group II: John Chamberlain, Louis Adamic, Eugene Lyons, John Dewey, George S. Counts, Ferdinand Lundberg.
It may reasonably be asked in what sense we list these individuals as groups; and how we happen to direct our attention to the two groups in a single article. All of those in Group I have a similar political background. They are all what is known as “radical intellectuals.” Most were once, for varying lengths of time, within the orbit of the Communist Party, several of them Party members. With the exception of Eastman and Stolberg, they continued as Communist Party sympathizers well into its Stalinist period. From five years to a year and a half ago, they broke sharply with Stalinism, and for a period were, in political sympathies and general political orientation, close to the revolutionary movement – that is, to the Fourth Internationalist or “Trotskyist” movement. Indeed, they were and still for the most part are known to a considerable public as “the Trotskyist intellectuals.” Within the past year or more, they have been steering away from the revolutionary movement.
Group II is of a different character, and will occupy us only incidentally. These intellectuals, also, were at one time closely associated with Stalinism. However, in contrast to Group I, they were – to employ a picturesque phrase which has become current in this country – ”Stalinist liberals”. Their support was always in terms of bourgeois, not of working class, politics. They have in recent years drawn away from Stalinism, though of them only Lyons and Dewey have broken sharply. For Group II, however, this change does not mean a decisive shift: their basic bourgeois liberal politics dominated their Stalinist associations, and now continues little altered without the Stalinist trimmings. Group II is herein included because its members with those of Group I are known as “radical anti-Stalinist intellectuals”; and more especially because, from a different origin, some of Group I have coalesced politically with Group II, and others of Group I are now heading plainly toward that same outcome.
As we shall show, the ideas and actions of these persons whom we have grouped together are in many symptomatic respects similar, and the current direction (though not the speed) of their political evolution is the same. It is in addition worth noting that this group, considered as a political phenomenon, is by no means confined to this country. As prominent European analogues we may mention: Victor Serge, Willi Schlamm, Andre Gide, Charles Plisnier, Ignazio Silone, Eric Wollenberg, Anton Ciliga. The political background and present course of each of these corresponds closely with that of our Group I, except that Serge and Plisnier were never associated with Stalinism.
There seems, then, ample prima facie justification for treating our subjects as a group. It is true, of course, that they do not like to think of themselves as a collectivity, a group. In their own minds and in public they seem to stress that they are “individuals”, “independent thinkers”; and this is related to a theoretic stress which they place upon Psychology, attacking revolutionists for “disregarding psychology” and blindly “reducing” everything to political terms. Indeed, this assertion of independent individuality and of the primacy of psychology is another of their group characteristics.
It is also true that it would be an over-simplification and indeed a serious error, to suggest that there are no important differences among them, to lump them together in a single mass. Harrison and Rorty, for example, are birds of a different political species, Harrison having now ended up unambiguously in the cage of the class enemy. Nor shall we maintain that each of these individuals, as individuals, will “necessarily” finish up on the same spot. We are writing not psychology nor morality but politics. Our aim is to analyze the nature and direction of a political phenomenon; and politics is concerned with groups, not individuals. Having determined the political nature of a group, we can say of any given individual only that if he thinks and acts consistently as a member of the group such and such an outcome will follow. But individuals are, perhaps fortunately, often inconsistent; and individuals change.
 
The Frying Pan of the Intellectuals
WE MAY NOTICE AT ONCE about our subjects that as compared with the Stalinist intellectuals and with most of the bourgeois intellectuals they have outstanding abilities, talents and moral virtues. This should not surprise us. The foulness of Stalinism and imperialism can today breed only maggots; in particular is it impossible for intellectuals to avoid degeneration not merely of their characters as human beings but also of their minds if for any length of time they give their allegiance to these allied monsters of the lie.
The chief talent of the intellectuals in our list is that of writing well. This almost all of them do. How refreshing it is to compare their styles with the dull and dreary pages of New Masses or Science And Society!
However, we should also observe that those with whom we are dealing are primarily “ideologists”: they are critics, philosophers, sociologic-political writers. Only one of them (Farrell) is a creative artist; Harrison, Wilson, and Adamic have written novels in passing, and Rorty a number of poems, but these are a subordinate part of their work. None among all of them is a physical scientist. What pretensions they have to empirical science of any sort are to be found in the dangerous fields of history, sociology and politics, where it is so hard to distinguish an hypothesis from a prejudice; and even in these fields, Hacker and Lundberg only have done any substantial original research.
We may further record that all of these individuals, some of them outstandingly, have many good and progressive deeds to record. In some cases for more than a generation, they have been in the forefront of many of the most important cases in this country and internationally where civil and human rights were at stake. Their names are linked with the fight for Sacco and Vanzetti, for the recognition of the Soviet Union, for Fred Beal, for the Scottsboro boys and Tom Mooney. With the exception of Counts, everyone of them made the vast social and personal sacrifice which was involved in serving on the Committee for the Defense of Leon Trotsky, and three of them were members of the Commission of Inquiry into the charges against Trotsky in the Moscow Trials. The work of the Committee and the Commission remains as an enduring monument; its influence has been felt throughout the world. Nor are their good deeds of the past only. We continue to find their names in the majority of those cases where men have joined efforts toward some genuinely progressive end.
It is hardly to be expected that such activities can be carried on without trouble; and they have, indeed, plenty of trouble. The troubles are of several sorts. One type might be called “craft troubles”: they find heavy obstacles placed in the way of the fruitful exercize of their talents. The bourgeoisie and the Stalinists, controlling between them the press, the magazines, the publishing houses, are not eager to give recognition to these persons who proclaim themselves against the status quo and against Stalinism. A none-too-subtle sabotage, increasing in recent years, scuttles their work or at the least handicaps it.
To add to these craft hazards are pervasive and equally painful personal troubles. Psychologists and anthropologists teach us that the pressure of public opinion, of social approval and disapproval, praise and blame, is one of the most powerful forces molding the human personality; and the bourgeoisie and the Stalinists have learned the lesson. Our subjects find themselves to be modified pariahs in their community. Old friends cut them dead or throw vicious insults at them. Public and private denunciation becomes commonplace; the lurid prose of the Kremlin apologists holds them up to the world as fascists, counter-revolutionists, German or Japanese spies, even – last bitter indignity – as Trotskyists. When serving in such an enterprise as the Trotsky Committee, to these are added an unremitting plague of telephone calls, letters and telegrams, all designed for the harshest possible effect on the nervous system.
Yet, in this vale of tears, where at least some trouble is the lot of every man, and where therefore judgment of troubles must be relative, it would be possible to exaggerate the ills of our subjects. None of them is forced into the loneliness of the mountain eagle; none is compelled to be altogether silent; and none as yet is exactly starving. In fact, after ten years of economic crisis during which even brokers and bankers have gone bankrupt, some seem to do rather well by themselves. Especially is this true of those who have either remained throughout on the bourgeois side or who have gone over to it. Each one under Group II may be presumed to use the larger form for his income tax reports. Chamberlain’s recognition by the owners of Fortune runs, it is said, well into five figures. Columbia University, second richest educational institution in the country, has given its fullest academic honors to Dewey and Counts, and their books are widely published and read. Lyons is able to combine public relations counsellorship with substantial free lance journalism and lecturing. The recent books of Adamic and Lundberg were not too badly treated by the general press. Though Eastman’s earlier defenses of the revolution had to content themselves with modest appearance in little magazines, his recent attacks on the socialist ideal are featured on the covers of Harper’s and Liberty. Hacker’s defense of liberal capitalism in his Graphic History does not seem to have injured his academic standing (also at Columbia) nor his access to publication. We understand that Harrison’s ringing break with Marxism (in the New Leader) was followed by negotiations for a well deserved appointment in the Federal Housing Administration ...
Dewey has often and brilliantly explained how the conflicts with which human beings unavoidably find themselves confronted give rise to ideas and ideals which are projected as instruments for solving those conflicts. (There is, of course, no a priori assurance that the given idea or ideal will actually be capable of solving the given conflict.) Out of the troubled conflicts of our subjects, an ideal, a dream emerges. In a world pressing tumultuously, imperiously against every one of its inhabitants, grinding and battering them from every direction, they seek a little peace, quiet, a chance to cultivate and bring to harvest their talents. They ask for freedom, meaning by freedom what Eastman, who is usually several steps in advance, has written: “Freedom is being in a position to do what comes into your own head, to act whether sooner or late on your own impulses.” Phrased somewhat differently: They ask to be able to do and write what they wish without having to accept the consequences when what they do and write affects others; they ask not to be pushed around by others who are sure of their ideas and intend to fight for them; they ask to be released from responsibility.
 
When Is a Program a Program?
IT IS A LITERAL and easily verifiable fact that not one of these intellectuals, in all the millions of words they have written and publicly spoken, has presented a new political program. Indeed, so far as explicit statement goes, we find in them very little reference to the concrete political issues of the day. It goes without saying that by “political program” we do not mean a list of empty generalities such as those with which Eastman ends his Harper’s article: “Problems of being and of universal history ... should be acknowledged to exist ... The various components of the [socialist] ideal should be analyzed and considered separately ... Those obviously fantastic ... should be thrown out ...”; nor the apostrophes to Truth and Freedom by which Hook has lately taken to climaxing his essays. No one need bother to agree or disagree with such abstractions, because agreement or disagreement commits one to nothing. A political program means a set of doctrines, principles, rules or directives which gives the unambiguous answers, or from which the answers may be derived, to the chief concrete political problems of the present time: war, insecurity, fascism, unemployment, the struggle for (or against) socialism ...
Eastman, as so often, gives the show away. At the end of his polemic against Burnham (New International, August 1938) he confesses openly that he has no (conscious) program. “If I live,” he promises, “I will complete my thesis.” But he “would not hurry”. To him, “it seems just now in America a period for deliberation.”
Let us pause for a moment to consider the meaning of this confession, assuming it to be true. What is Eastman (and almost any name on our list could be substituted for Eastman’s) saying? What is he saying, for example, to the French worker standing today with the whip of fascism descending toward his back? to the American worker plunged into the misery and despair of permanent mass unemployment and swamped by the tidal wave of Roosevelt’s armament preparations and his looming war? to his fellow-intellectuals? Eastman is saying: I, who am not a humble clerk in an office nor an obscure cog in an assembly line nor a timid teacher trying to keep a job in a high school, but a writer widely and publicly known, one who presumes to sit publicly in judgment on the great events of history, to publish my decrees on the Russian Revolution, the century-old struggles of the proletarian movement, the rise of fascism, the lot of humanity and its future, I who do not hesitate to attack and expose Lenin and Hitler and Stalin and Trotsky, I tell you: “Sorry, there is nothing to do about it; I regret that at present I have no answer to give you; you will just have to wait patiently until I get around to completing my notes – a page or two seems to be missing from my files.” And if meanwhile fascism completes its conquest of Europe, if the war begins with no organization of the forces against it ...? “Sorry, that’s not my responsibility ...”
But, our subjects uniformly reply, when we remind them that they have overlooked the detail of supplying us with a new program: “That’s not our affair. We are not politicians. Politics is not our field. We are – writers.”
We have heard this reply so often that we believe it, too, deserves a word of comment. In making this answer, we ask ourselves, whom are they trying most to fool? their general readers, us, or themselves? The truth of the matter is: with one or two partial exceptions, these are all thoroughly political people. They intervene constantly in political affairs; their interests, feelings, thoughts, conversations, personal relations, speeches, writings and actions are bound up predominantly with politics. Though members of no political parties, it is entirely safe to say that they are far more politically active than, for example, the median Socialist Party member, more active than many members even of such parties as the Communist Party or the Socialist Workers Party.
If they are not writing about politics most of the time, what in hell is it that they are writing about? About what are Hook’s books, his articles in the Modern Monthly, in the New Leader, in the Southern Review, most of his reviews in a dozen periodicals, his hundred-and-one speeches in a score of courses and forums? What is Harrison’s very novel about, if not politics? Where is politics absent from Stolberg’s essay on the New Deal, his book on the C.I.O., his ex cathedra review of The Revolution Betrayed in the Nation? What is Counts writing about when he publishes his thick volume on democracy? or Lundberg on the Sixty Families, with its concluding defense of New Dealism? or Chamberlain when he explains that Washington is “our state” in Common Sense? or Adamic, the immigrant boy who made good, when he covers the whole field in My America? or Lyons in his book about Russia, his column, his speeches? or the whole bunch in their recent New Leader essays? You will have to search through Rahv’s and Phillips’ and Dupee’s Partisan Review with a high-power microscope to find an article, whatever the alleged subject, that avoids politics. How about Hacker, now reviving evolutionary meliorism in his latest interpretations of American history? Or even such a one as Wilson, who is reported to say nowadays that “Writers should not sign anything; they should merely write” – what does he deal with in his book about his Soviet journey, his discussions of proletarian literature, his essays on Marx and Engels and Marxism, his New Republic article on the Moscow Trials, his ballyhooing of Willi Schlamm?
Let us finish with this tommyrot about “Not interested in politics; not politicians ...” once and for all. These are indeed “political animals” in a sense far more complete than Aristotle had in mind when he first applied the characterization to men in general.
They are above all preoccupied with politics, they are in their own not obscure way politicians. The trouble is precisely that their politics are negative, irresponsible and unprincipled.
These adjectives may seem to be harsh, part of the “insufferable Trotskyist tone” which our subjects are not the last to criticize. As is usual with us, however, we employ them not as mere careless emotive epithets, but as carefully meant description.
Their politics are negative in the sense that they are always and constantly criticizing and attacking everybody else’s politics, often in the sharpest conceivable manner, on every type of question from the highest branches of theory to the latest move in the trade unions or the labor party, but seldom making concrete and positive proposals of their own. If anyone has any doubts about this generalization, he may remove them through acquaintance with their works.
Their politics are irresponsible in the sense that they do not lay their cards on the table, state and make explicit the premises from which they derive their particular conclusions (they do not even to themselves), and thus they can jump from one week to the next in and out of organizations, back and forth from one position to another, one attitude to another, without being checked up and called to account. If anyone has any doubts about this generalization, he may remove them by studying their actions during the past couple of years.
Their politics are unprincipled because their specific political actions and positions are not derived from consciously, explicitly recognized principles (whether such principles were right or wrong would be irrelevant to this point). If anyone has any doubts about this generalization, let him try to find such consciously and explicitly recognized principles in their writings.
Now, though our subjects have not presented – and, we may be confident, will not present – any new program, it would be very naive to suppose that they have no program at all. Like all those who intervene more than sporadically in politics, they of course have a program – if not a program openly stated, then a program which may be deduced from their actions and the positions they take on specific questions at issue. In fact, our group may be said to have not one but two programs: a “formal”, avowed or alleged program which has been developed at length in the writings of its more prominent spokesmen, to some extent in the writings of all of them; an “actual”, politically decisive program which we may piece together from their actions and specific positions on concrete questions. It is to these two programs that we turn.
 
Part 2


am/Shachtman: Intellectuals in Retreat (Part 4)



Burnham Archive   |   Shachtman Archive   |   Intellectuals in Retreat

Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

James Burnham & Max Shachtman
Intellectuals in Retreat

IV: What To Do?
AN ANALYSIS OF THE POSITION of the radical intellectuals would be incomplete without tracing the social causes of the movement we have been discussing. In turn, an understanding of the causes is a prerequisite to a correction of the tendency to which they have yielded and a return to the position which will enable them to make their authentic and positive contribution to the revolutionary class struggle.
The main sociological cause of this movement is to be found in the long list of defeats suffered by the revolution in Europe and Asia, and the failure of the revolutionary movement here to grow rapidly enough to cope adequately with its great problems. It is obvious, also, that the Russian Revolution, which had such a powerful effect in restoring revolutionary Marxism to its rightful place in the ranks of the working class movement as well as among the radical intellectuals, had the contrary effect in the period of its degeneration under Stalinism.
The revolutionary socialists, however, could not and cannot see in any of these developments a reason for abandoning Marxism. Quite the contrary. Marxism was verified not only on the triumph of the October Revolution but also negatively in the defeats and decay that followed. Who other than those who applied the methods of Marxism to the realities of the class struggle were able to predict the setbacks suffered by the world proletariat, to explain the phenomena of the revolutionary ebb and the rise of fascism, to outline the only policy that would enable the proletariat to turn the tide of defeat into an irresistible wave of victory? The Marxists did not require the post hoc elucubrations now dished up on “one-party dictatorship” in order to explain the causes of the revolution’s degeneration. As early as 1906, in a fundamental way, the Marxist Trotsky already analyzed the danger of reaction inherent in a revolution confined to a single country. From 1917 onward, Lenin, Trotsky and all the other Bolsheviks repeated “a thousand times” that without the world revolution the Soviet republic would succumb to counter-revolutionary forces. Beginning with 1923, the Trotskyist Opposition, basing itself upon a political analysis which has never been excelled or even matched, launched the struggle against the Thermidorean degeneration of the Soviet power and the Communist International. Every important event in the last twenty years has only emphasized the irreplaceability of revolutionary Marxism as an instrument of analysis and a weapon of struggle for social emancipation.
Every period of reaction that follows a revolutionary defeat produces a variety of superficial and transient “new” and “stylish” doctrines, which eschew Marxism as “outlived.” It would be instructive to compare the history of the “factional struggles” following the defeat of the Russian revolution of 1905 with their analogues of the last decade or more. It is the present reactionary moods of depression, discouragement, loss of confidence in the recuperative powers of the proletariat and its revolutionary movement, which are rationalized into the widespread attacks against revolutionary Marxism. The radical intellectuals, by the very nature of their social position, are generally the first to yield to these moods, to capitulate to them instead of resisting them deliberately. In an entirely different degree, to be sure, they are as much the victims of our prolonged period of reaction as the Stalinist degeneration of the Russian Revolution and the temporary rise of fascism are its products.
The main intellectual disease from which these intellectuals suffer may be called Stalinophobia, or vulgar anti-Stalinism. The malady was superinduced by the universal revulsion against Stalin’s macabre system of frameups and purges. And the result has been that most of the writing done on the subject since then has been less a product of cold social analysis than of mental shock, and where there is analysis, it is moral rather than scientific or political.
It is interesting to note in this connection that virtually all our subjects have for years taken us to task for what they considered bur exclusive preoccupation with the fight against Stalinism, “Why don’t you ever attack anybody or anything besides Stalinism?” they used to complain. If we were not deeply stirred by their criticisms then, it was because they were based on a misapprehension of our fundamental position. Now times have changed to the point where the roles seem to be shifted; but in a very peculiar way. There is hardly an article written by our critics, or a speech delivered, without the fiercest attacks on Stalinism which they increasingly and undiscriminatingly identify with revolutionary Marxism. Their vulgar anti-Stalinism consists in this: they condemn Stalinism in reality for precisely those policies which – and this is what the critics of Bolshevism do not realize! – have brought it steadily closer to the fundamental policies of social reformism and bourgeois democracy; and at the same time they have adopted a conciliatory attitude towards reformism and democracy. They abstract Stalinism out of its concrete historical context, its relation to declining world imperialism. Thus their opposition is opportunistic, since it is divorced from the basic struggle against imperialism itself. This leads them into the most peculiar combination with people who profess some sort of “anti-Stalinism” even when they represent views no less reactionary than Stalin’s.
The “Trotskyist” movement was insured against such a conciliatory attitude by the objective political position it adopted from the very beginning. It began the struggle against the Soviet Thermidoreans fifteen years ago not on the grounds that they were the legitimate heirs of Leninism, but because they were a bastard product; and it always related this struggle to the general fight against imperialistm and for world socialism. The struggle against Stalinism was launched, Trotsky insisted, because it represented a capitulation to social democracy, because it was the channel through which flowed the forces of capitalist restoration. The policy of the Second International is the policy of surrender to the bourgeoisie. Stalinism differs from that policy in no important particular. The methods by which Stalinism rules were not invented by it: it copied them from the bourgeoisie and the social democracy – frameups, massacres of revolutionists and all the rest of it, merely giving to these methods a more totalitarian character. If the political genealogy of Stalinism were to be honestly established, it would be found that while it is neither the son of Leninism nor the brother of fascism, it is the totalitarian offspring of the bourgeois and social democracies.
Once this is understood, the struggle against Stalinism assumes a solid and objective political character. It can be conducted progressively only from the standpoint of revolutionary Marxism. It is in this way that anti-Stalinism acquires a positive significance, and is prevented from being vulgarized to the point of reconciliation with reformism and bourgeois democracy. (We dismiss entirely that brand of “anti-Stalinism” which leads to, or is only a cloak for, complete retirement from the struggle.)
 
For a Reorientation
OUR AIM IN WRITING this article is not to abuse or disparage our critics among the radical intellectuals, but to address ourselves seriously (even if sharply!) to the problems they themselves have raised. As Max Eastman has observed, this is indeed “a time for deliberation”. But would it not be well for these intellectuals and those who incline towards their ideas to ask themselves: In what direction are we traveling? Eastman has already announced that his deliberations will take place in retirement. Harrison has already proclaimed his conversion to social democracy. Others have already taken steps in their direction. The deliberate purpose of our article is, by presenting sufficiently convincing arguments, to stop their further drift towards an anti-Marxist position and to bring about a change of direction.
We are intransigently hostile to the attitude of the Stalinists towards the intellectual fellow-travelers of the working class; it is repugnant to a revolutionist. The combination of flattery, bribery and intimidation with which they keep “their” intellectuals “in line”, that is not our method. We do not demand of the writer that his creative work – under penalty of being denounced as worthless – be imbued with the philosophy of dialectic materialism, for we believe with Lenin that a work of art can be great and of value to the working class even if it is “imbued” with an idealistic philosophy, or for that matter without any systematic philosophy whatever. We do not demand of the singer that his poems be written in line with the latest or the last-but-latest turn in party policy. Towards the intellectual we have neither the contemptuous attitude expressed in “Stick to your last and keep your nose out of politics”, nor the desire to buy his praise of our party and its policies (or its Leaders!) in return for “official” party praise of his creative products.
The intellectual genuinely concerned with advancing the socialist movement has a multitude of opportunities to put his energy and talents at its service. There is the work or making possible continued life and activity of the revolutionary refugees from persecution; there is the work of defending the class war prisoners. There is above all the work of popularizing the ideas of revolutionary Marxism, if not among the proletariat, then at least among the now conservative or reformist-minded members of their own circles. And for those who are prepared to participate more actively and directly in the movement, who understand that without a consciously organized vanguard party the working class cannot win its war and consolidate its victory, there is membership in the world party of the social revolution – the Fourth International, which needs and welcomes serious intellectuals in its ranks. Such action is not proposed as a substitute for critical articles on no matter what fundamental question, for free and candid exchange of opinions, for the right to join in the discussion of every revolutionary problem. Not at all and just the contrary. It is only by such action that criticism and discussion acquire richness and reality and fruitfulness and purpose. Without it, they become common intellectual perambulations in midair, a spurious substitute for positive activity.
The intellectuals have also an autonomous and far from unimportant role to play in the cultural field. Entirely justified and necessary is a union of intellectuals – writers, scientists, philosophers, teachers – regardless of their divergent “factional” views, but only on the basis of specific and concrete action against specific abuses, of which there are a growing number under “democracy” to say nothing of the totalitarian regimes (Teacher’s Oaths, censorship, sabotage of publication, reactionary intolerance in schools and universities, etc., etc.). Such alliances or united fronts have a positive and progressive significance, in contrast to the anti-Marxist “ideological” political unions typified by the League Against Totalitarianism.
What a contrast is presented to the latter by the international movement which André Breton and Diego Rivera have in their manifesto proposed to launch! They, too, call for an association of artists and intellectuals. While they do not propose that it be tied to a political party, they take just as firm and infinitely clearer a position against both fascist and Stalinist totalitarianism, but they also make the indispensable distinction between the two. They do not take a mouthful of hot potatoes when they are called upon to express themselves flatly on the question of bourgeois and social democracy, on the question of imperialist war, on the question of capitalism and socialism.
Why have not the radical intellectuals responded to their call which was prominently displayed in the Partisan Review? Is it perhaps because they object to the references to Freudianism? Or to some minor formulation? Or to the style? But those are scarcely of real importance. Rivera-Breton have explained that they consider the manifesto to be simply a draft. Obviously, what is important and decisive is the main line of thought and action which it proposes. That line, while boldly describing the sphere of freedom and independence which the artist and intellectual must take for themselves, is unambiguously revolutionary – not Stalinist, not social-democratic, not middle-class radicalism.
Is it possible that the reply to our question will be the one we have heard so often in the past? “The line is none too radical for me, you understand, but it will repulse ‘the others’ whom we want to win.” It is the answer of the psychologists and not of the revolutionists – and not of such good psychologists. The only way we, or anyone else, have learned to win people to a revolutionary position is by standing on that position. To start out by adopting or adapting yourself to the present (i.e., conservative) position of those you seek to win over – which is the alternative – means that you will win nobody over for the simple reason that you have already been won over yourself. The not at all imaginary quotation we have cited was the basis of the argument in the editorial board of the late Marxist Quarterly, which is one of the reasons why the adjective must now be affixed to it; it is heard often enough in the Partisan Review; it was not absent in the days of the American Committee for the Defense of Leon Trotsky; it was the argument used to trap so many into going along (for a time) with the muddle known as the Keep America Out of War Committee.
But its shallowness is revealed by a single glance at the totality of those who employ it. Each of them uses it, with a vague toss of the head in the direction of those who “have to be won over”, so that all of them, taken together, finally end up by being less “radical” than each of them taken individually! Yet, united, and shedding their conservative rationalizations, they already represent a sufficiently imposing force which, together with those who would be immediately attracted to them, would bring to life in the United States such a movement as is outlined by Breton and Rivera.

IF THE “SUBJECTS” OF this article have been a group of radical intellectuals, the matters we have dealt with far exceed them in political importance, and only thereby make possible a justification of this essay’s length. The devastating crisis of capitalism is accompanied by a no less devastating crisis in the labor movement. Reflecting it is a turbulent discussion of proletarian principles, tactics, strategy, theory, ideology, history. Our article is a summary of the most important points in this discussion and a contribution to it in the form of a criticism of critics.
For us political criticism is worth the time spent on it only if it lays the basis for action. Action has positive significance for the socialist movement only if it is directed towards its historic goal. Not merely by doctrines handed down to us by those great minds which founded our movement, but by the endless variety of events which we have experienced in our own lifetime, the conviction has deepened in us that if the socialist revolution is not triumphant, society will end in self-destruction. And if the socialist revolution is to be realized by the working class, an indispensable prerequisite of this victory is the building up and consolidation of that party which stands on the program of revolutionary Marxism. The wisdom of man has supplied no effective substitute for it in the great struggle for freedom; the less effective, we see no reason for accepting. The confirmation which history has given this program gives us the right to call upon the revolutionary intellectuals as well as the class-conscious workers for support to the party which is its champion.



 


James BURNHAM
Max SHACHTMAN



[Copies of the issue of The New International containing the above article will be sent to all the individuals against whom it polemizes, with an invitation to make any comments desired in coming issues of the magazine. – Ed.]
 

am/Shachtman: Intellectuals in Retreat (Part 3)



Burnham Archive   |   Shachtman Archive   |   Intellectuals in Retreat

Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

James Burnham & Max Shachtman
Intellectuals in Retreat

III: The Actual Program
THERE ARE ONLY FIVE significant and clearly-defined programs in present-day society, supported and acted upon with a more or less continuous tradition by organized social groups. Each of these offers a distinctive solution of the devastating crisis that threatens civilization itself. In the ranks of the working class: revolutionary Marxism, or the Fourth International, commonly referred to as the Trotskyist movement; Stalinism, the theory and practise of internationally-projected anti-Soviet totalitarianism; and reformism, or the social democracy of the Second International. [7] In the ranks of the bourgeoisie: liberalism, whose left wing merges with the labor reformists, and which is concerned with keeping capitalism alive by “making democracy work”; and fascism, which is concerned with keeping capitalism alive by putting an end to bourgeois democracy.
Stalinism has drawn increasingly close to social democracy. As far back as a dozen years ago, the Stalinists functioned as stand-in for the absent social democracy in the Chinese revolution. In the last three years especially, even theoretical and reminiscential distinctions have been abandoned, and no important differences exist between the two movements in any important practical political question. Their different origins, bases and functions – as well as narrower “job” interests – militate against their complete fusion or even unmarred collaboration; nor do we identify the two. But what is of paramount importance in connection with the point we are discussing is the common position they hold on such vital questions as: the class nature of the state; bourgeois democracy and socialist revolution; democracy and fascism; class struggle and class collaboration; independent political action and People’s Frontism or coalition government; class war and “war for democracy”; colonial independence; etc., etc. We shall have occasion to refer to this similarity of positions more concretely later on.
As for liberalism, it represents a period of capitalist development which, where it is not already outlived and irretrievable, is in rapid decay. Where it continues to subsist, it is on its last legs. There is no power on earth that can make it endure, which may well be why so many liberals have taken to prayer since Munich. If it is not replaced by workers’ rule that can reorganize society socialistically, it will be crushed inexorably by fascism. Not even those liberals who, like Max Lerner, rebaptize themselves “democratic collectivists”, can, we fear, redeem it from its fate. Even if it should be restored later in the now totalitarian countries – the post-1931 events in Spain show that it is not absolutely excluded – its resurrection can only be episodic, again as shown by the events in Spain.
So far as the working class movement goes, experience shows that all programs and tendencies that seek or claim to be independent and distinct from the two main streams – revolutionary Marxism and reformism (social-democratic or Stalinist) – merely move back and forth among them, never acquiring either stability or consistency, and coming to rest finally in one or the other. This holds true even of the sterile and miniscular sects which seem to accomplish the biological miracle of existing outside of life itself. Nobody has yet succeeded in holding together a centrist movement for any length of time. Depending on its point of departure and the direction in which it moves, it ends up sooner or later in the camp of revolution or reformism. It is the classic fate of Hamlet politics – centrism.
To the extent that it has a real program – and it has one – the group of radical intellectuals we have been discussing is centrist. Protests at this political characterization on the grounds of our “label-mania” can already be heard. More than anyone else, the centrist, who shows a cavalier lack of discrimination in ticketing everybody else, has a congenital dislike for being properly and bluntly designated by the name of his tendency. Yet there is no other way of describing politically a group made up of individuals who, in virtually every case, have been moving from a revolutionary Marxian position, or one close to it, towards reformism, or a little beyond it to bourgeois liberalism (or in some instances, scarcely concealed passivity). Factual evidence that has been accumulating throughout the recent past substantiates this conclusion.
 
Straws in the Wind
WE WILL NOT dwell here on the apparently trivial and unconnected incidents of the past year, except to point out that running through them all like a thread has been a series of “dissociations from Trotskyism”. They began during the period when the Commission of Inquiry was rendering its verdict on the Moscow Trials and the case of Leon Trotsky – for example, at the public meeting in December 1937 when several of the Commissioners went out of their way to assure the audience that they had nothing to do with Trotskyism. They have continued down to the present day. Oddly enough, the “dissociations” were made public on the most inappropriate and unwarranted occasions; the announcement never seemed to have any germane relationship to the context or the circumstances in which it was delivered. But lest we seem to insist too much on punctilio, we hasten to add that everyone has a right to pronounce himself on a program or a movement and even to choose an inauspicious moment in which to do it. We would go further: one who is not a supporter of “Trotskyism”, or who has convinced himself to cease being one, not only has the right to proclaim his opposition to this movement, but also the duty to do so. We would not be the last to urge him to fulfill it. Thus, we can only be grateful when Mr. Charles Yale Harrison writes in the New Leader that “as for myself, I must dissociate myself” from the Trotskyist movement, after he discovered the distilled essence of Truth in the pages of a posthumous brochure by Julius Martov. It is a blow hard to survive, but at least it is delivered in the open. (But then, it had to be delivered openly if the unemployment crisis in the United States was to be solved, at least so far as Mr. Harrison is concerned.)
We have said that if a person is sufficiently known to warrant being listened to, if only for a moment, on political questions, or even if that is not the case and he wants to express himself on such questions, he has both the right and duty to declare what program and movement he repudiates or opposes. But that is not always very interesting; certainly it is not his most important obligation. He must also state in one way or another the program or movement he advocates, especially in these times when everybody is looking for guidance to a way out of a situation widely acknowledged to be untenably bad. For it is not so much by what is opposed, but by what is proposed that a political tendency may be established. From the actions taken and proposals made by the group under consideration, it is not difficult to establish the political tendency of its component parts-more developed in some, less in others, to be sure – as one of rapprochement with the social democracy or even bourgeois liberalism. And a tendency which is in general away from revolutionary Marxism and towards social democracy, we are justified in designating as centrist. A few examples, so that we may follow the scriptural injunction of knowing people by their acts:
Item: Several months ago, the Thomasites and Lovestoneites launched their private imitation and would-be rival of the Stalinist anti-war farces under the name of the “Keep America Out of War” Committee. Such movements were inaugurated about a dozen years ago, and since produced in kaleidoscopic series, by Stalin-Münzenberg, as a petty bourgeois-pacifist substitute for independent working class struggle against imperialist war. Nowadays, whether of the frankly patriotic Stalinist variety or of the more subdued pacifist type established by Norman Thomas, they all proceed from the fatal premise that the fight against war is an independent task, above, outside of and separate from the class struggle and to be conducted with “special” (i.e., petty bourgeois) methods. It goes without saying that the KAOW included the standard quota of pacifist ladies of uncertain age and sure-fire nostrums (yesterday’s stand-bys for similar set-ups managed by the Stalinists), to say nothing of Hamilton Fish, Maj.-General Rivers (Retired) and Mr. Frederick J. Libby, who has the ingenious idea of warding off another war by dividing more equitably among the imperialist powers the present world’s colonies – without, of course, consulting the goddamn niggers who inhabit them. It goes without saying, also, that the founding conference of the KAOW endorsed the Roosevelt “good neighbor” policy – could it do less? – and adjured the government to show that it was really worthy of the name “democracy” by exerting America’s economic pressure upon the fascist “armament economy” nations (i.e., the policy of government sanctions which, when advocated by the Stalinists in slightly altered terms, arouses the horrified indignation of the Socialist Call and Workers Age.) In a word, we had here a less lurid variety, but only a variety, of the familiar social-democratic-Stalinist-pacifist trap. Yet, among the signatories to the call for the first KAOW meeting in New York’s Hippodrome were to be found Sidney Hook, James Rorty, James T. Farrell, Anita Brenner, Dwight Macdonald, Suzanne LaFollette, Ben Stolberg, John Chamberlain, Liston Oak, etc. That many of the signatories subsequently withdrew from the KAOW – naturally without explaining publicly why they had gone in or why they pulled out – is a tribute to the effects of the predictable policies of the KAOW on their conscience. That they sponsored it in the first place is not so complimentary to their foresight.
Item: Several weeks ago, the country voted in local elections. In New York, the ALP, the Stalinists and the Lovestone group, not being sectarians, supported No. 18 of the Sixty Families, Herbert H. Lehman, Democratic party candidate for governor. But there were two labor candidates for the office. The Socialist party nominated Norman Thomas; the Socialist Workers party conducted a write-in campaign for James P. Cannon. Norman Thomas and the SP are social-democratic; Sidney Hook, presumably, is not. James P. Cannon and the SWP are revolutionary Marxists; so, presumably, is Sidney Hook. But Sidney Hook endorsed the candidate of the SP, without even a statement to show that he was not a supporter of Thomas and the SP in general. Since this was not a private, confidential matter, but a public political act, may we ask, also publicly, why? Surely Thomas was not supported on the “good man” theory. Surely also, he was not supported because he had a chance of being elected, whereas Cannon didn’t. Surely, again, he was not supported because his party’s program was superior from the revolutionary standpoint to the SWP’s. Surely, finally, the choice was not made by tossing a coin. Wasn’t Hook running the risk of letting the uninitiated conclude that he feels a closer political affinity with the party of social democracy than with the party of revolutionary Marxism?
 
The New Leader’s Dress Parade
LET US LOOK a bit further into the matter of political affinities.
In the last few months, there has been a veritable parade of new but not unknown contributors across the pages of the New Leader, the New York weekly edited by James Oneal. About half of the newcomers wrote an article apiece as the private guests, so to speak, of Eugene Lyons, for whom they substituted as “columnist” during his absence on a speaking tour; the other half appeared under more general editorial auspices. The political significance of their appearance cannot be denied. It is not a matter of an article written by one individual or two, which might therefore be dismissed as accidental or incidental. But the number of individuals involved, and above all their common characteristics (virtually all of them, regardless of other differences, have been avowed opponents of the Second International and what it stands for), make it possible and necessary to draw certain political conclusions. The writers include Leon Dennen, Charles Yale Harrison, Sidney Hook, Max Nomad, James Rorty, Ben Stolberg, Philip Rahv, James T. Farrell and Stephen Naft.
What is wrong, some will say, with writing for the New Leader if an invitation is extended by its editors? We pinch-hit for Lyons, others will say, as a personal favor to him while he was touring. These explanations for the sudden and concerted appearance of this group of radical intellectuals on the pages of the New Leader seem to us too simple and, in fact, irrelevant.
The New Leader is not an “ordinary” periodical, like, let us say, The Nation and the New Republic, or even the Saturday Evening Post and Liberty. It is a distinct party paper, the official organ of the Social Democratic Federation, American section of the Second International. As such, it has a distinct political line, and avowed political and organizational objectives. As a consequence, literary collaboration with it is willy-nilly an act of solidarity with the organization for which it speaks, and an aid to it.
What is this organization? The Social Democratic Federation is composed of the self-styled “Old Guard” of the split-up Socialist party. On every important political question of the day, the Federation and its paper take the position of the extreme right wing of the Second International. To them, Norman Thomas is (or rather, was!) the incarnation of Bolshevism. To them, in the words of the late Hillquit, the Russian Revolution has always been “the greatest disaster and calamity that has ever occurred to the socialist movement”; and they have never given up their vicious fight against it. This has not prevented them – quite the contrary! – from taking a position which is substantially indistinguishable from that of the Stalinists, on all the important questions of the day.
The New Leader is for the Popular Front because it is for class collaboration, and was for it long before the Stalinists adopted it. It stands for “collective security” and is for the holy crusade of “democracy against fascism”. It is for Rooseveltism and the New Deal with at least as much vigor and even more sincerity than the Daily Worker. It can give the Stalinists cards and spades in licking the boots of the trade union bureaucracy and still come out ahead of the game. Wherein does it differ on any urgent political question from totalitarian Stalinism – which, by the way, is not an abstract concept but a system of concrete policies and actions on concrete issues? It does not, it is true, entirely cover up or justify the crimes of the Stalinist bureaucracy in Russia, but it does its best to defend or conceal the no less reprehensible crimes of the social-democratic bureaucracy in Europe – including the deals it makes with the same Stalinism. And if it does not use the Stalinist formula of “Drive the Trotskyists and Lovestoneites out of the labor movement”, it is only because it believes that the slogan is too restricted: the Stalinists should be driven out too! (The New Leader has just heartily endorsed the Red-baiting resolution of the Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party bureaucracy, which calls for the automatic expulsion of all advocates of proletarian revolution.)
The New Leader is, however, respectable, ever so respectable. In its pro-war propaganda, it is not quite so blatant and clamorous as, let us say, the Daily Worker, but that does not lessen its comparative effectiveness as a recruiting sergeant in the coming imperialist war “for democracy”. Two of its chief editorial writers are Charles Edward Russell and William E. Bohn, a couple of social-patriotic renegades from socialism and the SP in 1917, who served their country in the last World War, even if at a safe distance (i.e., 3,500 miles) from the trenches. They are no doubt ready to serve again in the coming war, even if every able-bodied citizen must again be drafted. By pure chance, Messrs. Russell and Bohn are past 60; Mr. Oneal is 63, Mr. Algernon Lee is 65.
In brief, the New Leader is a rotten social-democratic sheet from which so overpowering an odor has emanated that even Norman Thomas, not so long ago, found it too much for him. A spray of respectability that will reduce the pungency of the odor has therefore become pretty much a physical necessity for the editors. To get it, they have laid a not unclever trap for incautious people. The paper has not only been given a snappier typographical dress, but the splenetic and hysterical abuse Oneal used to heap on everything radical has been given a somewhat primmer polish. Above all, a systematic, deliberate effort is made to draw into the paper especially those radical writers who were at one time connected with the communist movement and whose personal and even political probity is so high that when the eye focuses on their names, the name and repute of Oneal and Co. are automatically excluded from the field-scope of vision. All this helps to retrieve the political fortunes of the New Leader. It is able to point with pious pride to the unselfish hospitality it vouchsafes “all radicals”, even those who “disagree with us”, provided they aren’t “totalitarians”. It is enabled to foster the pernicious myth that the “decent” alternative to Stalinism is the right wing social democracy. It is enabled to fortify itself as a rallying ground for all “radicals”, and especially for those who are disillusioned with Stalinism, which the New Leader would like to equate with a disillusionment with revolutionary Marxism. These are the obvious political motives behind the invitations so generously extended by Oneal and Levitas, and not some weak-boned sentimental desire to convert their paper into a broad, all-inclusive “radical forum”. In a word, it is a political trap for wandering radicals.
– But in heaven’s name! are you so bitterly and narrow-mindedly sectarian that you cannot conceive of a revolutionary article being written in a social-democratic paper, whose editors, whatever their private motives, invite you to write whatever you please, without censorship?
This rejoinder has, unfortunately, more indignation in it than critical thoughtfulness, as may be seen from an examination of what the new crew of contributors has written in the New Leader.
 
Emily Post in the House of the Hanged
TAKE EUGENE LYONS, for example. And a very good example he is, our anti-sectarian objector will retort. Don’t the editors allow him full freedom of expression, even when he writes in opposition to the official editorial standpoint of the paper? Hasn’t Lyons attacked “collective security”, whereas Oneal and Co. defend it? How then dare you call him a social-patriot, as you have?!
Softly, softly, friends. Let us see by taking a typical “column” by Lyons. On October 8, he does indeed assail “collective security” and with vigor. “In effect, the Stalinists and other collective security advocates were saying: ‘Trust your government, despite the fact that it is a capitalist government. Declare a moratorium on your larger grievances in this hour of emergency.’” Good. Very good. A telling blow at the Stalinists. But who might the “other collective advocates” be? Why, unlike the Stalinists, are they relegated to anonymity? Lyons couldn’t possibly be referring to the Second International, could he? Or to the editor of his paper and the Federation for which it speaks? Yessir, they are exactly the ones to whom he is referring! But not by name, either in this or any other of his columns, so that the “uninitiated” reader would never know from Lyons (who, however, knows it perfectly well!) that at least so far as the “collective security” doctrine is concerned, the social democracy is just as guilty of the crime as the Stalinists, Oneal as much as Browder.
In his Assignment in Utopia, Lyons stoutly inveighs against the “devotees of the theory of multiple truths”. Moreover, he has a whole, moving chapter called To Tell or Not to Tell, in which he describes the psychologically painful process by which he “overcame those inhibitions” against giving a complete picture of Soviet reality; “I decided, for myself, that I must tell the truth as I saw it. The decision in time assumed the magnitude of a pressing moral obligation.” Bravo! None too soon, but ... Bravo! Now, would it be asking too much of an “uncensored” contributor to a social-democratic paper to write a polite and restrained footnote to his next column saying, in substance: “I must apologize to my readers for having omitted an important element in my criticism of ‘collective security’. In this respect, as in most others, the official international social, democracy, including my good friends who edit this paper, are just as despicable a gang of war-mongering flunkies of imperialism as are the Stalinists.”
What is there to prevent him from writing this down and thereby clarifying his own position? Can the moral obligation to tell the truth which Lyons writes about so eloquently, refer only to the truth about Stalin? Surely, also, there is no “censorship” for the “independent” writers in the New Leader, such as prevented Lyons from telling “the truth as I saw it” while he was correspondent in Moscow (and, shall we add, while he was publicity director for Messrs. Rose and Antonini of the ALP?).
Or can the nasty and uncapitalized truth be, as Germans say: Im Hause des Gehenkten spricht man nicht vom Strick – You don’t talk of the rope in the house of the hanged!
Or take the case of Stephen Naft, who also substituted for Lyons in one issue of the New Leader. A social democrat? Not for a minute. He’s far more radical than that. So he writes on a “neutral” subject, that is, he attacks the Stalinists, doing both a good and timely job. Two solid columns of unanswerable evidence are devoted to excoriating the Stalinists for their united Popular Front with the fascists in the recent Chilean election. Conclusion? “The two totalitarian parties, the Stalinist and the Nacistas of Chile, were thus again united against another totalitarian competitor ...” All right. But Naft mentions only in passing and without any commentary the fact that the Chilean social democrats were also in this bastard united front. Now, why does he exempt them from his contempt and his denunciations? Why does he flay the Stalinists and not even murmuringly chide the social democrats? One might think that an anti-social democrat, writing in a social-democratic paper untrammelled by censorship, would make a point of clarifying his position in the manner we indicated. Is it possible that, like so many others, he is so absorbed in an effort to identify Bolshevism and fascism that he simply cannot find time or space for a gentle criticism of social democratic abominations? Or is it a point of honor with the Association of Friends of Morality and Truth not to offend a hospitable host? Im Hause des Gehenkten spricht man nicht vom Strick!
Or take the case of Sidney Hook, another of Lyon’s substitutes. His article on the conduct of the Kremlin and the Stalinists towards the Jewish refugees is not merely a fine polemic; it is as savagely eloquent and moving a political indictment as has been written in a long time. It is hard to imagine even a Stalinist reading it without involuntarily blushing with shame at the shame which Hook so bitterly pillories. Yet there is something missing in his two full newspaper-columned article. Hook proclaimed himself not so long ago an exponent of the principles of communism as set forth by Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky. This would lead one to believe that in spite of the fact that he now calls himself a “democratic socialist” (in distinction from the “totalitarian socialists”!), he nevertheless has little if anything in common with “the” social democracy, that is, the Second International. For did he not say, only a few years ago, that the objective observer cannot deny “that the historic function of social democracy since 1918 has been to suppress or abort all revolutionary movements throughout the world independently of whether it shared power in a coalition government or not”?
Would it be too much, then, to conclude that once Hook has decided to risk creating confusion about his politics by accepting the invitation-without-strings to write for the New Leader, he would improve on the occasion by dissociating himself just the teeniest bit from the social democracy? Just the teeniest bit – so that while “using” a social-democratic paper as a tribune for the presentation of his own views, it would be amply clear to the reader that his criticism of Stalinism has nothing in common with the reactionary social-democratic criticism of communism. Would it not, therefore, have been in place, after his excoriation of the Stalinist regime for not opening Russia’s doors to a single Jewish refugee, to add just a few words – a paragraph, a sentence – not to condemn but, let us say, to ... deplore the fact that the social-democratic governments of the three Scandinavian countries haven’t thrown open their doors either? After all, one cannot expect much from the totalitarian Kremlin. But Oneal’s comrades-in-the-government of Norway, Sweden and Denmark, who are so completely immune to the virus of Bolshevism – shouldn’t they be called upon to give an account of themselves? Why this gentleness and even silence about the social-democratic criminals? Im Hause des Gehenkten spricht man nicht vom Strick!
Not only don’t you speak of rope in the house of the hanged, but we make bold to assert that you may not. The truth of our assertion should not be hard to test. We propose that Hook, Farrell, Stolberg and Dennen each submit a series of articles to the New Leader: Hook on the crimes of the German social democracy from 1914 to 1933, along the lines of his theory of the “historic function” of this movement; or the more topical subject of the Second International’s preparations for the new war; Farrell on the strangling of the French labor movement by Leon Blum and associates of the People’s Front; Stolberg on the shady and reactionary role played in the American trade union movement by the “Old Guard” socialists; Dennen on the role played by the Russian Mensheviks and Social Revolutionists as agents of Kerensky and foreign imperialism in the early years of the October revolution. Do they have any doubt about the editorial reception of such articles? Do they not know that when Listen Oak was invited by Managing Editor Levitas to contribute to the New Leader, and replied that while he was neither a Trotskyist nor a Stalinist he was also not a social democrat, and that in any article he wrote he would condemn the social democracy as strongly or even more strongly than Trotskyism or Stalinism – that was the last, he heard of Levitas and his invitation?
The Oneal-Levitas invitations to “write freely” in the New Leader are a characteristic fraud, a trap for wandering radicals. But the fact that the latter fell into it so easily, and that when they wrote their articles for the New Leader they neglected the little detail of indicating any differences between themselves and their hosts, has, when taken together with what we have writtten earlier in this article, a strong symptomatic political significance. It is evidence of the fact that while they have all established the irreconcilability between their views and those of Stalinism (which many of them now equate with Bolshevism), they seem to find no such irreconcilability between their views and those of social democracy. By their political writings and activities, therefore – and not their artistic or cultural work, which we do not even wish to consider in this connection – they occupy the position of centrism, a centrism which brings them continually closer to social democracy, which, unless checked and re-directed, will end by transforming them from revolutionary radicals into ordinary petty bourgeois radicals.
 
The League of Abandoned Hopes



Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch’entrate – Dante



THIS PROCESS of transformation is best exemplified in the preparations now being made in this circle to launch the “League Against Totalitarianism”, sponsored by Sidney Hook.
The League is opposed, according to its draft manifesto, equally to the totalitarianism of Italy, Germany and the Soviet Union, that is, of Fascists, Nazis and Stalinists. What is it for? That detail is omitted; in its place there is a meaningless reference to the need of protecting artists and scientists from totalitarianism, and to the desirability of Freedom and Truth. The formula cannot be construed otherwise than as an evasion, which automatically opens the doors of the League not only to all sorts of conservatives and reactionaries, but reactionary policies as well.
Why?
On the face of it, so to speak, the projected League aims to be a united front organization. By its very nature, every united front is calculated to include different individuals or groups and at the same time to exclude those individuals or groups against whom the front is erected or directed. The united proletarian front aims to include all labor organizations in a common struggle against the capitalists. A united front for Tom Mooney aims to include those who stand for his freedom against those who stand for his imprisonment; it would not include Sidney Hook and ex-Governor Merriam. A united front to ferret out the truth about the Moscow Trials would include John Dewey and exclude Stalin-Browder-Lamont. The limits of any united front are established by its objectives.
Now, generally speaking, a united front against fascism could take one or more of three forms. It might be limited to giving material aid to the victims of fascism – political prisoners’ relief and defense, aid to refugees, etc. – and, by virtue of its specific, concrete and yet “broad” aims, would include people of the most divergent views. The League does not claim to be such a movement. The united front might be a movement of action against fascism in the strictest sense of the word, that is, for the organization of workers’ defense guards against fascist assaults. Such a movement, without committing itself to the program of any one “faction” in the working class, would nevertheless scrupulously and impartially defend from attack the newspapers and institutions of the trade unions, the social democrats, the Stalinists, the anarchists, the Trotskyists, etc., etc., and if need be, go over to the offensive against the fascist bands. The League does not claim to be such a movement, either; in all likelihood, it would disclaim such a program in the most vigorous terms. Finally, the joint organization or movement might be an “ideological united front”. That is precisely what the League is – an organization for combatting the ideology of totalitarianism.
But an ideology can be combatted only from the standpoint of another ideology, and in the given case, certainly, by a contrary ideology. Totalitarianism, especially if the term is applied both to the Italo-German and the Soviet regimes, represents a complex of political ideas, and not a social system. To capitalism, one can counterpose feudalism or socialism. To totalitarianism, one can counterpose democracy – bourgeois democracy or workers’ democracy. This restriction is all the more compelling in the case of the League, for the conflicting social views of those who make it up render impossible the presentation of anything more than a common political alternative to totalitarianism. The League makes no social distinction between Russia and Germany-Italy; it says not a word against the social order of capitalism or for the social order of socialism. That it may claim to concern itself with the supra-class interests of artists, intellectuals and scientists, does not alter the fact that it is confined to the question of alternative political regimes.
The League obviously would exclude avowed supporters of the German-Italian and Soviet regimes, that is, Nazis, fascists and Stalinists. But it would be interesting to learn on what grounds other than personal taste it would exclude Mr. Martin Dies who has spoken out categorically against totalitarianism of the fascist or communist variety and who champions “Americanism,” i.e., American capitalist democracy. On what grounds, further, would it exclude Mr. Matthew Woll, head of the newly-formed League for Human Rights, Freedom and Democracy, whose “faith is expressed in the Constitution of the United States and the Bill of Rights contained therein”? Woll adds: “Specifically included in the threats to this faith we feel it imperative to name those forms of autocracy known as communism, fascism and Nazism. To those we are implacably opposed, to the one as vigorously as to the others. Democracy can make no compromise with autocracy.” On what grounds would the League exclude Dorothy Thompson and Walter Lippman, who also oppose all three “totalitarianisms” and favor “democracy”, but go further than Hook in arguing that Rooseveltism personifies the encroachment of totalitarianism in America?
It would be enlightening to hear answers to these questions, for, on the basis of the League’s program, we can see no logical reason why the above-named reactionaries should be excluded.
Let us look a little closer at the League.
On what grounds would Max Eastman, opponent of Stalinist as well as Hitlerite totalitarianism, be excluded from the League? None, so far as we can see; on the contrary, there is every reason why his membership should be earnestly solicited. But if the League accepted Eastman’s conception of the struggle against totalitarianism in the United States – which is the only country in which he writes and acts on his beliefs – it would mean that at least its main efforts would have to be directed against the official Communist party, which, according to Eastman, represents in this country “the real menace of fascism” (the theory of Stalino-fascism at its worst!). But not only against the Stalinist party – according to Eastman, logically, also, against the Trotskyists who have their origin in communism (i.e., Leninism) together with Mussolini and Hitler.
On what reasonable grounds, further, would John Dewey, anti-totalitarian, be excluded from the League and on what grounds could he fail to take the position that the League must combat, not merely Stalinism, but communism (i.e., revolutionary Marxism) which, according to him, helps produce fascism? That Dewey is a man of outstanding intellectual probity, that he is among the last of the classic democrats – we do not even pretend to challenge. But we are concerned with his political position. His opposition to Stalinism is only derivative. He bases it upon his more fundamental opposition to what he believes it proceeds from: communism, Leninism, revolutionary Marxism. Thus:
Communism, then [the communism of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky which you once espoused, comrade Hook, and not merely “Stalinist totalitarianism”!], with its doctrine of the necessity of the forcible overthrow of the State by armed insurrection, with its doctrine of the dictatorship of the proletariat, with its threats to exclude all other classes from civil rights, to smash their political parties, and to deprive them of the rights of freedom of speech, press and assembly – which communists now claim for themselves under capitalism – communism is itself, an unwitting, but nonetheless, powerful factor in bringing about fascism. As an unalterable opponent of fascism in every form, I cannot be a communist. (John Dewey, Modern Monthly, Apr. 1934, pp. 136f.)
Dewey should not be excluded from the League. Nor is he. He is one of its sponsors. And that is fitting. It is proper.
On what grounds would Eugene Lyons be excluded from the League? He is already imbued with a “detestation of the soul of Bolshevism – its cruel, morbid, Jesuitical soul”, and there is little doubt as to what ideological line he would contribute to and support in the organization. A few samples:
We had gone to Russia believing there were good dictatorships and bad. We left convinced that defending one dictatorship is in fact defending the principles of tyranny. (Lyons, Assignment in Utopia, p. 621)
The talk of New Deal regimentation sounded absurd against my experience of totalitarian practises. Though I had given many years to the defense of political prisoners and civil liberties in America, I now found myself angered by glib and off-hand denunciations of American democracy by people who could not even imagine what total annihilation of democratic processes and civil rights meant. (Ibid., p. 624)
The very basic elements of the Leninist-Trotskyist-Stalinist methods of revolution are in disrepute. The cumulative and gigantic sacrifice may be justified ultimately, when history’s record is clearer, chiefly as an object lesson how not to make revolutions. [8] (Ibid., p. 639)
In light of these views, Lyons’ membership in the League should be assured. And so indeed it is. He is already one of its moving spirits.
From all the facts adduced, the unavowed but quite implicit program of the League is the defense of bourgeois democracy from fascism, Stalinism and ... Marxism, which is the theory and practise of the revolutionary proletariat .Whose “traditional” program is this? Who has always stood for the “struggle on two fronts”, against the “dictatorships of the left or the right”, for the hopeless not-so-golden mean? Hook, at least, is more than sufficiently aware of the fact that this is the classic outlook of the middle classes. The program of the League is nothing but a program of middle-class radicalism.
But it may be objected, however, whatever may be the individual views of this or that member of the League, do you not show your own totalitarian inclinations by your contempt for the struggle to preserve democracy from totalitarian extermination? The objection is based on a misunderstanding. The revolutionary Marxists are not only the staunchest partisans of a socialist republic. They are also the only consistent defenders of democracy in a very concrete and meaningful sense. Of “democracy” as an abstraction, or some absolutist conception? Not at all. Of the vicious fraud which is bourgeois democracy, that is, the social dictatorship of the bourgeoisie? Not at all. But we are fierce partisans of those democratic rights which capitalism has been compelled in the course of decades of bitter struggle to grant the masses: democratic popular representation, the right of free speech, assembly and press, the right to organize and strike, etc., etc. Circumscribed as all these concrete democratic rights are under capitalism, we are not only for their preservation but for their extension, for converting them into genuine and not crippled rights, for anchoring them in social democracy – the socialist society.
We are anything but indifferent to the attempts of fascism to abolish these rights, and are ready to join with any progressive force to defend them, even in their present crippled state, from reactionary assault, as is confirmed concretely by our position in the Spanish civil war. But in our position there is a little “reservation”, which distinguishes us from all brands of liberals and social democrats and Stalinists. It is this: not only socialism, but even the defense of the democratic rights of the masses is impossible of attainment without the methods of the proletarian class struggle. Those who have not learned this elementary lesson, have learned nothing from the tragic but instructive experience in Germany, Austria, Spain and Czechoslovakia. Middle-class politics, class collaboration with the “progressive” bourgeoisie (and under its domination!), are perfectly fitted for paralyzing the masses and facilitating the victory of fascist totalitarianism. The attempt to ward off fascism by defending bourgeois democracy-made over and over again in the recent past with calamitous and not unknown results – is in direct conflict with the policy for the struggle against fascism and defense of democratic rights which revolutionary Marxists advocate – a policy confirmed by all recent events, both negatively and positively.
It is for this reason also – and not only because the “orthodox Trotskyists” are regarded by the League founders as totalitarian – that the revolutionary Marxists are neither invited nor desired as members of the new organization. For among the first questions we would raise in its as yet unimpressive ranks, would be included these:
Where does the League stand on the question of “Stalino-fascism”? Are there no differences between Stalinism and fascism, between Germany and the Soviet Union, and if there are, why are they not indicated in the League’s program? If a war broke out between Germany and France, we assume that the League would not feel called upon to take a position in favor of one or the other belligerent. But suppose Germany were to launch a war against the Soviet Union in order – as a beginning! – to detach the Ukraine, would the League also refrain from taking a position or would it declare itself neutral? In a word, is it for the defense of the Soviet Union from imperialist attack, regardless and in spite of the Stalinist regime? Whatever the answer, why does not the League say so? What is more, what position does the League take on the question of a war between “democracy” and fascism? (The League draft is simplicity itself on this score: It hasn’t a word – not one word – on war or imperialism or their direct relation to totalitarianism, thus leaving the membership doors open to supporters of “democratic” wars or imperialism.) Is it not mandatory, even for artists and intellectuals and scientists, to express themselves on this most vital question?
To be sure, these are concrete and far from remote or unreal questions; nor are they academic and abstract. It is far more important and interesting to have an anti-totalitarian League express itself unambiguously on these urgently real matters than to proclaim ever so sonorously its attachment to Truth, Freedom and Justice. But even if the League or its collective sponsors could ever be prevailed upon to give precise answers to these questions, the result would make it perfectly clear to everybody, we are convinced, that – regardless of their individual protestations – we are dealing with an association of democrats working on a program of middle-class radicalism. Or, to put it differently, these anti-Stalinists are forming a typically Stalinist People’s Front – without the Stalinists.
 
Where the Road Ends
IT IS THEIR evolution (at different speeds, to be sure) towards futile middle-class radicalism that is bringing so many of the members of “Group I” progressively closer to these whom we have classified in “Group II”, that is, to those who, we gratefully recall, never pretended to be Marxists, revolutionary or otherwise. Sidney Hook is now in a political alliance with John Dewey. Harrison, out of not such ideological considerations, has become an enthusiastic barker for the A.L.P. and presumably, like it, he is at least as enthusiastic a partisan of the New Deal as, let us say, Ferdinand Lundberg. The difference between Eastman’s estimate of the Russian Revolution and Lyons’ is rapidly approaching the political vanishing point, and such an estimate involves all the fundamental questions of Marxism.
Dewey’s views of communism, Marxism and class collaboration as against class struggle are too well known to require repetition here. John Chamberlain has recently written (in Common Sense) an exposition of his view that the degeneration of the Russian Revolution has its original source not so much in Stalinism or even in Leninism but in the pernicious and false doctrine of the class nature of the State which was set forth by Karl Marx. The State is not theirs, it is ours as well, it belongs to all of us, declaims Chamberlain. The point of view is not merely class-collaborationist but, fundamentally, patriotic. Hence he is able to write, more concretely, that “Sweden has a swell civilization, which is enough for me. I want a mixed economy under coalition rule ...” Adamic is frankly for the preservation of capitalism “for I have become convinced that labor cannot abolish capital if it would ...”
You would imagine that in our critical times, when the most paralyzing poison in the labor movement is the spirit and practise of class collaboration, of bourgeois or social-patriotism, the main fire of even the “dissident Marxists” would be directed at the ruinous doctrines disseminated by the Lundbergs and Adamics and Chamberlains and Deweys and Oneals and Lees, as well as against the Stalins and Browders who, in abandoning revolutionary socialism, have really taken over these doctrines from the former. We dare say that if any one of the members of “Group I” could now be persuaded to write a political criticism of the partisans of bourgeois democracy who compose “Group II”, it would be couched in the most conciliatory manner imaginable and would not generate one-fiftieth as much heat as is contained in their sharp polemics against Marxism. But the first group has simply forgotten to criticize the second. Virtually all the fire of our backsliding “Marxists” is aimed in the other direction, and they are so active in abandoning the revolutionary position that they have retreated, many without noticing it, towards the camp of the apostles of bourgeois democracy.
The centrism which develops in the course of a departure from Marxism moves, if not deliberately checked, gradually but inexorably to the program of social reformism, of middle-class radicalism. To the extent that they act politically, that is the actual program of the group we have been discussing.
 
Part 4




“We are an American Party, composed of American Citizens. We view all our problems in the light of the national interests of the United States.”
Suppose we bumped up against this quotation on a dark night, and were forced to guess the author. What would be our answer? Would we say the president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce? or Chairman John Hamilton of the Republican party? or Chairman Jim Farley of the Democratic party? or Leader Pelley of the Silver Shirts?
Any of these answers would certainly be legitimate, and we would have the right to demand a good mark for giving it. But we would, nevertheless, be wrong.
The quotation is, direct and literal, from the lips of Earl Browder.
The occasion, crowning and monstrous irony, was a publicity release for the February 27th mass meeting in celebration of – the twentieth anniversary of the founding of the Communist International.
 
The Ghost from the Past
There is an unutterable cynicism here. To link these phrases of crude and vulgar chauvinism to the celebration of the forging of that instrument whose first aim was to be to teach the workers of the whole world that they have no country, no nation, no fatherland except what they conquer through the fire of their revolutionary struggle!
“All socialists, in proving the class character of bourgeois civilization, of bourgeois democracy, of bourgeois parliamentarism, have expressed this conception formulated with the maximum of scientific precision by Marx and Engels: that the most democratic of bourgeois republics can be nothing else than a machine to oppress the working class at the bidding: of the bourgeoisie, to put the mass or workers at the mercy of a handful of capitalists.”
So read the thesis of Lenin adopted by the founding congress which Browder now celebrates by proclaiming his dedication to the interests of that “machine to oppress the working class.”
“The New International Association of Workers is founded with the aim of organizing the joint action of the workers of different countries for one sole and precise purpose, namely: the overthrow of capitalism, the establishing of the dictatorship of the proletariat and an international republic of Soviets ...”
So read the first article in the statutes of the second congress of the Communist International, whose very corpse Browder now dishonors.
 
Whose Interests?
“The national interests of the United States” ... Let us translate: the interests, that is, of the billion dollar Cuban sugar industry which enslaves the masses of Cuba; the military dictatorship of Porto Rico, grinding and terrorizing the Porto Rican workers; the deputized tyrannies over the people of the Philippines, Hawaii, the Canal Zone – ruled all or them by decree enforced by the United States army; the threatening intervention in Mexico ...
This is only what is most obvious. But these same national interests in whose light Browder now views all his problems are what require the subjugation of the ten million Negroes at home, the enduring unemployment, the armed protection of the fascist meetings, the persecution of working-class militants.
These interests – the interests of the ruling class of the United States – are what demand the nearing war of imperialist aggression, demand the tranformation of the United States into a fascist concentration camp.
It is these interests that Browder is defending.
 
What Else is Forgotten?
During the past months you will search vainly through the Stalinist propaganda for the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union!” What has happened to the aim of defending the Soviet Union, which has been the alleged justification for the policy of the C.I. during the entire last decade? Today, we are taught, “all our problems” are viewed in the light of the national interests of the United States.
Ah, but – we are told in whispers – the new phrase is “just a maneuver.”
Let not the ranks of the Communist party be deceived. Politics is serious; you cannot play around with politics. The new orientation, summed up in Browder’s phrase, has its own logic. Defense of the Soviet Union, even under the distorted Stalinst conception of such defense, is in the process of being sacrificed to defense of the national interests of the United States. This must be, because the imperialist interests of the U.S. are in unappeaseable conflict with the interests of the Soviet Union. “Stalino-patriotism” is being transformed into patriotism pure and simple.
 



Let me try to put it very plainly:
Who is it who cuts your wages? Not Hitler, not Mussolini, not any “foreign tyrant,” but your own American boss. Is it not?
Who lowers the piece rate and speeds up the assembly line? Again: not Hitler, but your own boss, the American boss.
Who throws you and your fellow-workers out of your jobs whenever profits start getting a little lower? Who forms and runs company unions to prevent you from getting your rights? Who fights genuine collective bargaining to the last ditch? Who pays for the spies and stool pigeons who frame you up? Who buys the tear gas and clubs and sawed-off shotguns that appear when a strike is breaking? Who hires the guards and thugs and finks?
Not Hitler, not a German or Italian or Japanese boss, but your own boss, your American boss.
 
Which Chamber of Commerce?
Who is responsible for the ten to fifteen million unemployed, and their tragic, hungry, empty lives, for their children without enough clothing or food or housing or doctors? No one in Germany or Japan, but the bosses of this country and the system in this country which gives the bosses their power and their privileges.
Who carries out the racial policy, the “Aryanization program,” which drives thirteen million Negroes into ghettoes, which deprives them of every right, of chances to work, which forbids them to live like decent human beings? Hitler can still take lessons from the good Americans who tyrannize the Negroes.
What Chamber of Commerce is it that howls for “economy” at the expense of food and houses for millions of workers, that cracks down on every progressive proposal which might serve the interests of the masses of the people? It is not the Berlin or the Tokyo Chamber of Commerce.
Which National Association of Manufacturers floods newspapers and magazines and radio with the harsh, reactionary demands of the Tom Girdlers?
 
And as for Governments?
What courts are those that issue the injunctions which are used to break up strikes and picketing and labor boycotts? Not the Berlin People’s Tribunal.
What Supreme Court insolently prohibits the sit-down, labor’s firmest, most effective weapon? It is not located in a foreign country. What judges sentence militant workers whenever they stand up resolutely for labor’s rights, but somehow seem never to notice when, as in South Chicago, workers are slaughtered in cold blood?
What cops smash picket lines, club the unemployed, protect the rights of fascists and prevent workers from demonstrating against the fascists? Not Hitler’s Gestapo, not his Brown Shirts, but the good American cops of good American cities and states.
What parliament refuses to vote adequate relief and at the same time votes billions for airplanes and lifts taxes from big business? Not the Reichstag, but the Congress at Washington.
Who sends in the National Guard or even the regular army if labor seems to be on the point of winning a really major victory? Did you ever hear of cops or soldiers being called to throw lying, criminal, exploiting bosses out of the plants?
 
While for the Future?
Who put across the anti-labor amendment in Oregon, and aims to duplicate it throughout the country? No one has pretended that Associated Farmers is a Nazi outfit.
Who has drawn up the Industrial Mobilization Act, which will clamp down on the people a totalitarian military dictatorship over night? It was not thought of in Berlin, but in the private offices of the American War Department.
Who will be in charge of the concentration camps now being prepared for American workers who will be bold enough to resist seriously the onward march of reaction? Not Brown Shirts with swastika armbands, but home-grown fascists paid for in good American dollars from good American bosses.
 
What Liebknecht Meant
These questions are simple, and not hard to answer. They explain what revolutionary socialists mean when they repeat, following the words of the great and noble German, Karl Liebknecht, that the main, the first enemy is in your own country.
In each nation, the main enemy of each worker is the boss at home, and the bosses’ government. To. win freedom for himself, and to aid best in the world-wide fight for freedom, he must fight first against the bosses at home and their government.
In the United States today, the bosses and their government – the Roosevelt government, and all their liberal and reformist and Stalinist tallies, are asking the workers to forget the main enemy. They are saying: Forget the lessons of your own experience, forget What we do to you. Turn your eyes on Hitler. Give us your liberties and your lives, so that we can protect our profits against the claims of our boss-rivals in other countries. Kill your fellow-workers, for our sake.
With their voices shouting everywhere, is it not time, more than time, to remember the voice of Liebknecht?
 



The Fansteel Metallurgical Company is located in North Chicago. During the latter part of 1936, the overwhelming majority of its workers joined the C.I.O., and asked the company for recognition. The management, however, had for years enjoyed the profitable blessings of an unorganized plant. They indignantly pointed out to the men that “outside” unions were un-American.
The opinion was a normal one. After all, under the blessed system of “free enterprise,” should not a patriotic American boss be permitted to keep wages as low as he pleases, to pile on the speedup when competition gets keener, to fire any employee who sneezes at the wrong moment? “Outside” unions certainly play hell with the good old-fashioned ways of bosses.
The management told the C.I.O., nothing doing. And just to be on the safe side, the management did a little organizing on its own account. It hired a labor relations magician who pulled a cozy little company union out of his hat. It isolated one of the most militant unionists in a job that prevented him from being in contact with his fellow-workers. It fired a few others. It brought a stool-pigeon or two in from one of the best agencies. It undertook a well planned publicity campaign among its employees, their families and the community on the evils of outside unionism.
But somehow the men kept asking for recognition. And the management each time kept refusing and then redoubling the campaign against the union.
 
Time to Stop the Run Around
So, on February 17, 1937, the workers decided that the run around had been going on long enough. They had been, God knows, reasonable enough. They were getting nowhere. They knew that the company’s acts had been brazenly and openly illegal; and they knew that neither the company nor the police nor the courts gave a damn whether the acts were illegal or not. The time had come to protect the right to a job and a decent living by the only means left.
With complete quiet and discipline the workers sat down in two of the company’s key buildings. For ten days they sat there, maintaining their discipline, keeping the buildings and machinery in perfect condition. The management “discharged” them; but the workers were guarding their jobs and they continued to sit.
 
Law and Order Yet to Work
But, lo and behold, after the long, long months of silence and reserve, the forces of law and order sprang suddenly to life. The rights of citizens were being invaded! Time for justice to come to the rescue!
Did law and order clap a summons on the management for their illegal fostering of a company union, their illegal employment of a labor spy, their illegal discriminations and discharges, their illegal refusal to bargain with the union? I need not tell you, dear reader: law and order did not.
Law and order, in the person of a dignified judge of a state court, bowed politely to the management and issued an injunction requiring the workers to vacate the premises of the company. A sheriff and his merry men came to the buildings bearing the injunction order. But the workers believed that their right to a job was superior to the injunction; and the sheriff, after an encounter which he was not willing to confine to words, retired in some confusion.
 
Justice in Action
Law and order were now very upset indeed. Justice came back to the buildings with a formidable enough array of thugs, cops, firemen, deputized gangsters to have besieged Pearl Harbor. A struggle, pictures of which look like high points in the assault on the Alcazar, took place. Fire ladders were raised so that tear gas bombs could be shot into all floors. Guns and clubs that would have stocked an arsenal went into action.
The workers defended themselves with courage and honor. But the forces and weapons against them were too much. They were routed, and placed under arrest.
Most were later fined and jailed – for violating the injunction.
The company then happily re-formed its company union, as the Rare Metal Workers of America. Some of the sit-downers were graciously permitted to return to work. Many of them were not. Those who were not petitioned through the Labor Board to get their jobs back.
This was the Fansteel case. The facts, known to every worker in Fansteel, to every resident of North Chicago, recorded by the Labor Board, are uncontested. The Supreme Court did not question them.
“The sit-down,” wrote Chief Justice Hughes in the Court’s decision for the company, “was a high-handed proceeding without shadow of legal right ... The conduct on the part of the employees manifestly gave good cause for their discharge ...”
Manifestly, Justice Hughes, yes, manifestly.
 



In the March 13th issue of the magazine, Time, there is a long article on Hearst. It is an excellent piece of journalism, summarizing the career of Hearst and his enterprises. It sketches the great expansive days that reached their zenith in 1922. It shows how, during the ’20’s Hearst kept up what had become the illusion of expansion through huge borrowings; how even in 1930 he was able to sell $50,000,000 of preferred stock to the public.
But Hearst’s gross extravagances, the top-heavy financial structure, the complexity and internal instability of his empire, were sapping the foundations. A definite crisis of the entire Hearst system came to a head in 1937. Application to issue $35,500,000 in debentures was filed before the S.E.C. Objections were made to the issue, and it became clear that it would not get approval.
 
Enters the New Regime
In this crisis, Hearst, like hundreds of other capitalists in hundreds of similar crises, was faced with a choice between two alternatives only: to continue along the old lines and in a few months to lose everything – ownership, control, income, everything; or to institute a drastic, savage reorganization which would also mean giving up a good deal but which would have a chance of saving something – some income, privileges, rights – for the present and the future.
Hearst chose, not unnaturally, the lesser evil. On June 27, 1937, he turned management of his affairs over to a regent, Clarence John Shearn, a hardened New York attorney closely associated with the Chase Bank.
The regent got ruthlessly to work. Unprofitable units of the empire were sold. Many luxuries, such as the grotesque Hearst art collection, were dumped. Hundreds of individuals, from workers to high executives, were fired. Wages and salaries, including Hearst’s own salary, were sharply cut. Rigorous financial control was instituted. A drive (though this is left delicately unnoticed by the Time article) against the wages and working conditions of employees was conducted by all necessary means – including the thugs and gangsters used in the strikes at Milwaukee, Chicago and on the Pacific Coast.
The fat, rich old days are gone. But the empire, desperate, stripped and shaken, still stands; still, at any rate, today.
 
The Scale Drawing
The story of Hearst is interesting in itself. But what struck me particularly, once again reading it, is the astonishing fullness of the analogy which it, and the so frequent business situations comparable to it, bear to that more generalized “drastic, savage reorganization” of capitalist enterprise – to fascism.
What happens in fascism? Not Hearst, or any individual capitalist, but the capitalist class as a whole comes face to face with Hearst’s choice between two alternatives only: to continue along the old lines and in a few months to lose everything – ownership, control, income, everything; or to institute a drastic, savage reorganization which would mean giving up a good deal, but which would have a chance of saving something – some income, privileges, rights – for the present and the future.
Like Hearst, the class chooses the lesser evil. A stewart, a “regent” – the fascist party and its führer – is brought in. He gets ruthlessly to work. Many luxuries are stripped away; financial control and coordination is instituted; unprofitable units dropped or absorbed. Above all, the thugs and gangsters, now with the legal sanction of state power, smash the organization of the masses, and drive down wages and working conditions.
But the analogy is even more illuminating. For it shows how and why the capitalists themselves have to pay a heavy cost for fascism. Their own income, privileges, freedom are decreased. It shows why capitalists, most of them, “do not like” fascism – any more than a business man “likes” those measures necessary to save his business from immediately threatened bankruptcy. Observing the limitations which capitalists in Italy and Germany have accepted, our liberal nincompoops try to tell us that the capitalists there were “mistaken” as to their own interests When they put fascism in governmental power, or even that capitalism has disappeared in Germany and Italy. It has no more disappeared, they were no more mistaken, than in the case of the individual enterprise, like Hearst’s, striving to keep alive through frantic, totalitarian reorganization. Fascism is the politics of bourgeois desperation. The fat, old rich days are gone. But the empire, desperate, stripped and shaken, still stands.
 
The Analogy Strikes Home
And for the United States? The great expansive days reach their zenith in 1929 (Hearst’s 1922). The illusion of expansion is then sustained through huge borrowings. The gross extravagances, the top-heavy financial structure, the complexity and the internal instability of the empire, sap the foundations. The definitive crisis of the entire system comes to a head. The United States approaches swiftly Hearst’s 1937.
 



I was in Chicago at the time when the Fansteel sit-in strike was being smashed. I remember talking about it to a brilliant and thoroughly realistic young corporation lawyer who was a friend of the attorney for the Fansteel company. During the conversation I remarked, “I suppose that with this wave of sit-downs upsetting the bosses there will soon be some new laws passed to declare all types of sit-downs illegal?”
His reply showed an admirable lack of illusions about the function of law in capitalist society. He put it in more or less these words:
“There isn’t any need for new laws. There are plenty of laws on the books already that prove sit-downs illegal. How could it be otherwise? But when the workers by hundreds and thousands occupy the factories, the letter of the law doesn’t settle anything. We would have to bring to machine guns to clear them out, and under the present circumstances we can’t do that. Wait until the workers quiet down again, and then you’ll see the law get into action.”
 
What the Law Is For
This young man, who has cynically rented out his talents to the highest bidders, understands the task of the law – that is, of the statutes, legal “theory,” the courts, police and jails. He knows that the law is an integral part of the state, and that the central business of the state, to which all else is subordinated, is to defend the property rights of the bourgeoisie in the instruments of production. Consequently, in private conversations he does not bother with any hokum about “abstract Justice.”
The bourgeoisie, in general, is perfectly clear in its own mind about the nature of the law. It uses the law as an instrument in the class struggle, an immensely effective instrument in maintaining its dominance over the masses. The bourgeoisie cannot afford to fool itself with high-sounding phrases.
Most workers, unfortunately, are not clear about the law. Never-ending propaganda assures them that the law administers impartial justice to all members of society. An anti-strike injunction or a Fansteel decision comes as a puzzling shock and disappointment. And, not being clear about the law, not realizing that the law is not “society’s law” or worker’s law, but solely and exclusively the bosses’ law, the workers are handicapped in their unavoidable fight against the law.
 
The Law and the Factories
For a capitalist, the right to private property means first and foremost the free and untrammelled ability to own and use in any way he may see fit the instruments of production. It means that he shall have at all times free access to these instruments, and that he on his own decision shall be able to grant or refuse such access to others: that he himself shall decide whether or not to employ the instruments to turn out goods; that the entire product of the instruments shall belong to him.
He and his fellow-capitalists have constructed their state to defend this right by all necessary means. However, in the course of the development of capitalism, the original right to private property suffers some modification and limitation.
These limitations are roughly of two sorts: one type is a concession forced on the state by the strength of the workers (for example, the workers’ right to strike and picket, both of which are limitations on the capitalist’s right to private property); the other and more frequent type is imposed by the bourgeois state itself, acting as representative of the entire capitalist class, in order to protect the system of private property against being undermined by the too anarchic practises of individual capitalists (for example, “blue sky laws,” “fair marketing agreements,” laws governing fulfillment of contracts, etc.)
Capitalists, as individuals, usually resent both of these types of limitation, but it is only against the first that they carry on and must carry on a bitter and decisive struggle. The second type is in the final analysis a mode of self-preservation for capitalism – in its last stage taking the form of fascism. The first means a direct invasion by the class enemy, means that the workers are stretching their hands toward the seat of power, toward control over the factories and machines and mines which, if really won, would give them control over society as a whole.
 
Sit-Downs and the Law
In a sit-down strike, the workers do not merely limit but indeed negate the property right of the capitalist. It might be said that, in a passive way, they establish control, direct physical control, over the instruments of production. From this it is, really, only a small step to active control, to the workers going on to start up the machines again, but as masters, not slaves, of the machines. And that, of course, would be the socialist revolution.
This is why the law, the bourgeois law, would not, could not, will not ever recognize sit-downs as legal. And this why workers, if they are ever to achieve their own emancipation, must throw off the shackles of bourgeois law, to replace it with the workers’ law.
 



It took just about forty-eight hours for the belly-crawlings of the Stalinist hangers-on to begin. For the first day following the announcement of the Pact, they were too stunned to be heard from; the first day following the announcement of the Wednesday the procession had started, led by the cringing whine of Heywood Broun and Freda Kirchwey, followed promptly on Thursday by the editorial whimpers of the Nation and the New Republic. Soon they will be trampling each other, choking the road back to the comforting shelter of the good old Red, White and Blue; and the air will be deafened with their yowls.
Picture the anguish in Hollywood! What a lamentable disaster for the brave champions (at $5,000 a week) of the Anti-Nazi League and the thousand-and-one committees, for the James Cagneys and Dorothy Parkers and Miriam Hopkins and Donald Ogden Stewarts and Joan Crawfords and Franchot Tones!
And think, with a tear or two, of the pained distress of bold writers and artists and professors and bishops whose names adorned the stationery of the North American Committee to Aid Spanish Democracy and the Friends of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade and the American League for Peace and Democracy and the Writers’ Congress and all the other play-committees of the G.P.U.!
But, most embarrassing of all, most needing our sympathy, is the predicament of those who signed the Statement of 400. This statement, for which signatures have been gathered during the past four months, was designed to defend the Soviet Union (that is, Stalin) with its democracy and its “peace policy” from the slanders of the League for Cultural Freedom. By a charming stroke of irony, large excerpts from the statement, together with an approving editorial comment, appeared in the issue of the New Republic which is pre-dated August 23rd – the day the pact was sighed.
Of those four hundred, are there today half a dozen who would not give their right eye to be able to prove their signatures a forgery?
These people, mind you, are the Moralists, these the ones who use their most ringing abstractions to denounce – the “immorality” and “a-morality” of the revolutionists.
 
Who Is Betrayed?
They have been, you see, “betrayed”. Stalin has betrayed them. Therefore ... therefore, they plead, take pity on us, for we are the innocent victims.
There are, it is true, millions and hundreds of millions who have been betrayed, most terribly betrayed, by Stalin’s pact with Hitler: the world proletariat, the peasants and poor farmers, the colonial peoples, the Jews of the whole world, yes and the simple, honest intellectuals and professionals and sincere liberals. But, search as hard as I can, I do not find the names of our fine-feathered friends among the long list of the betrayed.
I find their names, rather, on the roster of the active agents of the betrayer.
Yes, for tens and hundreds of thousands of sincere persons, including many many workers, who read their magazines, listened at their meetings, bought their books, believed and trusted them, they are exactly the ones who made Stalin’s betrayal possible. It was they who, openly or by lies or by silence, defended the Moscow Trials and fought the effort to let the world know the truth about the trials. It was they who hid the truth about what was happening within the Soviet Union, and spread the hideous falsehoods about its democracy and plenty. It was they who helped put across the infamies of the Popular Front, and aided the G.P.U., in their own way, in its destruction of the Spanish workers. It was they who covered the blood and guns of Stalinism, covered the steps to the pact, with a mantle of respectability and ideals and morality.
What else have they been doing for the past five years?
No, they have not been betrayed. Their readers and audiences have been betrayed; but they are the agents and tools and stooges of the arch-betrayer.
All dishonor to them! All contempt, all the revulsion which we are capable of feeling!
 
The New Popular Stooge Front
Do you think these people feel shame for their past, that they have learned even a little from what has happened? Do not be deceived: they are immune to shame, sterilized from learning. If the editors of the Nation and the New Republic were sensitive to even the shadow of shame, do you think they could publish even a single issue more of their magazines after what has now been made clear?
No, they lie and grovel to order, these people. They are not happy unless they have their full quota of lies and grovelling, and they are hungry without sufficiently dirty boots to lick.
They never loved, but always hated the workers’ revolution. They loved only Stalin – the established power, the status quo – the hangman of the revolution; and they licked his boots only while they were alongside those of the masters at home: the rulers of imperialist America.
Now the boots are on opposite sides of the street. And they know, never fear, which pair can kick them hardest. They will now – with what lightning speed! – wrap themselves seven-fold in the red, white and blue, and prostrate themselves at the feet of the master at home.
They will be the spokesmen, the most eager and the loudest spokesmen, for a wave of chauvinism such as this country has never known. Soon they will tell us that they knew all along that “communism and fascism are at bottom one and the same”, and that “naturally” Stalin and Hitler got together. You must, they will shout from the housetops, shed your lifeblood for DEMOCRACY and FREEDOM and the AMERICAN WAY. Yes, and for MORALITY – the morality, of course, of the Sixty Families, which, since they are American patriots, is so diametric an opposite of the morality of TOTALITARIANISM.
 



In a major naval engagement, the strategic plans of the general staff of the United States Navy provide that the airplanes on the aircraft carriers shall be “expended.” This little word, under the circumstances, is not without interest.
What is meant is the following: The planes will leave the carriers in order to fulfill their various functions in the battle. While the planes are busy, the carriers, which are not equipped for serious combat, will retire far from the scene just as rapidly as possible. Those planes which are not shot down will, when their gas is exhausted, have no place to go to but the cold grave of the open sea.
The reason for the tactic is simple enough: planes and pilots are far cheaper and quicker to build than the $50,000,000 aircraft carriers.
 
Little Lessons in Neutrality
Britain and France declared war against Germany on Sunday, September 3rd. The President was thereupon required, by the law of the land, to proclaim immediately an embargo against shipments of munitions to these two countries. He did not do so, however. The proclamation of the embargo was delayed until the next day.
Perhaps this was because the President, as a religious man, considered Sunday a day of rest. Perhaps, also, he had more material concerns in mind.
On Monday morning, three ships loaded to capacity with airplanes, cleared from Pacific ports for England and France. An interruption of the President’s Sunday would have held those ships at the dock.
Not one of the airplane factories in the United States working on British and French orders has stopped or even slowed down production since the embargo went into effect. On the contrary, all of them have speeded up their lines.
No orders previously given by Britain and France have been cancelled. On the contrary, a number of new orders have been placed and accepted during the past two weeks.
Evidently the airplane companies are not alarmed by Senator Borah.
Since last Spring, the War and Navy Departments have been flooding veterans of the last War and reserve officers with requests to return to active service. The response has not been up to hopes. It takes dictatorial conscription to get men into the democratic war.
Early last summer, the War Department reorganized its operations on the basis of the following perspective: war in Europe in September; U.S. troops fighting abroad by Spring of 1940.
 
The Big Arms of the Big Brother
It was not prominently noticed that shortly after his declaration that the United States would defend Canada against its declared enemy, Roosevelt added that the United States would also defend all of the possessions of Great Britain, France and Holland in the Americas. These include the three Guianas in South America and more than a hundred islands scattered chiefly in the Caribbean and extending to the gulf of the St. Lawrence.
Somehow the isolationists don’t seem to have noticed that these declarations are, in effect, acts of war, authorized in the best totalitarian manner by executive decree. No doubt the isolationists are so busy forgetting the Ludlow Bill that they didn’t even hear about these declarations.
By them, the United States Navy and Army are committed, in advance and without any declaration of war by constitutional process – much less any expression of opinion from the people – to open up hostilities against Germany if Germany, in pursuit of her war aims, undertakes any actions against Canada or any of the British and French possessions in the Americas.
The armed forces of the United States are thus already intervening, and are altering the military balance.
 
New Boundaries for Old
In the old days, the territorial boundaries of a nation were accepted as extending three miles beyond its sea coast. The nation exercised sovereignty within this three mile limit.
During the last war, this three mile limit was extended to twelve miles, and “international law” tended to recognize the validity of the twelve mile limit.
Without any fanfare, and naturally without any, legislation, Roosevelt two weeks ago added immense territories to the United States. When asked where the limits of jurisdiction extended, he answered quite simply: wherever United States’ (read – Sixty Families’) interests lay. Acting on this doctrine, he instructed the Navy and the Coast Guard to get to work protecting this vast new territory.
It is authoritatively reported that Philip Fleming will soon replace Elmer Andrews as Wage-Hour Administrator. Fleming, like WPA Administrator Harrington, is an army Colonel attached to the War Department.
All governmental agencies having to do with workers are, you see, being put into the firm hands of the army.
In the chief agency of all, the War Resources Board, the army representation is headed by Marshal, the Chief of Staff. But there the true and full relationship is made clear: for General Marshall is subordinate to Chairman Stettinius, of U.S. Steel and Morgan & Co.
 



EXTENT of the “Congressional revolt against the President”, in particular of the inner-party Democratic revolt, has been exaggerated, and its meaning obscured. Let us review the major enactments of the session in an effort to come to a better understanding:
1. Armaments: The enormous armament expenditures – totalling nearly two billion dollars for the present fiscal year, the highest in the peace-time history of the country – were in all cases proposed by the President. In most cases the proposals were adopted unanimously by Congress; on a few minor items there were a half-dozen scattered Nays.
2. Relief: The over-all figure for relief during the current fiscal year, which compels the reduction of WPA rolls to an average of 2,000,000, was proposed by the President. The abolition of the prevailing wage was proposed by Roosevelt through Harrington. Congress added the clauses on the 18-months provision and the cutting down of geographical wage differentials, together with minor amendments. A rumor was allowed to circulate that the administration opposed these amendments. Nevertheless, here is the fact: Congress passed the Relief Bill by a vote of 373 to 21. Only 9 Democrats voted in opposition. The President signed the bill.
3. WPA Investigation: The motion for a WPA investigation was motivated by the wish to prepare for a still more drastic attack on the unemployed in the future. The motion, passed 351 to 27, with only 26 Democrats voting against it.
4. Dies Committee: Huge funds were voted to the labor-baiting, arch-reactionary Dies Committee, by a count of 344 to 35. Here, as with the WPA investigation, the Roosevelt men in Congress voted with the majority.
5. Taxes: Corporate tax laws, including the undistributed profits tax and laws concerning deductions for losses and status of capital stock, were revised in accordance with Wall Street demands. The changes were proposed by the administration, and voted without opposition by Congress.
6. Social Security: The present social security setup is not in the least what its name implies, but merely a device for increasing taxation and carrying a small part of the relief load. Certain changes were made in the earlier law, a few of them liberalizing some payments, the most important freezing the tax payment at 1% for the next three years. All the changes were voted by a majority of 361 to 2.
7. Executive Reorganization: The revised bill to reorganize the executive departments was submitted by the President and voted with no opposition.
8. Agriculture: Subsidies to farmers were revised upward from the President’s figures by Congress to the highest sum in US history. The Republicans made some objections to the “parity payments”, but the bill was overwhelmingly passed, and was signed by Roosevelt.
9. Appointments: In a few cases, Roosevelt’s nominations were objected to. In the most conspicuous of these – Amlie to the Interstate Commerce Commission – Roosevelt capitulated and withdraw the name. The three big appointments – Douglas to the Supreme Court, Leiserson to the NLRB and McNutt to the Security Administration – were overwhelmingly approved of by Congress.
 
Where the Squabbles Came
10. Labor Relations: No direct legislation on labor relations was passed, or even considered on the floor of this session of Congress. The most significant governmental act in this connection was the revision of the rules of the NLRB. These revisions, all of them in the interests of the bosses, were carried out by Roosevelt’s appointed officials, and were heartily welcomed by both parties in Congress. Roosevelt’s appointment of Leiserson shifted the NLRB sharply to the right. A motion to investigate the NLRB was, as in the case of the other investigations, motivated by the desire to prepare for reactionary legislation in the future. The motion carried 254 to 134. On the vote the Democrats were almost evenly divided: 103 to 123.
11. The Hatch Bill, restricting the political activities of Federal office holders, occasioned a sharp fight. It passed by 241 to 134. After horsing around a week and writing a wordy message, Roosevelt knuckled under and signed it. (It should be remembered that, except when a veto is over-ridden – and there were no vetoes over-ridden during the last session – a bill passed by Congress does not become law until the President signs it. And when a President signs a bill, he thereby accepts his full share of the responsibility for it.)
12. One of the most bitter struggles of the session took place over the so-called monetary bill. As this finally shaped up, it involved continuance of Presidential power to devaluate the dollar further in terms of gold, the existence of and his control over the $2,000,000,000 stabilization fund, and the price paid by the Treasury for domestic mined silver. After first being defeated, the President rallied and won his points by a small margin.
13. Spending-Lending: Toward the end of the session, Roosevelt proposed some additional pump-priming. He used a new formula which would have kept the money from appearing as an addition to the national debt. The first headlines announced that the new program was for $3,600,000,000. In actuality, $800,000,000 at most would have been spent during the current fiscal year: a tiny drop in the bucket when measured alongside the economy as a whole, or the $13,000,000,000 Federal budget alone for that matter. Congress ended by shelving the whole matter, 47 Democrats voting with the Republicans to defeat it.
14. Housing: A similar outcome held for the proposal to add $800,000,000 to the funds of the USHA, with 54 Democrats here joining the Republicans. It should be noted here also that the President’s proposal was extremely vague, and, as the dismal past history of the administration in housing has proved, did not in the least mean that many actual dwellings would be constructed.
15. Foreign Policy: Foreign policy is for the most part in the hands of the President, without much intervention from Congress. Throughout the session, the White House and the State Department continued and deepened the aggressive, provocative, war-mongering policy which has distinguished their acts since the Chicago speech of October 1937. Secret military negotiations with France and Great Britain came momentarily to the surface when the French military attaché was killed in California. The open letter to Hitler plunged Roosevelt into the European crisis. Spy scares and spy trials flourished from New York to California to Panama. Latin American dictators took time off from their butchering of workers to be feted in Washington. The nation was swarming with “democratic” European royalty. Franco was recognized, and an ambassador sent to hail him as a savior. The tough policy toward Japan was climaxed with the denunciation of the treaty, while the United States meantime kept supplying the bulk of Japan’s munitions. Most of these moves were hailed by all members of both parties in Congress; a few aroused timid squeals from the isolationists. On one point, however, Congress, feeling the pressure of constituents, turned the President down. He wanted repeal of the law providing for a compulsory embargo of munitions for either side in a war. He asked for either a unilateral embargo, applying only to the side which he designated as “aggressor”, or a “cash and carry” policy with no embargo, which would permit manipulation as desired. By a small vote, he was refused.
 
Where the Compass Points
THERE IS THE RECORD, spread out right before you. This is not what somebody thinks or wishes or dreams, but the facts.
If we look over this record carefully, study and analyze it, what do we find? The first and most striking discovery is certainly not that of a universal fight between Roosevelt and Congress or between Roosevelt and the Tories or between Roosevelt and anyone else. The first discovery is, rather, how, on the whole, in the great majority of the most important cases, Roosevelt and Congress, the executive and the legislature, have supplemented each other, have travelled together in one direction, have been running along the same, not different roads: at different paces, perhaps, but along the same road.
What is that road? Here again the record gives the unambiguous answer: the road of war and social reaction. With the tiny exceptions of some of the amendments to the social security act and some of the provisions of the agriculture bill, every other measure taken by Congress and the President since the beginning of the year has been reactionary, reactionary not merely in the light of what might be done by an ideal government, but reactionary in comparison with what has been the case in this country. Does anyone doubt this? Look at the list.
The division of the US government into three branches is, in reality, designed for one key purpose: to hide from the people the truth about the government, that the government as a whole, in all three branches, is nothing but the political agent of the bosses. The Sixty Families have decreed that their interests demand a rapid march toward war and social reaction, and all three branches obey. The record of the Congress and the President since the session opened is paralleled by the record of the courts, as all who remember the Fansteel and Apex decisions will recognize.
We have, then, full evidence in experience of the thesis which we have been putting forward first as a prediction and then as a commentary on immediate events: that the remnants of New Dealism, insofar as New Dealism included certain progressive phases and social concessions to the masses (which was never very far) have been liquidated; that the New Deal has been replaced by the War Deal, which is also a deal of social reaction; and that both parties and all branches of the government, Roosevelt as well as Garner and Taft and Vandenberg, have joined in the common burial.
This conclusion is reinforced in another impressive way by analysis of the record. The major conflicts between Roosevelt and the Congressional opposition did not occur over the chief steps in the reaction. On the contrary, Roosevelt and his forces in Congress joined with the Republicans in these steps; and the split occurred for the most part over issues which were secondary from the point of view of the fundamental reactionary direction.
There can be no disputing that Roosevelt has taken the clear lead in the super-armament building and in the aggressive, war-mongering policy generally. Congress has on the whole merely tagged along; and on the few occasions when it has protested, has been feebly resisting the speed of Roosevelt’s drive toward the war.
The greatest single step in the reaction was the relief bill, with its slash of a billion dollars from last year. This is the joint product and responsibility of Roosevelt, the administration Congressmen, the Democratic right wing, and the Republicans.
The same goes for such other openly reactionary moves as the WPA investigation, the Dies Committee, and the tax revisions. There was a fight, it is true, on the NLRB investigation, but before this fight started Roosevelt had already swung the NLRB far to the right by the appointment of Leiserson and the revision of its rules.
The big disputes came over: (1) the Monetary Bill and the Neutrality Act, where the underlying issue was in both cases administrative control over foreign policy (part of the war question, therefore, and not in this case involving “progress vs. reaction”); (2) the Hatch Bill, where the issue was purely one of factional politics; (3) Spending-Lending, which was in actuality a matter of how best to increase profits.
 
What’s All the Shooting About?
IF, THEN, THE GOVERNMENT as a whole, both parties, Roosevelt and Garner and Vandenberg are all moving in the same direction, why was there so much trouble, and why did the Democratic party fall at least temporarily to pieces during the last two weeks of Congress?
Part of the trouble in the Democratic Party, and a not inconsiderable part, is simply the struggle between rival groups for control of the party machinery and all the privileges and opportunities that go with such control. This is not a minor question.
But there is also a severe complication in the position of Roosevelt, which is a source of recurring irritation between him and the right (Garner) wing of the Democratic Party. Roosevelt still has by far the greatest popular following of anyone in the party. This following, found especially in the proletariat, the unemployed and the youth, supports him because they associate him with “progress”, with social concessions to themselves. Now when a political leader has – however demagogically – built up his status and mass following on the basis of a progressive ideology, it is a painful and awkward business for him to have to assume direction of a more and more openly reactionary program. He, indeed, cannot do so openly. He has to cover his tracks, continue the old language, go slow once in a while, make a brief leftward foray in a minor act to hide the rightward advance on the major issues. He feels the burden of his past, but cannot shake it off all at once.
Meanwhile, the right wing presses impatiently, demanding greater speed, objecting to hesitations, growing bolder and beginning to swing the whip more imperiously. However, up to a certain point the “progressive” is necessary to the right wing. Only by keeping him as a front can the right wing deceive the people about what is happening and consolidate the reactionary position at a stage where the progressive can, and must, be dispensed with.
All this follows from the laws of politics. MacDonald and Blum and Caballero are as good examples as Roosevelt.
The Democratic Party is divided into a right wing (which may be symbolized by Garner), a politically impotent and cowardly left wing (John L. Lewis) and a center (Roosevelt). Roosevelt has had the illusory dream that he could rise above the party factions, and in the confusion of 1933-38, with the help of his public support, the dream almost seemed to come true. In the last two weeks of the Congressional session, the party dissolved into its elements: the hardened section of the right in a coalition with the Republicans; Roosevelt fluttering and helpless in the center, demanding “record votes” (but making no real fight for anything else) ; and Lewis doing nothing at all, but compelled to talk big in his rhetorical damning of Garner (Roosevelt, of course, has never yet uttered a peep against Garner).
Naturally, under these circumstances, as always under similar circumstances, there is friction. Roosevelt, poor man, is trying his best to keep in the saddle of the reaction as successfully as he did in that of the “progress”. But he has got his rear, his followers, to think of, whom he can’t betray too crassly – or he will not have anyone left and will be thrown out of the window as useless. The right wing wants action, and to make sure that it gets action, it delivers a stiff blow at suitable intervals.
 
Will the Democratic Party Split?
HOW DEEP IS THE division in the Democratic Party? Will it lead to a split at next year’s convention? We may answer that, so far as the outcome depends on the Democratic politicians of all wings, the division, though serious, is not sufficient to bring about a split.
Weighty influences work against a split. To begin with, we may observe that a split to the right of more than a few isolated individuals is virtually excluded. The right wing is sitting pretty, and has no reason to split. Through its own strength and particularly through the vacillations and timidity of its party opponents, the right wing can get close enough to what it wants within the party.
But how about a split to the left? This, too, from the point of view of the party machine, is unlikely, though
from entirely different causes.
The outbreak of war, or the intensification of the war crisis would, in the first place, reconsolidate the party under Roosevelt’s leadership. Roosevelt has had the boldest and most consistent line on the war, and, with his sanctimonious hypocrisy of a super-Wilson, is peculiarly suited to be a popular war chief.
Secondly, a split, with two separate Presidential candidates in the field against the Republicans, would automatically mean the loss of the Presidency; and this is naturally a tremendous argument against a split.
But, third and most important, there is no independent left wing in the Democratic Party. The left wing, such as it is (Lewis and the rest of the labor bureaucracy, the young radical intellectuals in or close to the administration), has and has had as its sole policy: put faith in Roosevelt. Roosevelt, however, is at the center, with his firm links to the right. Roosevelt and the right wing are, in fact, supplements to each other. Roosevelt keeps the left in line and, above all, by his progressive coloration holds the workers and the unemployed, whom the right wing by itself could not keep. The right wing runs most of the State machines, and through it comes the financial backing from big business. The right wing could ill afford to let Roosevelt go; and Roosevelt, from all indications (though there is always an incalculable element in centrists), would be afraid to try it alone.
Consequently, we find the party apparatus straining toward compromise in the very midst of the Congressional chaos. Farley, as in the past, spends his time cementing relations between Roosevelt and the right wing. Amusingly enough, Mayor Hague of Jersey City and Mayor (Bloody Sunday) Kelly of Chicago have lately taken the lead in the third-term-for-Roosevelt movement. These men are corrupt, old-line machine politicians in industrial centers. By their recent pronouncements they are pointing out to the right wing how necessary it is, for the sake of the proletarian vote, to keep the film of Rooseveltism on the party; and at the same time they are holding Roosevelt firm within the party. Roosevelt himself, while his bills were being contemptuously shoved into pigeon-holes by Congress, kept “a good temper”, according to the reporters, and refrained from any harsh direct attacks.
The tendency toward compromise brings about a search for a compromise candidate, acceptable to both Roosevelt and the right wing – under the theory that the left wing will accept anyone OK’d by Roosevelt. Roosevelt himself, the new Roosevelt of the War Deal and social reaction, properly tamed and chastened, would be such a compromise. But others are being primed. Paul McNutt is the latest, and the process of grooming him is entertaining to watch. McNutt is at heart a confirmed reactionary, with a record in Indiana and the Phillipines to prove it fully in action. The right wing knows that he is their man. And the right wing watches in amusement while he is given a coat of Rooseveltism for public consumption: foreign policy in the speech at the Cleveland Poultry convention; liberalism in the Pittsburgh speech to the Young Democrats. But Garner, too, is a “compromise”. Why not? Did not Roosevelt take him twice as running mate? Has either of them ever said a harsh word about the other?
 
The One Possible Variant
TO THE EXTENT THAT the outcome depends on the party politicians, things are already in the bag, and from all the smoke there will be no fire – not next year, at any rate. But there is one imponderable: the attitude of the masses, above all of the workers and unemployed who today still go along with the Democratic party. The Democrats have got to keep their support, or be slaughtered next year. Disillusionment is already setting in. A too obvious ascendancy of the right wing, and a right wing candidate, would put a too heavy strain on the allegiance of the workers. Feeling them slip away, the Democratic left wing, perhaps with Roosevelt, might find itself compelled to split away and to run its own candidate on a radical third-party ticket.
Against this possibility, however, is the fact that the right wing understands the problem, and realizes that it must make certain formal concessions to liberalism – in words, in the party candidate, and even in measures enacted in the next session of Congress, the session of election year.
Equally against it is the fact that no individual or group is preparing for a new party or candidate: and these are not brought into being overnight.
Here is where the black treachery of John L. Lewis’ politics comes most clearly into the open. The Democratic Party is moving headlong to the right, and nothing is going to stop it. Roosevelt is proving the most effective leader in driving home the blows, one after another, against the masses. The workers, who have so vainly and so loyally supported Roosevelt, are up against a blind wall. And Lewis continues to act exclusively as a cover for Roosevelt, just as Roosevelt covers the right wing. Lewis continues his abominable policy of the past, as proved a few weeks ago in the Kentucky primaries, where he ran his man for Democratic nomination and saw him roundly defeated by Happy Chandler’s candidate (Chandler, whom Lewis elected Governor). What now in Kentucky? Lewis will turn around and support Chandler’s ticket, just as he supported Earle’s ticket last year in Pennsylvania, after Kennedy was whipped (and it was Kennedy, in 1932, who was chief seconder of Garner).
Everything is ripe for a bold and independent policy on the part of the workers. The session of Congress just completed and the prospect of the future gives the entire case for striking out on an altogether new line, for breaking forever with all varieties of boss politics and beginning the building of a labor party, with a workers’ candidate in the field next year. But this is not going to happen so long as the workers’ eyes are on the Democratic Party, on Roosevelt, or on Lewis. It will not happen until the workers decide to take their own future into their own hands.
James BURNHAM



The Anglo-French propaganda machine is daily putting out – usually under the dateline of neutral capitals – stories of mass discontent within Germany. We are told that there have been numerous strikes, protest movements and desertions.
At the same time, British planes have been dropping within Germany millions of leaflets which blame Hitler for the war and call upon the German people to get rid of Hitler and Hitlerism.
Chamberlain’s efforts in this direction have been notably supplemented by the British labor leaders, who have been addressing messages and radio broadcasts, along similar lines, to the German people.
It is, of course, impossible to judge whether there is any truth in these stories of German internal dissension. We know that there are in Germany many millions of workers and peasants who have never been reconciled to Nazism. They have bowed down to it only because of terror and the threat of terror, and because their means of opposition – their parties and independent unions – have been smashed. At the same time, there are even more millions of peasants and many workers who have, for a while at least, accepted Nazism, as a last resort, with a kind of mystic and despairing hope.
It is certain that the first group, in whose hearts still live the traditions of Marxism, and a large section of the second will one day break into open opposition and finally revolt against the Nazi regime. But the experiences of history make it unlikely that this is commencing to any extent so soon. It will need to be stimulated by the ever-increasing war hardships, growing casualty lists, military setbacks, and, above all, by signs of international support for a movement against the war.
 
The Effects of Treachery
What is most necessary of all to understand is that the effect of Chamberlain’s and particularly of the British labor leaders’ “anti-Hitler” agitation, far from hastening the process of revolt within Germany, is to strengthen Hitler. There is no paradox here; it could not be otherwise.
In the first place, this agitation, accompanying the military attacks on the German mass-armies and the economic blockade, enables Hitler to say to the German workers: “You see, everyone is against Germany and against you. This agitation is merely a trick whereby your enemies supplement their guns and their economic strangulation. You have only me to rely upon, me and our united German strength.” He says this, and under the circumstances it must appear to the German workers to be the case.
But when, to the voice of Chamberlain is added that of the British and French labor leaders, the German worker – even without prompting from Goebbels – is compelled to reason to himself as follows:
“Not only are the imperialist governments of Britain and France united to crush Germany. I am deserted also by my brothers and fellow-workers in France and England. Instead of joining with me to overthrow the whole imperialist war-system, my fellow-workers are willingly and eagerly fighting for their own imperialist governments in order to defend the colonies and possessions of Britain and France. What hypocrisy when they tell me, by leaflet and radio, to overthrow Hitler but at the same time support their own robber-masters. Hitler is bad enough, but shall I give him up merely to become the slave of British and French plunderers?”
 
Stalin Does His Bit
Such a reaction is deepened a hundred-fold by the infamy of Stalin. The effect of the Stalin-Hitler alliance on the consciousness of the German workers is the most terrible of all its consequences.
In spite of everything, the Soviet Union had appeared to the German workers as their hope and their great ally which would when the day came be at their side to aid in throwing Nazism from their backs.
With the signing of the pact and the subsequent proofs that it is a broad alliance, they see Stalin also lined up not with them against their tyrant but as the chief aid of that tyrant.
 
How to Help the German Workers
We see here the full measure of the crime of social-patriotism. The soical-patriots in England, France and the United States are, in actuality, the main bulwarks of Hitler.
There is only one way in which we can help the German workers to overthrow Hitler and Hitler-ism: by refusing to support our own governments and their war, by carrying on our struggle agatast the enemy in our own country.
If we do this, then the German workers will know that they have allies who are neither hypocritical nor treacherous, who are fighting on the same side of the same war. They will take courage from the example of their fellow-workers in other lands, and Hitler’s demagogy will prove empty and sterile.
Every word that a labor leader in this country says in support of Roosevelt’s war machine and his war plans is worth an armored regiment to Hitler. Every word and deed against Roosevelt’s war is a nail in Hitler’s coffin.
Do we wish to make this in reality the war to end fascism? Then, for us, the answer is clear: Against Roosevelt and his war; for the international struggle of the workers of all nations to destroy imperialism and build a world socialist order.
 



The most vicious and the most dangerous lie about the war, so far as this country is concerned, is that it is being fought “for democracy” by England and France. I am not going to repeat now the facts about the “democratic” British and French Empires which, for the benefit of a handful of industrialists and bankers in London and Paris, hold in abject slavery six times as many human beings as Hitler rules. I am thinking about a far broader and more startling irony in this lie of a new war for democracy.
Not merely is it absolutely false that this is a war for democracy. The truth, the ironic truth, is that this war which began a week ago is the war to end democracy – as democracy has been known in the modern world – for all time. Not to end it for the period of the war (as the dreamers suppose), but forever.
 
Bourgeois Democracy: Road’s End
Even under the barrage of minute-by-minute events that swamp our nerves and feelings, it is worth a pause to reflect under a wider perspective on the close of a great political era: the era which witnessed the development of bourgeois democracy, the form of government which for some hundreds of years the most advanced statesmen and philosophers thought to be the ultimate achievement of political man.
For the democracy which has ended is not, of course, democracy “in general” or “in the abstract,” but one particular, concrete form of democracy: namely, parliamentary democracy based upon capitalist property relations.
In 16th century England, bourgeois democracy began its stirring career. There parliament, in alliance with the King, fought the feudal lords; and, later, in the 17th century, breaking from the King, achieved supremacy through Cromwell’s revolution. Parliamentary democracy was transferred to the United States, where it flourished. In France, it was established by the great revolution. In the 19th century it spread for a while until it seemed destined to supplant all other governmental systems; but long before its goal was reached, there could be seen the shadow of its early doom.
Bourgeois democracy was the form of government best suited to the young, vigorous and expanding capitalist nations. It permitted the maximum of freedom for the bourgeoisie: allowing them to throw off the shackles of feudalism, and at the same time to hold the masses in check. As capitalism reached imperialist maturity and old age, however, bourgeois democracy became a luxury that had to be discarded. After the last war, which marked the turning point into the final decline of capitalism, democracy could be afforded only by the rich, fat empires which could feed their democracy at home from the spoils of the colonies. The impoverished, desperate nations had to throw it aside, one after another.
Now, with the new war, it topples from the last remaining pedestals.
 
Fascism and Democracy Become Twins
The war has already, in a week, bridged the pretended “ultimate gulf” between fascist and democratic imperialism. The political and social regimes of Germany, France and England become identical in all essential aspects, merged into the war dictatorships. “Regimentation,” censorship, abrogation of all civil and democratic rights, wiping out of all opposition ... Where is the meaningful difference?
Exactly the same thing will happen in the United States as it nears and enters the war. Indeed, complete plans for the totalitarian war dictatorship are all in readiness.
But when the war is over, we are told, England and France and the United States will immediately return to their old democratic selves. Vain hope, vain and impossible! There can be no return.
There is no imperialist solution for this war. Whatever its outcome in a military sense, the social and economic chaos which has led to and, far more, will result from the war is of so colossal and profound a character that a recovery of “normal conditions,” stability, security, is unthinkable. The problems and conflicts of the post-war crises will be even more shattering than those of the war itself. To suppose that these could be handled by the old-style bourgeois parliamentary governments is really laughable if it were not so fatal an illusion.
Parliamentary democracy might conceivably linger for a few years in one or two small and unimportant nations, off the beaten track of history – but even this is unlikely. For the decisive sections of the world, its day is over. Let us understand this. It is finished, done.
 
The Future of Democracy
Bourgeois democracy goes, and will not return. But the fate of democracy, of freedom and self-rule for the masses of the people, is not bound up with bourgeois parliamentary government, indeed, bourgeois democracy was never more than a deception of the masses, the way in which the bourgeoisie enforced its rule over the people.
The end of bourgeois democracy means simply and clearly that the fate and future of democracy is bound up indissolubly with the overthrow of the rule of the bourgeoisie – who can no longer rule by democratic means, of their imperialism, of their war, and with the victory of the masses in the socialist revolution against the war. The only kind of democracy possible in the future is socialist democracy.
A war for democracy is well worth fighting! But it is not the war of Chamberlain, Hitler, Daladier and Roosevelt. The only war for democracy is the struggle against their war. Let this be remembered in the midst of the lies of the days to come!
 



You have probably never heard of Herman Brassert. His name never appears in headlines, nor is it ever listed in the reports of international conferences. Nevertheless, Herman Brassert is one of the most important men in the world, and millions upon millions of human beings are now beginning to feel the effect of his activities.
Herman Brassert is one of the greatest living engineers. His specialty is the design and technical organization of steel mills, and at this he has no equal.
The great economic crisis of the late ‘20’s began in Great Britain several years before it hit the rest of the world. The British industrialists believed that they were handicapped by the outmoded technological character, in comparison with Germany and the United States, of much of the equipment, of their heavy industries. They decided to remedy this by a program of what was then called “rationalization”.
Brassert was called in as a chief consultant for the re-making of the steel plants. From then on he made frequent trips to England.
 
Steel Gets a New Direction
After a short while, however, it became clear to Britain that the “rationalization” of the steel plants had actually to be made the preparation of the steel industry for war, and that the whole process had to be speeded up. Occasional visits by Brassert were not enough. The British government induced him to transfer residence to England, where five years ago, he settled his family on a beautiful estate which he bought in the English countryside.
The idea that Britain began re-armament only after Hitler had taken over Austria and was threatening Czechoslovakia is a myth. The fundamental preparations were far advanced long before Vienna fell.
Brassert did his work well. The British steel industry is re-located, reorganized and re-equipped. It is specifically and admirably adapted for turning out the maximum quantity of the most destructive implements so far devised by human ingenuity.
 
A New Assignment
While Brassert was working in England, Hitler conquered and consolidated power in Germany. The German industrialists were also faced with the problem of the reorganization of heavy industry, and from the beginning they were clear about the purpose of reorganization: for war. Through the Nazi Four Year Plan, they proposed to bring all existing plants and mills to the highest technical efficiency, and to add new works of a surpassing order. In particular, they wished to build toe greatest steel plant in the world: the Hermann Goering Works.
There was one man whom they wanted for the job in steel: Herman Brassert. And they got him. In addition to his English estate, he rented a splendid apartment in Berlin; and every week he shuttled back and forth by airplane between the two nations.
The Hermann Goering Works arose in record time, the full flower of engineering art.
What a consolation it should be to the soldiers facing each other from the Maginot and Limes Lines! No favoritism in this war! They can each know that the tanks which crush them, the planes that hurl destruction on them, the shells which tear their guts apart, are on both sides alike the very finest products of the very highest skill. And all of them are turned out with the trademark of the one supreme artist.
But, you ask, did not the two governments and the two sets of industrialists object to Brassert’s double duties? If you ask this question, you have still a lot to learn. Business is business; and patriotism is also business. During this same period it was Britain which supplied the greater part of the coal and ore which built and extended and fed Krupp and Stinnes and the Hermann Goering Works. And, after all, should not a British soldier be far happier to be torn to pieces by steel forged out of exclusively Empire products?
It was this same Brassert, by the way, who was first offered the job (which he finally refused) of building Magnetogorsk. And it was he who was chief consultant in building the great steel plant ordered by Kemal Ataturk – the completion of which task has given Turkey a new weight among the neutrals.
 
How to Get on in the World
So far, all was well with Brassert. But, when war was declared you would think that he would have found himself in something of a jam, and would have been bound to end in either a British or a German concentration camp. But such thoughts, too, forget that business is business.
Brassert was born in Germany, but long ago he became a citizen of the good, old U.S.A. And you may be sure that his years of European residence did not lead him to give up his U.S. citizenship. The “main office” of his firm continued to be located patriotically in Chicago.
So, four days after the war began, Brassert and his family stepped off the Queen Mary to the unbombed and unbombable docks of New York City.
There is work still to be done! The steel industry of this country is already, from a technical standpoint, primed for the war. But there are last minute changes and revisions and improvements to be tended to, so that we may all be confident that the death which is “Made in America” will be more sure and certain and terrible than any alien death.
 



Roosevelt is back on top of the heap. When he realized that his internal policy was hopeless, that it was collapsing miserably, he gambled his entire stake on the war. And he won.
When he brings together his special session of Congress, he will resume the command that he lost in July. He will call the tune, and a big majority will swing into the dance. Full speed ahead toward the war!
But let us hope that no one will be so simple as to imagine that this will mean a revival of the New Deal. It will not be the dead Roosevelt of the dead New Deal who takes the helm, but the Roosevelt of the War Deal. And the War Deal will hand out short shrift to those who try to remind it of the old promises of “reform” and “the more abundant life”.
The aim of the War Deal, on a world scale, is to bring the United States into the war in such a way that American imperialism will dictate the war settlement. Internally, the aim of the War Deal is, in the shortest possible time, to fasten on the people of the United States a totalitarian military dictatorship – a dictatorship which will never be lifted so long as American imperialism survives.
That will be the reward to the American people for dying in the “crusade against Hitler” abroad: totalitarian dictatorship at home.
 
Roosevelt on Easy Street
It is certain that Roosevelt plans to send this country into the war well before the party conventions next Spring. If he succeeds, he takes it for granted that his nomination for a third term (and his election) are in the bag. Who will dare oppose him? He will be able to take chief personal credit for the war, will he not? And he has good grounds for his anticipations.
Roosevelt is the leading, and most skillful warmonger in the United States. There is, in fact, substantial reason to believe that Roosevelt’s march toward the war is considerably faster than that desired by the Sixty Families themselves, and by the economic needs of American imperialism. The Sixty Families would like a maximum interval for war-time super-profits under conditions of formal neutrality, with direct military intervention delayed until the decisive last stages of the war. Then, with all the European powers exhausted, they could make sure that “victory” would guarantee not merely the crushing of Germany – which is only one part of the purpose of the Sixty Families in the war – but firm dominance over their “allies” as well. American imperialism does not want any victors in this war except itself.
But all of Roosevelt’s actions since his Chicago address of October 1937 prove that he is impatient for the role of war-lord, that he wants to become “world-leader” from the outset – and, in the process, save his own political carcass from being thrown into discard.
It is reported on good authority that one big factor in Great Britain’s decision to precipitate war this autumn was the fact that Roosevelt was entering the last year of his second term of office, and, without a war, would have had little chance for a third term. Though Great Britain would in any case have counted on U.S. aid, it would not have been so sure of enormous and rapid aid from another President.
Everyone is so convinced of Roosevelt’s intentions that his declaration of the embargo required by the Neutrality Act had not the slightest dampening effect on the rise of the “war baby” stocks, or the stepped up speed of production of military planes for export. Roosevelt proposes, everyone knows, to transform large sections of American industry into a base of supplies for England and France which will be free of the risk of German bombers.
 
The Forgotten Man again Forgotten
Meanwhile, WPA dismissals are still continuing; the rolls are down below 2,000,000 now. It is no doubt unpatriotic to mention such details when everyone should be practising up for the trenches. Still worse, I imagine, to recall that, according to the record, it is not Hitler who has thrown 1,500,000 WPA workers into the streets in less than a year.
How convenient for Roosevelt, this war! Here is your blanket cure-all; no more talk is in order now about unemployment and starvation and misery and wretched houses and mounting debts and taxes. And here is your ticket for an express ride to a third term.
It is unutterably tragic that even a single worker believes he can defeat Hitlerism by supporting Roosevelt’s war plans and his war to come. By such support we only strengthen Hitler at home, since he can then prove to the German workers that they are deserted by their brothers in other nations who fight to defend the colonies and profits of “their own” imperialisms. And in this country, by such support we give a free hand to reaction, we necessarily abandon all struggle for jobs and decent living conditions, and we accept in advance the totalitarian dictatorship which Roosevelt’s subordinates and his Morgan-Rockefeller-DuPont War Resources Board have prepared to the last item. By such support we make certain the victory, not of Hitler perhaps, but of Hitlerism, throughout the world.
To Roosevelt’s call for national unity in the crisis, it has never been so important to reply: Against the national unity of the imperialists! For unity of the working class in uncompromising class struggle against Roosevelt and his war and his reaction!
 



MRA – “Moral Re-Armament” – has been getting a big play in the press lately. It recently climaxed a cross-country series of meetings with a capacity crowd (25,000) at the Hollywood Bowl, and has currently been holding a “convention” at the swank California resort of Del Monte. Thirty-three State governors, and President Roosevelt, have sent messages of endorsement. Henry Ford is very enthusiastic, and Louis Mayer of M.G.M. (one of the six highest on the recently published list of 1937 salaries) spoke at the Bowl ceremony.
What is this movement, and where did it come from? Why are politicians and big shots so happy to have their names connected with it, and why do virtually all newspapers treat it at such length and so kindly? When we notice that Roy Weir, of the Minneapolis Central Labor Union, Charles Copperman of the California Teamsters, and a number of Scandinavian labor officials have been conspicuous at the California meetings, these questions become worth enquiring into.
 
Primitive Christianity, à la Buchman
MRA is the new ballyhoo by-line for a movement which has been known for a number of years as the “Oxford Groups”, which was self-advertised as a twentieth century return to the primitive Christian Brotherhood of the first century, A.D. Before it took the title of “Oxford Groups”, this movement was usually known as “Buchmanism”, from the name of its founder, Frank Buchman.
Buchman, a plump, soft, oily fellow with the typical appearance of a thousand small town Kiwanis Club secretaries, started his comfortable racket fifteen or more years ago, in the United States. He busily “converted” suitable persons through a patent method of his own, which he called “soul surgery”, to a “new life” based on “God guidance”. He specialized in young people of respectable families, particularly good-looking young men, and wealthy dowagers.
High point in his course of treatment was the “House Party”. A rich sympathizer (several members of the Rockefeller family, for example, were included) would turn over a big house, and a group would be invited for a few days. Long meetings would be held, at which individuals would make public “confessions” of the errors of their ways: drinking, gambling, and such-like skullduggery, but, in the case of the really smash confessions, charmingly intertwined with plenty of sex.
After good thorough confessing, the converts would become model citizens, and go around converting their acquaintances.
For a while Buchman set up shop at Princeton University; but at that time, for some reason, the undergraduates did not take kindly to his brand of theologico-pornographic pap, and, in the wave of an angry protest, Buchman found it expedient to pull up stakes.
 
A Not-So-Innocent Abroad
Soon thereafter, Buchman showed up at Oxford University in England, traditional home, as Matthew Arnold called it, of lost causes. After a few months’ careful maneuvering with the right people, he got off to a flying start. Prominent figures signed on the dotted line, and House Parties were blossoming around the English country-side. He stretched out to Holland, and, oddly enough, to South Africa, in both of which spots he met a jolly reception; and he found the Scandinavian countries, also, hospitable.
He followed the same method in getting key recruits: young people, especially young men, of good appearance and families, and older persons of wealth and if possible of title.
He worked on a gradually bigger scale. He travelled often with hundreds of followers (there were a thousand on his just completed trip to California), in the best of style. Yet no one seemed to know where the money came from. He never asked for contributions, or passed a plate, like an ordinary preacher.
And such a friendly man! The first time you meet him, it’s “Frank” this and “Bill” that: no such formalities as “Mr.” among the Buchmanites. And such hearty slaps on the back and practical jokes and general good fellowship!
 
New Worlds to Conquer
As his movement grew, Buchman’s ideas have grown with it. A couple of years ago, he made his first little ventures into politics. His voice is getting louder in telling the world how to run its business, how MRA is going to solve the problems of depression and crisis and war – this was the theme of the Hollywood jamboree.
And here, my friends, is where Labor comes in, as MRA’s “Absolute Honesty, Purity, Unselfishness, Love” get into political action.
From the New York Times, reporting the Del Monte convention:
“Lauritz Laustsen, a Danish sawmill worker, in broken English told a story of how his employer had been ‘guided by God’ to give better conditions. This had built up confidence among the men, he said, so that in the midst of deadlocked strike negotiations the trades union president told an employer that because he was morally rearmed he trusted him, and any terms he might make would be acceptable.”
At the Bowl meeting, from the platform, Copperman, the Teamsters’ official, pledged his-friendship to G.G. Bennett – who happens to be president of Associated Farmers in the Imperial Valley.
Clear enough, then, why Henry Ford telegraphed his support to MRA and all its works. What need for unionism at River Rouge, when the workers can get all the better conditions they want simply by putting faith in the morally re-armed Henry Ford? Let us hope, however, that Edsel (and Campbell and Bennett) are following the example of the God-guided Henry.
 



In almost all of the conflicts between Roosevelt and the anti-Roosevelt opposition in Congress, conflicts which during the present session of Congress have generally led to Roosevelt’s defeat, the bulk of the boss press has to one or another degree supported the opposition. To this general rule there is one outstanding exception: namely, the conflicts over foreign policy. Wherever Roosevelt and some section of Congress have differed on foreign policy, the boss press has overwhelmingly declared for Roosevelt.
The sharp struggle over the Neutrality Act has been a notorious example.
 
Pro and Con Close Together
The issue here, when all the smoke is cleared away, boiled down to very small potatoes. Roosevelt wanted the power to declare, by executive decree, unilateral embargoes on war munitions: that is, to embargo the shipment of war munitions from this country to another country which Roosevelt would declare was “at war” and was an “aggressor” in the war.
A large bloc in Congress did not want to grant this power to the President. It wished to retain a section of the old Neutrality Act which provides for an embargo on the shipment of munitions to either side, when a “state of war” is defined to exist by the President.
This Congressional bloc, for the time being, came out on top, and the President was forced to withdraw his demand. The boss press, led by the New York Times, condemned the Congressional bloc for sabotage of the national interests of the United States.
In this whole fight, there was a large element of contemptible farce. So far as the question of war or peace goes, the outcome doesn’t make a great deal of difference. Whichever law is on the books, the Sixty Families can still swing their power and resources in the direction where it suits them best – in the direction, that is, where the biggest profits lie. Nowadays “war munitions” are only a tiny part of what goes into a war: coal and petroleum and copper and cotton and rubber and food and iron are in the end more important than guns and military aircraft, both for the warring nation and for the economy of the exporting nation.
Consequently, whether an embargo on war munitions alone applies to one side or to both sides or to neither (as in the compromise “cash and carry” plan which is favored by a number of Congressmen) is not going to decide either who wins the war or how it entangles the United States. Moreover, the government and the bosses can always get around any embargo statutes, if they really wish to, by credit devices, transshipments, etc.
 
Ganged Up on War Referendum
It is furthermore interesting to note that in the heat generated by Roosevelt, Hull and the members of Congress over the Neutrality Act, all parties to the dispute managed to forget about the proposal for a war referendum, embodied in several bills submitted to Congress, and favored by the huge majority of the people. Can it be that part of the reason for the big argument over Neutrality was precisely to turn public attention away from the war referendum?
Nevertheless, making the proper discounts, a genuine difference between the two sides remains.
Roosevelt’s entire domestic program and policy have collapsed in an utter and complete breakdown. All that he can salvage from the dismal wreck of his once shining armor is his foreign policy. He knows clearly that his foreign policy has the fundamental perspective of a war of imperialist aggression, in which United States capitalism, mortally sick at home, would try to save itself by acquiring unchallenged dominance for exploitation of vast areas in Latin America, the Far East and even Europe.
From this premise comes the Lima Conference, the parade of Latin American dictators to Washington, the notes to Japan, the intervention in Europe, the huge armament increases.
But to carry out his perspective, Roosevelt wants and needs an absolutely free hand. He wants and takes a free hand in spending the armament billions; he closes the State Department files; he negotiates secretly. He does not want any “interference” from Congress; there are always a few Congressmen who are apt to ask embarrassing questions, who like to “investigate,” who might argue when the time for action comes. For these reasons, Roosevelt wants a Neutrality Act which leaves everything up to himself.
Big business has exactly the same fundamental perspective in foreign policy as has Roosevelt. And consequently, big business supports Roosevelt in foreign policy, whether it is a question of armaments or secret diplomacy or discretionary embargoes.
It should not be imagined that Congressmen are any less “patriotic” than the President, or that they will have any difficulty supporting the war when the day arrives. Indeed, many who were against Roosevelt in the Neutrality conflict explained that they took their position only because they didn’t think war was near: in other words, if they thought the crisis serious enough they would change at once.
 
Congressmen Must Face Constituencies
But two special factors operate on many of the Congressmen. The Republicans use the dispute here, as on other points, for factional advantage – to bring about another defeat in Roosevelt’s growing list, and to get an “anti-war” issue for next year’s campaign. And all Congressmen have got to go home and face their constituents at closer hand than the President. (The legislature is, in general, more subject to popular pressure than the executive.) Now the constituents are, of course, opposed to war; and many of them, especially in the Middle West, have a pretty good idea of the direction in which Roosevelt’s foreign policy is leading. Under such circumstances, a vote against the unilateral, discretionary embargo is highly desirable if the Congressmen want to see a friendly crowd when they gel to the home-town station after their strenuous seven months of serving their country.
The conflict over the Neutrality Act, like other similar disputes in all imperialist governments, is in the last analysis a disagreement over the most effective means of dragging the country into war.
 



Of all forms of politics, “centrism” is the lowest. Centrism in politics is the equivalent of hypocrisy in personal morality. The centrist, without a firm program or clear perspective of his own, tries to make a career out of playing the left wing against the right. He talks big and acts little. Today he is a radical and tomorrow a conservative. His words never correspond to his deeds.
In confused times, the centrist can for a while make most people, including himself, think he is God Almighty. But, as the lines get drawn more sharply, every centrist meets the same fate: he is first squeezed and then crushed between the right and the left: He squawks and yowls a bit, and then either capitulates or gets thrown into the junkheap. As a matter of fact, he usually ends up in the junkheap even when he capitulates, since both right and left have only contempt for him.
 
Roosevelt as Centrist
In relation to boss politics generally, and specifically in relation to his own party, Roosevelt is a centrist. He is an outstanding, shrewd and brilliant centrist, true enough, but not all his qualities exempt him from the operation of the general laws of his kind of politics.
Basing himself upon wide mass support among the people, he has tried to raise himself above the factional struggle within the Democratic Party. He has thought that, with the help of Farley and the party’s center, he could mediate between and reconcile the right wing (Garner) and the left (John L. Lewis).
While always serving the interests of the right wing in major matters, for five years most of his speeches and some of his acts were designed to appease the left. In the confusion of 1933-38, this worked well enough; but times have grown harder, the crisis sharper, and the right wing more definite in what it wants, so that the right now demands an end to playing around.
After getting a taste of the right wing whip in the defeat of the Supreme Court expansion plan, the first bill for Executive reorganization, and the failure of the “purge”, Roosevelt – who, like all centrists, is a coward – was willing and anxious to buckle down.
From last November on, he has tried to prove to the right, in action, that he is ready to do their bidding. He began the drive against the unemployed. He set the shamefully low figure for the new WPA appropriation. His man, Harrington, demanded the end of the prevailing wage. He appointed the right-winger, Leiserson, to the Labor Board, and compelled the Board to alter its rules in favor of employers. He revised taxation along the Wall Street lines. He appointed McNutt, the Hoosier Hitler. He announced to the world that “You cannot strike against the government”. He stopped the sniping at the private Utilities.
In other words, Roosevelt abandoned the substance of the New Deal, insofar as the New Deal meant those social concessions to the masses which were the stock-in-trade of the Democratic Party’s reformist left wing.
 
The Ungrateful Right Wing
Having thus given the right wing virtually all it demanded, having done its dirty work for it (as is the universal custom with centrists), Roosevelt doubtless expected a little gratitude. He must have felt he had the “right” to some party harmony and a few minor face-saving bills to patch up his record with “the people”. He sent along to Congress his fake “spending-lending” bill, which didn’t amount to a pinch of snuff anyway, and a bill for increased authorization for housing loans (though the present authorization is by no means used up by his snail-paced housing program).
But when a right wing gets going, it develops a prodigious appetite. And it delights in humiliating a centrist, as well as defeating him, in order to teach him a few lessons for the future.
Roosevelt’s capitulation, far from pacifying the right wing, only hardened it. The bloc with the Republicans was, in the last weeks of the session, solidified into a working majority, and the President was mercilessly pounded with one sharp blow after another. Not only were all of his proposals thrown out of the window, but the Hatch Bill, planned to weaken his influence on the Party machinery, was thrust down his throat. Roosevelt, cutting the same contemptible figure as all centrists under the same circumstances, could do nothing but sit back impotently; and, in spite of whining complaints to the press, did not have the guts even to veto the Hatch Bill.
Meanwhile the miserable left wing of the Democratic Party, whose whole policy boils down to “put faith in Roosevelt”, tried to cover its own bankruptcy with a rhetorical demonstration: John L. Lewis’ denunciation of Garner.
 
What’s Left for Roosevelt
The session of Congress just ended has written finis to the New Deal chapter. The New Deal has gone, and no one has the power to summon it back. It went, basically, because its socio-economic function in the United States was finished; and this was reflected by the political collapse of its previous supporters, and the rise to control of its opponents.
If the internal situation were all that had to be taken into account, we could now say that Roosevelt would have finished his important part in U.S. politics and would be on his way out of the picture – except perhaps for window-dressing in the future.
One element of Rooseveltism, however, remains, and this is enough to take precedence, by itself, over all the rest: his war. On the issue of foreign policy and the war, Roosevelt remains the first and authentic spokesman for U.S. imperialism. “The Great Reformer” is as dead as the decaying remnants of the sloppy pseudo-reforms of his New Dealism. What remains politically alive is only the chief War-Monger.
 



No front is neglected in the ever-hastening preparations for the war. While, last week, the nations were turning out new armaments at the rate of two billions of dollars worth a month, and additional millions of men were being mobilized in Europe, Columbia University, second richest of this Country’s educational institutions, was doing its bit in the moral make-ready.
Under the direction of Dean Russell of Columbia’s Teachers College (the most influential school of education in the United States), a three days’ “Congress on Education for Democracy” was held and immensely publicized in the press. Some 400 “delegates” of various organizations were present, and several thousand others attended the sessions. The meaning of the Congress was well symbolized by its leading guest and by the chairman of its key session, the huge banquet held at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Earl Baldwin of Bewdley, elder statesman of Britain’s Conservative party, was the guest. Winthrop W. Aldrich, head of the country’s largest bank, the Chase National, was the chairman.
Such Congresses, however, are never complete without their “left decoration”. To their shame and disgrace, this was prominently provided by Ernest Bevin, one of the chiefs of the British Trades Unions and the British Labor Party; Charles Beard, America’s leading liberal historian; Norman Thomas, whose picture the Times wisely featured; and William Green, who sent an effusive message from Atlantic City.
 
Democracy of Baldwin and Aldrich
The dozens of speeches at the sessions were studded with some of the biggest generalities on record. Simple facts and concrete details were beneath the scorn of these master-minds. Here were to be found only “eternal truths”: freedom and liberty and conscience and God. “If civilization is to avoid overwhelming damage,” bleated President Nicholas Murray Butler of Columbia, “and perhaps ruin for centuries, there is something to be done which must be done now.”
No one, of course, was so indiscreet as to mention just what it is that “must be done now”. But they did not need to put it into words. What must be done, the whole Congress implied and prepared for, is to go to war against the Axis powers.
The most farcical performance of the whole three days was the speech of the Ambassador from Poland. Poland, giving its lessons to the people – on democracy! Poland, land of eternal military dictatorship, pogroms, suppression of minority rights, everlasting violence against the labor movement, telling just how and why we must “fight for democracy”!
But it should not be imagined that this Congress was a trivial affair or a joke, or that the time, energy and money spent on it was wasted. Congresses such as these, and the permanent organization which issued out of it, are an indispensable part of imperialism’s preparation for war.
It is particularly significant that Teachers College sponsored this Congress. Imperialism prostitutes everything in society to its ends, and firm control over the educational system, with the educators’ vast influence over the moral and intellectual climate of the public, is essential to its plans. It must be confessed, alas, that the big shots of the teaching world do not need much urging to fulfill their prostitutes’ role.
The people would never accept the war if they knew one-half of the hideous, vicious truth about it. Therefore the “leaders of intellectual and cultural life” have got to manufacture lies attractive enough to make the masses willing to die for the Sixty Families and their counterparts in the other great powers.
 
Democracy That the Congress Forgot
The gathering was entitled a Congress on Education for Democracy. Now I will be the first to grant that the world is very much in need of education for democracy. A Congress in this country might well devote its serious attention to the subject.
Spokesmen from the United States could easily compose most eloquent speeches explaining how U.S. imperialism murders democracy through its military dictatorship in Puerto Rico, and could raise the democratic demand for the independence of Puerto Rico. They could tell how the ten million Negroes of the South are deprived of all democratic rights, and herded in squalid, disease-ridden ghettoes; and demand full political, economic and social rights for the Negroes. They could analyze the M-Day plans of the U.S. government, already in their first stages of setting up a totalitarian military dictatorship.
The Polish speaker could discuss the endless crimes of the Polish landlords, industrialists, politicians and generals against democracy.
The British delegates would not have to search far for material. They could tell the story of Ireland. They could show by what devices an imperialist handful keeps 350,000,000 Indians ground into the earth – and might even make clear that democracy, genuine democracy, means immediate freedom and independence for India. They could give the simple facts about Palestine, Ceylon, South Africa ...
And they might, all of them, show why, if a war involving all of mankind threatens, the peoples themselves are not given the right to decide whether that war is worth fighting.
But such a Congress on education for democracy would not be called by Dean Russell, nor would its delegates comprise the glittering figures of the Earl of Bewdley, Winthrop Aldrich, Ernest Bevin, or Charles Beard. It would be a congress which would have to name these liars and hypocrites, these pimps of the spirit, as among the most vicious of the enemies of real democracy. The struggle of the masses for democracy must recognize in them and their Congresses a corrupt and degraded instrument of the enemy.
 



A man, they used to say, is known by the company he keeps. It becomes an easy matter to know Franklin D. Roosevelt by this test if we apply it in connection with the six buddies whom he has just appointed to his new War Resources Board.
Who are these six? First comes the chairman Edward R. Stettinius, Jr. Stettinius is chairman of the board of that well known charitable organization, the United States Steel Corporation. And a little note further: His father, Edward, Sr., was one of the three leading partner’s of Morgan & Co. during the period which included the last world war. When Morgan & Co. became fiscal and purchasing agents for the allied powers (two years prior to the entry of this country into the war), Stettinius, Sr., had charge of purchases, and dispensed more than three billion dollars to the corporations favored by Morgan. The part which these operations played in getting the United States into the war belongs to well-established history.
Second comes John Lee Pratt, a leading director of General Motors corporation, which has just reported a $100,000,000 profit for the first six months of 1939, at the same time that its ample resources have been doing their best to smash the UAW. Pratt himself is a member of the mighty clan, high in the list of the Sixty Families, whose interests are closely interlocked with the Rockefellers.
 
Just a Bunch of the Boys
Then we have Walter S. Clifford, head of the American Telephone & Telegraph, which managed to scrape by during the past six months on a profit of $80,000,000, a paltry enough trifle in the light of its more than five billion dollars worth of listed assets.
Amusingly enough, there was issued a few months ago a government report, prepared by two years of research, proving fully that A.T.&T. was gouging the public by every form of hijacking known to high finance. For this happy record, Roosevelt now gives Gifford his fitting reward.
Next comes General Robert E. Wood, chairman of the board of Sears, Roebuck & Co., which has been rolling in profits this year to the tune of around a million dollars a week. General Wood has been a Roosevelt favorite for some while, having functioned until recently as a special adviser to the Department of Commerce.
A few weeks ago, in Boston, General Wood made a little speech. He surprised some of his audience at the time by praising several aspects of the German and Italian regimes, confessing that he was particularly partial to the forced labor allotted to young men and women.
Each of these four is a millionaire many times over.
The remaining two are the “intellectual” frosting for this very juicy cake: Karl T. Compton, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Harold G. Moulton, president of the Brookings Institute.
Compton, before his appointment to M.I.T. (a school run by the Sixty Families – financed chiefly by the DuPonts – to supply their corporations with technical help), was a distinguished physicist. Since his appointment, he has used his scientific prestige to deliver a series of the most bitterly reactionary speeches on social and economic affairs.
The Brookings Institute, founded to give expert analysis and advice on how to make capitalism work, had vague liberal leanings in its early years, but during the past five years has become a pillar of orthodox reaction.
Both Compton and Moulton have, by the way, singled out nearly every even mildly progressive phase of Roosevelt New Dealism for special attack.
 
The Vulture Smell Carrion
When we say that the war is going to be fought for the benefit of the Sixty Families, we mean this literally. It is not a question of their “moral’’ or “spiritual” benefit, but quite plainly and bluntly for the benefit of their pocketbooks.
War, for the Sixty Families, is a chance to make super-profits. That’s what it amounts to, and that’s all. There’s not much sentiment in the Sixty Families.
In the last war, their corporations coined billion after billion out of the blood of 45,000,000 casualties.
To make sure of the maximum profit and graft, they had to put their agents at the heart of the government in Washington, at that heart where contracts were allotted, purchases made, and financing handled. In those days, Bernard Baruch (also one of Roosevelt’s closest friends and advisers, incidentally) was their key man as head of the War Industries Board.
This time they are taking no chances. They are getting in there well before the war starts, monopolizing the War Resources Board which will be made the chief social and economic agency of the government during war-time. Contracts, purchases, money and profits will be under the control of this board.
With the exception of Pratt, these six are not actually members of the Sixty Families (though they are extremely wealthy in their own right). The actual members, most of them, are happy to sit back in Long Island, their yachts, the divorce courts and Honolulu, while drawing down their dividends. But these members of the War Resources Board are among the ablest and shrewdest agents of the Sixty Families: “front men” who, for a stiff price, manage their corporations for them and handle “public relations”.
In this new Board you’ve got the whole setup for the coming war concentrated in a nutshell.
And, my friends, it wasn’t John Garner who selected the names. It’s the President, in these United States, who has charge of appointments.
There’s no doubt about it: Roosevelt is going to give us a rip-roaring democracy, with no holds barred, in that war of his.
 



WE CANNOT AND WE DO NOT WISH to conceal from the readers of The New International the extreme danger which faces its continued existence.
The Second World War has struck us a terrific blow, far graver than most readers realize. Our review has from the beginning been an international review in every sense of the word. In these times when the poisonous fumes of nationalism are corroding the very vitals of society, we have sought to do all in our power to keep alive and alert the spirit of internationalism. We have never hesitated to devote our pages to the best Marxist talents of other countries who dealt with the political problems of countries other than the United States, even if at times this was done at the cost of analyzing problems and events in this country. We have always been proud of the large and loyal circle of readers which formed around the review in every important country of the world, especially in the English-reading lands.
The advancing wave of totalitarianism washed away part of that circle in some countries in recent times. Now, with the outbreak of the World War which involves directly all the English-reading countries outside the United States, the possibility of distributing the magazine abroad has been drastically limited at a single blow.
We need not enter into too great detail on this score, especially for those readers who have followed the reports on the state of our circulation which appear every month in the manager’s department. It is enough to say that with the rigorous press censorship and control over all radical and advanced elements which have already been enforced in the countries of the British Empire, our circulation has been virtually wiped out abroad. The few copies that now get through Britain’s police lines simply do not compare, numerically, with the former distribution of the paper.
England, Scotland, Ireland, Canada, Palestine, Australia, South Africa: these countries not only had a flattering circulation of The New International but were a sure source of important revenues for the magazine. We always reflected with mingled joy and regret that our friends in these Empire countries were a greater financial mainstay of our review, proportionate to their position, than many of our friends right here in the United States. Now, in view of the situation that has developed, it is impossible any longer to count upon a single penny from these countries in drawing up our budget—and we say this even though we are aware that our friends abroad retain the warmest feelings toward The New International.
So serious is the blow dealt us by this change in the situation that unless we are compensated for the loss by assistance, speedy and generous, in the United States, our review will certainly be suspended. Not may be suspended, but will be suspended.
We say this with the utmost restraint and objectiveness. Our readers know that we have rarely made appeals for special financial aid to the review. We have not been alarmist in the past and we are not now. In fact, we have tended more often than not to lean too far backward in this respect.
That alone is why the greatest importance should be attached to our assertion now that unless financial aid is given immediately, The New International will go out of existence before the next issue can be published.
Yet, our requirements and our appeal are comparatively modest. We are not in business; we seek no profit; we never expect to lay up a huge reserve of funds. Thorough discussion and a carefully estimated budget drawn up to meet the new situation, indicate that in order to continue the review must have from its readers the sum of $200 right away, before the next issue can go to press. And every month thereafter, at least until the situation is altered for the better, we must have $100 every month over and above the regular income from subscriptions to and sales of the magazine.
Modest needs—but quintessential for continued life! We have no advertizers to subsidize us; we have no wealthy financial agents. We can depend only on the rank and file of our readers.
This urgent appeal is addressed to them. We are confident that they will answer in such a way as to guarantee The New International’s existence. Speed is now of the essence of the matter. Anything from one dollar to ten dollars—and more if you can afford it!—should be rushed to our office the minute you read this appeal.
We are counting on every reader to come through!



 


Martin ABERN
James BURNHAM
Max SHACHTMAN



 



Not the least remarkable phase of the just concluded Panama conference and the Declaration which issued out of it is the minor attention which the whole matter has received in the general press. I have not found a single newspaper which gave its main headline to the Declaration. Indeed, very few even put the news from Panama on the front page. Why such modesty?
The explanation is simple enough: The publicists for United States imperialism – which means all of the bourgeois and most of the labor press – have got to keep the attention of the people focussed on the crimes of foreign bullies, and off the doings of the bully at home. Otherwise the people might begin to understand the real aims of the war into which Roosevelt is so democratically herding us.
Editorial hands are raised in horror when Germany and the Soviet Union conquer by arms or subjugate by diplomacy a few fifth and tenth rate countries. But the editors are most discreetly silent while United States imperialism utilizes the first weeks of the war to cinch up control over two entire continents.
 
What Washington Wants
The first of the minimum war aims of United States imperialism is domination of the Americas. Such domination involves control over trade, capital investments and raw materials in the American nations to an extent that will reduce the share of other powers to a negligible fraction, and will assure that this residue does not interfere with the subordination of American economy as a whole to the needs of the metropolis.
Such economic domination demands, in turn control over the foreign policy of all the American nations. But control over foreign policy necessitates, also, a decisive measure of control over internal policy. At the very least, the United States must be sure that the various governments are friendly” to itself, oriented toward Washington. This means that the United States must prevent these governments from being, as many have been in the past, tools of one of the rival powers (notably Great Britain); and prevent even more stringently the rise of popular, anti-imperialist revolutionary movements. Either dependence on another power or revolutionary mass struggle strikes at U.S. domination.
This aim has been among the guides of U.S. policy during the past quarter of a century, and comes to the forefront in the war. The Panama conference brings it a mighty leap toward realization.
 
Who Are the Rivals?
In spite of the Monroe Doctrine, the United States was a minor factor in Latin America before the last war. England had been by far the principal influence, with Germany moving up during the decade preceding 1914. The war and the reconstruction years which followed gave the U.S. Its first big chance; and money, goods, warships and marines were pumped south. England rapidly regained an important position while Germany was frozen out. In the last few years, however, Germany went ahead again, and overtook England in volume of trade – though both together have had less than the United States’ 36%. In amount of capital investment, England and the United States are probably now about even, with no other nation approaching. Indeed, from all points of view, the powers other than England and Germany hardly count.
As soon as the war began, Germany’s trade was virtually eliminated. In spite of her Navy, England’s must be seriously curtailed, both because of the difficulties of convoy and because of the scarcity of export goods which will be available from British industry.
The United States proposes that this withdrawal of her chief rivals shall be permanent. The Declaration of Panama was Roosevelt’s way of making this proposal known.
 
Some Problems Ahead
The Declaration was “adopted unanimously” by the conference. There was as much chance of an open negative vote as of Estonia’s rejecting Molotoff’s proposals. Sumner Welles was there to dictate, and the others to sign. But the sorrows that were hidden under the unanimous vote stretched all the way to Berlin and, above all, to London.
Argentina and Bolivia, for example, have for long been closely tied to London. They tried to object, but Welles granted them only a face-saving clause or two. And London must meditate bitterly about its plans for a Brazilian regime less wholly at Wall Street’s orders.
And then there is this: Britain and France have many possessions in the Americas. These are most valuable in war, not merely as sources of supplies but especially as bases for warships. The language of the Declaration can be interpreted to mean that these possessions cannot be used as such bases.
Of course, proclaiming the Declaration does not put it into operation. It is not yet accepted by the belligerent powers; and if it is accepted in words, this will not guarantee their acceptance in deeds. Acceptance will be ensured only by force; and the force in question can only be United States ships and planes. These however, are concentrated in the Pacific: for the second of the minimum war aims of U.S. imperialism is free entry into the Far East.
From this, by the way, it would seem to follow that “the principle of a two-ocean navy” will be adopted by the next regular session of Congress.
It is true that the Declaration is aimed primarily at Germany; and it is true that Roosevelt will enter the war against Germany. But at times England must be less than delighted as she watches her mighty ally.
Yes, and Canada too is in the Americas. Would it be so startling if Canada “declared her independence” from the Empire during the course of the war and its aftermath? On U.S. War Department maps of the war resources of the great powers, those of Canada are listed in the column of the United States.
 



The energetic young Sumner Welles, under-secretary of State, is now on his way back to Washington from Panama with a juicy present for the Sixty Families in his pocket. The Declaration of Panama, which Welles drove through the conference of the twenty-one American “republics”, against the opposition of a number of them headed by Chile, will go down in history as a very remarkable document indeed.
The Declaration contains many pious references to the solidarity of the American nations, their neutrality, their resolve to aid each other and to keep out of the war. But its key section is of course that which defines the “neutral zone” around the Americas.
 
Extent of “Neutral” Zone
This neutral zone extends from 300 to 600 miles into the ocean from the shores of America, from the latitude of Canada’s southern border to the last tip of South America.
The zone thus includes all of the Caribbean, the islands both west and east of South America, and even Bermuda. Within this area all “belligerent acts” are to be forbidden. This means that within this area no ships are to be molested by the warring powers, and no military acts of any kind carried out on land or at sea.
Let us see what is involved here:
The zone includes more than a hundred territories and possessions of European powers, chiefly British and French and a few Dutch. All of these are therefore declared to be immune from attack by enemy powers – that is, by Germany.
If submarines or raiding cruisers wish to attack ships transporting goods from an American port to Europe, their best chance is to lie in wait near the port, or, in the case of the Central and Northern South American ports, in among the narrow channels through which the ships must pass in the Carib-bean. In this way it is clearly easier to spot the ships than in the vast reaches of the open sea. But, by the terms of the declaration, ships cannot be attacked within the neutral zone.
 
War Aim of U.S. Imperialism
Here, too, the declaration is aimed primarily at Germany,and in several senses. Ships with goods for Britain or France would sail with safety to the edge of the neutral zone, half way across the Atlantic, and would there be taken up by convoys. The British squadrons now compelled to do duty within the area would be released for work elsewhere. The U.S. navy would be in effect, convoy to French and British ships to the edge of the zone. Ships for Germany, on the other hand, would not appreciably benefit, since Germany has no large surface fleet, and since they would still have to pass the almost insurmountable blockade of the Channel, the North Sea and the Baltic.
But it is of the greatest importance to understand that, though the declaration, like so many other of Roosevelt’s acts, is primarily an intervention against Germany, it is also directed against Britain. We cannot repeat too often that the war aim of United States imperialism is not to bail out the declining British Empire nor to bring aid and succor to the “democracies”, but to gain decisive world dominance for United States finance-capital against all rivals. This is openly indicated by the Panama Declaration.
 
Policeman of the Americas
Washington has not let the grass grow under its feet. It has utilized the “distraction” of the very first stage of the war to announce, through the Panama Declaration, that all of Latin America is its province. It proposes to monopolize economic, social, and, indirectly at least, political control of the two continents of the New World.
Who is going to enforce the declaration? Not Ecuador or Bolivia or Columbia or Nicaragua, naturally, but the United States fleet and air forces. Already U.S. bombers are patrolling the Caribbean, along with the Atlantic squadron of the fleet. Reserve destroyers are being re-conditioned by the scores to go on active duty.
United States imperialism will be the policeman of the Americas; and, by the terms of the declaration, no one else will be allowed to operate within its precinct.
Putting the declaration into effect will not be so simple as Sumner Welles perhaps imagined. The belligerent powers must first “accept” it; and, when they do in words (as they doubtless will), it must then be seen whether, under the pressure of their necessities as belligerents, they do so in fact. And what will happen to warships which, when pursued by the enemy, cross the line into the zone where belligerent acts are prohibited? And what about the many German ships now in American harbors? Will they be free to carry on coastal trade among American ports, guaranteed against molestation by the British?
 
Washington Holds Whip-Hand
Such difficulties, by the nature of the case, are unavoidable. They will be settled not by legalisms or logic but in subordination to the main direction of U.S. policy. The present declaration is designed to carry out, crudely and brutally, one essential step in this policy: to establish unchallenged dominion over Latin America.
The conference in its concluding session set up an executive committee to continue the task of “coordinating” the efforts of the American nations. In the old days, the United States might have indulged the hypocritical luxury of allowing this committee to have its headquarters at Lima or Rio or even Panama, to show that everyone was “equal” in the new world. But you have to act fast in war-time. So the committee will be located where it belongs – in Washington. Then it won’t be necessary to telephone or cable to give orders. The boss can call the boys into the office, and no time wasted.
 



Since the beginning of the war, the isolationist Congressmen, especially the group of Senators headed by Borah, LaFollette, Nye and Vandenberg, have attempted to pose before the country as “the peace bloc,” the aim of which is “to keep the country out of war.” Several weeks of the Special Session provide us with new evidence upon which to judge their claim.
The isolationists continue their opposition to repeal of the arms embargo. On this particular point the Socialist Workers Party agrees with them. Nevertheless, agreement here or on any other single point does not in the least imply the slightest similarity in general policy toward the war. We must always ask what motivates the position taken on any given point that boils down to a “yes or no” question; and ask how this position is related to the whole policy pursued by any group or party.
The Nazi Bund and, today, the Stalinists also oppose repeal of the arms embargo. They do so for a clear and simple reason: because they favor the victory of Hitler, and, under the immediate circumstances, opposition to repeal happens to favor Hitler as against the Anglo-French coalition.
 
Why the S.W.P. Opposes Repeal
The Socialist Workers Party stands for the defeat of both sides in the war, of Hitler and of Britain-France. The S.W.P. is opposed to repeal of the arms embargo because the SWP is against the war, and because Roosevelt’s proposal to lift the embargo is a war act. This can be most obviously seen in the following two ways:

Repeal of the embargo is a unilateral intervention by United States imperialism in the war, on the side of one of the belligerents. This is understood by everyone, and has been brought into the open during the Senate debates. Repeal will turn part of US industry into an armory for Britain-France. This intervention is necessarily a step,and a very important step, toward further involvement which must lead in the end to military entry.
 
Even more important, however, is the fact that repeal of the embargo is a key part of the direct war preparations of the US military machine. The orders from Britain-France will enable the US armament industry to increase its plant and facilities and raise its capacity to war levels before formal declaration of war. From this point of view, opposition to repeal follows in exactly thesame way as opposition to any and all military appropriations by the US or any other imperialist government.

At the same time, the SWP does not regard the embargo issue as decisive for war or peace. It refuses to delude itself or the workers. Retention of the embargo would prove only a minor bump in the path of the war machine.
 
Why do the Isolationists Oppose Repeal?
A study of the conduct of the isolationists – not, of course, from the point of view of their psychological motives or moral ideals, but of the political meaning and function of their acts – proves that their opposition to repeal of the embargo has nothing in common with that of the SWP and of the militant anti-war fighters in general. On the contrary, their opposition can be correctly understood only as a demagogic exploitation of the anti-war sentiments of the people, and as a pacifist cover for the war preparations of US imperialism. Far from helping in the fight against the war, they are most dangerous – because deceptive – enemies of the anti-war fight, and allies of the war-mongers.
This judgment will sound harsh to sentimentalists, but no other conclusion is possible. Consider:

Not a single isolationist in the Congressional debate has called for the peoples’ referendum on war. If the isolationists are sincere, if they really are against the war, if they really want the will of the people to be done, how can they possibly fail to make the referendum a central issue in their fight?
 
Not a single isolationist has had one word to say- against the colossal armament expenditures of the government. Quite the contrary: many of them have been loudest in demanding great increases in armament expenditures. The only possible purpose for this mighty war machine is military entry into the war.
 
Not a single isolationist criticized Roosevelt’s declaration that the armed forces of the United States would defend Canada – one of the belligerent nations. This declaration was itself an intervention in the war.
 
Not a single isolationist has even mildly criticized the Declaration of Panama which in actuality places the United States in the forefront even now of the world imperialist struggle for the re-division of the earth.

In other words and in general: on all major fronts the isolationists are in the vanguard of those who are pushing forward the aggressive war plans of US imperialism.
 
Jumping the Gun
In fact, the isolationists are often well in advance of their “opponents.” For example: it is on the initiative of the isolationists – specifically, Borah – that the present bill is now being amended to “relax the restrictions on shipping.” As drawn up by the administration, all shipments in US vessels to ports of belligerents were to be prohibited. The amendments will prohibit shipments only to “belligerent zones,” which will include only Europe, and will exclude the entire East – Australia, New Zealand, India, Hong Kong, Indo-China, etc..
But this is exactly the major strategy of US imperialism, which, stretching out from a stranglehold on Latin America has as its next immediate aim dominance of the East.
And it was the isolationist Shipstead who a few days ago gave more of the show away by openly proposing in the Senate that the United States take over Canada and the European possessions in this hemisphere.
Borah, let us remember, not merely voted for the declaration of war in 1917, but made the most rabid of all the speeches supporting it.
 



During the past year and a half, in the Socialist Appeal and the New International we have been publishing considerable material dealing with India. Many of our readers were unable to understand this preoccupation; some even complained, and insisted that we should get down to more practical matters.
The first seven weeks of the second world war already make clear that nothing could be more “practical” than the Indian question.
We know little enough, it is true, of what is actually going on now in India. But let us review what we can piece together from the heavily censored dispatches. And let us do so against the background of India’s relation to the last war.
 
India Fights for Democracy
India, with its 350,000 inhabitants, is the richest of all Britain’s possessions, the key and crux of the Empire. No shred of independence or democracy has ever been allowed to disturb London’s steady exploitation of its great human and material resources.
During the course of the last war, it was not, then, so entirely simple to persuade India to line up actively on the side of her democratic dictator. But vague promises of independence or at least dominion status to follow the war, the treachery of the native bourgeoisie and of its spokesman, Gandhi, together with the inexperience of the masses, put the fraud across.
India sent approximately 1,400,000 soldiers to Britain’s battlefields to fight Britain’s war – all of them,by a crowning irony, equipped and paid by India (just as the civil servants, retired to England have their pensions paid by grateful India). Besides these soldiers, India poured material goods and wealth into the British war machine.
The war was won, and Britain’s phrases about democracy and independence were put in mothballs against the next rainy day. Bombers strafing the native villages took the place of promises.
 
Another Day, Another Way
But these matters, alas for London, were not altogether forgotten. Came a new war. The papers joyously announced that India had promptly followed the British parliament in declaring war against Germany. But it was Lord Linlithgow, the King’s viceroy, not India, that had spoken.
Again the promises: as soon as the war is over, the problem of India’s independence will be taken up. But, of course, not now; now there is business to be done, and all talk of independence must be dropped while hostilities last.
The promises no longer have power to charm. Day after day we read of the negotiations between the Viceroy and the leaders of the great Congress Party. Gandhi and his associates have tried hard enough to be loyal servants of British imperialism, but it is toomuch even for them. They are “anti-fascist” and especially “anti-Hitlerite,” they want “the democracies to win the war against fascism,” they proclaim; but they are “gravely disappointed over the white paper.’’If the war is for democracy, they find themselves asking, then why not democracy for India? They cannot “actively support” the war on the basis which Britain proposes.
A few days ago they took the first decisive step. They called upon the local governments of eight of the provinces, controlled by the Congress Party, to resign. These resignations will be an open act of non-confidence in the war.
 
What is Behind These Events?
Is it too much to believe that the resignations of the provincial governments will turn out to be the first preliminary act – distorted, timorous, unsure as it is – in what will broaden into the Indian revolution? The call for the resignations was, from what of it has been reported, a most cowardly document. It warned against any civil disobedience, any active opposition to the war. But in spite of all limitations, it was a heavy blow against the war and the Empire whose life is now staked on the war.
The Indian revolution begins, as have all colonial revolutions up to the present, under the leadership of the native bourgeoisie, represented outstandingly by Gandhi. From this follows the shamefaced, whining character of this first stage. The native bourgeoisie in reality wants only a larger share for itself of the profits sweated from the Indian workers and peasants – that is the concrete meaning of “independence” or “dominion status” in its mind.
But at its back the native bourgeoisie hears the awakening thunder of the masses. Its recent moves are its vacillating attempts to keep at the head of the coming movement of the masses, in order not to be overwhelmed. What have the masses been doing since the war started? Are they only half-consciously preparing, or are there already great strikes and demonstrations? The censorship does not let us know, but the comparatively drastic nature of the call for resignations seems to indicate broad and open activities.
 
The Shoals Ahead
The Indian revolution has a stormy course to steer,but if it drives through it can set the world on fire. The outcome will depend upon the ability of the proletariat to organize itself independently, and, drawing the peasantry with it, to assume undisputed leadership in the struggle. This means an end to the dominance of Gandhi and those for whom he speaks.
But there are other very dangerous lines now cast in these troubled waters. The German and Russian agents, now working as a team under the Hitler-Stalin alliance are not idle. They are, for their own ends, making their efforts to guide the developing struggle into their own channels. They will be compelled to increase their intervention. An India divorced from London must mean, for them, an India attached to the camp of Berlin-Moscow: they fear a free and socialist India no less than London.
Their intervention, propagandistic now, will therefore have to be translated into arms when the time comes: which, because of the strategic situation, means Stalin’s regiments in India.
But the future has ample promise that against every force of reaction the workers and peasants of India will conquer.
 

