


Public pressure has finally forced members of the House Veterans Committee to break the stranglehold which its reactionary chairman, Representative John Rankin, has maintained over the investigation of veterans’ hospitals. By a vote of 13–2, the Veterans Committee voted on May 29 to lift the contempt citation against PM reporter Albert Deutsch and to call him back before the committee as a witness.
Led by the Mississippi poll-taxer Rankin, the same Committee had cited Deutsch for “contempt of Congress” on May 18 when he refused to give the names of doctors in the Veterans Administration who had supplied him with information on the mistreatment of sick and wounded veterans. The outcry raised by this obvious attempt to suppress the facts about conditions in veterans’ hospitals was too much for the majority of Veterans Committee members. Representative James Domengeaux, who made the motion that the Committee reverse its stand in the Deutsch case, pointed out that it was necessary “to reestablish the confidence of the public in the Committee’s action.”
 
Official Whitewash
Begun in March, the House Veterans Committee’s “investigation” of veterans’ hospitals has so far been little more than a whitewash of Veterans Administration officials. Brigadier General Frank Hines, Veterans Administrator, has been publicly commended by Rankin several times since the “investigation” was begun for the manner in which veterans’ hospitals are operated. On May 25, Rankin introduced a bill drawn up in cooperation with Veterans administrator Hines proposing some mild reforms in the veterans’ hospital system.
But “mild reforms” of the veterans’ hospital set-up are not enough, according to investigators like Deutsch, Albert Maisel of Cosmopolitan, Leo Egan of the N.Y. Times and others who have exposed the terrible conditions in these institutions. In the foreword to his article, Third-Rate Medicine for First-Rate Men in the April issue of Cosmopolitan, Maisel writes:
“Read the evidence in the accompanying article – the shocking, shameful evidence of brutality, beatings, overcrowding, and third-rate treatment which are the lot of our most defenseless disabled veterans ... The Veteran’s Hospitals must be purged from top to bottom.”
 
Discharged Uncured
In the same article, Maisel presents evidence to show that less than eight per cent of the 23,147 veterans discharged during a year from the 30 mental hospitals are rated as cured or even as “apparently recovered.” Maisel has considerable proof that veteran mental patients do not have the benefits of modern psychiatric and medical techniques in veterans’ hospitals. That so many thousands of them are released without achieving a “cure” represents not only personal tragedy for the individuals involved but potential tragedy in the communities to which the patients return. Maisel quotes Colonel H. Foster, clinical director of the Northport, Long Island Hospital as saying that there is “no harm” in releasing these patients if they are “not violent.” Several instances are cited by Maisel to show how such supposedly “harmless” patients have done violence to themselves or others shortly after their release from a veterans’ hospital.
 
Warning Emphasized
New emphasis is given to Maisel’s warning by some recent headlines dealing with violent acts of discharged servicemen who were mental cases: Veteran Held Insane After Slaying Wife (N.Y. Times, June 2); Flier’s Fatal Leap Laid to War Shock (N.Y. World-Telegram, May 31).
Such reports of problems of veteran patients arouse little interest in Rankin. According to PM reporter Elizabeth Donahue, who covered the May 29 hearing of the House Veterans Committee “only once did Rankin show concern for the conditions in the hospitals.”
“‘Are the Negroes separated from the whites at the Huntington, West Va. hospital?’ Rankin inquired.
“Rep. Cunningham replied in the affirmative.
“‘In my opinion,’ Rankin observed, ‘that’s much more important than separating World War I veterans from World War II veterans in these hospitals’.”
 




Old-line politicians of the Republican and Democratic parties like to talk about the United States as the “land of equal opportunity for all.” And the less they practice “equality,” the more they talk about it! Southern Congressmen, like Senator Bilbo and Representative Rankin, who spend all of their time trying to keep the Negro citizens of this country from getting any rights are great ones to quote the Declaration of Independence.
“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.”
But Charles Schwab, the steel magnate, and Jesse Little, the Negro factory worker from Newark, N.J., were not “equals” in this so-called “land of equal opportunity.” Certainly, Jesse Little did not have an equal right to “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.”
 
Contrasting Lives
Both of these men are dead now. Charles Schwab died in 1939 at the age of 77 after a lifetime spent in extravagantly luxurious surroundings. Jesse Little was burned to death in his Newark tenement home last month at the age of 26. The stories about the “homes” of both of these American citizens which appeared in the papers during April provide this tragic study in contrast.
The Baltimore Negro newspaper, The Afro-American, tells the story of the life and death of Jesse Little in its April 14 issue.
A low-paid worker of the Union Carbide and Carbon Company of Newark, Jesse Little could not afford to rent a pleasant, comfortable home for his family of four young children – not even a safe home! “The Littles paid $15 per month for a third-floor apartment – four rooms, no bath, no heat, and with ceilings approximately seven feet high.” This apartment located in a tenement house at 49 Broome St. was “a dilapidated frame building, the only exits being a narrow, winding stairway – boxed in between two houses – and a rickety fire escape with a none too reassuring appearance.”
 
Fire Trap
When the Afro-American reporter interviewed the owner of this fire trap, he learned that only $90 had been spent for repairs in 18 years and that there had been no fire inspection in 17 years. The owner “refused to say whether the building measured up to safety regulations.”
The night of Jesse Little’s death, his young wife awoke at 1:30 A.M. to see “flames bursting from the ceilings and walls.” “I grabbed my baby and one of the children and ran out,” she told the reporter, “then went back to get my husband and other two children.” When she reached the apartment, the fire had spread so that they could not enter, but she said, “I heard my husband inside stumbling around in the smoke. He was trying to find the children but he was forced toward the door by the terrible heat.”
She went on to relate how she beat her fists against the walls in order to help him find the way out. When she pulled him through the doorway, it was too late. “The husband collapsed and fell down the stairs. He succumbed the next day at the City Hospital. The two children died on the scene,” the news story ends.
 
Schwab’s Mansion
But the “home life” of Charles Schwab was quite different! According to a news story in the April 19 N.Y. World-Telegram, the Schwab mansion is for rent at $75,000 a year. Until his death in 1939 Schwab lived in this palatial residence, which occupies a full city block on Riverside Drive and Seventy-third St. in New York City.
As President of the United Steel Corporation and head of Bethlehem Steel Company, Schwab spent most of his time thinking up ways of “busting” unions and holding down the steelworkers’ wages. But he found enough time to direct the building of his mansion which cost him $3,000,000 in 1905. The furnishings cost another $5,000,000.
In describing the Schwab mansion the World-Telegram reporter says: “The unique 75-room structure has a private chapel, an art gallery, two elevators and a $50,000 pipe organ. Its kitchen could cook for 1,500 and its meat refrigerator would hold 20 tons of beef.” Other breathtaking details followed in the story; “a kitchen range, 14-ft. long,” a “60-ft. swimming pool, flanked by 10 Carrara marble pillars,” “hand-painted bathtubs” etc., etc.
Living members of America’s richest Sixty Families have mansions like this one.
Living members of the “ill-fed, ill-clothed, ill-housed one-third of the nation” are crowded into rickety tenements like the one that killed Jesse Little.
And that’s not exactly “equality of opportunity.”
 




Even ultra-reactionary Representative John Rankin has been finally driven to admit there are some “defects” in the administration of veterans’ hospitals. In an obvious attempt to counteract the bad publicity his House Committee on World War Veterans Legislation has been receiving lately, Rankin introduced a bill into the House on May 25, proposing some mild “reforms” of the Veterans Administration hospital system.
But when newspapermen, veterans and members of their families criticized the terrible conditions in veterans’ hospitals and demanded a clean-up of the Veterans Administration, they were smeared by the poll-taxer from Mississippi as “irresponsible” or “insane.” The so-called House investigation into the situation in veterans’ hospitals was an attempted whitewash of Veterans Administration officials. The “investigation” was undertaken by the Rankin-led Committee in March in order to head off the real expose of conditions in veterans’ hospitals which would have followed had an impartial committee been named to investigate the floods of complaints which have been pouring in on members of Congress.
Public pressure did not permit a routine whitewash of the Veterans Administration. Writers like Albert Deutsch of PM, Victor Maisel of Cosmopolitan, Leo Egan of the N.Y. Times had reported such shocking facts about the mistreatment of sick and wounded veterans that Rankin’s Committee was forced to hold open hearings. The first outside witness called, Albert Deutsch, was not allowed to present facts about overcrowding, inadequate treatment, etc., which he had gathered in a five-month survey of veterans’ hospitals. Because he refused to give the names of doctors who had supplied him with information, Deutsch was cited by the House Committee on May 18 for “contempt of Congress.”
Such tactics were too obvious, however. Under pressure, other members of the House Veterans Committee demanded that Victor Maisel be permitted to testify. But they have not yet been able – or are not willing – to get a reversal of the contempt charge against Deutsch. In a PM editorial on May 24, Rankin is quoted as saying that he was going to let the Deutsch case “cool and cool and cool.” Meantime the contempt charge against Deutsch stands.
Testifying before the House Committee on May 23, Victor Maisel produced a mass of evidence, substantiating that thousands of patients in veterans’ hospitals are being neglected, underfed and often mistreated. This was only a small part of the voluminous evidence against Veterans Administration heads which Maisel had presented in his article called Third Rate Medicine for First Rate Men (March and April issues of Cosmopolitan).
Despite all of the documented proof offered by this witness concerning the ill-treatment of veteran patients, Rankin concluded his grilling of Maisel with a violent outburst: “You’ve done a great disservice to the greatest system of veterans’ hospitals the world has ever seen.”
But only two days later, Rankin himself offered his bill, which he admitted had been drawn up in cooperation with Brigadier General Frank Hines, the Veterans Administrator. According to an analysis of the bill by Deutsch in the May 28 PM:
“The Rankin bill is a small step in the right direction. But it provides no fundamental reform. It sidesteps the real issue – the need for a thorough-going housecleaning of the Veterans Administration medical and hospital program from top to bottom.”
 




For the past couple of weeks, the publicity committee in charge of my national tour has been Urging me to include some material about prison life in this column. This would serve as something of a “preview” of the tour speech on “Women in Prison.” The committee argues that giving “previews” is a good advertising technique and I’m sure they’re right.
For this purpose, I thought that some stories about the jails in which I stayed before I was taken to the federal prison at Alderson, West Virginia might be of interest. Fifteen of the 18 prisoners in our case surrendered in Minneapolis on December 31, 1943 and were taken to the Hennepin county jail. The 14 men were transferred to the Sandstone federal prison the next day but I was kept in the Hennepin county jail until January 9, 1944.
 
Life in Jail
Here are some excerpts from a letter which I wrote to Evelyn Anderson, acting secretary of the Civil Rights Defense Committee on January 7. (The letter was dictated to a Minneapolis friend who came to see me on one of the visiting days):
“Mr. Litel, a U.S. deputy marshal was in to see me just an hour or so ago to say that we shall probably start for Alderson by car this coming Sunday. I will confess that I do not look forward to a three or four-day car trip with a flatfoot but he tells me that it was impossible to get train reservations until the 20th of this month.
“I refrained from asking what the U.S, Government had been doing from Nov. 22 – when they knew we were going to surrender – until today! Sometimes. I think that the money which we taxpayers have been pouring into the U.S. Treasury is being squandered by a lot of lazy bureaucrats!
“I shall be glad to leave here, though, and get into some kind of a routine at Alderson, despite the fact that I have enjoyed visits from Dorothy, Elaine, Bea, Winnie and other friends. They have kept me supplied with books, clean clothes and even some candy and cookies. They tried to have other foods sent in, but were told that it was against the rules. I tell you this so that you will know that the local defense organization was on the job and did the best they could.
 
Potatoes Galore
“The things they brought helped a great deal. I do not have much praise for the food here. I don’t believe that I have eaten as many potatoes in the past five years as I have eaten here – twice a day without fail! The forces of law and order in Hennepin county do not ‘season’ their ‘justice’ with very much ‘mercy’.”
But I lived to learn that the accommodations which the Hennepin county jail provided for its “guests” were quite superior to those of many other such county “lodging houses.” Here are some excerpts from my first letter from Alderson, dealing with the county jails with which I became familiar on the trip down to West Virginia. It was written to my sister Dorothy on January 16 – the first letter-writing day after my arrival at the prison on January 12. (All of the information I had accumulated and the impressions I had received since leaving Minnesota had to be reported about on one single piece of ruled prison paper. To an awfully wordy person like me, this seemed like a terrible persecution!):
 
Trip to Alderson
“So many things to say; so many questions to ask and so little time and space in which to do it all! Well I’ll just do the best I can.
“The trip down was not a happy one, although Mr. Litel and his wife really tried to be friendly. They are simple, folksy souls who call each other “Ma” and “Pa.” But we drove for much of the way along the same route which Bea, Elaine, Ray and I took last year. We even ate at some of the same places, so the comparison was a pretty sad one.
“We were on the road three nights. They stayed at hotels; I stayed in county jails – one night in Madison, Wisconsin; the next in Lebanon, Indiana; the third in Huntington, West Va. I do not have space to give you complete details, but I have come to appreciate the superior qualities of Hennepin County Jail – relatively speaking.
“Neither the Madison or Huntington jails had springs, just steel slabs. The Huntington jail didn’t even have pillows or sheets, nor private cells (8 in a room), nor a sheltered toilet. BUT, it did have cockroaches and other species of small animals! I didn’t even take off my clothes – just used my pajamas for a pillow and my robe for a blanket.
“The poor devils in the cell with me looked like characters out of Tobacco Road. When I left in the morning, I gave them some cosmetics, soap, a towel etc. – not much to do, but the best I could.
“Conditions at Alderson are quite different. The buildings are of red brick, trimmed in white and are excessively neat and clean ... One of the big occupations here is cleaning up and straightening up. Even so great an exponent of Cleanliness and Order as I am feels the strain of it a little bit. But I know that in organizing the lives of over 500 girls, many of whom have not been exposed to much training in these things, pretty strict rules have to be laid down. And I was never one to let my own selfish interests stand in the way of the ‘common good’...
“Please send me a flock of bobby pins immediately, also my curlers. I really need them. I fixed my hair yesterday by means of two paper, flips, two combs and paper – not so awfully bad, but not so awfully good, either! And tell me what has been in the papers about the dissolution of the Communist Party. I haven’t seen a paper for days. So what with that and other lacks, I am not excessively happy, but neither am I terribly uncomfortable. People often put up with much more for much less reason.”
I think that talking about prison is going to be much more fun than living in prison!
 




What Is the American Look? In a recent issue of Life magazine, this question appears as the title of an article in which Dorothy Shaver, first vice-president of the exclusive New York department store, Lord & Taylor, tries to analyze the basic characteristics of American women. Illustrations of well-groomed, expensively-dressed girls are spread lavishly through the pages of the article.
The whole thing was very irritating to a New York reader of The Militant who sent the clipping to me last week. Here is the letter which accompanied it:
 
Made Her Boil
“I read The Militant every week ... Since I am a woman, your articles about housewives, etc. especially appeal to me. How right you are! I came across the picture magazine Life this week and want to send you a piece out of it – something that makes one boil up in reading it.
“I don’t have to say much about it. You just look at it and you will see why a hard-working housewife and mother (that’s what I am now; I used to be a waitress) gets mad at reading a thing like that. I don’t look like those girls and the waitresses I worked with didn’t either. Do you? Or the girls you see in the subways before or after working hours?”
By an interesting coincidence, another letter that also came in last week had some good answers to this woman reader’s angry questions. This letter was from Doctor Antoinette Konikow, whose intimate knowledge of women’s health problems and her equally extensive information about the heavy burdens of women factory workers give her a double right to speak on this subject. Here is Comrade Konikow’s letter:
 
Beauty and Cosmetics
“Your article on The Right to Be Beautiful, in which you discuss the use of cosmetics and beauty aids, awoke a few thoughts that I should like to share with your readers. I have lived for almost three-quarters of a century and in my youth we never used cosmetics. In fact, the use of them was considered indecent. And still we had beauty and romance. How do you explain the present situation? It seems to me that women’s entry into industry has a great deal to do with it.
“While rich ladies use cosmetics to cover up their pale faces acquired during Society’s winter whirl of endless nights of drinking and dancing, women who work in factories and shops have pale and tired faces because of physical exhaustion due to overwork, bad air, hurried lunches and their whole life of rush and worry.
“The working woman uses cosmetics, not only for her own satisfaction – to have a nice appearance or to attract possible romance – but she has to look well and attractive to keep her job. I think that if women would lead a healthy and normal life, their faces would look different. They would acquire the rosy cheeks that we had in our youth and the bright eyes and the red lips.
“To me cosmetics are an expression of our unhealthy life under capitalism. It is not an important issue but it is just as well to understand that changes in women’s work affect even the most minute forms of their life. This doesn’t mean that I condemn cosmetics. I think that we shall have to use them for quite a while yet!”
 
Unhealthy Life
Of course, Comrade Konikow is completely right in saying that good health is the basis for good looks. The Life magazine writer says this, too, and argues that all American girls have a chance to grow up strong and healthy. “The glow of health” she points out, is the most distinctive feature of the “American Look.” Besides this basic factor, she feels that another important element of the American Look is “an unaffected elegance in make-up and dress.” And all of this is supposedly the heritage of every American woman!
Leaving aside the fact that even fairly well-paid women workers cannot hope to achieve “an unaffected elegance in makeup and dress,” the main reason why millions of American working women and working-class housewives do not have this so-called typical American Look is that they cannot afford good health.
 
Health Essentials
Good health means a well-balanced diet – plenty of milk, meat, fresh fruit and vegetables. Good health means enough rest and sleep and this is impossible for women who carry the double burden, of industrial work and housework. Good health means proper medical care, besides, especially before and after childbirth.
I’d like to meet the woman reader who sent me the article from Life magazine. I can tell from her letter that she’s a fighter. I’m sure that she would have a look of determination on her face – determination to do something about the injustices of this system. Some day that’s going to become a very widespread American Look!
 




On April 6 of this year, Senator William Langer introduced a bill into the Senate providing for the payment of “baby bonuses.” Under the terms of his bill, parents of a first child would receive $500, of a second child, $750, and of a third child, $1,000.
I don’t know what became of this “baby bonus” bill. I never saw any other reference to it than, the one-inch Associated Press report which appeared in the N.Y. Herald-Tribune. I expect that the silence about this proposal is due to a certain embarrassment over its resemblance to the “baby bonuses” paid by the late and unlamented Benito Mussolini in Italy.
 
Births Declining
Langer’s proposal to reward parents for having large families is intended, no doubt, to deal with the fact that the birth rate in the United States is declining. The 1940 census showed that there were almost 3,000,000 fewer children under nine years of age in the country than there were in 1930. It is expected that the 1950 census will show a further decrease in the number of children, as well as a reduction in the number of youths, 10 to 19 years. Like Mussolini in his time, Langer is probably beginning to worry about where American imperialism will get cannon fodder for its next war!
I would certainly not oppose the idea of giving parents some extra financial aid – but it should be much more than $500. How far does that go in raising a child? If Senator Langer were really sincere about aiding parents, he would be trying to help workers get higher wages, so that working-class parents could take proper care of the children they now have. Every year, thousands of the ill-fed, ill-clothed, ill-housed children of the poor are driven into early graves in this “land of the free and the home of the brave.”
Take just one childhood killer – rheumatic heart disease. At the ages of 10 to 14, it is the leading cause of death; between the ages of 15 and 25, it is second only to tuberculosis. The annual death toll from rheumatic heart disease is 30,000 each year. Many other hundreds of thousands became cripples for life – heart cripples – because of rheumatic heart disease infection.
 
The Poor Suffer
But, according to the eminent authority on chronic disease, Dr. Ernst Boas: “Rheumatic heart disease would largely disappear if decent housing and wages became the order of the day.” Surveys among school children in New York City, Boston and Philadelphia have shown that rheumatic heart disease is eight times more frequent in children attending school in the poorer districts than in those attending private schools.
A germ or a virus causes rheumatic fever but poor living conditions – damp or overcrowded sleeping quarters, inadequate diet, lack of sunshine, poor ventilation – are known to be predisposing factors. Many early cases of rheumatic fever go unrecognized because the main symptoms, pain and swelling of the joints, are often dismissed as “growing pains.” In about 90 percent of the cases of rheumatic fever, the heart is damaged and rheumatic heart disease results. The more attacks of rheumatic fever the child has, the greater the damage to the young heart.
Like tuberculosis, rheumatic heart disease requires long, costly medical care, and, also like tuberculosis, this disease strikes most often at the children of workers least able to pay for these services. Even fairly well-paid workers find it impossible to pay for this expensive but essential medical care for their sick children. Free public health facilities for the proper care of rheumatic patients are totally inadequate. The result is that thousands of children with early rheumatic heart disease, who might be restored to a near-normal life by proper treatment, develop, serious heart conditions and die prematurely.
Hope for rheumatic heart sufferers is said to lie in the use of sulfa drugs to prevent recurrences of the rheumatic fever attacks, Now if there were only a drug to abolish the damp, dark, over-crowded tenements in which rheumatic fever is born and flourishes! Millions of babies would be saved and grow up to be strong and healthy men and women. We wouldn’t need any “baby bonuses” then.
 




Failing in his attempts to whitewash the responsible Veterans’ Administration officials. Representative John Rankin, chairman of the House Veterans Committee is now trying to inject the race issue into the investigation of conditions in veterans’ hospitals. At the conclusion of the committee’s hearing on June 14, at which Colonel Louis Verdel, manager of the Veterans Mental Hospital at Northport, N.Y. confirmed earlier revelations of brutal treatment of veteran patients there, the Jim Crower from Mississippi burst out with:
“It is a disgrace that the War Dept. should send nigger troops into our Veterans Administration Hospitals to be mixed up with white nurses and with officers who cannot enforce discipline.”
This was in reference to Col. Verdel’s testimony that 130 Negro soldiers have been attached to the Northport Hospital as attendants and that 13 Negro soldiers have recently been court-martialed for alleged mistreatment of veteran- patients there.
Attributing the Northport “trouble” to what he terms the Army’s “non-segregation” policy, Rankin now thinks that the War Dept. should be investigated. “It seems to me that these cases (Northport) involved negligence on the part of the War Department rather than the Veterans Administration,” he told reporters after the June 14 committee hearing.
How the vicious Jim Crow treatment of hundreds of thousands of Negro troops in the U.S. Army could be considered as evidence of a “non-segregation” policy, only Rankin could say! However, this latest maneuver is proof that Rankin is continuing his efforts to divert public wrath from his friends in the Veterans Administration. Now, he is charging the Negro soldier-attendants, assigned to duty in veterans’ hospitals, with responsibility for all of the evils of the veterans’ hospital set-up.
For the first three months of the House Committee’s present “investigation” into conditions in these institutions, Rankin refused to admit that anything was wrong with the veterans’ hospitals. When Albert Deutsch of PM and Victor Maisel of Cosmopolitan magazine appeared before the Committee in May to testify as to the mistreatment of veteran-patients in VA hospitals, they were insulted by Chairman Rankin, Maisel, an authoritative writer on military medicine, whose articles in Cosmopolitan magazine and Readers’ Digest had been an important factor in forcing the House investigation, was told by Rankin: “You’ve done a great disservice to the greatest system of veterans’ hospitals the world has ever seen.”
Independent investigations by the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars confirmed the Maisel and Deutsch charges of brutality, inadequate treatment, underfeeding and overcrowding in veterans’ hospitals. Rankin was forced to change his line that nothing was wrong in these “best of all” veterans’ hospitals. The race issue was introduced. Each witness from the veterans’ organizations and each Veterans Administration official was questioned by Rankin as to race relations in VA hospitals.
When Colonel Verdel of the Northport Hospital admitted that patients there had been slapped, choked and hit with knotted towels, Rankin made very sure that every one understood that 13 Negro soldier-attendants had been court-martialed in connection with these incidents. Even more sensational charges of brutality had been made against white attendants and officials at the Lyons, N.Y. veterans hospitals some months ago, but Rankin did not publicize them!
Maisel reports the fact that Robert Hegler, a conscientious objector, ran away from the Veterans’ Mental Hospital at Lyons in October, 1944 to report the terrible conditions there. His diary, shown to New York reporters told of helpless patients being “kicked in the head,” “beaten up in bed,” “wrung out,” i.e., being choked with a towel around the neck. Hegler’s diary made it very clear, by relating incident after incident, that the brutality was not limited to attendants.
After Hegler’s story broke in the papers, Veterans Administrator Frank Hines (Hines was fired by President Truman on June 8 because of the hospital scandal) was forced to make an investigation. However, when Maisel went to the Lyons Hospital in January 1945 to find out what changes had been made, he learned from the Chief Medical Officer, Colonel Lopez that “no dismissals had occurred.
But Robert Hegler, the conscientious objector who had exposed the shocking mistreatment of sick and wounded servicemen at the Lyons Hospital was sent to federal prison!
 




Mutiny?, a 16-page pamphlet just published by the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, is a powerful indictment of the Jim Crow system of the United States Navy. The cover of this pamphlet is a reproduction of an official Navy photograph, showing Negro sailors loading ammunition. Against this background, the title of the pamphlet takes on added meaning – Mutiny?: The Real Story of How the Navy Branded 50 Fear-Shocked Sailors As Mutineers.
“Remember Port Chicago?” the pamphlet begins, and goes on to give a dramatic recitation of the tragic events of the Port Chicago case. On July 17, 1944 in this little town on San Francisco Bay, “over 320 American sailors were blown to tiny fragments ... in less time than it takes to say ‘Jim Crow’.”
Every one of the 320 casualties was a Negro sailor, who had been loading ammunition. Every one of the commissioned officers who had been charged with the lives and welfare of these men was white.
Eight or nine hundred Negro sailors survived the Port Chicago tragedy – dazed, bewildered, nervous, shocked by the sights, sounds and smells of “the worst home front disaster of the war.” When attempts were made to return them to loading ammunition, hundreds of them rebelled.
 
Unjustly Punished
Negro sailors were learning “that civilian longshoremen in the Bay Area had, on a number of occasions refused to work on the same ship where Navy personnel were loading ...; that the Longshoremen’s union wouldn’t permit a winch driver to work on ammunition unless he had had years of experience on other loads ...; that the Navy had ignored an offer by these same unions to send experienced longshoremen to train them in the safe handling of explosives.”
Hundreds of these Negro sailors, protesting against the vicious Navy discrimination which consigned only Negroes to the dangerous, dirty work of loading ammunition, were shipped to the South Pacific. Two hundred and fifty seven others were arrested. 50 of these were tried “for conspiracy to mutiny” at the largest mass trial in Naval history.
In the record of the six-week-long trial, as the NAACP pamphlet points out very correctly, there is “not one word of the most important issues of the case ..., not one hint that while these 50 bewildered youngsters sat for six weeks in a courtroom as the ‘accused,’ the real offender was the ‘accuser’ – the Navy.”
Long prison terms was the “justice” meted out to these Negro sailors – half of them under 21 years of age. Ten of the men were sentenced to 15 years in prison; 11 to 10 years; 24 to 12 years; and 5 to 8 years. Through Thurgood Marshall, chief counsel for the NAACP, a brief was filed for all 50 sailors with Judge Advocate General of the U.S. Navy. This was done at the written request of the sailors themselves.
“The pointless, meaningless deaths of 320 Americans must be given a point, must be given a meaning – for the living” says the NAACP writer in conclusion. “Meaning for the living” lies in militant support of the campaign to free these 50 Negro sailor-victims of Navy Jim Crow – a key case in the fight to end discrimination and segregation in the armed forces.
 




Headed by the reactionary poll-taxer Representative John Rankin of Mississippi, the House Committee on World War Veterans Legislation is attempting to convert its so-called investigation of conditions in veterans’ hospitals into a witch-hunt against newspapermen, doctors and veterans who exposed the bad state of affairs in these institutions. The Committee’s latest move was the indictment of Albert Deutsch, reporter for PM on May 18. Deutsch was cited for “contempt of Congress” when he refused to reveal the names of doctors who had supplied him with information for a series of articles criticizing the treatment of discharged servicemen in Veterans Administration hospitals.
This whitewash of the Veterans Administration was undertaken by the Rankin-led Committee in order to head off an “impartial investigation” into complaints of conditions in veterans’ hospitals proposed late in March by Representative Philbin of Massachusetts. By a parliamentary maneuver Rankin had Philbin’s motion killed and then announced that each member of his Committee would visit “veterans’ hospitals during the Easter recess to check up on conditions. At the same time he called Brigadier General Frank Hines, Administrator of Veterans Affairs before a closed session of his Committee and immediately afterward issued a statement complimenting General Hines for the manner in which veterans hospitals are operated.
But there was too much heat upon the members of Congress to permit so cynical a whitewash of the Veterans Administration. Too many letters were pouring in from veterans and members of their families complaining about the terrible conditions in the veterans’ hospitals. Rankin tried to discredit this evidence against the Veteran Administration officials in a speech in the House on May 11, in which he said, “Many such letters have been received by Members of Congress from individuals that we checked up and found to be insane.”
But Rankin could not pass off as “insane” such writers as Deutsch, Leo Egan of the N.Y. Times, Thomas Niall of the Associated Press and Victor Maisel of Cosmopolitan magazine. Pressure put upon the members of the House Committee by readers of the articles of these informed investigators of conditions in veterans’ hospitals forced Rankin to announce two weeks ago that the Committee would hold open hearings on the charges made against the Veterans Administration.
 
Reporter Indicted
Called before the House Committee on May 18, Deutsch was not permitted to give the facts as to overcrowding, inadequate treatment, etc., which he had gathered in his five-month survey. Challenged by Rankin for the names of his informants in the veterans’ hospitals, Deutsch refused to . give their names, saying that he feared there might be reprisals against them. Rankin then set the machinery in motion for instituting criminal proceedings against Deutsch.
Victor Maisel, who wrote the exposé of veterans hospitals called Third Rate Medicine for First Rate Men, which appeared in the March and April issues of Cosmopolitan, is also scheduled to testify before the Rankin Committee. A student of military medicine and author of The Wounded Get Back, Maisel contrasts the skillful care given to wounded soldiers in Army hospitals with the ill-treatment of discharged servicemen in veterans’ hospitals. The decline in the death rate of wounded fighting men from 8.1 per cent in World War I to 3.3 per cent in this war bears out the truth of Maisel’s statement that “endless resources and priceless skill combine to give our sick and wounded the best that modern medicine can provide.”
“But I have been shocked and shamed to discover,” Maisel goes on to say “that these servicemen – changed only because after long service, they have received a veteran’s honorable discharge – are suffering needlessly and all too often dying needlessly in our veterans’ hospitals.
“Yes, our disabled veterans are being betrayed by the incompetence, bureaucracy and callousness of the Veterans Administration.”
 




Some day in the future, I expect to have one of my grandchildren say to me, “Grandma, what is tuberculosis?”
Then I’ll answer her:
“Well, Dorothy, tuberculosis is a disease that used to kill lots of people in olden times, but under Socialism we have almost wiped it out. That’s why you haven’t heard very much about it.”
But I don’t suppose that Dorothy will be put off with an easy answer like that.
“But Grandma, it says in this old pamphlet that I found in your trunk that people who died from tuberculosis were ‘victims of social neglect’. What does ‘social neglect’ mean?”
“That’s a pamphlet the National Tuberculosis Association put out way back in 1944. They tried to tell the people then that doctors knew how to cure tuberculosis, but that –”
 
“Social Neglect”
Dorothy will interrupt me. She’ll be that kind!
“But Grandma, that’s silly. It says here, ‘In 1943, in the United States, tuberculosis killed 57,000 including 2,700 children under the age of fifteen years.’ The doctors wouldn’t have let all of those people die if they knew how to cure them!”
“What I was trying to tell you, Dorothy,” (I’ll have to be firm with her) “is that the doctors knew how to cure tuberculosis back in 1944 but there were so many poor people who didn’t get enough to eat and couldn’t afford the right kind of medical care that nothing could be done for them if they got tuberculosis. That’s what ‘social neglect’ is – when Society keeps from the people the things they need to make them well and happy.”
“Then why didn’t the well people see that the sick people got what they needed?” Dorothy will demand to know. It will be very difficult for the child trained under Socialism to live by the Marxist principle, “From each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs,” to understand the cruelty and irresponsibility of the capitalist system.
Even today, medical scientists who are active in the fight against tuberculosis express their disgust that a preventable disease like tuberculosis should still exist and kill so many thousands of young people. Considerably more than half of the 57,000 deaths from tuberculosis which occurred in 1943 were of individuals in the age range of 15 to 45, that is, individuals in the most productive years of life.
 
Can Be Wiped Out
Called by one medical writer, “the ancient enemy of mankind,” tuberculosis has left its characteristic marks on the bones of persons who died before history was recorded. Over the centuries tuberculosis has killed more people than wars have. Up to 1900, tuberculosis was the leading cause of death in the United States; today, it is in seventh place. But it could be wiped out completely! No one should die of tuberculosis in 1945 when medical science has perfected so many ingenious techniques for treating tuberculosis patients.
But thousands of people will die from tuberculosis in the United States this year. The vast majority of them will be workers. The National Tuberculosis Association has gathered some interesting statistics on this point, which they present under the heading, The Worker’s Chances of Dying from Tuberculosis.




2 times as many farmers die of tuberculosis as do bankers
4 times as many bakers die of tuberculosis as do bankers
4 times as many plumbers die of tuberculosis as do bankers
4 times as many truck drivers die of tuberculosis as do bankers
7 times as many miners die of tuberculosis as do bankers
9 times as many waiters die of tuberculosis as do bankers
11 times as many laborers die of tuberculosis as do bankers.




If a case of tuberculosis is discovered in an early stage, it is not difficult to cure the patient and restore him to productive life. But workers do not get the benefits of early treatment. Their general bodily resistance to disease is already weakened by their bad living conditions – crowded, poorly-heated homes, inadequate clothing, insufficient food. So they are an easy prey for tuberculosis germs.
 
How to Prevent It
The great majority of workers continue at their jobs for weeks and months after they show signs of illness before they seek medical advice. Even where there is a union, little sick leave is granted by the employer. Long periods of illness for the breadwinner of the family mean hunger, cold and worry for the worker’s wife and children. Small wonder, then, that workers struggle along at their heavy jobs for a long time with the burden of coughing, indigestion, pain in the chest and other symptoms of tuberculosis rather than risk unemployment. By the time they get treatment, it is often too late.
Dr. H.E. Kleinschmidt, Education Director of the National Tuberculosis Association, said two years ago, “Tuberculosis is only one of the evils growing out of greed and social injustice but it alone is enough to justify zealous crusading for the day when every family will be assured a decent standard of living.”
But these doctors who know so much about how to cure tuberculosis don’t know how to prevent it, because they don’t know how to “assure a decent standard of living” for every family. But in the Socialist Workers Party, we know how that must be done. And when my little grandchild says to me some day, “Grandma, what did YOU do in the war against tuberculosis?”, I won’t have to turn MY head away!
 




“No Meat – No Work!” This appears to be the slogan of a group of West Virginia miners. According to an Associated Press dispatch, 200 men went on strike at Earling, West Virginia on May 11 because there was no meat in the company store there. By May 17, more than 1,000 men were out.
William Blizzard, vice-president of the United Mine Workers Union, District 17, said that this was the first mine to be closed down because of a lack of meat in company stores but he predicted that “there will be other shutdowns unless this situation is corrected.” In giving the background of the strike situation, Blizzard said, “The men at Earling decided they could not work at their arduous duties unless meat is available ... It is a fact that miners cannot work without sufficient strength-building food.”
 
Proteins Essential
And the West Virginia miners are right! Men who are doing exhausting physical work need more food – and, most particularly, more protein food – than other sections of the population. Proteins are found in all kinds of cereals, nuts, and vegetables but first-class proteins are found only in foods of animal origin, that is, in meat, eggs and cheese. The West Virginia miners lined themselves up with the best nutritional experts when they decided by their strike action to demand first-class protein food.
For, declared Professor Paul Cannon of the University of Chicago at a nutritional conference in Washington last year, giving hungry people what have been lightly called “energy foods” is not enough. These so-called energy foods – breads, cereals, other cheap carbohydrates – will satisfy hunger Professor Cannon pointed out but they will not rebuild broken-down tissues nor will they build muscles. Along with vitamins and minerals, proteins are essentials in the diet. Proteins are the muscle-building, the tissue-building food.
 
Best Diet
“Any old protein” will not do, said Professor Cannon. The cheaper vegetable grain and nut protein foods lack one or more of the important chemicals called amino-acids which the body needs for proper health. Only the animal protein foods have all of these essential tissue-building elements. No diet is a good diet unless it includes proper amounts of lean meat, eggs and cheese, Professor Cannon concluded.
Even without the benefit of this sound scientific advice, the miners and other sections of the working class have been, trying to include more high protein foods in their diets. In the depression days, before the outbreak of World War II, there were millions of American workers who could not afford to buy enough lean meat for themselves and their families. This was particularly true of the Negro workers of the South who rarely tasted any other kind of meat than salt pork. Although the average per capita consumption of meat from 1936 to 1939 was 125 pounds, per year, which represents a little more than two pounds per week, over half of the workers averaged only 75 pounds per year which is slightly more than a pound per week.
With the increase in wartime wages, due to the decrease in unemployment and the greatly lengthened work week, the workers have been buying more meat. In 1944, the average per capita meat consumption was 147 pounds. It almost goes without saying that the low-paid workers were not averaging this much meat.
But, as more and more meat is going into the black market workers are again finding it impossible to find meat, at prices they can afford to pay. In many centers, as in Earling, West Va., meat has just about disappeared from the legal meat markets.
 
They Want Beef
In an article in the May 19 Collier’s, W.B. Courtney writes, “there are today more than 600 pounds of beef cattle grazing on the ranch lands or chomping in the feedlots and stockyards for every man, woman and child in this nation.” And that’s what the miners would like – their 600 pounds apiece of beef! Because it’s beef that the workers want now. Pork is the poor man’s meat. If the workers must eat pork, they want to eat “high up on the hog” – roasts and chops, not fatback and “chitlins.”
 
Miners “Fighting Mad”
But it’s beef that the miners are dreaming about and talking about and striking for! They want some good prime ribs of beef or maybe a tender sirloin steak or perhaps a juicy beef pot roast. When they know that there’s plenty of beef in the country, but they’re not getting it, it makes them “fighting mad.”
Even as you and I!
 




Patch, Save and Wear Out! V-E Day Won’t End Shortages. This is the headline of a feature article which appeared in the April 17 St. Paul Dispatch. “Some of the really troublesome shortages – the day-to-day needs that worry housewives and cause hours of hunting in the stores – in shirts, shoes, house dresses, children’s overalls and infant’s underthings are likely to become worse before they are better, come V-E Day or not,” the article goes on to say.
My sister Dorothy sent me this clipping along with an angry three-page letter. Because she is writing about problems which all working-class mothers face these days of wartime shortages, skyrocketing prices and frozen wages, I think that the readers of The Militant will find her letter interesting. “Ann” is her seven-year-old girl; “Jim,” her three-year-old boy – and, as parents of children of these ages know, they seem to outgrow their clothes overnight!
 
Try and Get It!
Here is her letter.
I happened to run across this item on the financial page and thought there might be something in it you could use. I suppose that’s because I myself feel pretty strongly on the question of what happens when I go shopping – especially for children’s things.
You must have heard me complain that Jim had to wear his last year’s shirts, which were two sizes too small for him all winter because I couldn’t find any to fit him. When I tried to exchange the red bedroom slippers you bought him for St. Valentine’s Day, I discovered that there are no bedroom slippers in larger sizes in the stores. ‘We’ve been out for months,’ they inform you.
When I bought shoes for Jim last month (and that makes $24 we’ve spent on children’s shoes in 7 months) I tried to get rubbers too – and people just laughed. One store keeper said he could sell me overshoes. He told me that he had been trying to get them all winter and had received a whole ‘basement full’ just as spring came.
I’m paying 29 cents and 39 cents per pair for socks for them because the cheaper socks always seem to be out while there is always a nice choice of color and size in the more expensive ones.
Ann is wearing her last year’s spring coat which is much too short for her. Of course, I could find plenty of new coats for her at $15 to $20. All the stores are advertising expensive coats and hats and they have stacks and stacks of luxurious handmade silk underwear – while youngsters can’t get shirts!
 
Shop Around
I certainly sound like a complaining housewife! I really know that there are burdens under capitalism which are a million times worse, but the hypocrisy of a ‘Patch, Save and Wear Out’ campaign when most workers’ belongings are already close to the worn-out stage and at the same time luxury goods fill the stores is pretty annoying.
Ann and Jim have been pestering and pestering so I’ll have to break off. Let me add just one rote of further annoyance. After you do go shopping for children’s shirts, towel racks for the bathroom, some kind of sauce pans other than the expensive glass ones that the children break – some salesgirls always says, ‘We did have some in. You’ll just have to come in often so you can catch them while they’re here.’
For somebody with children who is paying money to a girl to stay with the children – or like Elaine’s sister-in-law has dragged three children across town to leave with her mother – and is hoping to get a batch of necessary items in the short time available, that is the last straw! Just spend several hours, two or three times a week to shop around stores to see if anything has come in!
I have to go now to show Jimmy how to make ‘feets’ on the picture of the little boy he is drawing.
As ever, Dorothy
 
Super-Profits
A fitting climax to this report of the working-class housewife’s shopping problems is the recently-issued report of the OPA on department store profits for 1943. In dollar figures, department store profits reached $593,800,000 in 1943 in contrast to average profits from 1936–39 of $51,800,000. This represents an increase in 1943 profits of 1038 per cent! And preliminary figures on 1944 show that they are doing still better still!
But the National Retail Dry-goods Association isn’t satisfied yet. They asked the OPA recently to permit them to raise prices still more on the lower-priced articles – otherwise they will continue to refuse to carry such merchandise!
Who still thinks that we should PATCH and SAVE this WORN-OUT CAPITALIST SYSTEM?
 




“The defendants and their co-conspirators would endeavor by any means at their disposal to procure members of the military and naval forces of the United States to become undisciplined, to complain about food, living conditions, and missions to which they would be assigned, to create dissension, dissatisfaction and insubordination among the armed forces, to impair the loyalty and morale thereof ...”
This is Count 7 of the frame-up indictment brought in 1941 against 29 leaders of the Socialist Workers Party and Motor Transport Workers Union, 544-CIO in the Minneapolis Labor Case. No evidence was brought in court to substantiate the charge of interfering with the morale of the armed forces, but 18 of us had to serve terms in federal prisons just the same.
But the morale of the disabled servicemen – of the wounded and sick veterans who have been discharged to the Veterans Administration hospitals is not “protected” by the U.S. Department of Justice. Recent exposures of conditions in veterans’ hospitals have shown that there is plenty of reason for veterans themselves “to complain about food and living conditions” in these institutions. Investigators have found a tremendous amount of “dissatisfaction” among the veteran patients in these federally-operated hospitals.
 
“Morale Impaired”
The “morale” of these war casualties of the “military and naval forces of the United States” has certainly been “impaired.” But no federal indictments have been brought against the heads of the Veterans’ Administration who are responsible for these shocking conditions in veterans’ hospitals. They haven’t even lost their jobs. Most thorough of the investigations into conditions in Veterans’ Administration hospitals was made by Albert Q. Maisel, author of Miracles of Military Medicine and The Wounded Get Back.
Published under the title, Third-Rate Medicine for First-Rate Men, Maisel’s articles on veterans’ hospitals ran in the March and April issues of Cosmopolitan. In the introduction to the second article, Maisel writes:
“In last month’s Cosmopolitan, I exposed how thousands of tuberculous veterans are being neglected, mistreated, underfed, and discharged to almost certain death in the hospitals run by the Veterans’ Administration. Yet these t.b. hellholes – disgraceful as they are – are almost heavens compared with the thirty Mental Hospitals run by the same Veterans’ Administration.
“Read the evidence in the accompanying article – the shocking, shameful evidence of brutality, beatings, overcrowding and third-rate treatment which are the lot of our most defenseless disabled veterans. Read it – and remember that this is no description of Hitler’s concentration camps. This is happening today and every day, here at home to Americans – the veterans who should be our honored and best-treated citizens.”
Already 10,000 mental casualties of World War II have been “shoehorned” into the Veterans’ Mental Hospitals alongside the 30,000 mentally wrecked soldiers from World War I. Maisel visited many of these hospitals and talked to Veterans’ Administration officials and mental patients of both wars. He has mountains of evidence of bureaucracy, incompetence, backwardness and brutality.
The most damning evidence against them came from the diary of Robert Hegler, a conscientious objector who ran away from the Veterans’ Mental Facility at Lyons, N.Y. in October 1944. Hegler’s diary shown to New York City reporters told of veteran patients being “kicked in the head,” “beaten up in bed,” “being ‘wrung out’ ” i.e., being choked with a towel around the neck.
Maisel reports that after Hegler’s story broke in the New York papers Brigadier General Frank Hines the Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs was forced to make an investigation into Hegler’s charges. On November 17, 1944, General Hines said, “The investigation reveals some substantiation of the charges made by Robert Hegler ... Appropriate steps are being taken to remedy the situation ...”
In January, 1945, Maisel went to the Veterans’ Hospital at Lyons to find out what changes has been made. He found that M.E. Head was still the Manager of the hospital and that Colonel Lopez was still the Chief Medical Officer there. One physician has been transferred to another veterans’ hospital. According to Colonel Lopez, “no dismissals had occurred though a few attendants – two or three – had been permitted to resign.”
But there was ONE victim. Robert Hegler, the conscientious objector who exposed these conditions was sent to federal prison!
 




Before and after taking power in Russia, in days of persecution and struggle as well as in days of triumph, the Bolshevik Party of Lenin and Trotsky raised high the banner of working-class internationalism – the true symbol of May Day. Reporting on the 1917 May Day celebration in Russia – six months before the Bolsheviks led the October revolution which established the first workers’ state in history – Trotsky wrote this stirring account of Bolshevik internationalism in action:
“In both capitals and in the industrial centers the workers dominated the celebration, and amid them, the strong nuclei of Bolshevism stood out distinctly, with banners, placards, speeches and shouts. Across the immense facade of the Marinsky Palace, the refuge of the Provisional Government, was stretched a bold red streamer with the words: ‘Long Live the Third International!’ ... So far as it could, the army at the front celebrated. News came of meetings, speeches, banners and revolutionary songs in the trenches and there were responses from the German side.” (History of the Russian Revolution, Vol. I, p. 333).
Two years later, at a time when the young Soviet state was surrounded by the hostile armies of the counter revolution and the “democratic” imperialists, Lenin paid tribute to the basic working-class character of May Day in a speech delivered at a gigantic mass meeting in the Red Square at Moscow. No transcript of Lenin’s speech is available but the following is a newspaper account of the speech.
 
Lenin’s Speech
“The majority of those assembled here – said Lenin – who have not reached the age of 30-33 will see the flowering of communism, from which we are still so far removed.
“Pointing to the children, Lenin’ said that they, now participating in the holiday of labor’s emancipation, will enjoy the full measure of the fruits gained through the efforts and sacrifices of revolutionists.
“Our grandchildren will gaze in wonder at the documents and memorials of the epoch of the capitalist system. It will be difficult for them to understand how the trade in primary necessities of life could have been left in private hands; how factories and mills could have belonged to private individuals; how one man could have been permitted to exploit another; how people could have lived without any useful work to do. Up to now, we talked about what our children would see, as if it were a fairy, tale, but now, comrades^ you see with your own eyes, that the structure of socialism lodged by us is not a utopia. And our children will work still more zealously to build this structure.” (Vechernye Izvestia of the Moscow Soviet of Workers’ and Red Army Deputies, May 3, 1919)
But even the far-sighted Lenin could not have foreseen what tremendous obstacles were to be placed in the pathway of the Russian workers and peasants who were trying to build this “structure of socialism.” Betrayals by the parties of the Second International in the advanced capitalist countries were later matched by the infamous crimes of the Stalinist Third International against the principles of revolutionary internationalism.
In the course of its progressive degeneration Stalinism has violated every socialist tradition and principle, including the glorious revolutionary traditions of May Day, which the Stalinist bureaucracy is now attempting to destroy. In his Order of the Day, issued on May 1, 1944, Stalin carefully avoided any reference to the class character of this working-class holiday or to its traditions of socialist struggle. He did not pledge solidarity with the working-class of any European country, least of all Germany. On the contrary, he lumped the German workers together with the Nazis, under the epithet of “German vermin.”
 
Ehrenburg’s Article
An attempt at a theoretical justification for this shameful violation of the revolutionary internationalist traditions of May Day was made by the well-known Stalinist hack, Ilya Ehrenburg. In an article written in connection with the 1944 “observance” of May Day in the Soviet Union, Ehrenburg tried to show that the origin of May Day lay simply in seasonal changes – the coming of spring – and not in the class struggle at all.
“From time immemorial,” he wrote, “man has always associated the coming of spring with the idea of the triumph of life. The Greeks created the Eleusinian mysteries: young Persephone held captive by the god of the infernal regions returns to the earth. In spring, the early Christians celebrated the triumph of life. Sprouting seed, green shoot and flower-bud inspired men to wage war on darkness.
“Hence arose May Day. Progressive minds associated the will of the peoples for a better world with the spirit of spring.” (Information Bulletin of the Embassy of the USSR in Washington, May 6, 1944, Vol. IV, No. 54)
Under the great leadership of Lenin and Trotsky, the Bolsheviks cherished the glorious working-class traditions of May Day. The revolutionary internationalism which May Day symbolized was the cornerstone of their ideas and policies. It was through these ideas and policies that they defended the young Soviet state against its enemies and prepared the Socialist future of the whole world working-class.
The Soviet bureaucracy under Stalin usurped control in the Bolshevik Party and the Third International. In the course of a few years they trampled under foot every idea, every principle, every policy of Lenin and Trotsky. All the traditions of Bolshevism were besmirched, and in the end discarded, by the reactionary clique which now rules in the Kremlin. May Day and its traditions are no exception. The traditions of this symbolic day have been turned into their opposites. Soviet chauvinism, reviving all the vileness of the Great Russian chauvinism of Tsarist days, has been substituted for the idea of international working class solidarity. Pleas for class peace, and for submission of the workers to their capitalist foes have taken the place of the Bolshevik call for intensified struggle against capitalism.
Stalin and his clique have already gone down in history as the gravediggers of Bolshevism and betrayers of the struggle for Socialism. But the ideas of Bolshevism cannot be killed and buried. The Bolsheviks of today – the Trotskyists – have preserved them and are carrying them forward.
 




“Do you suffer from heartburn after eating? Do you have a sour stomach? Are you embarrassed by gas on the stomach? Do you suffer distress after meals – distress before meals? Then the answer for you is – ”
No, the answer is not what you might think from reading the fake patent-medicine ads in the newspapers or listening to the “cure-all” pill programs on the radio “to slip an Alkaid Tablet on your tongue.” The best scientific solution to problems involving stomach and intestinal disorders, as given by a Mayo Clinic specialist, is to inherit wealth.
Speaking before a meeting of the International Medical Assembly in Minneapolis some time ago, Dr. Walter Alvarez said that if the average man with stomach ulcers were left an income of $250 per month for the rest of his life, he would soon be cured and would never have ulcers again.
Worry and fear are the leading causes of “stomach trouble” Dr. Alvarez declared. Between 60 and 75 per cent of a group of cases examined showed no physical causes of the disorders. Practically all of these cases were brought on by fear, frustration, worry, anger, nervous and mental exhaustion. These, in turn, were due to the tremendous speed-up of modern industry and to the terrifying problems with which the war confronts the American people, he added.
Big businessmen may have ulcers, too. The strain of making profits and of keeping these profits away from their underpaid workers may cause some industrialists to break down. But if they do break down, how soothing and comforting and healing their wealth can be! The poet, who wrote that “wealth and poverty are merely mental pictures,” never stopped to think what a beautiful picture wealth can paint for the sick man ... plenty of rich, nourishing food, freedom from the nerve-wracking cares of the job, good medical and hospital care, extensive opportunities for rest and relaxation.
This is what Dr. Alvarez meant when he said that the possession of wealth was the best way for the ulcer sufferer to guarantee himself good health and a long life.
But what happens to the poor man who has an ulcer – as so many thousands of them have? Usually, he does not see a doctor until his case is fairly serious. When he first feels soreness and discomfort in his stomach, he tries to “doctor” himself, either by taking some patent-medicine, or by eliminating certain foods from his diet. If the pain in his stomach persists and begins to sap his energy, he may, at last, decide that it is necessary to spend some of the family funds for medical care.
 
How to Rest?
His doctor will give him a diet list, in which milk, cream, eggs and lean meats predominate. The doctor will urge the ulcer victim to avoid overwork. He will advise him not to eat when he is worried, tired, nervous, hurried or angry. Above all, the doctor will try to impress his patient with the importance of getting enough rest, particularly after meals. On this point, Dr. Logan Clendening says decisively, “they (ulcer patients) should rest on a bed or lounge – that is, in the recumbent position – for half an hour to an hour after each meal.”
Then the worker takes this sound medical advice home with him and tries to figure out how to use it. Where can he get enough “milk, cream, eggs and lean meat?” In the tragically-small food budget of so many millions of American workers, there is very little allowance for expensive foods. Usually whatever there is of this rich, nourishing food goes to the small children in the family. What worker will see his child suffer from hunger if he can prevent it – even at the risk of his own health ?
And with the lengthened hours of work and the wartime speed-up in the factory, how can the worker avoid overwork? With the short lunch hour, how can he keep from eating when he feels “hurried?” Where will he find a plant in which he can lie down for “half an hour to an hour after each meal?”
Doctors are in agreement that the typical stomach ulcer patient is an intense, conscientious, hardworking individual, whose attacks have been brought on by excesses of worry and work. Such a “worrier” will find plenty more to worry about in trying to find a way to follow his doctor’s orders!
What the many thousands of ulcer patients in the working-class need is – freedom from want and freedom from fear. But they will not find them in capitalist prescriptions!
 







It’s a very odd thing —
As odd as can be —
That whatever Miss T eats
Turns into Miss T.



In his Advancing Front of Medicine, George Gray uses this nursery jingle by Walter De La Mare very cleverly to introduce the subject of vitamins and their importance to health. What Gray does not emphasize sufficiently, however, is the fact that whatever Miss T does not eat also “turns into Miss T.” This is true of Mr. and Mrs. T, as well, and of all the little T’s, too. What people do not eat is a very important subject!
What working-class children do NOT eat – what they are deprived of eating – because of the poverty in their homes is the most important subject of all – and the most tragic.
Ill-fed children by the thousands have weak bodies, stunted growth and twisted limbs as a result of dietary deficiency diseases like rickets, scurvy and pellagra. These severe cases of malnutrition occur chiefly in the South. But East, West, North and South, there are today millions of children who have milder forms of nutritional deficiency. What these children do NOT get of the rich, nourishing foods they need may make them dull, listless, cross and irritable. What the children of the poor DO NOT EAT can twist their minds and spirits as well as their bodies!
Illustrations of the devastating effect of malnutrition upon the mental and physical health of young children are given in Case Studies of Nutrition compiled from the records of Child Health Clinics and published in a 1943 issue of The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. Here are one or two examples.
“Case 1. One of Boston’s Problem Children – Teen-aged, sandwich and pickle type ...
“An American girl, fourteen years old, referred to the Nutrition Department because of a rapid and widespread disintegration of the teeth ... A series of conferences first with Mildred alone and later with Mrs. D., disclosed the following symptoms which are frequently associated with early nutritive failure: chronic fatigue (especially noticeable when climbing stairs); inability to concentrate in school; restless sleep; lack of appetite; persistent worry; irritability; gradual loss of weight over a period of six months.
“Analysis of a week’s record of her intake indicated an extreme deficiency of milk, eggs, fruits, vegetables and whole- grain or enriched cereals. A day’s eating consisted of bacon, toast and coffee for breakfast; a crabmeat salad sandwich, potato chips and a dill pickle for lunch; a small salad, bread and butter and a brownie for supper.”
“Case 2 – From Chicago Italian-American – poverty’s child.
“A ten-year-old girl of Italian parentage, suffering from rheumatic heart disease and dental caries (decay). Conversation with the mother disclosed the fact, that the family was having serious financial difficulties due to the father’s illness and consequent unemployment for the preceding five months.
“A record of the patient’s intake showed that her daily diet consisted of several large servings of spaghetti with oil, homemade white bread, usually eaten dry but occasionally with oleo, one serving of either cabbage or dried beans, a potato, and coffee with a small amount of evaporated milk. Thus the diet consisted largely of refined carbohydrates and was low in proteins, minerals and vitamins.”
What good does it do these poverty-stricken children that earnest scientists on the National Research Council have arranged to place in schoolrooms huge posters, saying: “Eat the Right Food to Help You Keep Fit?” What use can their discouraged mothers make of the health leaflets, which the children bring home to them – leaflets warning of the dangers of “hidden hunger” and urging them to give their children more milk, fresh fruits and vegetables, meat and eggs?
Working-class mothers, like all others, want and try to give their children the right kind of food- food that will build strong, active, healthy young bodies. But this is a period of food shortages, rising prices and “frozen wages.” What prevents women of the working class from taking proper care of their children is lack of money – time – energy – and ration points.
 




“The way to a man’s heart is through his stomach” say the cook book publishers, hoping to increase their sales to girls and women, who are trying to attract a husband or perhaps, hold on to one. But sooner or later, most women discover that there are other ways “to a man’s heart.” Even women who are good cooks will agree that no one is ever handicapped by having a pretty face, smooth, lustrous hair, a slim figure and attractive clothes.
And so the struggle to he beautiful has absorbed the attention of women throughout the ages. The cosmetics industry was an old and flourishing business at the time of Cleopatra. Its chief customers have always been women, because the business of being beautiful has been one of woman’s main occupations. This is due to the fact that for centuries women have been barred from so many fields of competition – Music, Science, Literature, Politics and even today do not have full and equal rights with men in these fields, although they have made some important gains.
 
Deep-Seated Desire
Although “vanity,” as it is called, is supposed to be an exclusively feminine trait, the facts do not bear this out. Who buys the hair oils and tonics which are “absolutely guaranteed to cure baldness in 30 days or your money will be cheerfully refunded ? ” The manufacturers of various scented shaving soaps and cream and expensive after-shaving lotions certainly find plenty of male buyers, and these are only a few of the cosmetics and “beauty aids” sold to men.
The truth is that the desire to look well – “to put one’s best foot forward” – is possessed by all members of the human race, whether male or female. It is part of the individual’s feeling of self-respect and of his, or her, sense of personal dignity.
Recognizing this deep-seated human need, a popular woman’s magazine published an article in a recent issue, called, The Right To Be Beautiful. “Whether you live on a wind-swept farm in Nebraska, in a crowded flat in Chicago, or in a penthouse apartment in New York, you have the right of every American woman – the right to be beautiful,” the article begins. In fact, the article goes on to say, “there’s no longer a fragment of excuse for the girl, who facing her mirror, mutters, ‘I’m not pretty and there’s nothing I can do about it’.”
Suppose the working-class girl or housewife, facing the mirror and seeing a too-thin face, with dark circles of weariness under the eyes, hair and skin that need attention, and teeth that require dental care, decides to do something about it. If she had a few thousand dollars left over after paying the rent and buying groceries, she could have herself completely made over.
“Before and After” pictures are shown in the magazine of so-called “ugly ducklings,” who were transformed in a week’s time into glamour girls. All it took to do the job was a series of trips – “to the theatrical make-up man for face and hair restyling; to a dentist for temporary porcelain caps to fetch front teeth into alignment; to an instructor for lowering the voice a good three tones; to the dress designer for the appearance of curves we hadn’t the time to cultivate naturally; to Saks-Fifth-Avenue for a new outfit of clothes.”
Well, since she is lacking the necessary cash fo go through this transformation process, perhaps she can try some of the “home remedies” advised in the article. And so, she reads, “For a clear skin, for good teeth, for lustrous hair, for a shine in your eye, eat plenty of meat, fish, eggs, milk, fresh fruits and vegetables.” This isn’t going to be so easy either, she thinks. With prices of these foods so high, she can’t even get enough of them for the children,
What’s next in the line of beauty advice? “Hands to have and to hold must be smooth, soft and white. Rub some rich hand cream on at night and wear white lisle mits to bed.” At this point, the working-class mother is likely to throw the magazine down in disgust, knowing that no one could change the baby’s diapers several times during the night or bring innumerable drinks of water to the older children, while wearing “white lisle mits.”
Poor women do not have the much-talked-about American rights to “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness,” to say nothing of the “right to be beautiful.” Only women of wealth can feel secure in this right.
 




In the Society Today column of the April 14 N.Y. World-Telegram, this sad, sad story appeared.
“Nancy Oakes de Marigny, daughter of Lady Oakes and the late Sir Harry Oakes and heiress to a share of one of the greatest gold mine fortunes in the world, is thinking seriously of writing a book entitled Heiresses Get Just as Hungry as Home Folks ...
“Having miscalculated the date on which her allowance from the estate was to arrive, Nancy found that her immediate fortune consisted of $1.40 in American currency and one Canadian dime ...
“For the next few days the young lady who will one day come into millions nibbled on sandwiches and quaffed soup at the Automat, carefully avoiding all of her friends.
 
Poor Rich Girl
“Nancy comes of age next month, but it won’t alter the financial situation. Neither she nor her brothers and sisters come into a penny of their inheritance until they reach the age of 30. ‘I guess Daddy wanted to be sure we would have sense enough to handle our money wisely when we came into it,’ sighs the poor, little rich girl. Meanwhile, she lives on a comparatively small allowance from the estate.”
Whenever a young cub reporter brings back a story to his editor telling of a dog biting a man, the editor tears the story up and advises the writer that it isn’t news unless “a man bites a dog.” The Story of the Hungry Heiress illustrates the same thing.
If a reporter on a capitalist paper were to bring in a story, telling of an undernourished miner’s child, whose limbs were twisted by rickets or of an ill-fed Negro share-cropper suffering from pellagra, his editor would throw him out of the office. It isn’t news when poor people are hungry ! But there are so very, very few “hungry heiresses” that even if one of them is hungry only a couple of days, you can make a feature story out of it – and get it published.
It isn’t even news to the capitalist press when poor people starve to death in the United States! There were no stories written about the 2,373 American citizens who died from dietary deficiency diseases in 1940. These deaths from pellagra, beriberi, scurvy and rickets could have been prevented if a way had been found to supply the patients with enough fresh meat, milk, eggs, fresh fruits and vegetables. But the richest country in the world couldn’t find the way.
 
Hunger and Death
And this is only a part of the tragic picture of Hunger and Death! In commenting on the figures, listing deaths from starvation, the doctors on the National Research Council’s committee on Nutrition say:
“It is thus probable that deaths actually due to malnutrition are many times greater than the mortality statistics indicate ... It would be interesting to know how much malnutrition is concealed in the 370,600 deaths recorded in 1938 under the heading, ‘diseases of the circulatory’ system ... or among the 2,569 listed as due to ‘alcoholism’ ... (Bulletin of National Research Council, Nov. 1943)
For every actual death from malnutrition, there are thousands who are seriously ill from diet deficiency diseases and millions who have mild or moderate vitamin deficiencies. A survey made in 1942 of the diets of the relatively well-paid workers in the Lockheed Aircraft Plant in Burbank, California showed that 87 per cent had diets which were unsatisfactory. Surveys of the diets of Southern sharecroppers and of North Carolina textile workers and their families showed a 100 per cent unsatisfactory record.
Here is the daily allowance of food which the National Research Council recommends:




1 pint of milk at least, preferably 1 quart
2 servings of potatoes
2 servings of fruit, one of which should be oranges or grapefruit
2 vegetables, one of which should be leafy green or yellow
1 serving of meat, fish or poultry
1 whole-grain cereal dish
Butter or vitamin-fortified margarine
Whole-grain or enriched white bread at every meal




How many working-class housewives can afford to buy enough of this vitamin-rich food for their families every day?
Despite the opinion of the World-Telegram’s Society Editor, Heiresses Don’t Get Nearly as Hungry as THE HOME FOLKS!
 




“Fala is the father of twins.” Dr. Thomas
Sheldon, veterinary, announced today that twin daughters were born on
March 9 at the Sheldon Canine Hospital to President Roosevelt’s famed
Scottie and Buttons, owned by Miss Margaret Suckley of Hyde Park.
“Fala’s daughters, named Meggy and Peggy,
were sent home with their mother yesterday,” Dr. Sheldon said.”
So ran a March 13 Associated Press report from Rhinebeck, N.Y.
Now, I do not think all the troubles of this country are due to
the fact that F.D.R.’s dog, and his dog’s “bride”
receive expensive medical care. I should not want to force the young
Mrs. Fala to go through the ordeal of motherhood, alone and unaided!
But I wonder what a visitor from Mars would have thought if he
had read in the same paper which carried the news of Mrs. Fala’s
successful delivery at Sheldon Canine Hospital, the report from the
U.S. Children’s Bureau about inadequate hospital facilities for
human mothers?
Very likely, the citizen from Mars would have decided that the
members of the human race are crazy and taken the first rocket ship
back home!
 
Rich – and Poor
Public health authorities have long known there are hundreds of
thousands of American mothers and their newborn infants who do not
receive proper medical and hospital treatment. Census reports show
that only 73 percent of white women are delivered in hospitals. Far
more shameful – only 29 percent of Negro women receive this
type of care.
These 27 percent of white maternity cases and 71 percent of Negro
maternity cases who do not receive hospitalization represent poor
mothers – mothers of the working-class. When babies are born to
the rich, their mothers receive elaborate obstetrical and hospital
treatment – even more impressive than the maternity care given
their dogs.
But with the wartime shifts of population and crowded living
conditions in the large mass-production centers, the problem of
working-class women needing maternity care has become still
more serious. Dr. Martha M. Eliot, associate chief of the U.S.
Children’s Bureau, spoke about this in a press dispatch
published in the March 13 N.Y. Times.
“Facilities for hospitalization of maternity
cases are seriously inadequate and in some places totally lacking,”
said Dr. Elliot. “Effort to accommodate the women in hospitals
has meant crowding for the mothers and in many situations such
serious crowding for the newborn infants in the hospital nurseries
that many lives have been endangered and too many have been lost.”
 
Preventable Deaths
Dr. Eliot pointed out that maternity homes of four, six or eight
beds, which have been set up for desperate mothers-to-be, often do
not meet what health authorities regard as proper medical standards.
This is true even of many regular hospitals. “Some small
hospitals have no special maternity unit,” Dr. Eliot reported,
“but use the operating room as a delivery room, or as the
nursery, with all the attendant risks of infection of the mother or
infant that this implies.”
So to the already large number of preventable deaths of mothers
and newborn infants which occurred in pre-war America will now be
added this wartime toll! It had been estimated previously by medical
men that almost two-thirds of the deaths of mothers in childbirth
and close to one-half of the deaths of newborn infants were due to a lack of proper
medical and hospital treatment. In round figures, this means that
nearly 100,000 lives could have been saved every year if this society
had only been willing to spend the money needed.
But statistics are cold and impersonal. What do maternal and
infant deaths mean in terms of human values?
The death of a working-class mother in childbirth. Tragedy in
the home – improper care for the new baby and the other young
children. Very often, the necessity for breaking up the home because
the hard-pressed father finds it impossible to carry the double
burden. Then separation of the children – boarding-homes or
orphan asylums. This all-too- familiar story has been heard thousands
of times in the courtrooms where so-called juvenile delinquents are
tried.
 
Fala Is Fine
And the death of a newborn infant! Who can look upon a dead baby
without bowing his head before the tragedy of a human being that
never had a chance?
100,000 deaths of mothers and newborn babies could be prevented
every year!
BUT MOTHER AND BABIES IN THE HYDE PARK KENNELS ARE DOING
NICELY!
 




Over New York City’s municipal Radio Station WNYC in the middle of a busy Saturday morning came the voice of a public health lecturer. “Learn to relax,” she said. “Cultivate a hobby. Relieve the tension of wartime living by healthful recreation.”
Warning her listeners against the dangers which lie in the long hours, increased worries and general stresses and strains created by the war, the doctor pointed out that individuals must obtain adequate rest and relaxation or there will be a still more alarming number of mental breakdowns in this country.
The well-meaning doctor went on to offer some practical suggestions for healthful recreation – sports, folk dancing, even such simple advice as to “sit down on the floor and play with your child.”
But what thoughts went through the minds of the working-class mothers in this radio audience as they listened to instructions on how to relax?
11:45 a.m. – Saturday morning. The baby in the high chair, crying to be fed. Three-year old Jackie, just in from play, struggling with the worn-out zipper on his handed-down snow suit. The half- cooked meal on the stove, but no butter in the ice-box. Should she let seven-year-old Joan finish setting the table or should she send her to the store for butter? Perhaps, if she went to the store herself, she could persuade Mr. Engelmeyer to bring out a pound of oleomargarine. This would save precious red ration points and still more precious money. Maybe, she could even buy a package of cigarettes and save Bill a trip downtown after he gets home from the shop.
 
Two Kinds of Mothers
Into her thoughts comes the voice of the radio lecturer, “Learn to relax” – and the weary housewife sighs to herself, “RELAX! Where, When, How?”
But the “Cafe Society” mother, sitting before her mirror, patting astringent on her face finds inspiration in the radio speech. Just put of bed after a hard night at Cafe Zanzibar, followed by an hilarious party at a friend’s apartment – one can’t go to bed at 12:00 o’clock, curfew or no curfew – she feels the need for “healthful recreation.”
“Sit down on the floor and play with your child.” “A charming idea,” she thinks and perhaps after two-year old John Pierpont Van Renssalaer III has had his lunch and been cleaned up by his nurse, she will go into the nursery and play with him. Anyhow, getting down on the floor and playing with the baby will probably be good for the waistline as well as be “relaxing.”
To the already long list of tasks, which make up the life of working class mothers – washing, cooking, sewing, scrubbing, watching over the children – are now added the problems of housekeeping in wartime. Trying to make the ration points stretch to fit the food needs of the family; shopping around for the lower-priced childrens’ clothing, which has almost disappeared from the stores; attempting to meet the rapidly rising cost of living with wages “frozen” at a low level – all these, and many more such war-created problems tear down the physical and mental health of the housewife of the working-class.
Offering her the ordinarily sound medical advice about not worrying, getting enough rest, and learning to relax, is simply ironical. There was far more insight on this point shown by the cartoonist in a recent issue of a medical journal. He shows a thin, harassed-looking mother in a doctor’s office with a crying baby in her arms and a whining child pulling at her skirt. “What you really need,”, the doctor says to her, “is two weeks on another planet – alone.”
But how can THIS planet be made into a fit habitation for mothers? When will mothers get a chance to enjoy life WITH their children? Only the socialist movement can really answer these questions.
 




“Do you dream about ‘that place in the
country’?” begins an article in the March issue of Good
Housekeeping magazine. Then the author goes on to answer her own
question. “We do. We like to think of the room pictured above
in the farmhouse of Mr. and Mrs. William Rietheimer in Woodstock,
Illinois."
You may be very, very sure that the room pictured
there was not the unlighted, shabbily-furnished one room of a
sharecropper’s cabin. No, indeed not! Nobody “dreams”
of that kind of a “place in the country." Neither the
gushy writer of the Good Housekeeping article, nor her
millionaire boss, William. Randolph Hearst nor the magazine’s
readers. As for the sharecropper himself, his “place in the
country” is much more of a nightmare than a “dream.”
 
“Casual Living”
Photographs of the interior and exterior of this
real “dream house” are shown in the article with details
to appeal to the housewife-reader, weary of the cramped
living-quarters and the dirt of city life. “The sun streaming
through the crisp organdie curtains filled the rooms with warmth and
friendliness.” And more delectable details – “The
entire attic was covered with pine panelling” ... “Storage
and closet space was cleverly tucked under the sloping roof”
... “There were three built-in beds with deep drawer space
underneath.”
This all adds up to what the Good Housekeeping
writer calls a “design for casual country living.” No
sharecropper or “dirt farmer” is Mr. Rietheimer for we
learn from the article that he “commutes to his business in the
city.” His wife and daughter putter around in the garden of
their 30-acre farmyard and raise fresh vegetables for the family
dinners, but they wear gloves while working to keep from getting
“farmyard hands.” Casual country living is very different
from the life of backbreaking toil and grinding poverty which is the
daily experience of millions of agricultural workers and “dirt
farmers!”
 
Only a Dream
Why does Good Housekeeping show its readers
glimpses of a life which they can never hope to experience? Designed
as “the magazine America lives by,” Good Housekeeping
is read chiefly by housewives of the working class and lower middle
class. When William Randolph Hearst and his associates want to tell
the members of the “Smart Set” how to live or what to
wear, they use one of the >many other Hearst-owned periodicals,
such as Town and Country, Harpers Bazaar and House
Beautiful. The “upper classes” do not read Good
Housekeeping. Why does every issue of this magazine continue to
offer its readers the kind of advice about their homes which only the
rich could use?
That is exactly why Good Housekeeping
magazine is so popular with working-class housewives – it gives
them a chance to dream and to hope. Amid the dirt, noise, clutter and
general confusion that form the warp and woof of life in workers
homes, the housewife can dream of “a place in the country”
– quiet, comfortable, clean, well-furnished, adapted to the
needs of growing children.
If the average reader of Good Housekeeping
were told of life in Hearst’s Enchanted Hill Castle on his
75,000 acre estate in San Simeon, California or on one of his
luxurious “ranches” in Texas or in Mexico, it would seem
so unreal that it would have little meaning. Such remote, lofty and
obviously unattainable luxury can never form the basis of the poor
housewife’s dream. But a cottage in the country, with plenty of
“storage and closet space,” “crisp organdie
curtains” at the windows, “built-in beds with deep drawer
space underneath” – this is a dream that even a worker
may have!
But under this social system, it will remain only a
dream. According to the latest government figures on housing
conditions, half of the homes in the United States – nearly 17
million – had no private bath. Eight million homes had neither
gas nor electricity; 11 million had no refrigeration equipment; 4½
million had no central heating or stoves. Houses in rural communities
were said to be in even worse condition than those in the cities.
Farmhouses were the worst of all.
Housing conditions have grown still worse since 1940.
The war has stopped the building of new houses almost entirely. The
virtual absence of vacancies in lower-priced houses and apartments
makes it impossible for workers to force their landlords to make
necessary repairs on the old buildings.
And so, working-class women continue to dream of
“that place in the country,” while they go through the
dreary round of daily housekeeping tasks in crowded, uncomfortable,
run-down city homes!
 




On Tuesday, Jan 13, four-mouth old Arthur Jensen died in Minneapolis. The death of a small baby scarcely ever receives any space in the daily papers but Baby Boy Jensen’s death was blazoned in the headlines of all Minneapolis papers. Because it is news in any city when a baby dies in the Mayor’s office.
Behind the screaming headlines is the all-too-familiar story of inadequate medical care for the children of the poor. Here is the pathetic report, that the sorrowing young mother gave at the Public Welfare Board hearing on the case.
The baby had been at the Minneapolis General Hospital for about a week earlier in the month with an infected ear. He was discharged from the hospital on Jan. 10, but later developed a cold and fever. On Jan. 12, the child was taken to the hospital’s baby clinic, where he was examined. The doctor advised the mother to take the baby home and keep him on a liquid diet. Later in the day, the baby’s condition became worse and Mrs. Jensen took him back to the hospital’s receiving room. The baby was given a chest X-Ray and an injection of penicillin, with the advice that he be brought back to the clinic the following day.
(At the public hearing, the harassed and overworked young interne, who had examined the baby, pointed out that General Hospital is terribly overcrowded; a fact that all city officials know – and carefully ignore.)
Mrs. Jensen pleaded with the doctor to keep the baby in the hospital but was told that his condition did not warrant hospitalization. During the night, the baby became worse and cried a great deal. In the morning, the agitated parents brought the baby in a taxicab to Mayor Hubert Humphrey’s office in the vain hope that he could arrange to have the baby admitted to the hospital immediately. And as he lay on the desk in the Mayor’s office – waiting for the representatives of this rich, capitalist government to come to his aid – tiny Arthur Jensen drew his last breath.
 




“Protect Yourself Against Winter Colds – Take Vitamin Pills.” “To Insure Good Health and Well-Being, Take a Vitamin Capsule Every Day.” These are the kind of slogans, with which the vitamin pill manufacturers bombard the citizens every day on the billboards and street car signs, in newspaper ads, and over the radio.
Impressed with the seeming scientific basis for the vitamin pill propaganda, hundreds of thousands of people have been streaming into the country’s drag stores to lay down their hard-earned cash for these synthetic vitamins. And what do they get for all of the millions that they spend for vitamin pills? Not much!
lt’s true, of course, that many vitamin pill-users may think they feel better when they take vitamin concentrates regularly. But this is no proof that they have been materially benefitted by the pills and capsules that they have swallowed. A study reported in a recent issue of Industrial Medicine gives us some interesting facts on this point.
Dr. A.C. Ivy, assisted by Drs. Jung, Bing and Cisler made a year’s study of the effect of a daily supplement of vitamins on production and absenteeism in a Chicago area steel plant. 241 steel workers were divided into three groups. One group received a vitamin capsule every day. The second group received placebos (capsules which looked like the vitamins but actually were an inactive drug). The third group received nothing. The treatment was rotated periodically and a questionnaire was circulated to all the workers every four months.
35% of those taking vitamin capsules said that their appetite, sleep and feeling of well-being had improved. But, so did 35% of those taking blank capsules! The rate of absenteeism due to illness was lower in the blank capsule group than in the vitamin group. The rates of voluntary absenteeism were the same in the vitamin and placebo group and lower than the non-treatment group. There were no significant differences in production in the three groups.
All this study proves is that people have been so thoroughly propagandized as to the great value of vitamin pills that even if they think that they are getting them, they imagine that they feel better.
Dr. G.C. Engel, a member of the Graduate School of Medicine of Pennsylvania University said in a recent talk on diet in health and disease, “It is altogether untrue that a normal person’s sense of well-being and ability to perform work can be improved greatly by the addition of vitamins to the diet. The truth of the matter is that only people who have vitamin deficiencies as established by reliable tests should indulge in vitamin therapy and then, only under the guidance of physicians who understand their needs.”
Just the same, the drug monopolies continue to peddle their expensive vitamin preparations to all who have the money to pay for them. The vitamin pill is the new gold brick!
 




Readin’, ’Ritin’ and ’Rithmetic are the much-talked-about and much-sung-about three R’s. To hear American politicians talk – especially in election years – one would be led to believe that every American child had an equal opportunity to master not only the three R’s but also any other subject in which he was interested. The facts, of course, are quite the opposite.
In their recent study, Unfinished Business in American Education, Professors John Norton and Eugene Lawler point out that:

Three million adults living in the United States have never attended any kind of school.
 
Ten million adult Americans have had so little real schooling that they are actually illiterate.
 
Half of the brightest and most talented youth in the country leave school prematurely – before they have had the kind and amount of schooling which would train them to make full use of their talents.
 
Two million children, aged 6 to 15, were not in any kind of school in 1940 and this number was substantially increased during and after the war.
 
Underpaid, overworked teachers are unable to provide decent schooling to other millions of American children because they are handicapped by inadequate instructional supplies, ancient textbooks and crowded classrooms.

These tragic conditions exist because the capitalist politicians are not willing to spend enough money for the education of the country’s children. Only three billion dollars a year is appropriated by all public agencies – state, federal and city – for the operation of the schools in 1948. But 23 billion dollars will be spent for militarism in the United States this year (over 62% of the total budget).
And the proposal is now being made that another 3 to 5 billion be added to the military budget each year in order to finance Universal Military Training! In the January issue of Economic Outlook, the CIO Educational Department tells working class parents just what this 3 billion could buy for the school children of the United States. It would be possible to:

Construct a 10-room modern school building in every county in the United States each year.
 
Construct a $50,000 library in every county in the United States each year.
 
Employ 10 doctors and 10 nurses full-time for schools in each county.
 
Purchase 10 new school buses in each county in the United States every year.
 
Erect a $750,000 trade and technical school in each congressional district each year.
 
Provide free education for the 3 million children now under 18 who are not now attending school.
 
Bring all schools of the country up to a reasonable standard of efficiency.

And there would still be millions left over!
 




Through the Walking Man radio contest, millions of people heard about the work of the American Heart Association, many of them, for the first time.
Very likely, the majority of these radio listeners felt, that the million dollars, which they had contributed in the contest, would enable the American Heart Association to carry on its research on a greatly expanded scale. Unfortunately, this is not the case. The fact is that an adequate research program for heart disease would cost hundreds of millions of dollars.
Heart disease is the Number One Killer. In 1946, over one-half million people died from diseases of the heart or blood vessels. This is a larger number than died of the next five causes of death combined. Nine million people in the United States now suffer from diseases of the heart and blood vessels but there are only 700 doctors who specialize in this disease. Only one hundred medical research specialists are investigating this disease and only two hundred hospital beds are available for their research work.
This despite the fact that significant advances in the diagnosis and treatment of heart disease have come about from research. Take, for example, coronary thrombosis, which was a fatal disease twenty years ago. Today, the deaths from this disease have been materially reduced in those patients who receive prompt medical treatment. Coronary artery disease has to do with an interference of the blood supply to the heart. The most serious phase of this disorder is the occurrence of coronary thrombosis where the blood supply to a portion of the heart is suddenly cut off by plugging one of the coronary arteries.
Twenty years ago, the patient with coronary thrombosis looked forward to a life of invalidism if he survived his attack. Today, most of these people are continuing to carry on their daily activities and many of them are living out their life expectancies.
One very valuable piece of research, which has enabled doctors to give added years of life to the coronary patient has been the use of anti-coagulants. Drugs, like heparin and dicumarol, have been used to prevent the blood from clotting. They have been utilized in cases of coronary thrombosis, in which blood clots migrate from one spot in the circulatory system to another. At present, 17 institutions are cooperating with the American Heart Association in studying the value of this type of drug therapy in coronary disease. So far, one thousand patients have benefited by this treatment.
The amount of money available for research in diseases of the heart and blood vessels averages only five dollars per death from these causes. In infantile paralysis, five hundred thousand dollars is used per death. At this rate, one hundred sixty million dollars should be made available for research into America’s Number One public health problem.
But a capitalist government, which is driving at break-neck speed toward the Third World War – the Global War – the Atomic War – has no money for saving human lives through medical research. War is an expensive undertaking! The total money spent for all medical research in this country in 1944 would pay for only eight hours and twenty minutes of the last war.
 




All of the big commercial bakers tell the suffering public that their product is “unique” – that it is baked according to a special “home recipe”; that it “stays fresh longer; that it contains some “priceless ingredient.” The facts are, of course, that the ordinary loaf of packaged white bread is uniformly soggy and tasteless. And recent medical studies indicate that it may be uniformly dangerous to its users.
In the December 14, 1946 issue of the British Medical Journal, the famous nutritional expert, Sir Edward Mellanby reported that bleached flour gives dogs fits. Since that two groups of American scientists have verified Mellanby’s findings. Their reports, published in the November 22, 1947 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association gave the experimental evidence to prove that bleached flour poisoned dogs, cats, ferrets and monkeys. In each case, the symptoms varied with the species.
Nine-tenths of the bread eaten by the American people is made out of bleached flour. For the past 30 years, most of our bleached flour has been “agenene-ized.” Agene is the trade name for nitrogen trichloride – a substance added to flour during the milling process. With the agene treatment, the flour is not only bleached, but is made inedible for weevils. Thus, it keeps for a much longer time in the bakeries and warehouses.
On the subject of agene and its possible dangerous effects on human beings, the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council has made the following recommendations:

Investigation of the effects of agene-ized flour on human subjects.
 
Exploration of alternative processes of flour treatment to make sure that flour is free from toxic effects.
 
Reduction of the use of agene by commercial bakers.

Agene gives fits to dogs. What it does to human beings is still a matter of speculation. Experiments now under way indicate that agene may change some of the wheat protein into a nerve poison, which, in turn, may cause alcoholism or some other personality disorder.
But the mere discussion of the “agene” question is giving all of the flour trusts and the profit-hungry bakeries fits. Because all of their bread recipes call for the addition of “a dash of poison.”
 




In the period between World Wars I and II, public health agencies spent tremendous amounts of time and money and energy in trying to make the American people “vitamin-conscious.” Posters in schools and plants, health leaflets, nutrition classes for housewives, hammered away at the idea that people needed vitamin-rich foods in order to stay strong and healthy.
The phrase, “hidden hunger,” was coined to describe the condition of the hundreds of thousands of American men, women and children, who were getting enough food to eat, as measured in calories but not enough of the protective, foods — milk, fresh fruits and vegetables, meat and eggs.
In Food and Life, the 1939 Yearbook of the United States Department of Agriculture, the dangers of using calories as the sole measure of inadequate diet were pointed out in the foreword:
“People of a certain age will remember the furor about calories early in this century. Apparently the only thing that mattered about food in those days was whether you got enough calories—or too many, so that you became fat; and even today, undernourishment or starvation is still thought of as failure to get enough calories. People can starve to death, however, even when they eat too much food, if some element necessary to life is lacking in the food they get.”
There is once again a “furor about calories” and the question of vitamin lacks and “hidden hunger” has been pushed into the background. The science of nutrition has dropped back four decades!
“Hidden hunger” is still a serious problem among the poorly-paid workers of the United States, but this problem has been overshadowed by the terrible specter of open hunger, which today threatens so many millions of European, Asiatic and Indian peoples. This is the state to which capitalist war and destruction, greed, inefficiency and mismanagement have brought the peoples of the globe!
In this extremity, where millions of people are getting only one-third to one-half enough calories to sustain life, the American people are being urged to cut down on their calories and share their food with the hungry. The desire to “feed the hungry” is shared by all decent people. American workers and farmers are no exception.
But American workers and farmers are not going to subscribe to the theory of the editorial, writer of the St. Paul Dispatch, who said on May 18 that the United. States is “a nation whose ailments are more from overeating than from undereating.”
Compare this scientifically-chosen diet, which the National Research Council recommends, with the food allowances of the average American working-class family and see whether overeating is the great American problem!

1 pint of milk at least, preferably 1 quart
2 servings of potatoes
2 servings of fruit; one of which should be oranges or grapefruit
2 vegetables; one of which should be leafy green or yellow
1 serving of meat, fish or poultry
1 whole-grain cereal dish
Butter or vitamin-fortified margarine
Whole-grain or enriched white bread at every meal

This should be the goal for the people of this country and every other country in the world under any kind of a decent social system. Because enough calories are not enough!
 




Up to the first of this year, neuropsychiatric disorders have hospitalized 850,000 World War II soldiers. This was the startling report which the members of the American Psychiatric Association heard last month from the Army’s chief of Psychiatry, Brigadier General William Menninger.
Another 500,000 men were discharged from the Army for “personality disturbances” of all types, said Dr. Menninger. All of these neuropsychiatric casualties occurred despite the Army’s elaborate “screening-out” process. Approximately 1,875,000 men were rejected for military service because of personality disorders of one kind or another, Dr. Menninger reported.
But it is not only among the military that mental disease is a serious problem. United States Surgeon General Thomas Parran estimated recently that eight million persons in this country – more than six percent of the population – are suffering from some form of mental disorder. There are more beds in hospitals for nervous and mental patients, than in all other hospitals. And mental disease is on the increase!
These are tragic facts, but not too surprising when one considers the state of the world – the world in which human beings are trying to adjust. It’s a crazy world that the capitalist lords of the earth have built for us!
 
Constant Proof
It’s not difficult to prove that this is a crazy world. Every issue of The Militant offers more proof of capitalist insanity. Even the capitalist press is sometimes forced to comment on the irrational character of this social system.
Such an article appeared in the May 30 issue of the St. Paul Dispatch. This was a report on the “alarming increase” in the number of suicides since V-J Day, and the Dispatch writer speaks of the irony of the fact that the end of the war should make life seem less worthwhile to thousands of American men and women.
Pointing out that the end of the war brought “a sharp cutback in industrial activity and a consequent reduction in employment,” the Dispatch article goes on to show that economic factors always play a very important part in determining the level of the suicide rate.
Just the opposite trend was observed after the United States entered World War II. In a late 1942 bulletin, the Metropolitan Insurance Company reported on the sharp drop in suicides since Pearl Harbor and called this “a beneficial by-product of war.” The number of annual suicides during the war was only half of what it was in 1932–33 during the depths of the depression.
There is the crazy picture! War with its awful weight of suffering and sorrow stays the hands of thousands of individuals bent on self-destruction. But Peace – Blessed Peace? In its times of Peace, the dying capitalist system is wracked by financial crises, depressions and colossal unemployment problems. As a result, thousands of cold, sick, hungry workers are driven to suicide each year.
If one did not foresee a socialist solution to all of these problems, it would be easy to lose one’s mental balance in the midst of such contradictory and bewildering facts. The capitalists like to make fun of us and call us “crazy radicals.” But the shoe is really on the other foot! They are the ones who are operating this madhouse of capitalism.
 




DETROIT, Feb. 2 – John W. Anderson, Secretary of the General Motors Citywide Strike Committee of Detroit, characterized the January 29 Daily Worker story that “GM Strikers Bar Trotskyist Paper for Aiding Corporation” as a “pack of lies”.
In an interview here today, John Anderson gave a full report of the action of the Citywide Strike Committee on the question of the distribution of The Militant at the GM picket lines.
At the January 23 meeting of the Citywide Strike Committee, Fred Fisch, a delegate from CIO United Auto Workers Detroit Transmission Local 735, introduced a motion that the Committee go on record as “discouraging the distribution of The Militant” to GM strikers.
Fisch backed up his motion by a reference to a recent action of Local 735’s Executive Board in barring The Militant from their picket lines. Last week’s Militant carried the story of this frenzied attempt of Fisch and other Local 735 Stalinist leaders to prevent their members from being influenced by the ideas of Trotskyism. This bureaucratic action reflected a well-founded Stalinist fear that Local 735’s members were eagerly welcoming the weekly analyses of the present strike struggles which they have been reading in the columns of The Militant, which has been distributed regularly at all GM picket lines.
 
Report Upheld
At the Citywide Strike Committee meeting, Fisch tried to justify Local 735’s attempt to suppress a workers’ paper by charging that The Militant had misrepresented facts about the strike. In particular, Fisch referred to a story in the January 12 issue, which reported a recent clash between the police and the strikers on the Transmission picket line. Fish claimed that The Militant’s report that “blows were exchanged” was false. However, John Anderson pointed out that at the time the incident occurred, Local 735’s delegates to the Citywide Strike Committee had made the same report to the Committee.
John Panzner of Local 235, Chevrolet Gear and Axle and John Anderson, who represents Fleetwood Local 15 on the Citywide Strike Committee, argued against Fisch’s motion. The dangers to the labor movement inherent in such an attempt to suppress the rights of free speech and a free press were pointed out to the members of the Citywide Strike Committee.
 
Packed Meeting
But the Stalinists from Local 735 had brought five delegates to the January 23 meeting of the loosely-organized Citywide Strike Committee. Each local is supposedly allowed only two delegates. Three of the Transmission delegates had never attended a Citywide Committee meeting before. At the poorly- attended January 23 meeting Local 735’s delegation was one- third of the total attendance, and Stalinists from other Detroit locals helped to swell this figure. In this packed Committee meeting, the Stalinist motion was declared to have won a majority in a voice vote.
 
Slanderous Lie
But William Allan’s statement in the January 29 Daily Worker that the Citywide Strike Committee had passed a resolution “barring” The Militant from GM picket lines because it is “of service to the corporation instead of to the strikers” is a slanderous lie! Not even in a meeting packed with Stalinists could such an accusation be made. The solid working-class character of The Militant is too well known to Detroit workers to permit of such an open piece of falsification and slander.
As reported in last week’s issue, Arthur Burch, Detroit representative of The Militant, has written to the Local 735 Executive Board, requesting an opportunity to appear at its next meeting or at the next membership meeting. In his letter, Burch pointed out that the action against The Militant was a “clear violation of labor’s democratic rights.” If permitted to appear at a Local 735 meeting, he promised to “explain the situation and answer any questions that you might care to ask.” No reply to this letter has been received to date.
 
Attempts Fail
Recent attempts of the Stalinists to bar The Militant from the Fleetwood picket lines met with ignominious failure. When a well-known Stalinist supporter raised the question of barring The Militant at a Local 15 meeting, with the charge that it was “Communistic,” there was so much opposition that he didn’t even dare to introduce a motion.
Meantime, the distribution of The Militant to GM strikers on the Detroit picket lines continues. Despite all Stalinist motions, the Militant distributors always receive a hearty welcome. Many subscriptions have already been obtained and this number will be greatly increased when the GM workers return to their jobs.
 




In a sensational article in the March issue of The American Magazine, FBI head J. Edgar Hoover writes on The Rising Crime Wave.
“Our war is not over,” says G-Man Hoover. “It merely has shifted from a fight against criminal armies on the foreign fronts of the world to a fight against an army of criminals on the front of law enforcement here at home ... There is an army of at least 6,000,000 criminals in the United States today – one criminal for every 23 inhabitants of the nation. Their fingerprints and the records of their arrests are in the files of the Federal Bureau of Investigation at Washington.”
I am one of the FBI’s “6,000,000 criminals,” myself. So are the 17 other prisoners in the Minneapolis Labor Case. Our fingerprints, our photographs and our case histories are in its Washington files. Our “crime” consisted of telling the workers the truth about the imperialist war and in militantly defending their interests. While I was serving my sentence in the Federal prison for women at Alderson, West Virginia, I met hundreds of other members of Hoover’s “army of criminals.”
There was Maggie Owens, for example. (This is not her real name but it is her true story.) A spry independent little woman of sixty-nine, Maggie Owens tried to make a living in a poor community in the hills of Kentucky. But the Federal Government did not approve of her business activities. J. Edgar Hoover’s G-Men swooped down on her and she was sent to the penitentiary on a charge of violating the federal liquor laws.
And there was sixteen-year-old Betty Sue Tucker. (This isn’t her real name either.) Pretty, blue-eyed, black-haired Betty Sue worked in a cotton mill in Fayetteville, North Carolina, for miserable wages. Until the war came and an army camp was established at Fayetteville, Betty Sue had very few dates with boys and very little fun. Then, she began to go out with one of the soldiers from the camp. But her path of love did not “run smooth.” The soldier was transferred to another camp and Betty Sue was indicted by the FBI as a violator of the May Act – a law set up to protect the “morals” of the soldiers. She was sent to the federal prison to serve a year’s sentence. Her baby was born there six months after she was admitted.
Do you think that these people are “criminals,” Mr. Hoover? I don’t! No decent person could think so. Any human being with a spark of compassion feels that the Maggie Owens’ and Sue Tuckers’ in our jails and prisons are “more sinned against than sinning.” These are not criminals!
But I can tell you where you can find a real criminal, Mr. Hoover. He is former Federal Judge Albert Johnson of Lewisburg, Pennsylvania. Even the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives, which is usually very lenient in its judgment of criminals in high places, says that Johnson was guilty of “high crimes and misdemeanors.”
Judge Johnson’s many crimes are listed in the Judiciary Committee’s report, issued on February 6. This report says:
“Almost every litigant who had the misfortune to appear before this wicked and malicious judge became the immediate object of a crooked conspiracy whose sole interest was the amount of money that could be extorted from him for justice or the evasion of justice.”
Judge Johnson was further accused of having compelled his official secretary and deputized court clerks “to rent apartments in the buildings he owned at higher rentals than other tenants were paying him” and of compelling them “to do the menial work of servants in his home, dusting, cleaning and even washing his floors.”
What do you suppose happened to this crooked judge? Has he been sentenced to a long prison term? Not at all! The House Judiciary Committee said that Johnson’s crimes would ordinarily call for impeachment. But it did not request impeachment because the judge already had resigned and waived retirement rights!
So, there is ex-Judge Johnson living happily and comfortably on the fat fees and graft which he extorted from many hundreds of victims during his more than 20 years as a Federal Judge!
Now, here is your chance, Mr. Hoover, to demonstrate to the citizens that “crime doesn’t pay.” Go after this “wicked and malicious” judge! See that he is punished for his violations of a couple of dozen federal laws! Put this criminal behind bars!
Otherwise, a lot of us are going to think that the FBI is enforcing a different kind of “justice” against the poor, than against the rich. We are going to be forced to conclude that crime in high places does pay!
 




DETROIT, Feb. 23 – A call to all CIO United Auto Workers locals to support the General Motors strikers “to the utmost limit of your resources” marked the 95th day of the bitterly fought GM strike. The appeal for special aid to the GM workers was made in a telegram sent to all UAW-CIO locals by the UAW International Executive Board, which is meeting here this week-end.
Despite a series of false press reports during the past week that a GM strike settlement is “imminent”, negotiations between the UAW and the General Motors Corporation have almost blown up. The Corporation’s stubborn insistence on striking from the contract some of its most important provisions for union security and its further attempts to chisel on the Fact- Finding Board’s recommendation of 19½c an hour have stalled the GM-UAW negotiations.
The General Motors Corporation heads seem determined to punish the GM workers for raising: the demand that the company’s books be opened. With UAW Vice-President Walter Reuther as their spokesman, the GM strikers introduced the unprecedented demand that they be allowed to examine the company’s book in order to determine whether General Motors was able to pay wage increases without raising prices.
 
“Socialistic Demands”
At the present stage of the GM-UAW bargaining talks, the demand to “open the books” has dropped into the background.
But the GM officials have neither forgotten nor forgiven this assault upon the citadel of private enterprise! GM President Charles E. Wilson and other company negotiators have repeatedly charged Reuther with introducing “socialistic demands” into the GM strike.
Rumors that GM may actually carry its fight against the union to the extent of starting a “back to work” movement are circulating in Detroit. The false reports in the capitalist press about the imminence of a strike settlement are interpreted by union observers as a company attempt to demoralize the GM strikers. The concrete effect of these false reports has been a serious reduction in the amount of financial aid being sent in to the GM strikers.
In order to offset these false reports, to keep the morale of the GM strikers at a high level, and to secure a maximum of support for them from other UAW locals, the UAW. Executive Board sent out today’s urgent appeal for aid. The text of their telegram to the UAW Locals follows:
 
UAW Board’s Appeal
“The International Executive Board in special session in Detroit heard a full and detailed report on General Motors negotiations from the three top officers who have been participating in such negotiations. On the basis of that report the Board unanimously concludes that the General Motors Corporation in refusing acceptance of the President’s recommendation is delaying a settlement of the strike for reasons and motives which the Corporation representatives are not discussing in negotiations.
“In view of the Corporation’s attitude, we call upon every local union and every member of our great organization to redouble efforts in raising funds to support the GM workers so that they may carry their fight to a successful conclusion.
“The Board wishes to correct the erroneous impression which may have been created by false press reports that a settlement is immediately imminent. Several basic issues plus local demands and the wage question are still not settled.
“The picket lines of the GM workers have already won substantial wage increases for Ford, Chrysler and Briggs workers and for workers in other large sections of industry. Every auto worker is indebted to the General Motors strikers for the fight they have made. We know you will give them financial support to the utmost limit of your resources. Our International Union is determined to mobilize its full strength to carry this fight to victory.”
 
All Aid to GM Strike!
James F. Dewey, special Labor Department Conciliator refused comment on the UAW International Executive Board’s charge that the Corporation is suppressing its “reasons and motives” for “delaying a settlement”. But it is an absolute certainty that both General Motors and Government officials are discussing the UAW Board’s statement in private.
Corporation hopes, to undermine the morale of the GM strikers and to starve out the strike, are being threatened by the UAW Board’s demonstration of solidarity.
Even after 95 days of strike struggle, the GM picket lines are still solid, but the GM workers cannot win this fight alone. If all locals of the UAW and other sections of the CIO rally to the aid of the embattled GM strikers, the mighty General Motors Corporation will yet be brought to its knees!
 




DETROIT, Feb. 16 – With the final settlement of the U.S. Steel strike, news of the end of the 88-day old General Motors strike is expected here almost hourly.
Negotiations between the General Motors Corporation and the CIO United Auto Workers which were broken off by the union last Tuesday, were again resumed yesterday.
In breaking off negotiations February 12, the UAW Top Negotiating Committee charged the corporation with trying to put over “a contract that would leave the union in a helpless bargaining position.” In a letter of explanation sent to all GM local unions, UAW Vice-President Walter Reuther said that the union would resume negotiations only on the following basis:

“The prompt and satisfactory settlement of all local 	union demands.
 
“Reinstatement in full of the cancelled contract.
 
“Payment of a cash wage increase across the board of 	the full 19½ cents an hour recommended by the President and 	his Fact-Finding Board.”

Reference was also made in the Reuther letter to the corporation’s proposed changes in the 1945 contract – wiping out of the maintenance of membership clause, equal pay for equal work for women, changes in grievance procedure, etc. The net result of the corporation’s proposals would mean a “return to the 1940 contract,” Reuther concluded.
Special Labor Department Conciliator James Dewey, who is handling the GM-UAW negotiations, has so far refused to comment on whether agreement has been reached on the question of the reinstatement of the 1945 GM contract – or on the wage question.
 
Stalinist Double-Cross
The stab in the back dealt the UAW strikers by the leaders of the Stalinist-dominated CIO United Electrical Workers Union who signed a separate agreement with the General Motors Corporation last week will never be forgotten nor forgiven by Detroit union militants. A vigorous denunciation of the “double-crossing” strike policies of the Stalinist leadership of the UE who secretly accepted an 18½-cent settlement for 30,000 GM electrical workers, was made at the February 11 meeting of the UAW’s General Motors City-Wide Strike Committee here.
 
Fisch Backs Sell-Out
Cadillac Local 22 had previously adopted the resolution condemning the UE leadership. Its delegates to the City-Wide Strike Committee were instructed to introduce it in that body. In presenting the resolution, Dave Miller, Local 22’s President, made a sharp attack on the UE leaders, characterizing their act as a “sell-out” of the GM strike. Miller’s attack on these Stalinist trade union leaders aroused considerable comment in Detroit labor circles because Miller has been known in the past as a consistent supporter of the Stalinists.
Fred Fisch, Stalinist delegate from Detroit Transmission Local 735, was one of the two or three delegates who spoke against the resolution. He attempted to defend the treacherous deal which his Stalinist friends of UE had made with General Motors by pleading that a question of “union autonomy” was involved. His argument that UE had just as much right to sign a separate contract as did the Ford and Chrysler unions was quickly demolished by speakers who followed him. They pointed out that the Ford and Chrysler unions were not on strike and were not fighting the same corporation.
 
Text of Resolution
Fisch is the same individual who has been leading the Stalinist drive to prevent distribution of The Militant to Detroit picket lines and who pushed a motion on January 23 in the City-Wide Strike Committee to “discourage” the distribution of the paper to GM strikers.
The text of the resolution condemning the UE-GM settlement, which received the support of all but three of the delegates to the City-Wide Strike Committee, is as follows:
WHEREAS: The United Electrical Workers Union, CIO, gave assurances to the Strategy Board of the UAW, as reported to the National Conference of GM delegates “that their struggle for higher wage rates would be coordinated with the plans as outlined by the UAW International Executive Board" and
WHEREAS: A departure from this pledge was made when the UE failed to take joint action with the UAW in calling out their membership in GM plants, and
WHEREAS: Secret and separate negotiations have apparently been conducted by UE top officials which have culminated in an offer of 18½ cents per hour and is reported acceptable to said officials;
BE IT RESOLVED: That the GM City-Wide Strike Committee emphatically condemns this inferred “double crossing” of the UAW-GM workers by the UE leadership, and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That we call upon President R.J. Thomas and President Philip Murray to exert all necessary pressure to prevent ratification of this proposed settlement until GM meets the legitimate demands of the auto workers, and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That copies of this resolution be sent to R.J. Thomas, Philip Murray, George Addes, W. Reuther, and that all UE Locals in GM plants be urged to refuse to return to work until a settlement has been reached with the UAW.
 
Reuther’s Statement
After the above resolution was adopted, Walter Reuther, who had been invited to the Committee meeting to report on the union-corporation negotiations, devoted a considerable part of his speech to the treachery of the UE leadership. Reuther accused the Stalinists of demagogy because while they were calling for a “general strike” in words, they were attempting to undermine the GM strike in fact.
Although Reuther did not name them as Stalinists, he left no doubt in any delegate’s mind as to whom he was aiming at when he spoke in scathing terms of “these people who say one thing and do another.”
 




DETROIT, Feb. 8 – Negotiations between General Motors Corporation and the CIO United Auto Workers are continuing here, but they have slowed down almost to a crawl. Despite the presence in Detroit of “ace mediator” James F. Dewey, no real progress has been made toward settlement of the 80-day old General Motors strike.
Sent to Detroit as a special mediator by Secretary of Labor Lewis Schwellenbach, Dewey’s arrival January 29 was hailed by the local papers. The Detroit News of that date carried the front-page headline: “END OF GM STRIKE THIS WEEK NOW FORECAST.”
 
Committee Stands
Dewey’s record in "settling” the UAW’s sit-down strikes in Detroit and Flint in 1936 and 1937 and the strikes of tool and die workers at Chrysler, Dodge and Briggs plants in 1939 was praised in the News story. It was predicted that Dewey would “streamline” the negotiations by cutting down the size of the union negotiating committee.
But Dewey’s hope of high-pressuring the UAW into a speedy strike settlement was quickly blasted. The nine-man union negotiating committee, made up of representatives of GM locals from all parts of the country, insisted on taking part in all of the negotiations. Because of the presence of the full union negotiating committee, General Motors Corporation president, C.E. Wilson, refused to attend the sessions.
Wilson, who had absented himself from all the discussions between the union and the corporation since the first meetings last September, had promised Dewey that he would attend. But he withdrew his promise when the vigilance of the nine-man union committee prevented Dewey from following through on his plan to slash the negotiating committee to three or four top union officials.
 
GM’s Demands
From the first days of the renewed negotiations, the corporation has made it clear that it is sitting tight until the new government wage-price formula is announced. Only if assured of sufficiently high price increases, will the greedy GM officials, like the equally greedy U.S. Steel officials, consent to raise wages.
Meantime, the GM corporation’s negotiators are attempting to use Dewey’s presence at the negotiations to make some gains for the company. Their chief demand has been that the maintenance of membership provision, which was ordered into preceding contracts by the War Labor Board, be eliminated from the new union contract.
Like the Ford Motor Company and Chrysler Corporation, General Motors is also attempting to obtain “company security” against so-called wildcat strikes and “interruptions of production”.
 
“Company Security”
Agreements for an 18-cent an hour increase for the Ford workers and 18½ cents for the Chrysler workers were obtained because of the courageous fight put up by the General Motors strikers. However, these wage concessions have been tied in with dangerous contract provisions dealing with “company security.”
Considerable opposition to any such “company security” provision has developed among Ford workers and no final action has been taken on their contract as yet.
But most of the Chrysler locals have already accepted the Chrysler contract which contains this clause:
“The Union agrees that it will not oppose the discharge or discipline of anyone who instigates, leads, or induces another employee to take part in any unauthorized strike.”
 
Position of UAW Tops
No opposition has been expressed to this insidious clause in the Chrysler contract by any of the UAW-CIO top leaders nor by the Stalinists. In fact, the well-known Stalinist follower, C.G. Edelen, is a member of the Chrysler top bargaining committee.
But in 1937 every leading member of the UAW’s left wing, from Reuther on down to the Stalinists, joined in denouncing the reactionary UAW official, Homer Martin, for a very similar “company security” proposal.
Martin’s proposal at that time was directed against the General Motors workers who had been forced to strike in order to compel the corporation to live up to the contract signed only a few months before. Martin said:
“The International Union is determined to end, once and for all, unauthorized strikes. The International Union is ready and willing to accept full responsibility and will make every effort, not only to fix responsibility for unauthorized action on the part of members of the union, but will gladly recommend joint penalties by the union and the corporation.”
“COMPANY SECURITY” PROVISIONS ARE JUST AS DANGEROUS IN UNION CONTRACTS IN 1946 AS THEY WERE IN 1937.
 




In his Principles of Psychology the well-known American scientist William James, offers his readers some very sound advice on the way to build up good habits. There must be a close connection between thought and action, writes psychologist James. The person who is always filled with noble thoughts which he never translates into action is in danger of losing his “effort-making capacity,” he warns.
“Never let a fine glow of feeling evaporate without having some practical consequence” is the way William James puts it. We pass this advice on to the readers of The Militant. We think that it’s good psychology.
 
Militant Exposes Capitalist Crimes
Week after week, you read your copy of The Militant and are filled with righteous indignation at the stories that you find there – stories that are not found in the daily papers. You read of the latest mine disaster in McCoy, Virginia, in which 12 workers lost their lives and are outraged at the greed of the mine operators who value profits above human life.
And you read each week in Charles Jackson’s column of the brutal indignities that are inflicted on America’s Negro people – the latest being the Columbia, Tennessee, outrage.
When you read these weekly recitals of poverty and misery, suffering and oppression, you shake your head in anger and say: “Something should be done about these things!”
The Militant is doing its part! Each week we are now bringing tens of thousands of workers the story of capitalist cruelty and violence.
 
Do Your Part!
What about you? You have probably noticed that we are now conducting a Militant Sustaining Fund Drive. This is to help us continue and improve our work in spreading the message of revolutionary socialism. Each week during the drive, we are running a blank form at the bottom of page 6, which is headed “I WANT TO HELP!” This is included for the use of readers who want to help us in our work of exposing the capitalists and organizing the drive of the working people against them.
When the reading of the stories in this week’s Militant arouse your burning anger, don’t lay down the paper without taking steps to translate that fine feeling into action. Fill in the blank on page 6 and send it in to The Militant along with a contribution – 25 cents – 50 cents – $1 – more if you can afford it. It will be very well received and used by your fellow-workers on The Militant.
And it’s good psychology for you!
 




“Keep ’em rolling!” “Keep ’em flying!” “Keep ’em sailing!” with such appeals to patriotic sentiment, American industry tried to build up its womanpower during the war.
Millions of American women streamed into the nation’s war plants, but it is doubtful whether the patriotic appeals played a very big role in bringing them there. Much more important was the fact that war work offered the vast majority of these women workers their first opportunity for jobs at better wages.
American industrialists sang the praise of the woman worker – her ability to learn a skilled trade; her speed; her general adaptability. Opportunities were given women workers for almost every kind of trade-training. Women welders, women machinists, women sheet metal workers, women boilermakers found ready employment in shipyards, aviation plants, railroad yards, and machine shops.
But the days when the American industrialist wooed the woman worker are gone! American capitalism is back at its peacetime “normal.” The skilled woman worker has become “the forgotten woman.”
Since V-J Day, 4,000,000 women workers have been dropped from the country’s labor force, the Women’s Bureau of the Department of Labor reported recently. The most startling drop was revealed by the Ford Motor Company. In the peak year of 1943, women made up 22 per cent of the workers in the Ford plants throughout the country. In January of 1946, they were only 4 per cent.
Hundreds of thousands of skilled women workers are crowding the offices of the United States Employment Service looking for jobs.
Spokesmen of the USES say that the big majority of these women will not be rehired even when full production has been resumed. Many employers have instructed the USES not to send them any women workers. Orders which during the war specified women, now say “men only.”
To deal with this new situation, all of the agencies of capitalist propaganda have been set going to persuade women that, after all, they really belong in the kitchen – or, if they must work to support their families, they should go into a more “feminine” line of work, like low- paid domestic service.
Gone are the days when pictures of movie stars modeling the latest in war plant uniforms were prominently displayed in newspapers and magazines. Pick up any copy of Woman’s Home Companion, Good Housekeeping, Ladies’ Home Journal or McCall’s Magazine these days and you will find an article urging women to change from “drab wartime clothes” into something “frilly and feminine.”
And in the Food sections of these magazines, you will now look in vain for the “Quick Meals for Busy Women,” which used to fill these pages during the war. Now you will find that women are being urged “to end wartime hurry and glamorize your meals.” A multitude of recipes are given for complicated cakes and pastries; for fussy garnishes – “egg daisies,“ “radish roses,” “cucumber baskets,” etc.
But despite all of this advice as to the best ways to achieve a “home-made” glamor most women would prefer a factory job at high wages and a chance to buy their glamor – especially in the form of decent living standards which help maintain good health and natural beauty.
 




A news story in the April 22 St. Paul Dispatch reports the fact that we are now in the midst of the most sever diaper shortage in American history. The babies of the country are now short some 7,800,000 diapers a month and there is no relief in sight.
But this did not come as news to me. When I read the news item about the terrible diaper scarcity, I just thought wearily, “You’re telling me!”
Because the arrival of twin boys at my sister’s home on April 14 had meant that a number of us had to scurry around to find extra diapers and shirts and nightgowns and kimonas and what not! Anyone asking for two or three dozen diapers in a department store was met with the same kind of amazed stare as the person who comes in to buy 25 pairs of nylon hose.
After a few experiences like this, one learned to approach the diaper buying problem somewhat more intelligently. The thing to do was to go into the baby department in the store and order several other items of babies’ wearing apparel, then look the clerk in the eye and say firmly, “And I’d like to get a dozen diapers, please”.
Sometimes this would produce the desired effect. Looking around to see that no other customers were near, the clerk would reach under the counter, bring up a box of diapers, and say in the best bootleg style, “I think that I can let you have a dozen today”.
And so, by hook and by crook, we have gathered together some diapers for the twins. There aren’t enough of them for comfort and convenience. It will mean that there will have to be daily or twice-daily washes done in this household. But no one is going to let these babies suffer because the country is in such a mess!
They are only 11 days old. It isn’t their fault that shortages of diapers and various other consumer goods are plaguing the country.
They had no part in determining the official farm policy of the early New Deal whereby every third row of cotton was plowed under and farmers were paid not to raise cotton.
They are not responsible for the colossal destruction of World War II – for the blowing up of billions of dollars of wealth in the battles of the imperialists.
They have no connection with the present sabotage of the big industrialists, who are refusing to produce the things that people need unless they are guaranteed still greater profits.
The twins do not belong to the American Cotton Textile Institute, which hinted that the diaper scarcity could be ended if the Civilian Production Administration would grant them “price incentives”.
All of the poverty and greed, bloodshed and suffering on this capitalist-dominated planet is a part of a world they “never made.”
But we’re going to change it for them!
 




While I was visiting in St. Paul at Christmas time, my attention was attracted by a small item in the Pioneer Press about racial discrimination in Duluth. It appears that this northern Minnesota resort city had invited the United Nations Organization to establish its world headquarters there.
Knowing that the delegates from India have forced the UNO to turn down the bids of the South’s Jim Crow cities, the Duluth Chamber of Commerce had listed as a prime attraction that “racial discrimination is unknown in Duluth.” The newspaper story reported that this statement had been challenged by the St. Paul Branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
 
The Truth
I called Reverend Clarence Nelson, the President of the St. Paul Branch, to get “the news behind the news.” He told me that he had had some personal experiences with Duluth’s claimed hospitality to colored visitors. The telegram, which he sent to the Duluth Chamber of Commerce on December 22 tells the story:
“Surprised at your statement in cable to the UNO that ‘racial discrimination unknown in Duluth.’ Discrimination prevalent in large hotels there. Mrs. Nelson and I had our vacation ruined by being discriminated against in a hotel there in October. Reservations were cancelled at another hotel when management was informed that we were Negroes. Suggest that you find out the facts about discrimination in Duluth.”
All that remains to be said is that the Duluth trip was to have been a “second honeymoon” for the Nelsons.
And the hotel which denied them their rights was – the LINCOLN HOTEL!
 




I talked with Ernest Dillard, a UAW militant, on the Fleetwood picket line on one of the early days of the General Motors strike. There was an icy wind blowing down Detroit’s West End Avenue that November morning, and the pickets, marching back and forth in front of the plant’s gate, were stamping on the ground to keep their feet warm.
“My feet are just about as cold as Sloan’s heart,” Dillard exclaimed.
The pickets near him greeted his wisecrack about the GM boss with laughs of approval and shouts of “You said it, Ernie!” It wasn’t easy to carry on extended conversation on the picket line, so Ernest Dillard invited me to visit his home.
I got a chance to visit the Dillards last Sunday afternoon. We had a fine, two-hour talk, which was all the more pleasant because most of it took place in the Dillards’ friendly kitchen over an almost endless series of cups of coffee.
After 11 years of married life, the Dillards have become a real team – and attractive, 27-year-old Jessie Dillard is not a silent member of that team! The mother of two growing children, Marilyn, nine, and Ernest, Jr., eight, Mrs. Dillard has found time outside of her household duties to take an active part in trade union and political work.
In the course of the interview I learned the story of how the Alabama-born Dillards had come to Detroit and become active in the union movement. Both Jessie and Ernest Dillard were born and raised in Montgomery, Alabama. When I questioned them about their education, Ernest said with a smile, “Well, I guess that ‘education’ is what, they call what goes on in the colored schools in Alabama. But we got most of our education in the CIO here in Detroit – and it’s been a good education, too.”
When he was 12 years old, Ernest had to quit school and go to work. First as a dairy truck helper and later as a private chauffeur, he was paid $4 per week! In fact, this was all he was earning when he married 16-year old Jessie Dawson on Christmas Day, 1934. But after their marriage, Ernest did odd jobs on the side, and raised his income to $5 a week. Jessie got a job as a cook for $1.50 a week, and the Dillards managed to get along on their combined income until their first baby was born in 1936.
Then Ernest Dillard decided to go up North to get a job. He arrived in Detroit in June 1937 and went to work as a houseman at the Gotham Hotel for $14 a week. Most of his wages were sent back to Jessie in Montgomery. She needed all the money that Ernest could send, and more, because her second baby was born in November 1937.
It wasn’t until May of the following year that Ernest was able to arrange to have his family move to Detroit. But it wasn’t until 1942, when he went to work as a welder in the Fleetwood plant and received union wages, that he was able to provide his family with a semblance of decent living. That is why the Dillards are such union patriots!
“You can easily see,” Jessie Dillard said, at one stage of the conversation, “why the Southern bosses don’t like to have their $4-a-week Negro workers go up North and join unions and ‘get spoiled’.”
“Yeh, and these GM bosses would sure like to push us back to those starvation wages,” Ernest Dillard broke in. “But we’re going to fight this thing through.”
I pulled out a clipping from the Detroit News, which reported that 801 GM strikers had applied for relief and asked whether they had been receiving relief. “No, we’re luckier than the others,” answered Jessie Dillard. “Ernie has been getting a little unemployment compensation. He was laid off at Fleetwood after V-J Day, so he was eligible for it. $24 a week compensation isn’t much but it’s better than $10 a week relief.”
No, $24 a week isn’t much for a family of four in 1946! The Dillards, have had to cut their food allowance to less than half. Where they used to order two and a half quarts of milk a day, they now get only one quart. The whole quart goes to the children despite the fact that the doctor has ordered Jessie Dillard to drink more milk and eat more fresh fruits and vegetables.
And even the inadequate $24 a week compensation won’t last much longer. But the Dillards aren’t whining. They think that the union will win the strike and that Ernest will be back at Fleetwood, earning union wages.
This is the kind of faith that will move capitalist mountains!
 








BULLETIN
DETROIT, March 3 – General Motors Corporation, in a typical arrogantly-worded letter, today rejected the proposal of  the CIO United Auto Workers GM conference to arbitrate the remaining differences in the 103-day old strike.



*
DETROIT, March 2 – Meeting on the 101st day of the General Motors strike – the longest strike in automotive history – 250 delegates to the CIO United Auto Workers’ GM conference voted here yesterday to stay on strike until the corporation showed a disposition to meet the union’s just demands.
The final action of the delegates, who concluded their two- day conference this afternoon, was a proposal to the corporation, which has been deliberately stalling negotiations, to submit the remaining issues in dispute to arbitration.
Walter Reuther, UAW vice-president and director of the union’s GM department, opened the conference yesterday with a one- hour report on the progress of the negotiations with GM since the last conference. In a fiery speech which reflected the militancy of the delegates from 92 strike-bound GM plants, Reuther maintained that the negotiations had revealed a conscious plan on the part of the company to undermine the union.
Corporation hopes to place the union “in a helpless bargaining position” lay back of its stubborn insistence on removing important union security provisions from the contract, Reuther argued. Besides the wage demands, a number of important questions were still in dispute after weeks of union-corporation negotiations. Reuther listed maintenance of membership, transfers and promotions, vacation pay and local union grievances.
Reuther blasted the corporation lie that the union’s Top Negotiating Committee was holding out solely for the additional one cent an hour increase. But he lashed out at GM for offering only an 18½-cent increase in the face of the government Fact-Finding Board’s recommendation for 19½ cents.
Citing the problems which had been created for the GM negotiating committee by the “company security” clauses in the Ford and Chrysler contracts, Reuther contended that the “one at a time strategy” might have worked if there had been “proper coordination.”
 
Scores UE Agreement
But the separate agreement which the Stalinist-dominated CIO United Electrical Workers Union signed last month with the General Motors Corporation was “an act of treachery unparalleled in the history of the labor movement,” Reuther charged. Pointing out that the UE ranks had been betrayed by their leaders, he condemned the secret, underhanded deal which had been made with GM.
In order to rescue these workers from their present treacherous leaders, Reuther announced that he would ask the coming CIO convention for UAW jurisdiction over the electrical workers in auto plants. Wild applause greeted this announcement. (In the discussion which followed the report, not a single Stalinist delegate dared to defend the UE leadership.)
 
Proposes Program
At the conclusion of his report, Reuther made several proposals for a program to be followed if the corporation continues its arrogant opposition to the union’s just demands. They included: securing a two million dollar loan for aid to the strikers; a call upon CIO President Philip Murray to convene an emergency session of the CIO Executive Board; demonstrations in all cities with GM locals; an appeal to the whole labor movement to give full support to the GM strikers.
Delegate after delegate rose to support the position taken in the negotiations by Reuther and the Top Bargaining Committee. Not a single delegate favored the acceptance of General Motors’ terms. The vote to reject the Corporation’s proposals was unanimous.
When the report of Friday’s session of the delegates’ conference was delivered to GM by the union negotiators this morning, instead of making new offers, the GM officials launched a violent attack on the strike leaders. Immediately after the negotiations broke up, the GM officials called a hurried press conference. H.W. Anderson, General Motors vice-president, charged that a strike settlement was being impeded by “politics” within the UAW-CIO. No settlement would be reached, he said, until after the UAW convention, which opens in Atlantic City on March 23.
This and other company charges were taken up by Reuther in his report to this afternoon’s Conference session. He offered conclusive proof of the fact that every major decision in the GM strike had been approved not only by the UAW officers and the Top Negotiating Committee, but by the local unions as well. The delegates enthusiastically applauded Reuther’s statement that “This is not a leadership strike!”
Reuther predicted that GM would open up a widespread publicity offensive in an attempt to split the UAW and demoralize the GM strikers.
In order to demonstrate that the Corporation alone bears the responsibility for blocking a strike settlement, Reuther proposed the following countermeasure: that the Conference ask President Truman to appoint an arbitrator to rule on the remaining disputed points – the decision to be binding on both parties. If the Corporation agrees to this proposal, the union on its part agrees to return to work during the arbitration proceedings.
Doubt was expressed by several delegates as to the efficacy of this proposal but the motion passed with 85 per cent voting for it.
The possibility that the Corporation might turn down the arbitration proposal was also considered by the Conference. Should this occur, the Conference decided to put into effect an immediate program of mass pressure upon the General Motors Corporation – the program which had been proposed by Reuther and adopted at the Friday session.
 




Recently, the Woman’s Home Companion asked several thousands of its readers the question: “Now that the war has been over for some months, do you feel that we are on the road to permanent peace?” Eighty-two per cent answered, “No.”
Although I do not believe that she was approached by the Woman’s Home Companion investigator, I know one Detroit woman, who thinks the same way. She is sure that the United States will go to war again – and she is terrified at the thought!
I don’t even know her name. Ours was just a grocery store acquaintanceship. I met her one busy Saturday afternoon, after I had rescued her little boy from the grocery store window, where he was about to be snowed under by the piles of apples and oranges with which he had been playing. The mother thanked me gratefully and then turned to the four-year-old with that mixture of pride and irritation, which is characteristic of the parents of small children.
But her “Donald, you’re a bad boy,” didn’t bother Donald at all. He started for the window again, thinking that he would give the apples and oranges another try.
“I know that I spoil him,” she said to me apologetically when we were outside, “and I should know better too because I’ve brought up three other boys.” I was almost speechless with admiration for a woman, who could cope with the problem of four “Donalds.”
While I was trying to find words to express my admiration, she spoke again, And this time, there was a little catch in her voice. “Since Gordon died, I haven’t, been able to bring myself to punish Donald. When he was little, Gordon looked just like Donald does now – the same blue eyes and red hair, even the same dimple in his chin.” She pulled Donald’s curly head against her side in a gesture of affection – and sorrow.
I murmured a few words of sympathy, but the mother scarcely listened. She wanted to talk about her dead boy. The words came pouring out as if they had been dammed up for a long time,” Gordon was just 18. That’s why it’s so hard to believe that he’s dead. It’s almost a year now since we had the telegram from the War Department that he had been killed in action in Germany, but I still can’t believe that he’s really dead – that he’ll never come home again.”
* * *
Her voice broke then and we walked along in silence for a little while. When she spoke again, there was a note of anger in her voice. “It isn’t right for them to take a young boy like Gordon and give him only 17 weeks of training and then send him out to be shot. He just didn’t have a chance at all!”
All this came in a rush of anger. She paused a moment to catch her breath and then said in a meditative tone, “And I always took such good care of my boys. We never had much money, but they always went to a good baby doctor and had all their shots. Yes, you can save your boy from whooping cough but not from war!” She shook her head back and forth in a kind of hopeless anger, “It’s terrible, it’s terrible!”
I agreed with her that it was terrible and completely unjust! This seemed to give her the courage to go on. “And there’s another war coming. I’m half crazy worrying about it – when it will come and whether they’ll take my other boys, Robert is 14 and Peter is 16, so if the war comes in five or ten years, they’re sure to go. And, if the war holds off for fifteen years, they’d take all three – even the little one – even my baby!”
We had reached her home by then and were standing on the sidewalk outside talking. Donald was restless and wanted to go inside, so it was impossible to prolong the conversation. But I did say a few things about our fight against war and our hope for a socialist world of peace and brotherhood. I wanted to comfort her a little – to give her some hope for the future.
Otherwise, this world is a pretty terrifying place for the mother of three growing boys!
 




DETROIT, Mar. 9 – The General Motors strike has been turned into a lockout! A formal charge that the billion dollar GM Corporation is engaged in a lockout to force an ending of the 109-day walkout was filed here March 7 with the National Labor Relations Board by the CIO United Auto Workers.
The same charge against the GM Corporation was made in a statement issued on the preceding day by UAW officers, R.J. Thomas, President; George Addes, Secretary-Treasurer; and Walter Reuther, Vice-president. An opening gun in the UAW’s campaign for a national program of mass pressure against GM, the statement was “an appeal to all organized labor and all American citizens who believe in justice to come quickly and generously to the aid of the GM workers.”
The union action followed a rapid series of moves and counter-moves, charges and countercharges, which marked the 15th week of the GM strike.
 
GM’s Arrogant Reply
On March 3, GM flatly rejected the UAW’s offer to arbitrate the remaining issues in dispute. This offer had been authorized by the 250 UAW delegates at the March 2 GM Conference. Earlier in the Conference, the delegates had turned down the Corporation’s “final” offer because it failed to meet the standards set up by the President’s Fact-Finding Board for a 19½ cents an hour wage increase and reinstatement of the old contract..
In the Corporation’s arrogant rejection of the union’s proposal, reference was made to “the novel economic and social theories which your union advanced at the beginning of this dispute.” The GM strikers, with Reuther as their spokesman, had raised the demand that they be allowed to examine the company’s books to determine whether GM was able to pay wage increases out of profits without raising prices.
Attempting to drive a wedge between the GM strikers and the union leadership, the Corporation statement hinted that union politics was delaying a strike settlement and that the differences between the union and the company were slight. The open charge was made that Conference delegates had not given the company proposals the full and detailed consideration and discussion they deserved.” The 1,000 word GM statement concluded with a proposal that the NLRB “conduct a secret vote among our employees to determine whether they wish to return to work under an agreement embodying our latest offers.”
 
Union Counter-Proposal
Picking up the company challenge, the union made the following counter-proposal on March 4:
“We accept your proposition that a secret vote among the membership in GM plants be conducted by the NLRB ... provided that the question is put as follows,
“Do you favor returning to work and ending the current dispute on the basis of the Corporation’s offer of 18½ cents an hour increase and its latest proposals on basic contract matters, or
“Do you favor returning to work on the basis of the corporation’s 18½ cents wage increase offer and its latest proposals on basic contract matters with the understanding that all issues still in dispute shall be submitted to arbitration by the President of the United States?”
Replying to Corporation charge that the differences between the union and company positions were slight, the UAW statement listed the questions in dispute in addition to the wage increase. These included elimination of speedup and piece-work systems in 15 plants: correction of health and safety hazards in 41 plants; equal pay for equal work for women in 15 plants; general questions for all GM plants on promotions and transfers; maintenance of membership; vacation pay, etc.
 
Again GM Says “No”
General Motors’ answer to the UAW vote plan was a swift and unequivocal “NO!” “Who would not vote to accept the increased wages and other favorable proposals made by the company if they could still retain the opportunity for further gain by referring to an arbitrator all additional union demands which have not been fully granted by the company?” the March 6 Corporation letter to the union angrily asked.
UAW-GM negotiating sessions continue in Detroit under James Dewey, special Federal mediator, but they are almost at a stalemate. In a recent press conference, GM Vice-president Harry W. Anderson was quoted as predicting that the strike would not be settled until after the UAW convention which opens in Atlantic City on March 28. Concern of the UAW’s top officers over their union jobs would prevent an immediate strike settlement, according to Anderson.
 
GM Attacks Reuther
UAW members know that this Corporation attack is directed against Walter Reuther, whose progressive leadership of the GM strike has aroused the fierce hatred of the GM officials. The union’s Top Negotiating Committee exposed GM’s lies in a blast against the Corporation on March 6.
“The General Motors strike is being unnecessarily prolonged because the General Motors Corporation is trying to interfere in the internal affairs of the UAW-CIO. Such interference is part of the Corporation’s long- range program of fighting the economic policies advanced by the union of increasing wages without Increasing prices,” the Committee’s statement opens.
Other sections of the statement follow:
“General Motors doesn’t want the strike to be settled until after the UAW-CIO convention, March 23–31.
GM’s Motives
“General Motors wants to use the strike as a political weapon to influence convention decisions and to turn the union membership against its leadership in order to defeat the higher purchasing power policies which the union has so effectively advanced since V-J Day.
“The Corporation recognizes that the UAW-CIO and its leadership have put up the strongest fight of any group in the nation to maintain purchasing power and hold the price line. They know that the price line has been held as well as it has largely as a result of the UAW’s fight ...
“In their greed for profits and power and in their contempt for the national welfare, the people who control General Motors abhor any kind of economic thinking which threatens to reduce to respectable size the outrageous profits they had anticipated by plundering the huge consumer demand built up during the war years ...
“Delegates to the UAW convention will appraise the actions of its officers and their policies during this period without regard to the wishes or activities of the General Motors Corporation. If the General Motors strike is still in effect at that time, the delegates will know where to put the blame. They will condemn, as we do now, the shabby ethics and morals of a Corporation that tries to play politics in the union of its employees.”
 
Defense of Reuther
Considerably importance is being attached to the Top Negotiating Committee’s spirited defense of the strike leadership – in actuality, a defense of Reuther. The nine members of this Committee represent UAW Districts in all parts of the country and are in close touch with the rank-and-file GM strikers.
From another source comes further proof that the majority of GM workers have faith in the UAW strike leaders. Edwin Lahey of the Detroit Free Press, writing from Flint, where he had talked to a large number of GM strikers, says in a March 9 article, “Whether you like it or not, it appears that the GM executives who hoped that a long strike would destroy Walter Reuther have outsmarted themselves in this fight.” He admits that the morale of Flint’s 40,000 GM strikers is still very high and that they have faith in their union and in its strike leaders.
 
Reuther for President
A group of 17 GM local union presidents in the Michigan area have called a “Reuther for President Committee” meeting for Sunday, March 17, in Pontiac. Their action follows the lead of Detroit’s Chrysler Local 490, which on March 8 announced that it is “drafting” Walter Reuther for the UAW presidency. William Jenkins, Local 490 President, said, “Reuther has demonstrated his able leadership not only in the General Motors strike but also on countless other occasions.”
 
Truman’s Policy
Meantime, President Truman continues his do-nothing policy toward the 175,000 GM strikers, who have now gone through the longest strike in auto history. Despite the fact that the union accepted his Fact-Finding Board’s proposals while GM arrogantly turned them down, Truman has not lifted a finger to bring the Corporation to terms.
The Fact-Finding Board’s proposal of 19½ cents represented a chiseling down of the UAW’s just demand for a 30 per cent increase. The 19½ cent increase – approximately 17 per cent – is even considerably lower than the recommendation of the Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion.
In a report issued a few months ago, economists of this government agency demonstrated that industry would be able to raise wages 24 per cent after taxes without raising prices. But no government official or agency has taken any .effective action toward giving the GM workers even a part of their just demand.
In the UAW’s March 8 appeal for aid to the GM strikers, the road to victory for the GM strike was pointed out – the path of working-class solidarity.
“The morale of the GM workers is high and their determination is great. The moral and financial support they will receive from others so that their wives and children do not suffer will make their ultimate victory certain. They will not surrender!”
 




Editor:
If any conscious Minnesota trade unionist was ever tempted to recommend a coalition between the democratic and Farmer-Labor parties as a solution to the workers’ political problems, he was certainly cured of this temptation if he attended the Olson Memorial Banquet on June 17th. The Banquet held in honor of Minnesota’s famous Farmer-Labor governor, Floyd B. Olson who died in 1936, was sponsored by the Railroad Brotherhoods, the Farmer-Labor Association, a large number of AFL and CIO – and the Democratic Party. Two thousand workers attended the Minneapolis banquet and other thousands of workers attended similar banquets in other parts of the state.
The Democratic program – or lack of program – prevailed in the speeches made at the banquets. No proposal was made for a way out for the workers from the danger of involvement in another bloody war. Rather, each speaker – with the exception of Senator Burton K. Wheeler – emphasized his faith in Roosevelt’s program for keeping us out of war. The only anti-Roosevelt, anti-war speech was made by farmer liberal, Senator Wheeler. However, even his mild attacks on the warmongers were wildly applauded by the workers who heard him. His very timid hint at the end of his speech that “a new and great liberal anti-war party will be created unless they (the Republican and Democratic parties) bind themselves in unmistakable terms to a program of keeping the U.S. out of the European war” brought the meeting to its feet.
It should be recorded that the Stalinist stooge, Elmer Benson, also criticized the Administration’s war position and pleaded for a stand by Farmer-Laborites against the growing war hysteria. Although his speech was roundly applauded, very few Farmer-Laborites, except the Stalinists, place any confidence in former Governor Benson as a consistent anti-war fighter. It is no secret to Minnesota workers that Elmer Benson is and was a Stalinist captive. Before the recent change in the Communist Party line, he was whooping it up for collective security and pleading with Roosevelt to place an embargo on the aggressors, etc., etc. If the Stalinists return to this position, Benson will again make an emotional demand for faith in our great leader, F.D.R.
No, there was no speaker at the Olson Banquet whom the workers could trust as a leader in the fight against war. Vince Day, John Devaney, Dewey Johnson, John McDonough, and even John Boscoe, the President of the Minneapolis Central Labor Union, all swore their allegiance to President Roosevelt, the “flag and the country for which it stands.” Old-line Farmer-Laborites shook their heads and said that they had never seen such a chauvinistic display at a Farmer-Labor gathering.
It is very clear that the coalition ticket of Democrats and Farmer-Laborites planned for this fall’s state election has already wiped out the traditional anti-war position of the Farmer-Labor movement, at least on the part of the present leaders of this movement. Rank and file delegates from the unions to the coming State Convention of the Farmer-Labor Party must try to write a bold, anti-war, anti-Roosevelt platform. If this fails, Minnesota workers will turn away from the Democratic-Farmer-Labor pro-war ticket this fall. Advanced workers must be on guard to. keep this wave of anti-war feeling of disillusioned Farmer-Laborites away from the equally pro-war Republican Party and on the path of independent working-class action.



 


Grace Carlson
St. Paul, Minn.



 




A large number of letters have come in to Minnesota, from comrades and friends throughout the country, inquiring about the secret of our success in the recent election campaign. (The Socialist Worker Party, listed on the ballot as the “Trotskyist Anti-war Party,” received 8,761 votes – more than the combined totals of the Socialist and Communist Parties.) This secret is not hard to find. The Bolshevik character of the Minnesota Party determined the success of the campaign. Trained and disciplined ranks, led by workers with years of devotion and sacrifice for the revolutionary movement in their records, carried through the campaign in an efficient, organized manner.
There is no doubt that my candidacy at the time had “news value.” In Minnesota, where so many hundreds of Farmer-Laborites and liberals have been fired in the past two years by the reactionary Stassen machine, when a state employee voluntarily resigns from a job, she makes news. There is something of the “‘man bites dog” element in such a story. The campaign for signatures opened less than two weeks after my resignation from the State Department of Education, and we were thus able to “cash in” on the publicity attendant upon the resignation.
 
Whole Party Took Part
The first big task, the gathering of the signatures necessary to place our Party on the ballot, was done by Sunday morning mobilizations of St. Paul and Minneapolis comrades for house-to-house canvassing. A big majority of the Twin City membership took part in the mobilizations; those unable to do so gathered signatures in other ways. With less than a month allowed by Minnesota law for the work of placing a minority party candidate on the ballot, we filed 2,600 signatures in the Secretary of State’s office on October 5 – 600 more than the law required.
All of the comrades deserve credit for their efforts in this part of the campaign, the of the older comrades illustrates how seriously this work was regarded. This was a woman comrade who had recently gone through a serious surgical operation. Because of her frail health and age she would certainly have been excused from the work of house-to-house canvassing. She refused to be excused, however, and brought over 40 signatures in to headquarters. This is the type of Bolshevik courage which, conquering pain and fear, carried the Marxist program to Minnesota workers. A comrade in the Carpenters Union gathered a large number of signatures from workers on the job. (Even in Bill Hutcheson’s union, workers will support a militant, working-class program, brought to them by one of their own proven militants.) A waitress gathered signatures from her customers as did a butcher in a retail meat market.
 
Literature Distribution
The distribution of the 5,000 campaign leaflets and the 10,000 copies of the special Minnesota Edition of the Appeal was carried out in the same enthusiastic way. C. Johnson, the Campaign Manager, was in charge of this phase of the work. The piles of literature melted like snow as the comrades, under his direction, carried the Trotskyist election literature into working-class wards of the two cities. Bundles of Appeals were also sent to Duluth, St. Cloud and other centers for distribution. Here again, great ingenuity was shown.
Two comrades engaged in travelling work always carried a pile of leaflets with them and released a few dozen in every small town along their route. They reported that most of these leaflets were picked up and read, since residents of small Minnesota towns are not flooded with campaign leaflets, advertisements, etc. as are city people.
One of the young comrades on the University of Minnesota campus pressed our campaign literature on everyone who wore a Thomas-Krueger button. He even persuaded some of these S.P. sympathizers of the errors of their ways and made Trotskyists out of them before the end of the campaign.
 
Radio Broadcasts
The three fifteen-minute radio speeches, given on consecutive Monday nights, were publicized by paid advertisements in the capitalist as well as the labor and Negro press. Moreover 2,000 postcards were sent out, advertising the speeches. In addition, each piece of campaign literature carried a stamped message giving the time and radio station over which the speeches could be heard. We also obtained some free publicity from the press in the inclusion of our candidate’s name on the “campaign clock” which listed the political radio speeches of each day.
I have the clipping from the October 28 issue of the St. Paul Dispatch before me and see the following line-up of political speeches for that day:



9:00 p.m.


President Roosevelt from New York City KSTP




strong>9:30 p.m.


Wendell Willkie from Louisville WCCO.




strong>10:00 p.m.


Dr. Grace Carlson, Trotskyist Anti-war Party Candidate for U.S. Senator WLOL.




strong>10:15 p.m.


Governor Stassen for Willkie WTCN



Many comrades arranged radio parties at their homes so that friends might hear and discuss these speeches. One comrade, working on a night shift in a factory, brought a radio to the lunch room so that the workers could hear one of the speeches during their lunch period. He reported that this speech which consisted in the main of long quotations from the Manifesto of the Fourth International was very well received.
The diligent work of the Forum, Finance, Education and Social committees of the Twin City branches in their own respective fields bore fruit for the Party in numerous successful election rallies, meetings and socials, attended by new as well as old sympathizers of the Party.
 
Trotskyist Activity Known
Although large masses of workers in outlying parts of the state as well as farmers in rural areas did not hear the speeches or receive the literature, nevertheless an impressive vote was recorded for the Party in these areas.
The explanation of this phenomena is that these workers and farmers wanted to express their support of a Trotskyist program. Because of the activities of the Trotskyist leadership of the progressive Minneapolis labor movement during the past few years, the word “Trotskyist” stands for militant working-class action to thousands of Minnesota workers who have never read any Trotskyist literature.
 
Tribute to Trotsky
The recent tragic death of Leon Trotsky at the hands of Stalin’s G.P.U. agent dramatized the program of the Fourth International for other thousands of’ workers and farmers in Minnesota and throughout the United States. I am very sure that many hundreds of votes were cast for me as the Trotskyist candidate in order to do honor to the murdered hero who symbolizes for the oppressed the revolutionary struggle against the capitalist system of exploitation.
In this election campaign, the first in this country in which the name “Trotskyist” appeared on a ballot, the ranks of the Minnesota Party and the masses to which the Party appealed for support responded enthusiastically. To have been the instrument through which support for the program of the Fourth International was recorded is a source of great personal satisfaction for me.
 







(The author of this authoritative article on the ravages of tuberculosis among the workers is now starting a cross-country speaking tour. Among the subjects on which she will speak in 35 cities will be The Right To Life, the workers’ struggle for health and happiness. Watch the Appeal for news of when Comrade Carlson will speak in your city.)



* * *
In their fight against low wages and bad working conditions, the trade unions are also fighting disease. Take, as one example. tuberculosis which kills 64,000 people in the United States annually. Three-fifths of these deaths occur among individuals from 15 to 45 years of age. Tuberculosis is caused by germs which are passed from sick to healthy people who in turn become sick from tuberculosis and infect others. Nevertheless, the individual who is in a run-down condition is more likely to break down from tuberculosis than the individual who has strong resistance.
Strong bodily resistance is produced by good food, warm clothing, decent living conditions, adequate rest and freedom from worry. No trade union can feel that its wage scales are high enough so that its members can purchase all of these requisites for strong bodily resistance to disease. A good start has been made, however, and the fight must go on.
Evidence that poverty breeds tuberculosis has been accumulated by the National Tuberculosis Association. In a recent study, it was shown that nine unskilled workers died from tuberculosis to every professional or business man who died of this disease. The death rate from tuberculosis among skilled workers as well as office workers is three times as high as the rate for professional and business men. Tuberculosis is more common among poorly paid workers than among those who are well paid. Although a few occupations like mining, stone-cutting and grinding are a definite hazard for tuberculosis, the chief influence of occupation on tuberculosis is the wage level and the standard of living that goes with it.
Another study shows that the death rate from tuberculosis is five times as high among families paying $10 to $20 per month rent than among families paying $55 and more per month. Poverty itself does not cause tuberculosis (only the tuberculosis germ can do that), but poor housing and the subsequent crowding make it easier for the germ to spread from person to person.
 
Negroes Pay This Price of Poverty
Because the Negroes are the most poorly paid, poorly housed and altogether most exploited section of the population, they suffer greatly from this terrible scourge of the poor. Deaths from tuberculosis among Negroes are about three times as many as among whites. As a matter of fact, the death rate from tuberculosis among Negroes today is the same as it was among whites in 1910. It is clearly apparent that the progress of medical science, in cutting down the death rate from tuberculosis, has not aided the Negroes as it has the whites. This in a land of “equality”!
Tuberculosis, could be wiped out if the conditions of poverty which breed tuberculosis could be eliminated and if every person with an active case of tuberculosis could be placed in a sanatorium for the “cure”. The germs that cause tuberculosis grow in the lung of the person who has the disease. These germs are very small so that thousands may be present in a tiny drop of sputum. They are passed from individual to individual by direct or indirect contact.
When tuberculosis germs attack the body, certain natural forces of the body fight back. These forces are called “resistance.” Strong resistance withstands the attack of a few tuberculosis germs and the body may remain well. However, even strong resistance will not withstand the attack of many tuberculosis germs. Weak resistance, on the other hand, will give way to the attack of even a few tuberculosis germs and if many tuberculosis germs attack the body, a complete breakdown from tuberculosis is almost sure to follow.
 
Why Workers Don’t Get Cured
Because so many workers do break down with tuberculosis because of the conditions of poverty under which workers live, the individual worker should realize that he has probably been exposed to the disease from his many contacts with fellow workers. If a case of tuberculosis is discovered in an early stage, it is not difficult to cure the patient and restore him to productive life. It is very tragic that over 90 per cent of the patients admitted to the sanatoria of the country are in far advanced stages of the disease.
Anyone who is familiar with the problems of the working man can understand why a man continues at work for weeks and months after he shows signs of illness before he seeks medical advice and is sent to a sanatorium. Even where he is in a union, there is little sick leave allowed to the worker by his boss. Long periods of illness for the breadwinner of the family mean hunger, cold, worry, and undernourishment for the wife and children of the worker. Small wonder, then, that workers struggle along at their heavy jobs for long periods with the burden of coughing, indigestion, pain in the chest and other symptoms of tuberculosis rather than risk unemployment.
Tuberculosis will not be conquered until poverty is abolished from the face of the earth. Even medical science cannot keep patients well if they must return to the terrible conditions of hunger, cold and over-crowding which prevail among large sections of the workers in the population.
 
War Program Eats Up Health Funds
In many parts of the country, especially in the south, the conditions for the treatment of the tuberculous are extremely bad. The sanatoria are crowded to the doors, the technical equipment for the modern treatment of tuberculosis. (collapse therapy) is lacking, out-patient clinics do not exist. However, even when tuberculosis patients are treated in well-equipped, modern sanatoria they must be discharged into a world of poverty and unemployment. The meager rations of relief budgets are not adequate to keep them in good physical condition.
Many patients become disgusted with the terrible life on relief and return to jobs which are too heavy for the person with an “arrested” case of tuberculosis. Large numbers of patients break down again because of these conditions and must return to the sanatorium—many times to die.
American capitalism pays lip-service to the fight against tuberculosis in the yearly Christmas seal campaign. Throughout the rest of the year the “one-third of the nation” continues its losing fight against tuberculosis, the great scourge of the poor. Moreover, American capitalism is finding it necessary to withdraw benefits from the workers rather than to add to a social security program. Public health officials will be instructed to concern themselves primarily with the health of the prospective conscripts. Thus money allotted for public health work will be turned over to the armament program.
Today the fight for health, for decent living conditions, for even a minimum of social security becomes a fight against the basic structure of American capitalism itself. There is no longer a “middle way”. The worker must take a stand either for the preservation of capitalism which denies workers and their families the necessities of life, or he must accept the revolutionary socialist position and work for the establishment of a society of peace and plenty.
 




PHILADELPHIA, Feb. 10. – Advertised as the “City of Brotherly Love,” Philadelphia is known among Negro workers as one of the most reactionary and vicious of the Northern cities in the treatment of its Negro citizens.
A number of Negro workers, attending yesterday’s discussion on Negroes and the War, nodded their agreement to my expression on our party’s position that the oppression of the Negro people will not end until the capitalist system of exploitation is abolished through united action of white and colored workers.
The same agreement was expressed by Negro workers of the Newark audience in the meeting held there the previous Sunday. Over half of the questions directed at me in Newark concerned the question of Jim Crowism in the armed forces of the United States. Our program for trade union control of military training was easily understood and apparently readily accepted by the Negro questioners.
The good meetings held in Trenton, Allentown, Reading and Quakertown are testimonials to the patient, devoted and self-sacrificing work of true Bolsheviks. Comrades in these places cannot always see the results of their work as can those in larger centers. The success of the meetings, the general interest and enthusiasm shown by those present, demonstrated that the work of weekly distribution of The Militant, regular and sustained contact work, etc. has won support for the program of Trotskyism among new and wider sections of the working class in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
 




NEW YORK, Feb. 4 – I am sure that everyone who attended the Banquet given by Local New York on Feb. 1 at Germania Hall agreed that it was a huge success. The hall and the tables were beautifully decorated; a fine crowd of 125 comrades and friends were in attendance; last, but not least, the collection taken up by Comrade W. Warde for refugee aid was over $250.
Felix Morrow acted as toastmaster. Farrell Dobbs, Albert Goldman, Henry Martin, Larry Williams and I were on the speaking program. It was interesting to note that the speeches all dealt with various phases of Party work – the distribution of the Militant, trade union work in New York, recruiting in New York and throughout the country, etc. These practical, down-to-the-earth speeches were listened to by the comrades and friends with the greatest interest. A further indication of the wonderful change in the New York Party.
In my speech at the Banquet, I took occasion to thank the New York comrades in the name of the Minnesota Party, since I understood very well that the Banquet – formally in my honor – was intended to honor the Minnesota comrades for the good work done in the election campaign.
As I leave New York, I want to thank all of the New York comrades again for the very pleasant time that I had during my stay in the “Big City.”
 




PITTSBURGH – The most, interesting news of the week on my tour comes from two cities where until the other day our party had nothing – Pittsburgh and Baltimore.
Today, however, the Socialist Workers Party is definitely on the political map in Pittsburgh. My meeting here was the only public commemoration of the anniversary of Lenin’s death. Twenty-nine workers attended the open meeting, and indicated by their interested questions and participation in the discussion a real interest in the Trotskyist program. Subscriptions for The Militant were obtained and other Trotskyist literature was sold, so we can be confident that these workers intend to study our program. There is real promise of a rapid growth of our party in this great steel center.
Baltimore is another important steel center. It is also becoming a center in the aviation industry. The “open shop” tradition of Baltimore is breaking down as the SWOC and the UAW meet with great success in their organizing drives.
The Baltimore branch of the party was organized a short time ago. Its first task, successfully achieved, was to get all of the members into basic industry and the unions of these industries. We may look forward with confidence to other achievements, and soon, by the Baltimore branch.
 




When 8,761 workers and farmers in Minnesota record their support of the Trotskyist program by voting for the Trotskyist candidate for U.S. Senator, and when this represents 6,050 more votes than the Stalinist candidate for president received, that is, in the words of the National Committee of the Communist Party, “something to think about.”
If a worker does think seriously about the meaning of these election returns, he can come to only one conclusion, namely that the advanced workers and farmers of Minnesota, who have had a long acquaintance with Trotskyists, realize that the Trotskyists and not the Stalinists stand for militant working class action.
 
Workers Remember Stalinist Crimes
For the Minnesota workers and farmers have had a long acquaintance with Stalinism too. They recall vividly the criminal and irresponsible attacks made by the Stalinist officials on the valiant leaders of the truck drivers strikes of 1934. They haven’t forgotten the adventuristic Stalinist criticism made against the Trotskyism leaders for “accepting the support” of the Farmer-Labor Governor Floyd Olson in the victorious settlement of the strikes. As late as October 1934, the Communist Party published a 58-page pamphlet entitled, Permanent Counter-Revolution: The Role of the Trotskyites in the Minneapolis Strikes, and written by two Stalinist big-shots, William F. Dunne and Morris Childs. Despite the plain evidence of the success of the great strikes, and the growth of the General Drivers Union on the distributed pamphlet sought, to prove that the firm foundation of that Trotskyists had sold out the strikes. Try and find a copy of that absurd pamphlet in a Stalinist bookshop now! The growth of Minneapolis into the best-organized city of its size in the country, thanks to the drivers’ victories, has made that pamphlet a curio worth having. And we have copies that any interested worker can see.
Minnesota workers and farmers also have long night turned from a policy of attacking Farmer-Laborites to the “Popular Front” policy of capturing the Farmer-Labor Party and pushing it far to the right. The small-town banker, Elmer Benson, who was elected Governor in 1936, was an easy stooge for the Stalinists, and turned over all patronage to the C.P. machine. Minnesota Farmer-Laborites remember very well the bitterness felt by those rank and filers who had fought in the ranks of the F-LP for years to see a group of C.P. carpet baggers come in to the state, take over their Party by control of state jobs and turn it into an appendage to Roosevelt’s machine.
 
Stalinists Wrecked Farmer-Labor Party
Farmer-Labor workers don’t forget that the many attempts to “broaden” the Farmer-Labor Party into a Popular Front by coalition with the Democrats and “liberal” Republicans were Stalinist-engineered. These reactionary proposals were repudiated lime and again by the advanced workers in the trade unions affiliated with the F-LP.
Because of the succession of C.P.-inspired outrages, Benson was defeated in the 1938 election. The Socialist Workers Party gave critical support to Benson in the election against the Republican Stassen. In an Open Letter to Governor Benson, presented to him during the campaign, we warned that he could not rally the workers and farmers unless he made “a sharp break with the Democratic machine nationally” and “a clear ideological break with Roosevelt’s most vociferous supporters, the most determined pro-war group in the country today, the Communist Party.”
With the signing of the Nazi-Soviet pact in 1939, the Communist Party again changed its line, and it now tries to use for the new line the remnants of the Farmer-Labor party which survived after the disastrous defeat of 1938. And with no explanation of the somersault.
Nor can the Communist Party of Minnesota erase from its record its shameful, union-smashing campaigns of 1937 directed against the organised machinists, hospital workers and others in AFL unions. Working in the name of the CIO, Bill Mauseth and other Stalinist leaders succeeded in reducing strong and powerful AFL unions into weak “paper” organizations in the Stalinist-dominated CIO movement in Minnesota. This whole program of union disruption was carried on with the fullest cooperation of the Stalinist-controlled Governor’s office. The bona fide CIO national movement suffered as a result. Despite all efforts of the Minneapolis union leadership – who are pro-industrial union and recognize the progressive and major role of the CIO nationally – many workers identify the national CIO with the caricature concocted by the Stalinists in Minnesota.
The thinking worker can therefore easily understand that advanced workers and farmers of Minnesota responded eagerly to the proletarian, revolutionary program of the Socialist Workers Party in the 1940 election campaign.
 
The Trotskyist Record Is Clear
For, unlike the Stalinists, the Trotskyists have a clear record of unswerving support of the Marxist method of struggle. The Marxist method is the method of support of all of the day-to-day struggles of the workers against the bosses, and of militant struggle within the Farmer-Labor Party to draw the workers further along the road of independent working-class action.
The militant activity of the Trotskyists in the great strike struggles of 1934, in the demonstrations and struggles of the unemployed and WPA workers during the past six years, in the campaigns of the trade unionists and organized farmers of the Farmer-Labor Party against the reactionary Republican and Democratic machines, is well known.
The militancy and working class solidarity demonstrated by the Trotskyists of Minnesota have won them the respect of the vast majority of the organized workers of Minnesota and the hatred of the capitalists and their government. The ranks of the Trotskyists of Minnesota number many class-struggle fighters who have been imprisoned because of their activities iu behalf of trade union and unemployed workers.
 
The 1940 Election Campaign
This is the stainless record of the Trotskyists in Minnesota, and none of the smearing attempts of the Stalinists could blacken it in the eyes of the workers and farmers of Minnesota. We appeared on the ballot as the “Trotskyist Anti-War Party.”
We were careful in all of the speeches, leaflets and radio propaganda of the campaign to make clear that our attacks on the Communist Party were attacks of revolutionists against reformists. One of the planks in our platform called for “Defense Of the Soviet Union Against Imperialism and Stalinism.”
We appealed to the Communist Party workers in our election literature to “restudy Stalinism in the light of the writings of Marx and Lenin.” We expressed confidence that such a study would lead them to a break with the Stalinist Party and unity with the Bolshevik program of the Socialist Workers Party.
In sections of the state, particularly among the iron miners on the Range, there are a large number of former C.P. members who have for years supported the Russian Revolution. Impressive totals for the Trotskyist candidate were recorded in those sections.
A heavy registration of votes for Trotskyism were also recorded in those areas of the state in which there are industrial workers, such as the packinghouse workers, timber workers, drivers, miners, etc. The word “Trotskyist” stands for militant working-class action to these workers, who have understood the role of the Trotskyists in the militant Minneapolis labor movement.
The largest vote for the Trotskyist candidate came from the three industrial centers of Minneapolis, St. Paul and Duluth. In Minneapolis and St. Paul alone, our Party received a larger vote than the C.P. obtained in the entire state.
It is a great gratification to note how deeply the ideas of Trotskyism have penetrated among the Minnesota masses. Undoubtedly the recent tragic death of Leon Trotsky at the hands of Stalin’s agent dramatized the program of the Fourth International for thousands of workers and farmers in Minnesota as well as through the nation. I am very sure that many hundreds of votes were cast for me as the Trotskyist candidate in order to do honor to the murdered hero who symbolizes for the oppressed the revolutionary struggle against the capitalist system of exploitation.
 




MEMPHIS, Tennessee, Feb. 22 – I suppose that every white radical who visits the South for the first time is shocked and enraged by the open cruelties of the Jim Crow system of the Southern Bourbons. That all the colored citizens of the South are herded into Jim Crow restaurants, street cars, waiting rooms, etc., should call forth apologies from Southern Senators rather than their present frenzied demands – they are louder than all others – for support of a war to save this system of “democracy.”
There are encouraging signs of change, however. The CIO has penetrated into the South among the steel and rubber workers, the agricultural and cannery workers and others, and has brought Negro and white workers together into a joint struggle for the betterment of their conditions. There is no doubt that this is uphill work. Coupled with the terror against unions. Southern white workers, burdened with the prejudices of generations, do not readily accept a program for joint action with colored workers. The meeting of white and colored workers held under our party’s auspices in Memphis last night was, therefore, all the more encouraging. A courageous Negro woman gave us the use of her home for the meeting. It takes real courage in Memphis to have a meeting of white and colored people in your home. Members of both AFL, and CIO unions were there – longshoremen, building laborers, textile workers, steel workers and others.
This audience understood readily that Roosevelt and the Southern Democrats would not solve their problems. The need for a revolutionary program was easily seen by them. I am very hopeful that some Negro working class leaders will emerge from this group.
In St. Louis on Feb. 19, there was a good working class audience at the open meeting. Twenty-four people attended, many of them UAW militants.
 




Fargo, N.D., April 7. The 37th, and last city of the tour! It was very gratifying to be able to report to the Fargo workers at last night’s house meeting that the tour had been eminently successful.
It was also gratifying to learn from them of the progress which has been made in this city, once the center of reaction of the area, since the great strikes of 1934 and 1935.
Most gratifying of all were the plans laid for a public meeting to be held here under the auspices of the Socialist Workers Party within the next few weeks.
The public meeting held at Plentywood, Montana, on April 4, brought out 118 workers and farmers. A vast majority of those present were dispossessed farmers who are now on relief or WPA. It was very easy for them to understand that Wallace’s AAA and Roosevelt’s so-called Social Security programs had not ended the system of “want amidst plenty.”
Many of these proletarianized farmers accept the revolutionary program as the only solution to their problems. Some of them have been members of the Communist party in the past, but have broken away or been expelled because of “deviations from the line.”
The Trotskyist press has played an important role in all this. A great deal of credit must be given to those Plentywood comrades who have been so loyal and self-sacrificing in spreading the ideas of Trotskyism through the distribution of our press and literature.
 




NEW YORK, Jan. 25. – (Note to Minnesota comrades. It’s true what they say about New York! The general character and tone of the New York party has changed completely in the past eight months since the departure of the members of the Minority. The comrades here are workers now and their contacts whom they bring to meetings are also workers.
(Remember the indignation of our delegates to the Party convention in New York last April at the outrageous behavior of the undisciplined petty-bourgeois Minority members – whispering, shuffling around, laughing, etc., etc. Last night’s mass meeting here was completely different. Everyone sat quietly in his place and listened to the speakers! Revolutionary!
(Furthermore, the 250 members and friends in attendance, who came to the meeting despite the heavy snow storm, contributed over $130 in response to Comrade Morrow’s masterly collection speech.)
My second meeting in Boston held on January 20 in East Boston, was also a very inspiring one. Approximately 150 attended and these were chiefly Italian and Spanish workers. The meeting was held in the hall of an Italian workers’ group, with the cooperation of a number of the youth of this group.
The Boston branch too reflects the great change in the character of the party since the loss of the petty-bourgeois Minority. This loss was our gain.
 




BOSTON, Mass., Jan. 20. – Perhaps the most stimulating aspect of this tour for me has been the opportunity to meet and talk with the militant Negro workers of the steel mills, auto factories and other mass production industries of the Ohio, Michigan and upper New York areas. These Negro workers have found equality with the white workers in the great CIO unions of these industries, and now they are more than ever determined to establish equality for Negroes in other fields and to drive Jim Crow out of the country.
I want to pay a special tribute to our Buffalo (N.Y.) branch; though a newly-formed branch, our comrades there have not only distributed literature and discussed, political problems with Negro workers, but have also done unusual work in fighting at union meetings for the Negroes’ right to jobs. It was natural, then, that in my Buffalo audience there were 25 Negro workers,
Good work in this field is being carried on in Toledo also. Our friends there were able to arrange to have me address a meeting sponsored by the Toledo Discussion Group at the colored Y.M.C.A. and 30 of the 40 persons present were Negroes. The question and discussion period showed that they are anxious to abolish Jim Crowism in the army, and are impressed by our program of trade union control of military training. What stands in the way of whole-hearted acceptance of this program by the Negroes is the reactionary, lily-white AFL unions. We must make clear, in explaining our military program, that it goes together with a fight against the lily-white policy in the unions.
From the reports of Akron rubber workers, Cleveland auto and Youngstown steel workers. I am confident that Roosevelt’s “all-out” program will meet with difficulties. These workers know of the huge profits of the bosses in the war industries, and they are militantly opposed to the plan of one-sided sacrifices for the workers.
The mass distribution of the Appeal in these areas and the excellent propaganda work of our comrades has played its part in building this militant attitude of the mass-production workers. And we’re just beginning!
Last night my first Boston meeting was held, with approximately 70 present, and Comrade Antoinette Konikow presiding. What a wonderful old fighter she is!
 




CHICAGO, January 4 – The Windy City! No longer the windy section of the Party, however, since the departure of the windbags of the Minority into the so-called Workers Party, the whole tone of the Chicago Branch has changed.
Now one hears comrades talking about their shops, their union work, their contacts among the workers on the job, the distribution of the Appeal at factories, etc.
It is even possible to give a speech now in Chicago without having eighteen supplementary speeches made from the floor. All of these changes in the character of the Chicago Party have helped to erase the lines of care from the races of the older Chicago comrades who have been through very trying years. They are to be congratulated for having stuck it out. To them as well as to the new organizer, Dave Stevens, goes credit for the improvement of the Chicago Branch.
I was especially pleased to see what a fine group of women comrades we have in Chicago. Most of them are working at stenographic or factory jobs. They belong to unions and appear to be eager to carry out the Party program in their trade unions. In a word, they think of themselves and act as equals of men in the Party. I think that we re getting someplace!
The meeting held in Milwaukee on January 2 also represented a long step forward. Although the Milwaukee Branch of the Party was only established a few short months ago, and is consequently very small, they brought twenty people together for this open meeting. The subject of the speech was The Road To Socialism.
The audience was composed of workers from CIO unions and students from the trades courses of the Technical High School. From the questions, it was clear that they have become disgusted with the Daniel Hoan-Norman Thomas type of “Socialism” and glad to hear of a revolutionary Socialist program.
With the good work which our Milwaukee comrades arc doing on distribution of the Appeal at factory gates and in working class neighborhoods, together with their contact work, I am sure that we shall see a very healthy growth in the Milwaukee Branch in the coming months.
 




DETROIT, Jan. 10 – In centers like Flint and Detroit one has the feeling of walking on volcanic ground. Everyone is certain that there will be an eruption in the struggle between the UAW and the automobile industry bosses, but no one knows when or how the eruption will take place.
The whole story of the struggle over the speed-up in the auto plants, the unadjusted grievances, etc., has been reported in the Appeal time and time again. What seemed to me unique and extremely encouraging was that only our party carries on mass propaganda work among the workers. Hundreds of Socialist Appeals are distributed weekly at factory gates in both Flint and Detroit; pamphlets are sold in house-to-house sales drives in the working class sections; open meetings are held; educational classes on Marxist theory and trade union problems are conducted. Besides this many of our comrades are active as stewards and officers in the various UAW locals.
Formerly, the Socialist Workers Party competed in these cities with the Lovestoneites, Stalinists and Norman Thomas Socialists. Now, I understand, none of these groups do any literature distribution or hold any open meetings. The small numbers of union officials, etc., whom the Stalinists and S.P.’ers still control are voluntarily far, far underground. And the field is clear for us!
The last open meeting which the Stalinists held here several months ago for James Ford, their vice-presidential candidate, brought out,only 25 people. The open meeting which I addressed in the headquarters of the Detroit Branch of the S.W.P. last night had 46 people in the audience, and this did not include the more than a dozen comrades and friends who came to a Wednesday noon meeting because they are night workers.
Perhaps the most encouraging features of all was that 12 of those attending this meeting were colored workers, most of them from UAW locals. Colored workers are the most exploited both in the shops as well as in the army and they received the proletarian military program for the abolition of Jim Crowism in an enthusiastic way.
One thing is certain, that the devotion, enthusiasm and self-sacrificing spirit of the Flint and Detroit comrades who are bringing the Marxist program to the mass production workers of these centers “will bring forth fruit a hundredfold.”
 




San Francisco, March 29 – An audience of over 50 seamen, longshoremen, dining car employees, culinary workers, building trades workers and others heard the Trotskyist analysis of The War Today at the open meeting which I addressed in San Francisco last night.
From the interested questions and the substantial collection, one may draw the encouraging conclusion that an increasing number of San Francisco militants are accepting Trotskyism as the, only solution to the problems of the working class.
On Monday night, March 24, I had an opportunity to speak in Oakland at a meeting, sponsored by the Oakland Branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Copies of The Militant and leaflets announcing the SWP meeting were distributed there after the meeting. Some of the Negro workers who attended last night’s meeting were undoubtedly attracted there as a result of this distribution.
Good meetings were also held in Los Angeles and San Pedro. The Los Angeles mass meeting, which was held on March 23, attracted over 100 people. Many of these were militants from the aviation industry, who applauded vigorously all of the attacks made upon the red-baiting tactics of Roosevelt, Knudsen, Hillman, Green and the others. One aircraft worker, who announced that he was at his first Trotskyist meeting, took the floor to express his support of our program of an independent working class struggle against fascism.
The audience in San Pedro was made up of seamen, shipyard workers and cannery Workers. Some of these were Mexicans, and they had a genuine appreciation of our analysis of hypocrisy of the Rooseveltian “good neighbor” in Mexico and South America.
 

