

In a recent issue of Socialist Review there was an article dealing with Paul Garland, the recently expelled Queen’s Scout. Comrade Garland had protested at his expulsion, stating that it was not incompatible for a Communist to be a scout and be loyal to god, Queen and Country, etc.
Paul Garland, the West of England secretary of the Young Communist League, was of course stating the Y.C.L.’s policy in relation to the Boy Scouts. More recently he has demonstrated at least part of the truth of his statement that Communists could be loyal to the Queen and Country. It is a pity that he cannot demonstrate his loyalty to the ideas of Marxism which he professes to follow.
At the Conference of the Junior Workers of the Amalgamated Engineering Union held on April 23rd, a resolution was moved and carried calling for a cut in national Service from 2 years to one year. An amendment for the complete abolition was unfortunately rejected.
Paul Garland, as an A.E.U. delegate, was one of the main speakers for the resolution calling for the cut of one year. Let it not be thought however that his opposition to complete abolition of conscription was just his personal opinion. It has in fact been the policy for many years now of the Stalinists (both young and old) to favour a period of military service, and to oppose at all times any move to abolish conscription.
Comrade Garland, it seems, must have developed most of his political ideas whilst he was in the Boy Scouts, for he was very concerned as to who was going to defend Britain. “Be prepared” was almost the watchword of the conference. According to the Daily Worker he said, “Who would defend Britain when British lads were in Malaya, Kenya and British Guiana.” “They were used not to defend Britain, but for imperialist adventures to suppress colonial peoples.”
Unfortunately, Comrade Garland, this is no new thing. Armed forces, whether they be British, American or German, regular or conscript, are always used in this manner on behalf of Imperialism. It is also an historical truth that the forces responsible for the Imperialist adventures are the same forces that are in control of affairs in Britain, which you are so worried about defending. Did the Communist Party not inform you, Comrade Garland, that the foreign policy of any given country is only a reflection of its domestic policy? Do you imagine that the State department responsible for the defence of Britain is a different body from that which sends “our lads” on Imperialist adventures.
Would the Brass Hats, who act on behalf of the Capitalist class, and who order the suppression of the Queen’s subjects in Kenya and Malaya act differently in Britain if the Queen’s subjects here threatened the economic basis of Capitalist society?
Remember, Comrade Garland, that you and the Young Communist League support conscription for one year, so don’t complain when these same conscripts are used to fight against the Malayan Communists, or when they are used as blacklegs to break the strikes of dockers and transport workers.
What do you do when a conscript soldier drives a petrol tanker? Do you enquire first whether he has served over one year in the army before deciding what attitude to adopt?
Let’s have first things first, Comrade Garland. The State was defined by Marx and Lenin as “armed bodies of men.” in a class system of society these armed bodies of men are principally concerned with defending that system of society. Defending the wealth and privileges of those who have as opposed to those who have not.
As a socialist or Communist you can have only one attitude on this question, that is, to oppose conscription of youth. There can be no half-way measures such as “not a day over a year.”
Before you, Comrade garland, can graduate from the political boy scouts and become a real socialist you must see that the Y.C.L.’s slogan of “Not a day over a year” be cut also, so as to read “Not a day,” or better still replace it with a positive slogan such as “Conscript Wealth not Youth.”
Incidentally the Daily Worker of April 24th, when reporting your speech, quoted you as saying, “British Youth had the longest period of service in the world.” even supposing this were true, it would not be a good argument to use in favour of only having one year of National Service. It seems that the Y.C.L.’s attitude is determined along mathematical lines rather than class lines. As a supporter of conscription you would do well to bear in mind the famous lines of poetry:



Theirs not to reason why,
Theirs but to do or die.



I wonder, Comrade Garland, whether you really were under the impression that British Youth had the longest period of service in the world, or perhaps Scout Master Pollitt forgot to tell you that all men in the Soviet Union are liable to military service, either in the regular army or the reserve. The handling of the service liability law in the Soviet Union is delegated to committees in the various areas. On these committees sit the Military Commander of the area, a representative of the local government, physicians and a representative of the secret police (M.V.D.). the normal age for commencing service is 19, and the period of service varies from 2 years to 4 years, depending on whether the citizen is selected for military service or the M.V.D. Also as a matter of interest, there is no provision for Conscientious Objectors in the Soviet Union. So any Russian equivalent of a Boy Scout who believes in God and has conscientious objections to fighting and killing, has to maintain a discreet silence, in case he is mistakenly thought to be opposed to the Communist Party and therefore an enemy of peace, etc., etc.
The fact that conscription in the Soviet Union is for a period as long as in Britain, and in some cases longer, would have been very embarrassing for you if it had been known at the A.E.U. Youth Conference. It is sometimes said that “A little knowledge is a dangerous thing;” for you it seems it was a case of “Ignorance is bliss.”
The Daily Worker went on to repeat that “Some delegates tried to distort Paul’s remarks to mean that the Communist Party and the Daily Worker were anti-German.” I don’t intend to deal with this question now as it would take a separate article on its own, but it does lead me to ask you, Paul Garland, what your attitude is to the following passage, also quoted in the Daily Worker of May 11th: “Representatives of 200,000 Young West German metal workers (equivalent to the A.E.U.) Have firmly rejected the idea of military service and have called for general disarmament.” “The 154 delegates of the Youth Section of the Metal Workers’ Trade Union adopted a resolution to this effect at their conference at Braunschweig over the week-end.” Also, “at a meeting in Stuttgart 800 youths unanimously declared that they considered the West German Conscription Bill a threat to peace and to their freedom.”
Do you, Paul Garland, endorse their attitude or would you say they were wrong and that they should press for one year’s conscription in order to be able to defend “their” country, Germany, as you wish to defend “your” country, Britain.
In conclusion, Paul Garland, and all members of the working class youth, I would say that your best contribution to peace today would be to join hands with the young German Trade Unionists, and say, “No conscription of Youth, No defence of our respective countries when such defence means only the defence of Rent, Interest and Profit.”
When contemplating conscription, it is well to remember the words of Rosa Luxemburg, the German Socialist leader of the first world war: “In Imperialist War, Proletarians fall whilst Profits rise.”
 



The events in Guatemala over the last few weeks must have considerably shaken the faith of that ever-dwindling body of “Socialists” who believe that the United Nations would protect the weak nations from the aggressors.
More than at any time before, the United Nations Organisation has been shown to be completely in the pocket of the Americans, and no one dare move until the Americans give the signal. For without the shadow of a doubt, the overthrow of the elected government of President Arbenz was the work of the American State department, carried out in the interests of American capitalism in general and the United Fruit Company in particular.
Using the well-worn formula of “discovering Communist conspiracies,” coupled with the appeals to keep the American states free and democratic, the agents of Washington went to work to undermine and destroy one of the very few territories of the American continent where a certain amount of freedom and democracy did exist. The regime which has just been overthrown was set up in 1944, and in the following year a new constitution was introduced which had many progressive features, and represented a great advance for the ordinary people of Guatemala. For the first time literate women of eighteen years and over were allowed to vote and hold office. The constitution reaffirmed the principle that no President should immediately succeed himself, and in the event of any attempted transgression the right of the people to rebel was sanctioned. Even the representatives of the National Assembly, who were elected by popular vote for a period of four years, could not be re-elected until a further period of four years had elapsed. In an attempt to forestall the military dictatorships which constantly plague South and central American countries, the Constitution stated that no member of the armed forces could be elected to the National Assembly or be elected President. Trade unions were recognised for the first time and a comprehensive system of social security was outlined in a law passed in October 1946.
Under a Department of Education, a national system of education was maintained from kindergarten through university, and was compulsory for all children between seven and fourteen years. An indication of the seriousness in which education was viewed can be gained by reference to the national budget for 1951–52. The national budget was announced as 60,366,317 quetzal, and out of this sum 7 million (or 12 per cent) was allocated to the Ministry of education. For defence the sum was 5 million quetzal. In the 1954–55 budget of 68 million quetzal, over 10 million quetzal was provided for education, and 6,500,000 for defence. There are very few countries today that could boast of having allocated more money to education than to armaments.
 
The United Fruit Company
In 1952 an Agrarian Reform Law was passed, under which one-quarter of the land owned by the United Fruit company was confiscated. This land was uncultivated and was expropriated in order to be divided among the landless peasants. Compensation was paid to the ex-owners at the value they themselves had declared previously when they had been assessed for income tax. The United Fruit Company was paid 609,000 quetzal (the amount they had declared when assessed), but alas, the United Fruit Company said they had made a mistake, and in turn claimed 15 million quetzal as the value of the land, nearly 25 times their previous estimate. In all, the Fruit Company had 174 thousand acres of land taken from them, and it was used in a manner that was in keeping with then most urgent needs of the people of Guatemala.
The United Fruit Company, which owns many millions of acres in central and South American Companies also has other assets through which they attempt to control these countries. In Guatemala they even own their own railway system, and, in conjunction with the International Railroads of Central America (US capital), they control the land communications of that country. In a report from the International bank of Reconstruction, freight charges in Guatemala were the highest in the world, and it cost less to send goods across the Atlantic than it did to send them from Puerto Barrios to Guatemala City 200 miles. Incidentally the United Fruit Company also owns the piers and dock installations at Puerto Barrios, and operates the only regular passenger service from the United States to Guatemala. Of course the Fruit Company also has its friends in higher circles. Dr Juan Manuel Galvez, President of Honduras the country from which the attacks were launched, has for many years been the Honduras legal representative of the United Fruit Company. Mr Dulles, the United States Secretary of State, also has an interest in preserving the United Fruit Company, not only in the interests of American capitalism in general, but due to the fact that he is a partner in a law firm which acts as legal advisors to the Company.
Mr Spruille Braden, who was formerly Assistant Secretary of the American Department of Inter-American Affairs, is now the Public Relations Officer for the United Fruit Company. It was on the responsibility of the American Department of Inter-American Affairs that an embargo was placed on aid to Guatemala, and at the same time an increased supply of planes and napalm bombs was sent to Honduras. In March 1953 Mr Spruille Braden declared that suppression “even by force” of the Government of Guatemala “would not constitute an intervention in its internal affairs.” Mr John Foster Dulles, speaking on June 30th, declared that the overthrow of the Arbenz government was a “new and glorious victory.” The facts presented above should be sufficient to cast doubts on the story that was peddled by the national press that the events in Guatemala were purely those constituting civil war, or were just another example of a typical South American revolution.
 
UNO
The UNO demonstrated its complete bankruptcy as a world force interested in preserving freedom and the rights of minorities, by its failure to take action over this destruction of a democratically elected government. Can hypocrisy reach greater heights when one recalls the speech made by the Chairman of the Security Council, Cabot Lodge, on June 18th, the day before the invasion of Guatemala. “I hope I will never see the day when a small country comes to the United Nations and asks for protection, and is greeted with the question, ‘What’s the hurry?’” On June 25th the Security Council ruled the Guatemala question off the agenda.
Of course the Soviet Union did its best to make political capital out of these events, and by the use of the veto managed to keep the matter before the United Nations, instead of its being handed over to the organisation of American States. The fact that the Americans have the majority in the United nations serves them well in their international struggle against the Soviet bloc, it gives them “legal” cover to take whatever action they deem necessary to preserve what is termed “the free world”. Like its predecessor, the League of Nations, the UNO is doomed to failure. Its purpose, that of maintaining peace, freedom, human dignity, outlawing poverty, etc, etc, is an impossible task for capitalist society which, by its very nature creates the forces that drive to war. The society which, in the interests of profit, creates unemployment and poverty; the monstrous system which creates hydrogen bombs and other weapons of mass destruction, cannot solve thee major problems confronting mankind without first destroying the basic reasons for all these problems, namely the capitalist economic system. Any worker who believes that the United Nations would take such steps is living in a dream world. The tiny state of Guatemala held no power whatever in the international arena. It was not a Soviet satellite state, yet because it attempted to improve the standard of living of the ordinary people of that country, it came into conflict with the United Fruit Company, and hence the United States. The United Nations, the handmaiden of the Americans, would do nothing. The execution squads are busy, trade union members go in fear of their lives, the forty-five members of the strike committee of the banana-workers’ union who were involved in a dispute with the United Fruit Company have already paid with their lives. British workers must pay heed to these lessons, which are being taught at the expense of so much bloodshed. To say that it could never happen here is a very dangerous illusion. The German workers experienced it in 1933, the Malayans in 1948, Kenya Africans in 1952, and the East Berlin workers in 1953, and the workers and peasants of Guatemala in 1954.
Wake up, labour! Our voice must be heard. We must oppose with every weapon at our disposal these oppressions being carried out against our class brothers in other countries.
 



The Foundry Workers, a Trade Union History
H.J. Fyrth & H. Collins
Amalgamated Union of Foundry Workers. pp. 348. 18/-
For those who wish to make a detailed study of the Foundry Workers, no better material could be obtained than in this book. For others generally, this book could still be of immense value, for, in portraying the development, strengths and weaknesses of this particular union, there quite clearly emerges an image of the entire trade union movement of this country.
This craft union has been subjected to the same ups and downs as have other unions. Since its inception in 1809, in the form of the Friendly Iron Moulders Society, to the present day, it has been buffeted by capitalist economic laws, prospering in booms and sinking in slumps. During ‘good times’ branches sprang up and membership increased, but when ‘hard times’ came members left the foundries, legislation was introduced against workers’ combination and general attacks by the employers were launched to drive down wages and lower living standards.
The political development of the union was slow. Time and again during the early decades, its policy, as outlined by its leaders, was to try to bring harmony into the relationship between employers and employees. Far from wanting to forge a new society, it asked modestly for a few extra crumbs. We are told that as late as 1866 a speaker at a union rally boasted that “there was as much Toryism among the working classes as the upper and middle classes.” Only the hard knocks of capitalism forced the union to adopt political attitudes – to fight against the anti-combination laws which threatened its existence as anything other than a friendly benefit society. Today, it is in the forefront of the struggles of the T.U.C. and the Labour party. Among the best known of its ‘political’ leaders have been the Labour right-winger Arthur Henderson and the Stalinist Jim Gardner. The book contains much material relating to the struggles between the various political tendencies within the union.
Much space is devoted to the fight for improved working conditions and protective legislation, and the sections dealing with the history of the union during the post war Labour government with the problems then confronting the movement (arbitration, wage-freezing, the cold war), are of special interest. It also tackles the importance of the movement towards the amalgamation of the foundry unions and the idea of industrial unionism. While much has been accomplished in this field, there still remains much to be done.
In the early part of the book, dealing with the set-backs following a slump, it says “there are still trade unionists who think that somehow slumps make workers more militant and strengthen the Unions. The history of every depression proves the opposite.” If this idea were brought out and its implications thoroughly discussed, then, not only would the Foundry Workers be better equipped for the future, but, similarly, every trade unionist would have a clearer perspective.
True justice can only be done to this history if it is read from cover to cover, and, whilst it contains mainly indisputable facts and figures, it also throws out many ideas for our Labour movement to think about.
 

