

Women in England, 1870–1950 Sexual Divisions and Social Change
Jane Lewis
Wheatsheaf Books, £6.95
SO MANY feminist interpretations of the past depend on a superficial and highly selective reading of history. So it is a great pleasure to come across a book like Jane Lewis’s, which packs into a reasonably priced paperback a vast amount of knowledge and discussion, based on a thorough survey of both primary and secondary sources.
The materials Jane Lewis uses include statistics, government reports, social surveys, autobiographies and oral history, as well as all the major contributions to feminist debates on this period. These are all put together to produce a fascinating and thought-provoking picture of women’s lives from the maturing of industrial capitalism in England to the close of the Second World War.
The picture is valuable partly because the framework is good. The first part, on the family, is divided into sections on working class women and middle class women, so that the usual lumping together of quite different class experiences as ‘the Victorian family’ is avoided.
The vexed question of the working class family wage is discussed in the context of the evidence for actual working class incomes and standards of living, showing that married women’s absence from paid employment did not depend on the assurance of a reasonable living wage being paid to their husbands. Women’s contribution to family earnings by outwork, laundering and all kinds of casual work is also well documented.
The second part of the book, on women’s employment, suffers from a certain obsession with the sexual division of labour. The author seems to be convinced that we need to discover a coherent, underlying reason why some jobs were regarded as women’s work and some as men’s. But she provides a wealth of information on the work women did, and on the major change from domestic service as the biggest category of women’s employment to the much greater variety of service and manufacturing jobs in the twentieth century.
This book provides no dogmatic answers to the political questions that socialists and feminists argue about: do working class men benefit from women’s oppression, does the unity of women as a group override class considerations, and so on. But it contains plenty of ammunition for these arguments, and should be essential reading for anyone who intends to participate in them.
 



NOTHING is more fundamental to the politics of the Socialist Workers Party than the working class, because only the working class can get rid of capitalist society and bring about socialism. This was the central point of Marx’s theory, and since Marx it has always been a major concern of ruling class ideology to deny it.
Within the labour movement itself, there are reformists who may believe that the working class will benefit from socialism, but deny that workers can act as a class to bring it about. Today even many people who call themselves Marxists claim that the idea of working class revolution is outdated, and some even say that the working class is disappearing.
Opponents of Marxism have always found it useful to define the working class in ways that make it seem that Marx was wrong about working class revolution. It is necessary to say very clearly what we mean by the working class, and what we do not mean, because the term is used in so many ways that have nothing to do with Marxism.
It is often said, for example, that the working class is defined by a set of attitudes. A recent letter in the London Evening Standard from a businessman carried this to its furthest extreme. Class, he wrote, is ‘due to an upward-looking suspicion.’ Workers on the factory floor perpetuate it by refusing to trust or be friends with managers like himself. ‘Class’, he concluded, ‘is the observation of the workers, not the managers.’ According to this view, class divisions, like fairies, would just disappear if only workers would stop believing in them!
 
Values and lifestyle?
More seriously, most sociology defines class as a set of values, a whole outlook on life which distinguishes the working class from others. So we read, for example, that working class people spend money as soon as they get it, do not think ahead, and are not ambitious to plan a career for themselves but regard work as an unpleasant necessity.
But, in so far as working class people do have some or all of these ‘values’, they are a consequence of the conditions they live in – low pay, insecurity and bad working conditions – rather than something existing only in their heads.
In quite different quarters, it is even fashionable to define the working class by their ignorance. The Class War anarchists, for example, argue that socialists cannot appeal to the working class because they talk about Marxist theory, or know what happened in history – some of us even discuss art and literature! Real working class people, they claim, just say Bollocks to all that.
Some Marxists do cut themselves off from the working class by their academic approach, which seems to make theory the exclusive property of experts with a couple of philosophy degrees. It is also true that the way most working class people are educated denies them any real understanding of the world, limits their ability to express themselves (especially in writing) and deprives them of art and literature.
But it is surely an insult to the working class to suggest that they find their true identity by remaining ignorant and inarticulate. Gut reactions might take you as far as smashing up the Henley regatta or hating opera, but to smash a whole social system and a state knowledge and understanding are necessary.
If the working class is not defined by ideas (or lack of them), it is sometimes defined by lifestyle. There is often nostalgia for the way working class people lived 50 or 60 years ago: a lifestyle of poverty, when neighbours borrowed cupfuls of flour or sugar, working class homes had no modern conveniences, and holidays consisted of the occasional trip to the seaside.
Nowadays supermarkets, hire purchase, television and a fortnight on the Costa Brava are more likely to be part of the definition of a working class lifestyle. These things are often disparaged, though it is hard to see why, as they are (however shoddy in many cases) material gains for the working class. The main problem is, however, that any definition of the working class by lifestyle concentrates on what people buy (or can’t afford to buy) rather than on what they produce.
It is production, not ideas or lifestyle, that lies at the heart of the Marxist definition of the working class. We can only know what the working class is by looking at the relations of production in capitalist society. This is a society in which one class owns the means of production – factories, machinery, raw materials and so on – and another, the working class, produces the goods. Workers in capitalist society sell their labour power and are paid wages for it, at a level which allows the capitalist to make a profit as well as enabling the workers to buy the necessities of life.
Workers do not control the conditions they work in, and they do not at any point own what they produce. A self-employed carpenter who makes a table may sell it or keep it for himself; but a worker at Thorns who tried to take home a television set for her family would get the sack. The whole class system revolves around these central facts, though it is obviously not limited to manufacturing industry.
For workers not only produce the goods in our society, they supply services as well. Some of these services are directly related to production, to capitalist investment, or to the sale of goods. Office typists, bank clerks and checkout girls are as much part of the working class as factory workers.
Other services are less directly related to production but still essential to the system: transport of goods and people, for example. All wage earners who provide these services are part of the working class. So, too, are the majority of people who work in public services such as health, education and welfare. Their services keep the whole society going, and their wages are, like factory workers’ wages, enough to keep them at the same standard of living as the rest of their class. Dustmen, nurses and home helps are part of the working class, no less than miners or steelworkers.
The working class also includes many individuals who are not actually working for wages: children and housewives, for example, who depend on an employed workers’ wages. Unemployed and retired workers are also part of the working class, because at other times in their lives they have depended or will depend on earning wages for a living.
 
White, male and skilled?
The self-employed are not part of the working class, for reasons touched on above. Neither are managers, who make decisions and give orders on behalf of the ruling class. This is true whether managers are the offspring of bosses themselves, or have ‘risen’ from the factory floor, because it is not your parents’ position that defines class, but your own (though young people who have not yet started work must surely belong to their parents’ class).
Most professionals, such as doctors and lawyers, belong – like the self-employed and managers – to the middle classes. The position of teachers is perhaps more ambiguous, especially at the higher levels of the profession. A university is traditionally supposed to be a corporation of scholars; but the mass of primary and secondary school teachers are employed like any other skilled workers and have as little control over their working conditions as most office workers.
The Marxist definition of the working class is far from narrow, and certainly not limited to skilled white male workers, as Ken Livingstone and the ‘soft left’ are now claiming. Even the hard core of the working class, workers in manufacturing industry (the core because they are the model, hard because they are potentially the most powerful) are very far from being all white, male and skilled. Workers in public and private services – without whose labour also capitalist society would collapse – certainly include only a minority who are all three of these things.
A sociologist or a market researcher carrying out a survey could find many different values and a number of different lifestyles among the working class. A socialist trying to build a union or a party would find many different levels of class consciousness. But what defines the working class is none of these things. It is the material facts of the work they do and the wages they earn.
 



Introduction

1. The case for women’s liberation

2. Class society and class struggle

3. Women’s oppression and class society

4. Women workers fighting back

5. The family, right or wrong?

6. The revolutionary tradition and women’s liberation

7. Are there any alternatives?

8. Conclusions


Further Reading


Introduction
SINCE THE REBIRTH of the women’s movement in the mid-1960s there have been many arguments about the relationship between women’s liberation and socialism. Socialists want to change the world, to get rid of the rotten society we live in and build a better one based on workers’ power. Feminists also want to change the world, so that women can be free and equal. Are the two struggles the same, or separate? Can feminists unite with male socialists and trade unionists, or must their struggle always be against men?
In practice, events during the miners’ strike of 1984-5 showed how unity can be achieved in struggle. Through the strength of the women in the mining communities, who stood beside the miners on picket lines and took part in strike committees, as well as organising soup kitchens and food parcels, the unity of men and women became a fundamental fact of the strike.
Socialists, who had often argued that women can fight only as workers, were reminded that wives, mothers and daughters are also part of the working class, whether they have jobs or not. Feminists, who often assume that being a wife means only conflict with the husband, had to face the fact that there can be solidarity in the working class family as well as conflict.
The strike brought many women who thought of themselves as feminists into strike support work for the first time, on local miners’ support committees, in their workplaces and in their communities. It also changed the lives of many miners’ wives who had not thought of themselves as feminists but found themselves going to meetings and picket lines, or travelling to raise support in other parts of the country, while their men minded the kids or made the tea.
In action, the politics of class struggle may cut through the knot of academic and sectarian argument about the relationship between socialism and women’s liberation, but the problems remain. Many men in the labour movement are not convinced that women need to fight for themselves, though they reckon women fighting to support men is all right. Many feminists are not convinced that male workers can really be allies in their struggle: they point to sexist attitudes and male domination of the labour movement as proof that women’s fight is still basically against all men. And some women who have been very active during the strike don’t think that feminism has anything to do with them: they think of it as meaning women refusing to have anything to do with men – an image deliberately exaggerated by most of the press and television.
These problems can be worked out only by looking seriously at the meaning of class struggle and the politics of revolutionary socialism. For Marxists like the Socialist Workers Party, class struggle is the only way to change the world for the better – to get rid of our present ruling class and have a society, run by and for working people, where everyone can be in control of their own lives and free from the threats of poverty, powerlessness or nuclear annihilation. Women must be part of that struggle, and women’s liberation essential to its aims: a socialist society must be one where women are free and equal, sharing control with men in every way.
We do not try to justify the situation in present-day Russia, China or Cuba, which claim to be socialist societies but where it is quite clear that women have not been liberated. None of these are societies where the working class is in control; they are ruled, and harshly ruled, by a class of bureaucrats whose aims are at the bottom the same as the aims of our own ruling class: to exploit working people, accumulate capital and compete with one another internationally. This point is fundamental to the politics of the Socialist Workers Party. To claim that socialism liberates women and at the same time to claim that these societies are socialist would be a fraud.
Nor do we defend the way the labour movement is organised and controlled at present, for it is dominated by men to the almost total exclusion of women from any power of decision making or leadership, even where the majority of a union’s members are women. Trade unions should not be run by professional ‘leaders’ on high salaries, often appointed for life, who haven’t worked in the factory, office or mine for years and who see their job as being to perform a balancing act between employers and workers. They should be run by the rank and file members – women and men – from the bottom up instead of from the top down.
Nor do we accept the idea that there are stages of struggle: women can’t wait to be freed somehow after the socialist revolution; nor can the struggle for socialism be postponed until all workers have changed their old ideas about women’s place. Ideas begin to change through struggle, but the changes cannot be completed until the world we live in is changed – until society is organised for human needs instead of for profits. That change can come only through a socialist revolution.
These are the politics of revolutionary socialism: rank and file control in the struggle, the overthrow of our present capitalist society based on profit, and the establishment of workers’ power for a new society of equality and freedom. Women’s liberation can and must be part of the struggle to achieve these ends.


1. The case for women’s liberation
IN OUR SOCIETY today, women are discriminated against in pay, jobs, education and welfare. Most women are financially dependent on a man, and, without assistance, carry the burden of looking after children and caring for the sick and old. Society’s ‘opinion formers’, from judges to journalists, cabinet ministers to advertising copywriters, take it for granted that women are inferior. And in the end, they reduce all women – whatever their occupation, experience, politics or interests – to one dimension, sex, and judge them by whether they measure up to what men desire.
Women are more than half the population and 40 per cent of the workforce. But women’s earnings, on average, are only two-thirds of those of men, and women workers are found mainly in low-paid, low-status jobs. Three-quarters of all catering and clerical workers are women, but only 22 per cent of doctors, 4 per cent of architects and half of one per cent of engineers. There are very few women in positions of power or influence of any kind: less than 14 per cent of managers in industry, 2 per cent of company directors, and 4 per cent of members of parliament, for example.
Although girls get more ‘O’ level passes than boys, and there are more women than men at technical colleges and evening classes, the situation is reversed when it comes to higher education. Only 38 per cent of university undergraduates are women, and only a third of all post-graduate students.
More women than men live in poverty. Added to those who live in poverty with men, there are seventeen times as many single mothers as single fathers, and two and a half times as many women old age pensioners as men, living on social security. Married women who care for the sick at home do not get Invalid Care Allowance, and widows get neither sick pay nor unemployment benefit even though they may have paid full insurance for years.
This is usually justified by saying that it is women’s natural role to look after the home and children, and men’s job to be breadwinners. But history shows, as we shall see, that the care of home and children has not always been separated from other kinds of work as rigidly as it is in our society. In order to look after these things, women are expected to give up everything else – education, work (or at least decent, well-paid work), and outside interests of all kinds, including trade union and political activity. A woman is supposed to devote herself entirely to the care of a man, his children and his or her parents when they get old.
Because most women do what is expected of them and lavish a great deal of love and care on their families, often in very difficult circumstances, the world assumes that women are stupid, or at least simple-minded, unable to understand what goes on outside the home. Most women are economically dependent on men because they can’t carry the burden of household tasks and hold on to a decently paid full-time job as well – but the world says that women are dependent on men because they are weak and helpless without them.
From being described as women’s natural role, home and children come to be seen as women’s only role, even when they are obviously doing something else. In 1981, a Liverpool councillor addressed council clerical workers on strike in the city as ‘the wives, mothers and sweethearts of citizens of Liverpool’. The strikers pointed out that they were ‘typists, machine operators and clerks, not wives, mothers and sweethearts’ and were citizens of Liverpool themselves as well!
Yet young women are encouraged to see marriage and the family as their only aims in life, and are discouraged from learning most skills or studying the same subjects as boys. They are pointed in the direction of jobs such as typing, packing and assembling to ‘fill in’ the time till they get married and have babies. Then they marry with high expectations of family life – but it doesn’t work out like the ideal family of the advertisers’ dreams, especially when money is short and a husband’s job insecure.
Most women are trapped in the family. However much they love their husbands and children, they know they have little choice about it. It is harder for a woman than for a man to get out of a marriage that has gone wrong, and most women whose marriages break down are left to bring up children on their own with little or no support.
On top of that, many women are trapped in their homes by violence or the threat of it. Some men end up beating the woman they live with because they are ground down at work or don’t have enough money to meet their family’s needs – they make women suffer for what isn’t their fault, and most women have no way of fighting back and nowhere to turn to when this happens. What kind of society is it that puts women in this position? Only a society that insists that the family is ‘private’, and that women belong to the men they marry as if they were pieces of property, whatever the law now says.
In rape, women are exposed to a kind of violence which men don’t face, perhaps the most humiliating of all. Women are encouraged to look sexy and attractive to men, and to feel as free as men to enjoy themselves – a freedom long overdue after centuries of a double standard for men and women – but when an attractive woman is raped most men think she must have been ‘asking for it’. How can women feel free when this is going on?
In our society, women don’t have equality, they don’t have freedom, they don’t even have respect in any meaningful sense. What can be done about it? Women have to be able to fight back, for themselves and for the future of all women. This doesn’t mean an out-and-out conflict with all men all of the time. Separatism – the view that women can fight for liberation only on their own and against men – is a counsel of despair and a way of dividing women and men still further. Women have a right to organise with men to fight against the society that keeps us all down, to make men see that the world has to be changed. This doesn’t mean that women can’t organise their own meetings, demonstrations, pickets or whatever, when appropriate – we have that right, too – but we should be trying to reunite women and men in the struggle for socialism.
The people who have power in our society – governments and employers – want to keep men and women divided. They want women not to think about what is wrong with the world and, even more, not to do anything about it. They want strikers’ wives to nag them to go back to work, not to support them like the miners’ wives. They want women as a cheap labour force too, handicapped by household cares and discouraged from fighting for equality. They want to sell us images of the small, private family as the only way to live, and of women as feather-brained sex objects turning overnight into empty-headed household drudges, because they want to sell us more goods.
For too long the struggle against this society has been divided, not by feminism but by men, who have seen the labour movement as purely a male concern. Men who have put down, excluded and ridiculed women who do want to fight back; men who have expected their wives to keep quiet and service them while they do the fighting back; men who think women are good for sex, having babies, cooking and nothing else. Seventy years ago Hannah Mitchell, a working-class woman fighting for the vote, wrote that ‘those of us who were married had to fight with one hand tied behind us,’ and any married woman who has ever thought of fighting for something today must recognise that picture.
In playing the employers’ game, working-class men are tying themselves hand and foot to the governments’ and employers’ world, and all the exploitation and injustice that it contains, as well as denying women their right to freedom and equality. In demanding that men fight for women’s liberation too, we are calling on them to free themselves.


2. Class society and class struggle
AS MARXISTS, we say that we live in a class society. We don’t mean by this that some people have different life-styles from others, live in different areas or have snobbish attitudes and different accents. Class is the material reality on which our society and all others in the world today are based.
The vast majority of people – women as well as men – work to produce profits for the few, whether they assemble cars or televisions in a factory, type figures into a word processor or check out groceries at Sainsbury’s. Or else they sweep streets, dig coal or scrub floors for the ‘public sector’ so that the system can keep going, with the rich making as much profit as possible and the needs of the poor supplied at the lowest possible cost. This is the working class, and without its labour the lights would go out, food and water would be cut off, communications would break down and society would cease to function.
At the top, a tiny minority of people own most of the wealth and exercise most of the control. They decide when factories will close, when prices will go up, when capital will be moved around so as to browbeat governments into doing what they want. Some belong to families who have held wealth and power for generations, others insist that they have ‘worked their way up’ and are ‘still very working class’. But they are all part of the ruling class, and their wealth gives them power. Governments must look after their interests, and keep everyone else quiet enough for the system of power and profits to go on working.
In between, there are the middle classes – small employers, management and the upper layer of professional people. Most small employers and managers identify with the ruling class, because a society based on profits suits their own interests best. Some professionals – doctors, lawyers and the upper levels of the teaching profession – are the managers of society’s services, and think much the same, though sometimes government policies such as cuts in their own professional areas may rouse their opposition.
Most professional workers, however, school teachers, nurses, civil service and council clerks, and most social workers, are simply doing routine jobs with no element of control or decision-making. They are really part of the white-collar working class, along with office workers, draughtsmen and technicians. In the last few decades large numbers of them have joined trade unions because their interests and their need to organise are very similar to those of manual workers.
The point about women is that they are part of all these classes, even though they are second-class members of them. There are rich and powerful women, women workers carrying society on their backs, and women at all levels in between. Can women unite for their own equality and liberation, or does the division of society into classes prevent them?
Up to a point, women do have a common interest in equal rights and can unite to fight for those rights. The gains that were made by the women’s emancipation movement in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries applied to all women, such as the right to own money and property, the right to have custody of their own children, and the right to an education. A hundred and fifty years ago, when married women could own nothing, whether wages or landed estates, when mothers had no legal right to keep their children, whether little lords and ladies or half-starved infants of the slums, and when even the daughters of the rich had little education other than learning to read and write in their own homes, women of all classes needed to fight for these basic rights.
But the effect of the struggle for equal rights was to leave women more divided, even though the legal rights were a gain and the struggle for them a necessary one.
In 1831, married women could own no property. In 1981, the wife of a Tory cabinet minister was able to purchase in her own name a six-bedroomed house in Somerset with extensive grounds, while in the same year in the same county a woman living in a caravan with her disabled husband was refused a council tenancy because neither of them had a regular job. (Source: Labour Research Department pamphlet, Unfair Shares, 1981)
In 1832, virtually the only women employed outside their homes were factory workers, domestic servants and governesses. In 1982, there were women on the boards of giant companies such as GEC and the Midland Bank, and awards such as ‘Business Woman of the Year’ went to women running catering and clothing firms – in industries that are traditional exploiters of low-paid women – and to one woman who took over her husband’s precast concrete firm and made more profits than he ever did. Yet the vast majority of women are still confined to poorly-paid, low status jobs.
In 1839, a woman could not go to university, practise as a lawyer or enter parliament. In 1979, Margaret Thatcher – university educated, a successful tax lawyer, and independently wealthy as well as the wife of a very rich man – became prime minister. The contrast between Thatcher and a politically ambitious woman of 1839, Caroline Norton, is instructive. Caroline Norton pursued her ambition by becoming a political hostess and close friend of a male politician, Lord Melbourne. As a result, her husband dragged her through a notorious divorce case, and when he was granted a separation he refused her access to her children – even when one of them was dying. Though Caroline’s politics were every bit as reactionary as Thatcher’s (each would recognise the other’s ‘Victorian Values’ very well), Caroline became a campaigner for women’s rights. Thatcher does not campaign for women’s rights because she does not need to: the struggles of earlier generations of women have put her where she is.
Equality with men is not enough, because men are themselves not equal. As long as we live in a class society, some women will be able to use their improved position to exploit and oppress others, and they will do so without sisterly qualms or scruples. There are still comparatively few women politicians, employers and managers, but is more of them what we need? Do women employed by GEC benefit because there is a woman (Sara Morrison, prominent member of the Tory Party) on the board of directors? The answer has to be no – the aim of the company is to make profits, and that means keeping down the wages of women factory workers and closing factories when it suits GEC’s plans for profit.
Would other women benefit if half the Tory cabinet were women? Or if all of them were? The performance of the ‘hang ‘em and flog ‘em brigade’ at Tory women’s conferences is enough to suggest that they would not – Tory women are actually more reactionary than Tory men. Any Tory government would come to power on the employers’ terms, and carry out policies ruinous to working-class women.
Women in top jobs also exploit other women directly as cleaners, housekeepers and nannies to take over the burden of housework and family duties, which for most working women means a double shift of drudgery. Nanny agencies openly admit that they recruit young women looking for a short-term career between leaving school and getting married, and the wages these women earn are certainly not in proportion to the increased earning and career opportunities they provide for their employers. The more wealth and power high-paid women enjoy, the less they need to challenge the conventional roles of men and women in the family – all is taken care of by the discreet, and invariably female, modern domestic servant.
Middle-class women, the women in between, can identify with ruling class women, demanding equal access to top jobs and business opportunities; or with working-class women, fighting for equal pay. better social services, or the right to organise. Very large numbers of lower-grade professional workers, especially, are women: they hold two-thirds of all posts in education, health and welfare although these services are mostly managed by men. Their jobs often bring them into close contact with working-class women and children.
Since the mid-1960s, middle-class women have been the main organising force behind the women’s liberation movement, and they have moved left or right according to the situation. Up to the mid-1970s, when many women workers were getting organised and fighting for equal pay, most of the women’s liberation movement saw working-class struggle as important and gave it support. We have seen something of this again during the miners’ strike of 1984–5. But between these years, middle-class women mostly became preoccupied with other strategies, such as separatism, pacifism, and equal opportunities to move up the career ladder.
Why does class struggle matter for women’s liberation? The answer can be put in many different ways, but two things need to be said straight away. The first is that as long as we have a class society, all women cannot be equally liberated by having equality with men. It is one thing to be the equal of a cabinet minister, a cabinet minister or a Whitehall mandarin; it is quite another to be the equal of a miner, a bus driver or an out-of-work labourer. If this is all that women’s liberation means, then you can’t expect working-class women to be particularly interested in it.
The second thing is that only class struggle holds out any hope of getting rid of this system of inequality that we live in now. Class struggle is not just the gut reaction of downtrodden men and women to the nastiness of the ruling class. It is not, as many pacifist women claim, just another form of destructiveness and aggression. It is also the way forward to a better world.
Marx said that socialism is ‘the self-emancipation of the working class’. Women, too, can liberate themselves by being part of that struggle. The self-emancipation of women cannot be by a struggle of women ‘as women’, across all classes, because such a struggle would liberate some a lot more than others. Only by joining forces with the working class can we ever win liberation for all women.


3. Women’s oppression and class society
IT IS SOMETIMES SAID that women have always been oppressed by men, that the antagonism between men and women has its origin deep in human psychology or biology, and that the way women suffer in our society is nothing but the same old story that has been going on ever since human life began.
This is such a pessimistic view that it is hard to understand why it is so popular with feminists today. If women are put at a disadvantage by human nature itself, how can we ever change things? Either an all-out war against men could lead to men being forced to change their ways without changing their basically anti-women ideas; or a few women could separate themselves off from the rest of society and be free in a sense; or the human race could be destroyed by women refusing all co-operation with men. None of these conclusions can be very appealing for the majority of women.
On the other hand, the view that women are oppressed simply because men (and most women too) have the wrong ideas about women can be too optimistic. Liberating women is seen as just a matter of persuasion and education, of explaining to men that they have got it wrong and that they really should share the housework and the top jobs because it would be more fair.
History shows that all ideas can change: none are so deep-rooted in human nature that nothing can be done about them. But they can’t be changed by persuasion, by the light of reason alone, because ideas depend on material relations between human beings.
The idea that black people are inferior, for example, belongs to societies that exploit black people, either as slaves or as cheap labour. To get rid of the idea once and for all we have to get rid of the system that produces the idea. This doesn’t mean that we can’t argue or organise against racism here and now, but it does mean that persuading people that they have the wrong ideas is only the first step to getting rid of the society that is responsible for them.
The idea that women are inferior comes from societies that are divided into classes, where one set of people control the labour of others and enjoy wealth and power as a result. Our own capitalist society is far from being the first society divided into classes, though we hope to make it the last. In ancient Greece and Rome, slaves were exploited by slave-owners, in Europe in the middle ages lords lived off the labour of serfs on the land, and there have been variations of these societies at other times and places. With the rise of manufacture and the Industrial Revolution, those with wealth to invest as capital found new ways to make profits out of wage-earning men and women. In all these forms of society, women have been oppressed.
But there have been, even in quite recent times, societies that were not divided into classes, and where women did not have an inferior position. These were the societies we call primitive, where there was no production other than the gathering of wild plants and hunting of wild animals. Nowadays, most of these societies have been affected by contact with European traders, rulers and missionaries, who have changed their ways of life. But when white men first came into contact with most of the native tribes of North America, Australia and the Pacific islands, these were societies without classes and in which women were as strong and as powerful as men.
When production was simple and population low, women’s role as the bearers of children was important and respected. Though men and women might have their separate tasks and rituals, women as well as men took part in the most important decisions, such as whether to move a settlement or make war on another band or tribe. Couples might live together with their children, but sexual relations were more free and separation easier than in later societies.
When production increased, agriculture appeared, and flocks and herds of animals were kept for food and wealth (for fields and cattle were the first forms of private property), class divisions began to appear. Men of wealth could make others work for them, buy slaves and take advantage of others’ poverty. They began to own wives, too, like cattle, and pass on their wealth to their male children. As Engels argued a hundred years ago, in The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State, the oppression of women began when class society began.
Many of the details of Engels’ case have been challenged or corrected by anthropologists (most of whom have been male and have worked for imperialist powers – which gave them a vested interest in challenging him). But his basic argument still stands. The oppression of women is not universal; women are strong and equal in societies with simple production and no class divisions; all societies must have started out like this.
No one could really wish for the whole of humanity to return to this primitive state: the vast majority of people alive today would be wiped out by hunger and disease. Equality for women in the future would have to be based on the full capacity of modern science and technology to fulfil human needs – a capacity that today is largely wasted by the capitalist system, with its drive for profits and lunacies such as nuclear weapons. Women could be strong and free in such a future society because of their role as producers and creators of all kinds, and not just because they bear children or grub roots out of the ground – as they did in primitive society. But to achieve this, it is necessary to get rid of class society.
History shows that there have been as many ways of keeping women down as there have been class societies, and that the position of women has always been different for different classes in the same society. This is important because it helps us to understand the particular ways in which capitalist society oppresses women today and the reasons why. History shows that there is no one ‘natural’ role for women.
Ancient Greece and Rome were slave societies. Slave women had no rights over their own bodies at all: they could be sexually used by their master or sold to others, and their children could be taken away from them and sold too. The masters’ daughters, on the other hand, were married off at an early age and closely confined to their homes to show that they were of the slave-owning class – to be seen going to market, or washing at the well, was to admit to the shame of not being able to afford slaves. Women valued the respectability that slave-owning gave even though it meant many restrictions for them. There were slave women who tried to pass themselves off as free, but no free woman ever tried to become a slave.
In Europe in the middle ages, serfs tilled the land for the lord of the manor, but unlike slaves they lived in families on their own plot of land and could pass the plot on to their children. Serf women were obliged to marry serf men and reproduce the labour force of the manor, and most of them lived in small households of one couple and their children. Noble women lived quite differently, in large extended family households, and when they were married (usually at an early age) they brought property and valuable political connections into their husbands’ families. As heiresses or widows they often owned land and serfs, acting as lady of the manor in their own right and keeping armed retainers to fight for them.
When the mass production of goods for the market began to spread in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, these were at first produced in the homes of craftsmen and cottagers, by women and children as well as by men. In these families, neither men nor women went out to work, but produced goods at home for the merchant capitalists. Production was so essential to them that babies were sent outside the household to wet nurses almost as soon as they were born, cared for by servant girls or older sisters when they were weaned and returned (if they survived), and sent out again as apprentices and servants at any age from seven onwards. The bond between parents and children must have been very different then from what it is now.
Meanwhile, the merchants’ wives withdrew from the shop or warehouse into comfortable homes with domestic servants to relieve them of work altogether. The separation of work and home, men and women, into separate spheres had already happened for these middle class families.
The industrial revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries brought the separation of work from home for the working class as well. At first it was women and children who were drawn out of their homes and into the factories, followed by the men as more of industry was mechanised. But women and children in the factories worked in such appalling conditions of overwork and physical danger that working-class people began to fight to defend the family as a place of refuge for women and children, the sick and the unemployed.
Women, especially in the textile factory districts, often had to go out to work until their children were old enough to take their place as the second wage-earner, because men’s wages were not enough to support a family. At the same time, conditions in nineteenth-century industrial towns made heavy housework a necessity, and as there were no alternatives for the sick, the very young and the very old but to be cared for in the family home, women took on these duties too. No wonder they gave up factory work to take care of the home whenever they could afford it. The demand for a ‘family wage’ for men that would enable wives to stay at home and do the job properly (a target which was hardly ever achieved as far as the majority of the working class were concerned) was popular with women workers as well as with men – women cotton workers on strike in Preston in 1854, for example, fully supported it.
In our own century, the role of working-class women has again changed dramatically. About 60 per cent of all married women are now also working for wages. The typical woman worker is no longer young or single but a married woman between the ages of 35 and 49. There are many reasons for the change, among them the decline of the older heavy industries and the increase in services; inflation and the falling purchasing power of men’s wages (four times as many families would be below the poverty line without the wife’s wages); and the fact that people have fewer children in a shorter time than before, and live longer after their children are grown up.
All this suits modern capitalism very well. It gives many industries a more flexible labour force, for one thing. But it is also an advantage for working-class women. As housewives, women are isolated, divided and dependent on men; they can fight the system only in exceptional cases where the whole community is threatened, as in the miners’ strike of 1984–5 or the Glasgow rent strikes of 1915. As workers, they begin to have a chance to organise and act together, and by earning wages of their own they gain a certain amount of self-respect and independence, even if not as the main breadwinner. It has taken a long time for capitalism to bring women back into the workforce in large numbers, after starting the process in the cotton industry in the early nineteenth century, but in the long run that is the way it has been going. There is no turning back, nor would most women wish it: a new age has begun for working-class women as workers in their own right.


4. Women workers fighting back
THE VAST MAJORITY of working-class women today are workers, but they have not simply become like male workers. There are differences between women’s work and men’s that affect their experience, their consciousness and their struggles.
Two out of every five women workers are part-time (including two out of every three who have children under sixteen). Part-timers have fewer legal rights – redundancy, sick pay, notice, maternity leave and so on – and are paid less by the hour than full-timers doing the same job.
Cuts in public services such as school meals, hospitals, nurseries and nursery classes make it even more difficult for many women to take and keep a full-time job. Sickness in the family, a patient who should still be in hospital being sent home to recover, or the collapse of makeshift child-minding arrangements – all these can mean loss of earnings or even the sack for a woman worker.
Most women are in a worse bargaining position than men. Large numbers of women work for small firms with a high turnover of labour. Most of the skills that women have – such as typing, sewing or cooking – are not scarce skills, so are not paid as skilled work. Because there are always at any one time large numbers of women moving back into the labour force after a break for having children or other reasons, there is a ‘reserve army of labour’ keeping women’s wages low.
Men’s weekly earnings are on average 56 per cent higher than women’s, and this rises to 67 per cent in manufacturing industry. These figures include overtime and shift pay, which men get more of than women, but even women’s hourly earnings are less than 75 per cent of men’s, and the proportion has been going down since 1977.
What all this adds up to is that while women have especially good reasons to get together and fight for themselves at work, they face special difficulties in doing so.
Women can organise and fight back at work. Two-thirds of all new trade union members in the past twenty years have been women, and although women workers are still less fully unionised than men, union organisation is now normal in many fields of women’s work where it was virtually unheard of twenty years ago, such as hospitals and offices.
Women were very much part of the rise in working-class militancy in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The Ford’s sewing machinists struck in 1968 for upgrading of their skill, and won a substantial wage increase though they are still, in 1984, fighting for the principle of upgrading. In 1970, twenty thousand clothing workers went on strike in Leeds, reinventing the flying picket shortly before miners and building workers picked up the idea. Up to 1977, there were equal pay strikes in hundreds of workplaces.
Women fought employers and governments; they fought racism (at Imperial Typewriters in Leicester, for example), and they fought male workers who tried to obstruct them. They occupied factories, such as the Fakenham shoe factory in Norfolk in 1969, when factory occupations were almost unheard of in Britain.
Even in the 1980s, when it is harder to fight because of the economic recession and anti-trade union legislation, women have been prominent in the struggles that have taken place: the Lee Jeans occupation at Greenock and the Liverpool typists’ strike of 1981, the civil servants’ and hospital workers’ disputes of 1982, and so on.
Though women and men have often stood together in strikes, women have also often had to raise the question of their collective relationship to men workers in the same workplace. In many of the equal pay strikes of the 1970s, for example, men were unwilling to support the women’s demands; but if the women could convince the men and get their support, they were more likely to win (see the pamphlet by Anna Paczuska, Sisters and Workers, published in 1980). Clearly, it is better to try to convince the men that a victory for women is in the interests of all; that the women’s struggle is against the employer, against whom all workers have common cause, but if men workers insist on sticking to their differentials, then women trade unionists will have to fight them.
The way to fight back at work has to be through the trade unions. But it has to be said that the unions have often failed to do much for women. They are mostly run by men, even when they have a majority of women members, and they often don’t take women’s needs seriously.
The way to make trade unions a better weapon – and this goes for men as well as women – is by rank and file organisation. The strength of a union depends on how well its members support each other in the struggle, not on who is leader or how well-trained its officials are. All leaders and officials should be elected by the membership and easily recalled by them, from shop stewards to general secretaries.
The trouble with most trade union leaders today is not that they are men (though most of them are), but that they are remote from their members’ concerns. Women officials are just as capable of becoming remote from their members and selling them out as men. The new woman president of the printworkers’ union SOGAT in 1984, for example, was getting Fleet Street clerical members (most of them women) to back down from a long-standing dispute within a few weeks of taking office.
The way branches and meetings are run in many unions is offputting to most women: not because they are run by men – in fact, the majority of men members are clearly put off as well, to judge by low attendances. While there must be some rules for the conduct of meetings, otherwise the person with the loudest voice and strongest personality will dominate everything, the aim should be to encourage participation, not prevent it.
Instead, many trade union meetings are conducted so as to prevent too many members from talking or raising awkward problems. This is not because there is a man in the chair, but because he is usually a particular kind of man (backed up by his mates the branch secretary and treasurer, and egged on by the district official), the kind who don’t want action or trouble, but a quiet life and a long service medal when they retire.
Shop stewards and other workplace representatives who want ‘respect’ from management, plenty of facility time, and perhaps the convenor’s office next door to Personnel, don’t want to fight for their members but to smooth things over by negotiation. They often dread shop floor or section meetings more than they do interviews with management, because it is harder to satisfy their members than to agree with the powers that be.
Unfortunately, this is what trade unionism has come to mean for many people today: getting union positions for the status they bring, becoming skilled at persuading people to give up their grievances for a compromise, and attending conferences and committees where ‘big’ decisions are made. Some women argue that women need to play this game in competition with men – to get more women officials appointed, more women leaders at the top, more women delegates to committees and conferences.
It is not that these are bad things in themselves, but that they are useless while the unions are bureaucratically run from above. Getting women on to union executives by reserving places for them, or appointing women as district officials, is only removing the most active women from day-to-day contact with workplace members and so making them less effective in terms of any real fight back.
Many male trade unionists have reactionary ideas about women. For example, they may call for women to be sacked first if there are to be redundancies. This is not only an attack on women – the vast majority need their jobs just as much as men, and their families depend on them, too – but an admission of weakness in refusing to challenge the need for redundancies at all and in trying to shift the burden onto someone else instead.
These ideas are not going to be changed by a high-handed union official, or even by a conference resolution, but by women union members constantly organising, arguing and showing their strength. Changing ideas this way is, of course, a longer and harder job than winning an election or canvassing conference votes, but it is what trade unionism really should mean.
The most important thing about women’s trade union struggles is that they should aim to strengthen trade unionism as well as fighting men’s reactionary ideas, not weaken it. So feminists who wanted to see the Thatcher government break the NGA print union in 1983 because it is a male-dominated union were undermining the trade union rights that enable other women to fight back too. A defeat for the NGA set all trade unions back.
This is not to underestimate the problems of an industry such as the print, where the newspaper proprietors have been trying to use new technology and cheaper female labour to break the power of the unions, and union members have become even more anti-women as a result. But it is just not on for women to ally with the bosses, still less with the Tories and their anti-union legislation, because they are weakening themselves by doing it.
In the USA, under the Positive Action Programme, women have gained access to many skilled jobs from which they were previously excluded, by allying with the state, through compulsory arbitration, to impose these concessions on the unions. As a result, many of the unions are still hostile to the women who have entered these jobs (for example in the mining industry), and the women may still suffer from poorer pay and conditions than the men. Overall, such Positive Action has made little difference in the USA: 80 per cent of women workers are still in ‘women’s jobs’ in clerical, service, sales and manufacturing firms, and in 1982 women’s average earnings were still only 62 per cent of men’s (worse even than in Britain).
But Positive Action has also come to mean getting women into management posts rather than skilled jobs. As noted before, the number of women in white collar and lower grade professional work has expanded while the managerial hierarchy remains predominantly male, and seeing well-qualified women passed over for promotion can often rouse women to protest.
Being bossed around by men is certainly something women should fight against, but do we want to be bossed around by other women instead? Once they get there, women managers are not necessarily more sympathetic to the real needs of the women under them, and sometimes even harsher. While women have as much right to management posts as men, demanding more women managers is not a good strategy since it benefits only a few, and if successful it divides women from one another more than it unites them.
A better way to fight male management is by attacking what are grandly called nowadays ‘management prerogatives’. Why should decision-making, discipline, hiring and firing, and so on, be imposed as if by absolute power from above? The more restrictions the workforce can place on management’s power to do as they like, the stronger and better off its members will be. If women in a workplace can organise, for example, to prevent women being disciplined for taking time off to mind sick children, they will gain far more than if they get a woman into management.
The very words ‘Positive Action for Women’ suggest that negative actions such as challenging management power, upsetting production or going on strike are to be avoided. You have to remember that what is positive for the bosses is negative for the workers and vice versa. Otherwise you end up saying, like the authors of a recent guide to positive action, that ‘Good business means getting the best from everyone – the under-utilisation of women is bad business’ (S. Robarts, A. Coote and E. Ball, Positive Action for Women, The Next Step, published 1982). Good business is greater exploitation of the workforce, and we want to end it, not to make it work better!


5. The family, right or wrong?
WOMEN’S POSITION at work can never be completely separated from their position in the family, as long as the family continues to exist as we know it. As long as people live in small, private households of one couple and their children, with a distinct division of labour between women and men, women will be at a disadvantage in the world.
Many people feel that the love, warmth and security that family life provides are sufficient compensation for any disadvantages. The nuclear family seems ‘natural’ (though our brief account of history has shown that it is not universal), and timeless, even though it has in fact changed as much as any other human institution.
Socialists often describe the advantages of co-operation in terms of family relationships: fraternity, sisterhood, the brotherhood of man and so on. Trade unionists are Brothers and Sisters; branch officers in the print have been Fathers of the Chapel for hundreds of years, but have recently been joined by Mothers of the Chapel in some branches.
The family life of the working class has often been threatened by poverty and harsh laws. The Old Poor Law of Queen Elizabeth I broke up families by taking women and children ‘on the parish’ only when they had no man to support them – thus men who were unable to support their families through unemployment or poverty were forced to desert them, as the only way they could get any support.
This law also separated poor children from their mothers at the age of seven and sent them to be apprenticed. The New Poor Law of 1834 threatened destitute families with the workhouse or ‘Poor Law Bastille’ where men, women and children were separated, disciplined, and often half-starved into the bargain as a punishment for their poverty (or ‘pauperism’, as it was called).
Working people all over the country, but especially in the new manufacturing districts, organised resistance to the harsh New Poor Law. They also organised to demand an end to the exploitation of women and children in the factories. They defended their right to a decent family life, not because middle-class preachers and philanthropists told them that was how they ought to live (though they did tell them), but because without the family they had nothing. Victorian society provided no alternative for the sick, the old, the very young, or the day-to-day needs of the working class.
Today we have a Welfare State which (even under Thatcher) is humane by comparison with the Poor Law Bastilles. Yet it is still no substitute for family life. The more it is ‘rationalised’ – in other words costs cut and managerial authority increased – the more impersonal, bureaucratic and obviously inadequate it becomes.
It is probably true, for example, that patients recover better at home than in a large, impersonal hospital, even if that means a wife or mother sacrificing her job. But what happened to the small, local convalescent homes and cottage hospitals? We are told again and again that children who go to nursery grow up with more problems than children who stay at home with their mothers. But if nursery provision is so low that there are places only for children who have problems at home already (which is the way it is in most parts of the country) the ‘facts’ don’t prove anything at all.
It is often said that even a bad family is better than a good institution, and this opinion has had great influence on the modern Welfare State, which has been even more reluctant to provide good institutions than to provide real support for families who need it. It is, of course, nonsense.
Even Victorian schoolmasters like Dickens’ Wackford Squeers rarely beat children to death; in Britain today, three hundred children a year are killed in their own homes by a parent or parent’s partner. No one knows how many battered wives there are, but a serious estimate of the number of places in women’s refuges required to satisfy the known needs of battered women is one place per two hundred families. Over half of all women murder victims are killed by the men they live with, and 25 per cent of all violent crime reported to the police is domestic violence (even though most domestic violence is not reported to the police).
What is ‘love’ in the modern family if it can include all this? The small family household is a boiling cauldron of intense emotions focussed on a few people – hate as well as love, selfishness as well as caring, competition as well as sharing – with the lid screwed down ever more tightly by modern notions of privacy. As we have smaller households, less contact with other relatives and neighbours, and more indoor entertainments and preoccupations, it is no wonder that family explosions can be so terrible.
The family is changing under the pressures of modern capitalism, but it is not yet disappearing – as many people fear and a few, perhaps, hope. The divorce rate is higher than ever before, but many marriages that are broken in the divorce courts today would have been broken by death in the past. In 1911 the average bride could hope to survive for 22 years from the wedding day, and the average bridegroom 17 years. Now the figures are 42 years for the bride and 40 for the groom – ‘till death us do part’ means twice as long as it used to! The number of divorced people who remarry is constantly increasing, too: though many marriages fail, most of those involved try again sooner or later.
The number of single-parent families is also increasing, especially the number of women bringing up children on their own (about 11 per cent of all families with children). If this is a sign that the family is breaking up, it is a very unfavourable one for women. Most single mothers are not like the middle-class women in their thirties who are constantly telling the Guardian women’s page what a wonderful experience it all is (one wrote that she decided to have a baby because ‘I had my own home, I had fur coats, I’d had rich lovers, I’d had this, that and the other ...’). More single mothers are very young women who, faced with long-term unemployment when they leave school, find having a baby is the only ‘adult’ occupation open to them, and who find themselves much worse off than married mothers as far as housing, jobs (fewer single mothers work than married ones) and general freedom of action are concerned; many later marry as the only way they can see of improving their position.
More couples now live together without getting married than ever before – though ‘common law marriage’ has always been well known among the working class and sex before marriage was for hundreds of years a well-established custom that the churches never succeeded in stamping out. Most couples who ‘live together’ with their children nowadays are families in every sense except the formal, legal one, with very similar relationships to other families. The middle-class ‘progressive relationship’ is not the commonest kind of non-married couple.
Only 40 per cent of households actually consist of a couple and their children nowadays – but this does not mean that 60 per cent are childless or unmarried people! Because couples now have fewer children over a shorter span of time, they often live together without children for longer than they do with children. After their children have left home, they may have to take on other responsibilities: a survey in North-East England in 1979 found that more households included an elderly or handicapped relative than children under sixteen. This contradicts the picture painted by the Tory government of families having abandoned their traditional responsibilities. The proportion of elderly people in institutions is now many times smaller than it was at the turn of the century, when far fewer people survived to grow old.
The family continues to exist because it is the most convenient way of reproducing and caring for the workforce in a capitalist society. No government is going to spend resources on providing a full range of alternative care – nurseries, canteens, dormitories, and so on – and if they did these would probably be exactly the kind of bureaucratic and regimented institutions that most people think of when they hear such suggestions, because they would be planned from above for cost-saving and efficiency.
In Western capitalist society, private property is transmitted through the family; in state capitalist societies such as Russia and China, it is the privileges of the bureaucracy that are passed on to their children through better education and job prospects. Yet all these societies keep up a myth that people get where they are because of individual effort: the myth of free competition in the West, the myth of the classless society in the East! But in each case, the family reinforces existing class divisions.
How can we change all this, and begin to live in a way that produces fewer disasters and more freedom and equality? There is no way the family can be ‘abolished’ from above – like religion, banning it would simply drive it underground. The family can disappear only when people choose to live differently. Only a socialist society could offer a better way of life because it would respond to human needs instead of to the drive for profits.
Many different ways of living together and sharing tasks could be tried, for instance, if houses were not all built to the standard one-family pattern; if eating good food outside the home was not an expensive privilege; if adults shared children instead of owning them and smothering them with their own needs and desires. If women and children were not financially dependent on individual men (and if men were not dependent on individual women for personal services!) then tasks might be more reasonably shared and everyone equally rewarded for the work they do. If married couples were not so isolated they might be less possessive and break-ups less frequent or at least less traumatic.
The way that people live will not change until the material conditions – such as housing, social services, the structure of pay and production – change. But socialism means more even than that, for there are ideas and feelings imposed on us by our present kind of society that will be irrelevant and out-of-date in a society run by working people for themselves.
Capitalist society produces people whose aims and desires are ‘privatised’. Most people have little or no control over anything outside their own homes. Work consists of boring, repetitive tasks carried out under orders; the only thing that’s worse is not having a job at all. Democracy means putting a cross on a piece of paper once every five years. The only place where people are free to make choices and decisions, to do the things that really interest and absorb them, is Home. Literally, you can call your home your own when nothing else is (even if it’s mortgaged for the rest of your working life).
In a really socialist society, where the working class was in control, the field of choices and responsibilities would move outside the home. Working people could call the whole of society their own, and would have access to a far greater range of satisfactions than most of us have at present. When most people are busy and happy running things over which they previously had no control, they will not want to be cooped up at home any more.
This will not happen on the day after a socialist revolution, and presumably some people will want to give up small-family life sooner than others, but it will surely happen sooner or later if we manage to arrive at a socialist society. Family-centred feelings will seem as outdated and irrelevant then as the feudal concept of fealty or the ancient Roman idea of honour do now!
Some people already feel that they are happier outside a conventional family situation, and think that if enough people changed their attitudes and lifestyle it would just quietly disappear. That is all right for those who can afford it. It is much easier for people with middle-class jobs and middle-class incomes to find more flexible housing, distribute their time between work and home differently, pay for good childcare and even afford not to cook for themselves so often. (It is even possible for people on the dole to do a few of these things if they don’t have children and don’t mind living in squalor.) For the majority of working people, these alternative lifestyles are just not available.
People still turn to farnily life as a haven from a harsh and unpleasant world, even if it often a very choppy haven and sometimes a downright dangerous one. The only way this will be changed is by changing the world they are turning away from. It will not be changed by moralising about the family, telling people how they ought to live, or refusing to defend families when they are under attack – as many working-class families are under the Thatcher government’s programme of cuts, restrictions and unemployment. There is no eternal right and wrong about the family: it has always been a changeable institution, and it will go on changing whether we like it or not, according to material conditions in the world outside and not according to ideas of morality.


6. The revolutionary tradition and women’s liberation
UNLIKE THE WARS waged by one ruling class against another, class struggle has never been an exclusively male affair. Women have been part of revolts, riots and revolutions in past class societies, and in workers’ struggles against capitalism in modern times. Marxism comes out of this tradition of class struggle, and the link between women and revolution is not new.
In the French Revolution of 1789, women played a crucial role in riots and demonstrations, forcing the revolution forward despite the reluctance of moderate leaders. They led the march from Paris to Versailles which forced King Louis XVI and his family to move to Paris and recognise a new constitution. They took part in the republican movement that led to the abolition of monarchy and the rule of the radical Jacobin party, even though the Jacobins were unsympathetic to women’s demands. But women in radical groups and clubs such as the Club of Revolutionary Republican Women were well aware of class and political divisions among women as well as men, and were prepared to attack aristocratic women and supporters of the moderate party physically as well as in words.
Despite the bitter defeat women suffered in this revolution – the downfall of the Jacobins did not improve women’s position, it made it a great deal worse – the tradition of revolutionary action by women did not die, but reappeared in Paris in the 1848 revolution, when the working class first appeared as a separate political force in a revolutionary situation, and during the Paris Commune of 1871, when thousands of women died on the barricades to defend a workers’ government.
Meanwhile, the Industrial Revolution had transformed working class life in many parts of Europe, but first and foremost in England. Women were becoming involved in the new movements of the industrial working class: they joined and formed unions, went on strike, and took part in industrial protests. The poet Southey wrote about a women glovemakers’ protest in 1807: ‘Women are more disposed to be mutinous: they stand in less fear of the law ... and therefore in all public tumults they are foremost in violence and ferocity.’ The ferocity of women was also noted in the Derby silk riots of 1833 and the ‘Plug Plot’ strikes in Lancashire in 1842. Women readily joined the trade unions that sprang up in the 1820s and 1830s, and were involved in Britain’s first socialist movement, which was led by the manufacturer Robert Owen but involved many working people (see Barbara Taylor’s book, Eve and the New Jerusalem, published in 1982).
But the rise of modern industry often set men and women against each other, as employers tried to use women as cheap labour to undermine men’s traditional skills and organisations, while men tried to exclude women from many skilled trades. Within the working-class movement there were many reactionary ideas about women, the worst perhaps being among the followers of Proudhon in France, who said, ‘Woman must be housewife or whore,’ and wanted to exclude women from the workforce altogether.
By 1850, the still young socialist movement was beginning to divide on the question of women, and on the question of class struggle too. The followers of Proudhon believed in small property and gradual economic reforms; the Owenites turned to philanthropy and experimental communities; and as trade unions became more stable and permanent many of their leaders wanted to co-operate with capitalism instead of opposing it.
Marx and Engels, in their first important piece of political writing, the Communist Manifesto of 1848, came down clearly on the side of both class struggle and women’s liberation. They rejected all utopian communities and ideas of benevolent manufacturers or gradual reforms, insisting that only the working class could free itself from the tyranny of capital. They ridiculed the reaction of the ruling class to the shocking ideas of women’s liberation:
Abolition of the family! Even the most radical flare up at this infamous proposal of the Communists ... The bourgeois sees in his wife a mere instrument of production. He hears that the instruments of production are to be exploited in common, and, naturally, can come to no other conclusion than that the lot of being common to all will likewise fall to the women. He has not even a suspicion that the real point is to do away with the status of women as mere instruments of production. (Marx and Engels, Communist Manifesto, 1848)
In the First International (known as the International Working Men’s Association in English), Marx and Engels argued against the anti-women ideas of other political groups. They welcomed the affiliation of striking women silkworkers at Lyons in 1869, and tried to have one of the strikers attend the Congress of the International at Basle in support of a resolution on women’s right to work and to membership of the International; but this was prevented by the local section at Lyons, under the influence of the anarchist Bakunin.
Both Marx and Engels were intensely interested in the history and origins of women’s oppression, though it was Engels who wrote the book they had both planned, after Marx’s death. By that time, the movement for equal rights for women was well under way in England, and one of the most interesting things in the book is Engels’ comment on the question of legal equality:
With regard to the juridical equality of man and woman in marriage: the inequality of the two before the law, which is a legacy of previous social conditions, is not the cause but the effect of the economic oppression of women ... The necessity, as well as the manner, of establishing real social equality between the two will be brought out into full relief only when both are completely equal before the law. (Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State, 1884)
A hundred years on, when we have come much closer to complete legal equality but are still a long way from women’s liberation, Engels’ words still ring true.
Since the days of Marx and Engels revolutionary socialists in the Marxist tradition have tried to keep the link between socialist revolution and women’s liberation, despite the hostility of other tendencies in the labour movement and the reluctance of many men in the revolutionary movement itself. It has been at the highest points of class struggle, when the most working-class people have been involved, that the link has been strongest. Many of these are dealt with in Tony Cliff’s book, Class Struggle and Women’s Liberation (published by Bookmarks in 1984), but the most important is the Russian Revolution of 1917, because this did succeed, though only for a few years, in creating a genuine workers’ state.
In Russia, working women’s struggles were sometimes ahead of socialist theory from the start. Even before the first mass strike wave of 1905–7, women were a substantial part of the new industrial labour force and had begun to take strike action for specifically women’s demands such as maternity rights, time off for breast-feeding and laundry days, and the end of sexual abuse by management, as well as for improved pay and other conditions. During the early years of the First World War, women organised to fight falling wages and factory layoffs; they formed unions of domestic servants, soldiers’ wives, laundry workers and bakery workers, as well as the older textile and manufacturing unions.
Leading members of the Bolshevik Party such as Alexandra Kollontai, Nadezhda Krupskaya, Inessa Armand and Klavdia Nikolaieva (a typesetter who had joined the Bolsheviks as a girl of fourteen during the 1905 revolution) took part in women’s struggles and urged women to join the party. For a time in 1914 (until it was raided by the police) and again in 1917, they published a paper for women, Rabotnitsa or Woman Worker. They argued that working women could not and should not join aristocratic and middle-class feminists in the women’s movement (who, like most of the Suffragettes in England, came out in full support of the 1914 war). They argued that working women should fight for and with their own class. Women workers played an important part in the two revolutions of 1917, while aristocratic and middle-class feminists were bitterly opposed to revolution, especially the workers’ revolution of October.
The newly-born soviet government of October 1917 soon took steps to carry out the legal emancipation of women. Divorce, abortion and homosexuality were legalised, the hold of the Orthodox Church over marriage was broken, and the state took responsibility for the welfare of mothers and children.
But the Bolsheviks recognised that legal emancipation was only the first step to women’s liberation. Without far-reaching changes in social and economic conditions, women could not obtain the freedom that the law promised them. Russia was a huge and backward country with a mainly peasant population and the hold of reactionary religious ideas was still strong. ‘Women’s Departments’ were set up in all areas to bring women together actively to change things.
For the oppression of women in the old Russian patriarchal family to end, state provision for women and children had to become a reality, with maternity homes, nurseries and schools for all. Experiments in collective living, too, were encouraged, though the state had even less money to spare to support them than it had for the essential facilities. The determination to tackle these vast problems was there.
But by 1929, power in Russia had passed into the hands of a new ruling class headed by Stalin, hostile to women’s liberation and determined to do away with all traces of workers’ power – though they retained the rhetoric of socialism and women’s liberation to hide what they were doing. The Women’s Departments were closed down, and the progressive legislation of the 1917 revolution bit by bit reversed. Many people continued to believe that Russia was still socialist, despite an increasingly authoritarian regime; they had to pretend that women were liberated in Russia because they drove tractors or mined coal. But to the few critics of the retreat from socialism in Russia, the reversal of policies on women and the family was one of the most obvious signs of the betrayal of the revolution. Leon Trotsky, who was thrown out of Russia in 1929 for opposing the rise of the new authoritarian state, regarded the question of the family as crucial, and in his book, The Revolution Betrayed (published in 1937), denounced the new family policies of Stalin’s regime.
It is the revolutionary socialist tradition that women’s liberation goes hand-in-hand with workers’ power which we want to rebuild now. We reject all the other, anti-women traditions that have existed in the labour movement, and the idea that women’s liberation can come about by other means. We want, someday, to be able to carry on from where the Russian Revolution was forced to stop.


7. Are there any alternatives?
MANY PEOPLE think of feminism as an alternative to revolutionary socialism. Because there is no organised feminist movement, no feminist programme, it is often hard to tell what women mean when they call themselves feminist. The word may simply mean that a person (woman or man) is committed to the cause of women’s liberation – and in that sense, as I have been arguing in this pamphlet, it is fully compatible with revolutionary socialism.
But there has been, ever since the nineteenth century, a feminism that is definitely incompatible with revolutionary socialism; indeed that is an obstacle to class struggle and the participation of women in the socialist movement. This kind of feminism centres on the view that all men are enemies of women, including working-class men – perhaps particularly working-class men, as middle-class feminists seem a lot readier to denounce printers and miners for their sexist ways than Tory politicians or captains of industry. Rather than trying to change the outlook of working-class men, get them to support women in practice, and perhaps change their ideas more radically too, such feminists simply say that there can be no common cause of men and women in class struggle. In the early 1980s, this view became widespread among feminists in Britain.
Yet it is remarkable how many women who thought of themselves as feminists found themselves supporting the miners’ strike in 1984–85, simply because miners’ wives were leading the way and a defeat for the Thatcher government seemed like a good idea for feminists as well as socialists. Many feminists’ ideas are vague rather than clear-cut, and they do not accept all the consequences of a struggle ‘against men’. Many think of themselves as ‘socialist feminists’, but without accepting the revolutionary tradition.
Most feminists are not in the least like the lesbian separatists pictured by the media. Most lesbians are not like that either, since being attracted to other women and wanting to live together doesn’t necessarily mean lesbians have to be extreme feminists in their political opinions. The opinion-formers in our society want to create a picture of a threat that is at once political and sexual, and they play on people’s prejudices to create it.
But there is often among feminists a preoccupation with the personal and the trivial – the way people (especially other women, as it happens) live, dress and talk. In the 1960s, the slogan ‘the personal is political’ was a good one, because for decades many questions crucial to women in the socialist movement had been dismissed as private matters. But more recently it has become an excuse for ignoring political arguments about class struggle because only the personal is seen as political. The point is that the way most people live, dress or talk can’t be changed by moralising argument, but only by changing the world around us, by working for socialist revolution; and if that is achieved, people will choose new ways of living, dressing, talking (and loving) without instruction.
It is often considered essential to feminism to believe that women can only organise and fight separately from men. Because men have for so long excluded women from most organisations and struggles in the labour movement, women argue that they can no longer take part in organisations with men, who will only try to dominate them in the same old way. There is a problem about men’s way of running the labour movement without women, but it cannot be fought by separatism, because this method avoids confronting men and insisting that they give way on their ‘own’ ground.
The question of women’s organisation is above all a tactical one. During the miners’ strike, for example, women were usually mobilised into support of the strike by setting up a women’s committee associated with a pit or village – like the Women’s Auxiliaries often set up in the American strikes and occupations of the 1930s. But in many areas women also sat on the strike committee, which was even more valuable because they were gaining admission to the sort of discussions and decisions from which they had previously been excluded. Both of these were good tactics: what is wrong is to insist that women can only or must always organise separately.
Perhaps there could be a women’s movement which, while not feminist in the sense of being against all men, could be a separate but equal part of the class struggle? This depends on what kind of organisation you believe the working class needs so as to be able to fight effectively. In the end, the outcome of a revolutionary situation like that in Russia in 1917 (and many others that have not resulted in successful revolutions, like Spain in 1936 or France in 1968) depends on clear, decisive and often rapid action. A loose alliance of separate organisations with different ways of working cannot just suddenly jell into an effective revolutionary force at the eleventh hour; it is necessary, from long before a revolutionary situation arrives, to build an effective revolutionary party with a mass membership. Therefore, it is necessary to make sure that women become an important and recognised force in any such organisation, not outside it.
Our outlook on workers’ organisation is, therefore, different from that of the Labour Party. Large numbers of women who have been active in the women’s movement are now being drawn into the Labour Party (and to a lesser extent the wing of the Communist Party that is closest to the Labour Party). Why do we as revolutionary socialists refuse to join the Labour party, where, it is often said, we would have the chance to influence more people and even affect policies at the parliamentary level?
We are not in the Labour Party because we do not believe that society can be changed by a series of gradual steps in the right direction. The people who hold power in our society will not be removed except by the opposite power, the working class. Parliament does not have real power to transform society: as soon as it starts treading on the toes of big business it is brought back into line. The hope that the position of women in our society can be radically improved by parliamentary action is an illusion. Even the legislation that we do have, the Equal Pay and Sex Discrimination Acts, have been ineffective in themselves: the only thing that gave the Equal Pay Act some teeth in the mid-1970s was that women in hundreds of workplaces took action to see that they got what it promised.
All feminist calls for reform assume that the state is a neutral force which can redress the balance between men and women by action from above. But the state is not neutral, even under a Labour government, and the inequality of men and women is too deeply rooted in our system of society, the capitalist system, to be removed by a few reforms from above.
In addition to this, most reforms that feminists in and around the Labour Party have suggested in recent years have proposed to sacrifice the interests of the working class as a whole to the supposed benefit of women. Such is the ‘feminist incomes policy’ which, they claim, would hold men’s wages down and allow women’s to rise. But the experience of all incomes policies shows that while they can hold wages down, they cannot make employers redistribute the difference to lower paid workers. Incomes policies have in practice weakened lower-paid workers, such as the council manual workers who were made an example during Labour’s incomes policies of the late 1970s even though they were among the lowest paid.
Another feminist proposal, that the state should guarantee an adequate income to housewives and mothers whether they stay at home or go out to work, sounds like a good idea for making women financially independent, but could well have the effect of driving women out of the labour force in large numbers. The arguments for sacking women first when there are to be redundancies would be overwhelming, and many women would prefer to give up the unequal struggle for jobs and go back to being isolated in the home. Reforms like this, that tinker with the system without attacking the root of the problem, capitalism itself, could do a lot more harm than good for women.
At the local level, many feminists have been involved in left-wing Labour councils, and see their aim as being to improve life for women in their area. This has really amounted to two things. On the one hand, some small amounts of money have been given to voluntary organisations and women’s groups of various kinds, about which the media have made a quite disproportionate fuss, usually based on outright misinformation. On the other hand, women’s officers and committees have been set up within the councils’ own administration, often involving new posts at senior executive level to prove that women’s equality is being ‘taken seriously’, with salaries in the £15,000–£20,000 bracket even though the total amounts are still a drop in the bucket of council finances.
Despite the many hostile comments from the press and television on these ‘socialist republics’ or ‘parish communes’, the fact is that they are quite unable to improve life for the majority of women who live in these usually poor inner city areas. Central government (already under Labour in the late 1970s, but increasingly so under the Tories) has been starving these councils of the resources needed to keep essential facilities such as housing, transport and jobs at an adequate level, let alone improve them and supply other things that women need such as nurseries, out-of-school play facilities for children and refuges for battered wives.
What makes it worse is that the measures taken by even the most well-intentioned Labour councils are handed down from above and on their terms. Some Labour councils provide special facilities for women’s trade union committees, while keeping shop stewards’ meetings to an absolute minimum; others finance research into the changing position of women in the labour market, but denounce council typists who are trying to prevent the loss of jobs by themselves controlling the introduction of new office technology.
In circumstances like these, the news that a Women’s Adviser has been appointed at £20,000 a year or that women councillors use official cars to collect their children from school because they are too busy with committee meetings to wait in long bus queues like other mothers, is bound to infuriate many working-class women. Women reformers in local government have sadly often widened the gap that separates them from the women they claim to represent.


8. Conclusions
THE SOCIALIST WORKERS PARTY is not claiming to have womens’ liberation all neatly wrapped up in a parcel with revolutionary socialism ready to be delivered on the doorstep of the ruling class. We do aspire to build a party that can make the unity of the class struggle and women’s liberation a fact, a party that can one day be at the forefront of the class struggle with a clear revolutionary perspective for getting rid of capitalism and achieving workers’ power. We want to encourage other women to join us and to play an equal (not a separate) part in that struggle.
We do not accept the divisions between men and women that have been built into the labour movement by men’s selfishness and short-sightedness and by bureaucratic manipulation from above. But we do not accept, either, the divisions that many feminists would insist on, setting working-class men and women against one another and letting the class struggle grow weaker as a result.
We believe that the Marxist explanation of the origins of class society and women’s liberation is the key to understanding the position of women, but we do not regard this as a purely academic argument. As Marx said, ‘The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point, however, is to change it.’
The revolutionary socialist tradition holds out a glimpse of how the world can be changed for the better, in the vision of the few years following the Russian Revolution of 1917 before Stalinism took over.
We do not believe that feminism, in the sense of a struggle of women against men, holds out any such hope of changing things.


Further Reading
Frederick Engels, Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State. For recent comment on the debates over Engels’ classic work, see Chris Harman’s article, Women’s liberation and revolutionary socialism, in International Socialism 2:23 (1984), especially pages 3–10.
Tony Cliff, Class Struggle and Women’s Liberation gives an analysis of the political differences between feminists and socialists as the history of each developed.
Jill Liddington and Jill Norris, One Hand Tied Behind Us is a history of the role that working-class women played in the struggle for the vote in Britain
Cathy Porter’s Alexandra Kollontai: A Biography is a history of women in the Russian Revolution as well as a biography of the best-known woman Bolshevik.
Edith Thomas, The Women Incendiaries is the classic history of women in the Paris Commune of 1871.
 



While welcoming Chris Harman’s article, Women’s Liberation and Revolutionary Socialism (International Socialism 2 : 23, I felt that some of his arguments, though essentially correct, were based on confused reasoning and untenable assertions. I hope that by pointing these out and suggesting some better arguments I will be contributing support for our case that the struggles for socialism and women’s liberation are not separate but one.
The arguments I am concerned about hinge on Chris’s assertion that:
the logical thing is to see the family as part of the superstructure – something created by the needs of accumulation at a certain point in capitalist development, which capitalism now begins to undermine, but which it is prevented from abolishing because of its own crisis-prone nature. (p. 19)
The family is not, he says, ‘essential to capitalism in the same way as exploitation and accumulation.’ Yet he is quite clear that ‘there can be no end to women’s oppression under capitalism’ – indeed, this is one of his section headings, and he includes the impossibility of actually abolishing the family within capitalism under that heading.
Confused? I was at first, and I believe that the confusion is partly the result of Chris’s introducing the much misunderstood distinction between ‘base’ and ‘superstructure’ into his argument. But it is also the result of a common Marxist tendency in writings on the family, to leap straight from ‘the Origins’ to the twentieth century (or perhaps the nineteenth-century industrial revolution) without any consideration of the history of the family in class society in between. My point is that Chris’s case would be more coherent and persuasive without these impediments.
The article argues quite correctly against the Two Modes theory of Joan Smith and others – the idea that there is a ‘mode of reproduction’ in each society which is distinct and separate from the ‘mode of production’. Human arrangements for the reproduction of the species and for the day-to-day survival of its members (feeding, clothing and sheltering them) are always an essential part of the mode of production in a society, and have varied throughout the history of class society according to the level of the productive forces and the balance of relations between producing and exploiting classes. For example, in the slave societies of ancient Greece and Rome the slaves had no families: they were not allowed to marry or to claim ‘their own’ children, who belonged instead to their mother’s master. But in the feudal societies which followed, the serfs were tied to the soil as families, legally bound to reproduce the labour force of the manor as well as to labour for the lord themselves. Where feudal lords were relatively weak (mountain areas such as the Pyrenees), the peasants lived in clannish extended families, but where the lords were strong (in most of North-Western Europe) the nuclear peasant family was the norm. Many more examples could be given of the relationship between the family and the productive arrangements in different societies: for example, the multiplication of proletarian nuclear family households producing commodities for the market in the Domestic System of early capitalism; or the recreation of the family among the working class in the cotton towns of Lancashire in the nineteenth century where it had briefly seemed to be on the verge of disappearance.
Taking such historical developments into consideration, there are some difficulties about defining the family as ‘part of the superstructure’. In some societies – feudal and early capitalist – production actually takes place within the family unit. In another – industrial capitalism – there is an almost total divorce between the family and the workplace. In yet others, the producers may work in the households of other families (the slave workshops of Greece and Rome); or again they may be totally or partially deprived of family relations as workers on huge estates (parts of the Roman world and the American South). This makes it hard to say in general whether or not the family is part of the relations of production: it would seem that sometimes it is, but not always.
Even to see the problem in this way, however, would be to concede half the case to the Two Modes argument, for it is to suggest that production and reproduction are different kinds of things, one of which – production – is more ‘basic’ than the other.
I suspect that what underlies Chris Harman’s attitude is that he is unconsciously reproducing a fundamental tenet of most non-Marxist schools of sociology: that the ‘social’ is a separate realm from the ‘economic’. It is in this sense that many Marxists seem to have interpreted the distinction made by Marx and Engels between base and superstructure. Some of the best known quotations from Engels on this subject do indeed use the words ‘economic’ and ‘basis’ in conjunction, but it should be clear from the context and from other writings of Engels around the same time that he had no narrow conception of the ‘economic sphere’. For example, he did write:
The economic situation is the basis, but the various elements of the superstructure ... also exercise their influence on the course of historical struggle ... [To J. Bloch, 21–2 September 1890]
It is not that the economic situation is cause, solely active, while everything else is only passive effect. There is, rather, interaction on the basis of economic necessity, which ultimately always asserts itself. [To W. Borgius, 25 January 1894]
But in successive introductions to late editions of the Communist Manifesto Engels repeatedly defined the fundamental proposition of Marxism in the following terms:
That economic production and the structure of society of every historical epoch arising therefrom constitute the foundation for the political and intellectual history of that epoch. [Communist Manifesto, English edition, 1880, German edition 1883 (My emphasis)]
With regard to the subject under discussion in Harman’s article, the first letter of Engels quoted above explicitly says:
According to the materialist conception of history, the ultimately determining element in history is the production and reproduction of real life. [My emphasis]
By both these definitions, it seems to me, the family would be part of the base and not the superstructure.
Engels was always an opponent of what he called the vulgarisation of historical materialism, and some of Chris Harman’s formulations in the article in question were undoubtedly vulgar. For instance, he attempted to argue that the dynamic tension between forces of production and relations of production which shapes the course of human history is absent from the sphere of reproduction because ‘human beings are not constantly finding new ways of reproducing themselves (cloning in one epoch, laying eggs in another, live births in a third) ...’(p. 16) He does not go on to say ‘test tube babies in a fourth!’, presumably because he realises that history might prove him wrong!
But the argument is not just facetious, it is silly. Human reproduction in the narrow sense of procreation is not immune to technological change. Has Chris never used a condom, or slept with a woman on the Pill? Or does he think that the difference between Karl Marx’s experience of family life and his own is purely ideological?
Nor do technological changes in contraception lack that dynamic tension in relation to production that we see elsewhere. The twentieth-century spread of the condom, followed by the more reliable Pill, among the working class has been both a cause and a result of the increasing participation of women in the labour force. I should have thought that such changes precisely fit Chris Harman’s definition of the dynamic: ‘Every increase in the ability of human beings to control nature produces new interrelations between human beings themselves, and therefore begins to transform the pre-existing relations of production.’ (p. 16)
But long before the spread of mechanical means of contraception, it can easily be seen that having babies was a social and not a purely natural fact. Who had babies, who married whom and at what age, how many children were born and how many survived – all these reflect changeable social relations, varying from one mode of production to another and even from one specific economic situation to another. Demographic facts do not simply respond to economic change; they may even help to create new economic facts, such as the industrial labour force in the late eighteenth century. They may vary, in one society and one economic situation, between classes: for example, in the eighteenth century the French peasantry restricted births (presumably by coitus interruptus or abstention) in order to keep the family landholding intact, while the urban proletariat had more illegitimate births, more unions libres (common law marriages) and more children generally. Unless we realise that changes in population are overwhelmingly the result of human activity and human choice, we end up with the ‘hidden hand’ of mysterious and uncontrollable demography replacing the ‘hidden hand’ of the economic process.
Procreation is, however, only a part of the reproduction of the labour force: the rearing of children and maintenance of adult workers accounts for far more time and effort. Chris Harman’s article argues that Kath Ennis’s demonstration that ‘capitalism had an economic interest in socialising certain aspects of housework, so enabling women to be exploited through the labour market’ proved, by ‘irrefutable logic’, that the family is not essential to capitalism ‘in the same way as exploitation and accumulation’. (pp. 18–19)
The logic certainly can be refuted, because capitalism’s interest in socialising certain aspects of housework in order to make women available and willing to work for wages does not prove that capitalism has an interest in socialising all aspects of housework. On the contrary, the partial socialisation of housework has certain advantages for capitalism that the complete abolition of the family would lack. The dual position of women as workers and housewives facilitates their exploitation on worse wages and conditions than men. The fact that women move in and out of the labour force according to family needs keeps the market for women’s labour (and to some extent the market for men’s labour also) in the shadow of a reserve army of women seeking work or about to seek it. Finally, the privatised family system of reproducing the labour force is more flexible than any socialised system: in hard times, families are tightening their belts and changing their priorities, not rioting in the dining rooms or tearing apart the dormitories. This brings us back to the point that capitalism is prevented from abolishing the family ‘because of its own crisis-prone nature’.
It is not only ageing capitalism that has crises: I seem to remember that both youthful capitalism and middle-aged capitalism had short-term crises as well as the long-term tendency for the rate of profit to fall. Chris Harman himself has just written an excellent book explaining that crisis is an inescapable fact of capitalism. Yet he seems to argue in his article that capitalism’s ‘crisis-prone nature’ is somehow not ‘essential to capitalism in the same way as exploitation and accumulation’. This seems to me to be splitting hairs.
The distinction between base and superstructure, hallowed though it is by the Marxist tradition, also sometimes seems to me to be splitting hairs and to be misleading more often than it is useful. For the superstructure is surely no less essential, or easier to get rid of, than the socio-economic base of class society. This should be obvious when we think of the state, which both Marx and Engels undoubtedly regarded as part of the superstructure: it is not autonomous, nor capable of being destroyed without destroying capitalist society, nor can capitalist society be destroyed without destroying it. It is, perhaps, more variable, in that one mode of production – e.g. capitalism – can support more than one form of state – e.g. bourgeois democracy, fascism, state capitalism. In this sense, the family resembles the state, for there is no doubt that one mode of production can accommodate variations in the form of the family (as in the case of Western European feudalism mentioned above). But to place it therefore ‘in the superstructure’ would be to ignore its place in the productive process in some class societies, and its place in the reproductive process in all.
In conclusion, I hope that we can continue to defend the position that women’s liberation and the struggle for socialism are one fight and should be one movement, without resorting to the dubious arguments that occasionally crept into Chris Harman’s article.
 






The miners’ strike has seen both very backward sexist attitudes from some miners and a wonderful mobilisation of miners’ wives and girlfriends to help win the strike.



The best story of the last month was the one about the policeman who looked into a car carrying Yorkshire miners’ wives to a picket in Nottinghamshire. “Right, ladies, on you go,” he said. “We’re looking for pickets, but we can see you’re not pickets.”
Miners’ wives and girlfriends all over the country have been organising to support the strike. They have moved from setting up soup kitchens and collecting money to demonstrating and actual picketing. In all this, they have re-established in a very public way the solidarity of working class women with their men when their families’ livelihood is at stake and their communities under threat.
This solidarity among miners’ families is far from new, and militant action by miners’ wives goes back a long way. In 1844, women drove off Cornish scabs from a striking colliery m Durham: In Lancashire in 1868 and 1881 they also helped to drive away blacklegs and addressed large open-air meetings in support of the strikers. At Murton in Durham in 1910 men, women and children together raided stocks of coal at the pithead to heat their homes during a strike.
 
Naked
The commonest kind of action by women during miners’ strikes, however, was always the harassment of local scabs outside their homes with “rough music” – banging, shouting, parading with flags on clothes props or dressed in funny costumes. The tradition is centuries old, and it happened as late as 1935 in the Durham area.
So it should not come as a surprise that women have been involved in the current strike. But the miners’ history and traditions are often represented as being hostile to women from at least the time of the 1842 Mines Act that banned women from underground work. The “traditional” working class family with the full-time housewife and large numbers of children was strongest in mining communities, and it is a pattern which we now see as oppressive for women.
There can be no denying that present-day miners are often sexist, with naked pin-ups in miners’ papers and strikers on demonstrations chanting “Show us your tits” at passing young women.
But young married miners minding the kids while their wives travel to picket lines, and the enthusiastic welcome given to women’s contingents on recent demonstrations, show that there is another side to the picture.
Not all miners support the most aggressive sexist behaviour: at one college, where a handful of the miners who were staying there while picketing a nearby port harassed women students, the majority admitted that they were against it. (The important thing in this case is that the students who argued with the miners were supporting the strike, not criticising the miners from a remote and hostile position.)
Some of the “sexist” comments heard in Nottinghamshire have been part of the argument between strikers (and their families) and scabs (and their families). Scabs telling women to go home to their kitchens, and strikers accusing the scabs of being under their wives’ thumbs, are reaching for convenient insults rather than attacking women as women.
To see the history of the miners as simply sexist is a great mistake. The role of women in this history has often been controversial, and the controversies have often got caught up in outside arguments about women, sexuality and the family. But an understanding of nineteenth century mineworkers and their families shows that they cannot be interpreted in simple terms of antagonism between men and women.
Most male miners supported the banning of women from underground work in 1842. These women had worked in appalling conditions and in the most backward pits in a few areas only. Most of the women interviewed by the parliamentary commissioners hated the work and longed to be rid of it. No one except the local coal owners and the most doctrinaire opponents of state interference believed that such barbaric exploitation should be allowed to continue.
But the 1842 Act threw these women out of work all at once and with no compensation. Their families needed their wages, and there was no prospect of alternative employment for most of them. In those areas where women did work underground, both men and women miners had reservations about the Act – the division of opinion was not between women and men so much as between areas where women worked underground and those where they did not.
Some miners’ spokesmen did adopt the argument that work underground was a “moral danger” for women. This idea was born of middle class prurience, fascinated and shocked by women and young girls working scantily-clothed and in trousers in close proximity to men. This was the aspect of women’s mine work most luridly publicised by the illustrated press, and it was taken up by some miners from the areas where women did not work and by union officials.
Men who worked alongside women surely knew that there was no opportunity for sexual contact at work, and that husbands, brothers and fathers were usually around for protection!
Later in the century, the 1842 Mines Act came to be seen as having introduced the pernicious principle that working class women were not to be treated as adults – it was the first piece of industrial legislation not confined to children. It did become the springboard for later attempts to regulate women out of all “unfeminine” occupations. But at the time it was seen mainly as establishing the valuable principles that the state could set a limit to exploitation, and that women were entitled to protection of their health and safety – both of which principles were later to be extended in the direction of men’s work.
The problems of miners’ families in the nineteenth century are underestimated by those who see women’s right to work as the only principle at stake. Miners’ work was not only dirty, it was often damp as well: clothes had to be washed and dried daily, and hot water available for washing and bathing.
In many families, husbands and sons would be working different shifts; in others, disabled miners would have to be cared for. Servicing the family was a full-time job, heavy indeed though not as heavy as pit work. The division of labour between men and women was regarded as desirable not only by miners but by most working class men and women a century ago.
The male miner regarded a “family wage”, sufficient to support himself, his wife and young children, as a necessity. Yet even in mining, a relatively high paid occupation, one wage was rarely enough. It was the older children in miners’ families who earned the extra wages. Miners’ families had more children than the average working class family right up to the 1930s. As long as the industry was expanding, employment for miners’ sons was virtually guaranteed.
 
Teens
This division of labour was advantageous to the miners’ families, and when times were good they enjoyed a comparatively high standard of living. The first Inspector of Mines, Tremenheere, who opposed the exploitation of women and children, also deplored the “reckless spending” of miners’ families on meat and poultry, fresh vegetables, beer and spirits, and “excursions in carts and cars”!
In some areas the miners’ daughters also contributed to the family income, being employed as “pit brow lasses” unloading, screening and sorting coal and moving tubs and wagons at the pit head. Most of these women were in their teens and twenties, though miners’ widows and wives supporting disabled husbands often joined them.
There were several unsuccessful attempts to ban women from pit brow work, but they survived until 1972 when the last two were made redundant in Cumberland. Once again, the most vigorous campaigners for abolition were middle-class moralists who denounced the work as “unfeminine” and the trousers worn in the Wigan area as immoral.
But they were joined by the National Miners’ Union and the miners’ Liberal MPs in the 1880s, while the growing women’s rights movement took up the women’s case and denounced “selfish” male miners for wanting the jobs for themselves.
Locally, feelings about the banning of women from surface work were mixed. The union agent for the Wigan miners who campaigned for the ban was later thrown out by the miners for failing to represent their views on this and other matters.
The question of women’s labour being cheap, which led many miners to support exclusion, was double-edged. Men demanded a family wage – but the women were contributing to the support of their own families. They had never received help from the miners’ union officially, though they sometimes supported miners’ strikes. When they organised themselves to strike for higher wages, as at Pemberton (Lancs) in 1867, they were on their own.
This changed only during and after the First World War, when the union decided at last to recruit the surface women: The miners’ 1919 claim included (and won) a substantial improvement in the women’s wages. It is no accident that this was at the height of the miners’ strength, in the year when they turned back the employers with what many regarded as a threat of revolutionary action.
But by the 1950s pit-head mechanisation was squeezing women out of jobs, and the wholesale pit closures of the 1960s and early 1970s wiped out all the remaining women mineworkers, except cleaners, canteen and office workers.
Some miners today seem to regard the exclusion of women as a fundamental moral principle – it is said that in 1982 some striking women hospital workers were kept waiting outside lodge meetings while they voted solidarity action. This tradition is probably strongest in the North-East, where women had long ceased to be employed at mines when the union took shape in the 1840s.
The prejudice is clearly outdated. If it came to a question of women working underground today, modern conditions and mechanisation, with the principle of equal pay for equal work, would prevent any return to the days before 1842. Since 1974 women have worked underground in the USA – 2,500 of them by 1979, most of them attracted by decent wages rather than by feminist principle, though equal rights legislation paved the way. It is not very practical, however, to argue that women should enter the mines in Britain at the moment, when the loss of so many jobs is threatened.
 
Baths
Few miners’ wives or daughters would want to go down the pit in any case – they know its hardships and dangers too well. But like most working class women today, many miners’ wives are full-time or part-time workers themselves.
Compared with their grandmothers, the lives of women in mining communities have been changed by the coming of pithead baths and showers, better housing with running hot water, bathrooms, washing machines and other modern conveniences. They have fewer children over a short period of time, and children do not become wage earners till they are almost grown-up by nineteenth century standards. Miners’ wives work when they can for the extra income their families need – they are no longer tied for life to the tin bath and the washing line.
Perhaps more slowly than other working class women, miners’ wives are beginning to break out of their “separate sphere”. But in many areas, the opportunities for women to earn good wages are still few and far between. Meanwhile, the miners’ role as bread-winner is threatened by redundancies and pit closures. It is hardly surprising that in this situation there are tensions, that miners cling to a macho image and insist on seeing women in traditional ways.
The important thing that the 1984 strike has shown is that these tensions do not and should not wipe out the tradition of unity between women and men in the struggle to defend the miners’ jobs. Miners’ wives may be workers themselves – one woman proudly described herself as “breadwinner and picket” for the duration of the strike – or they may be housewives, but by organising for action in support of the strike they can show that they have to be taken seriously and are not just passive appendages of the men.
The best way of fighting sexism is to show that women have to be taken seriously, as equals, by male workers. In the long run, women will have to be freed from economic dependence and being tied to the home, so as to be able to act and organise for themselves. But in the present situation, miners’ wives and girlfriends have shown just how much solidarity with the men on strike can do towards winning an equal place for themselves in the class struggle.
 



It is hard for a teacher or student of the English Civil War in 1980 not to feel that Marxism is under siege with supplies running out. The big guns of the academic establishment thunder ceaselessly against it, and even articles in supposedly left-wing journals proclaim that Marxism is dead. [1]
Forty years ago, it was not so. The big guns were, of course, lined up against Marxism, but they were horse-drawn artillery compared with the nuclear rearmament which has since taken place. Right-wing historiography rested then on the two long-standing traditions of the ‘Whig interpretation’ – which saw the Civil War as an essentially progressive struggle for liberty against tyranny – and the ‘Puritan Revolution’ caused by the development of a system of ideas. Academic attitudes to Marxism were tolerant rather than vicious: a young American student who declared to his tutor that the Civil War was a class struggle was met with the bland response, ‘Of course, but what else?’ [2]
The ‘New History’ which has grown up especially in the last twenty years makes no bones about its hostility to Marxism. In the 1950s, the most vicious attacks on the Marxist interpretation of the Civil War (by Hugh Trevor-Roper, as right-wing politically and as nasty personally as you could hope or fear to find) nevertheless offered an alternative explanation in terms of social conflict, namely the struggle of the impoverished gentry against the overgrown Renaissance state. But from the mid-1960s it became right-wing orthodoxy to deny that the Civil War was a class conflict at all. By 1973, the introduction to a widely-used textbook by Conrad Russell could claim that ‘For the time being ... social change explanations of the English Civil War must be regarded as having broken down.’ Lest anyone should think that that places the burden of providing an alternative explanation on the shoulders of right-wing historians, the task of explanation is either postponed until we have enough new biographies of seventeenth-century politicians and studies of day-to-day debates in Parliament; or cynically denied altogether. One historian has even taken Marxists to task for ‘over-explaining the phenomena of the past’. ‘We must allow,’ he says, ‘for the role of sheer muddle and misunderstanding in history.’ [3]
Two views of the Civil War are, however, commonly regarded as explanations among anti-Marxists. One is that it resulted from the growth of factions, based on personalities and personal connections, among the ruling class; the other is that war was precipitated in 1642 by local interests and local rivalries in particular provincial areas. Both these provide plenty of scope for young academics to engage in ‘original research’. (Craftism has gone so far in academic circles that one Marxist article has been attacked for using ‘only printed sources’.) Both say a great deal about how, but nothing about why, such conflicts developed.
The Marxist response to this retooling of conservative ideology has been inadequate in several ways. First there is the actual shortage of Marxist contributions to the argument. Since Christopher Hill entered the field in 1940 with his essay, The English Revolution, 1640 (part of a Communist Party education pamphlet, reissued separately in 1955 and still widely read and enjoyed by socialists), he has dominated it completely.
Hill left the Communist Party in 1957 after playing a not very glorious role on the Commission for Inner-Party Democracy, and ended up as Master of Balliol College, Oxford. [4] Given the nasty and personalised tone of the right-wing attack, it is hardly surprising that defending Hill should come to be almost a significant activity in itself, yet the striking fact is that when a collection of essays by former pupils of his was got together to mark his retirement at the end of the 1970s, not one article made any explicit reference to Marxism, only one contributor (Brian Manning) could be regarded as in any sense a Marxist, and several (including the advocate of muddle quoted above) were openly anti-Marxist. There is something rather odd about ‘Britain’s greatest Marxist historian’ (as he is constantly described in journals such as New Left Review and History Workshop) raising no successors.
The other major influence on the Marxist orthodoxy of the last forty years has been R.H. Tawney’s work on the rise of the gentry. Though Tawney did not see himself as a Marxist, he identified the English Civil War as a bourgeois revolution; but in his version the bourgeois revolution was made by and for the landed gentry. Whatever the precedents for this view in passing remarks by Marx or Engels, Tawney’s treatment of the question has caused utter havoc for the class interpretation of the English Civil War. It has shaped the development of right-wing history, in the concern to deny it, as well as the stagnation of Marxist history in the concern to defend it.
It is only recently that Marxist history has begun to turn away from this obsession with the gentry and begun to focus again on the role of the masses and of radical movements such as the Diggers, Levellers and Ranters. A.L. Morton’s The World of the Ranters (1970) and Hill’s The World Turned Upside Down (1972) provide exciting new accounts of the opposition to the bourgeois revolution from within, while Brian Manning’s The English People and the English Revolution (1976) shows that the revolutionary situation of 1640–42 was created by peasants, artisans and workers in action more than by Parliamentary factions.
Yet there is, even in this area, an alarming absence of explicitly Marxist explanation. Manning, for example, states his position on the nature of the class struggle in the Civil War in nine lines of his preface, and in a form which makes it almost impossible to recognise it as Marxist. Left-wing historians seem more concerned to establish their impartial use of evidence than to engage in the development of a Marxist understanding of the class struggle.
 
The gentry
The gentry were, in origin, simply the mass of the feudal landowning class in England, where only the upper crust of this class had distinctive ‘noble’ titles. Both Marx and Engels suggested that the development of commodity production in agriculture in sixteenth-century England and the two-way social mobility between the gentry and the bourgeoisie made the gentry natural allies of the bourgeoisie in the revolution.
Tawney’s thesis went much further than this. According to Tawney, the gentry were a revolutionary social class in themselves: a distinct social class, fundamentally opposed to the old ‘aristocratic’ ruling class; the revolution was made by and for them. [5]
But it is in fact very hard to separate ‘gentry’ from ‘aristocracy’ as distinct social classes. Their sources of wealth were the same – land, with an admixture of trade and office-holding. ‘Traditional’ and ‘commercial’ attitudes to wealth (which Tawney proposes as an essential difference between the two) are found equally on both sides of the barrier of noble title. In terms of power, noble and gentle landowners shared the ruling positions in provincial society, both had access to positions at court, and they even (as Lords and Commons, both in opposition to Charles I in 1640) shared Parliament. Mobility between the two groups was very common, for a gentleman could easily be made a lord (under James I, he could even directly buy the title), while a lord’s younger sons were automatically mere gentlemen. The gentry were, it seems, born and bred members of the existing ruling class under the Stuart monarchy.
The ‘rise of the gentry’ thus becomes a gaping trap for Marxists into which perhaps only Perry Anderson of New Left Review has jumped with both feet. For Anderson, the English Civil War was ‘a “bourgeois revolution” only by proxy’, because it was made by a section of the ruling class. [6] But if a bourgeois revolution can be made by proxy from above, can a proletarian revolution? If a section of the ruling class could break the last bonds of feudalism on behalf of the bourgeoisie, could not a section of the bourgeoisie set up socialism on behalf of the working class?
The way out of this situation lies in a re-examination of the actual role of the gentry in the English Civil War – the very task at which the New Historians have been beavering away in the belief that they were destroying Marxism.
There is no doubt that the gentry did play the leading role in the preliminary crisis of 1640: they dominated the House of Commons, and the concessions they demanded of Charles I – the ‘constitutional revolution’ and the execution of his chief ministers – were major ones, resulting from the bitterness of the opposition to the King’s policies that had grown up during his eleven years’ rule without Parliament.
There is also no doubt that the previous hundred years had seen a major redistribution of landed property, which had benefitted the gentry at the expense both of the peasantry and of the Crown and peerage, and that this had put the gentry in a very strong position to challenge Charles I’s ham-fisted attempts at establishing an absolute monarchy.
What is not so clear is that the gentry’s position was a revolutionary one. Although their appeals to ‘liberty and property’ have a bourgeois ring about them, the terms in which the gentry defended their ‘liberties’ (the word also means privileges) were conservative: they claimed to be defending the old order against dangerous innovation. This has been described as a ‘smokescreen’ or a ‘block in the mind’ concealing really revolutionary aims; perhaps it should be taken more literally.
One of the main themes of gentry opposition to Charles I was resentment at his interference with their role as ‘natural leaders’ in the countryside. In administration, justice, military and financial matters, early Stuart attempts at a more rational enforcement of central policy elicited die-hard opposition from the Justices of the Peace and their network of county gentry support. Nor did they overcome this dislike of centralisation in the heat of revolution: gentry opposition to Parliamentary ‘tyranny’ during and after the Civil War took up some of the same themes as opposition to royal tyranny before it. Opposition to the centralised state is rather a strange role for a class credited with carrying out the historic tasks of the bourgeois revolution. [7]
Had the English gentry, in fact, broken with the old feudal order? Since Marx himself it has been argued that the nature of landowning in England had already, in the early seventeenth century, been transformed from feudal into bourgeois property. Agrarian relations in England had indeed set out on the long road leading to eighteenth-century agribusiness, but they were still at an early stage of the transformation. Indeed, the gentry still clung to their feudal rights in land – they would not hear of copyhold tenure (the last form of feudal tenure) being abolished when in 1646 their own feudal burdens were removed – because they could still use them to screw extra income out of their peasants, by grabbing common land and wastes, rack-renting hereditary tenants, and harassing cottagers. Marx’s later remarks on the evolution of ground-rent suggest that there is room for interpreting the state of affairs in the seventeenth century as transitional rather than the completion of the process. [8]
Tawney and others have argued that the gentry had broken free of the old power structure of feudalism, that they were no longer tied to the aristocracy by clientage and military power. Yet it is evident that when the Civil War broke out, long-established networks of patronage and clientage among the gentry and aristocracy operated in many countries to polarise the gentry into Royalists and Parliamentarians. The Tudors had indeed tried to eliminate the power of the ‘overmighty subject’ in the counties; it does not seem that they permanently succeeded, for in 1642 England was teeming with powerful aristocratic connections. The role of the House of Lords in precipitating the crisis (for example, by refusing to accept an Assembly of Peers as a substitute for Parliament) has certainly been underestimated.
The biggest problem about the gentry as a class, however, is that when the Civil War came in 1642, they played as a class an overwhelmingly counter-revolutionary role. Keen as they may have been to oppose the king in 1640, when it came to seizing the armed power of the state in 1642, the majority of the gentry either supported the Crown or attempted to prevent the outbreak of war. The ‘pure country gentlemen’, those not regularly involved in national politics through Parliament or the JPs’ bench, were the first to desert the opposition, but in some counties there was an almost complete turn-around of the MPs from opposition in 1640 to royalism in 1642. Forty per cent of the House of Commons itself opposed Parliament in the Civil War, despite the fact that MPs were the most involved, the most committed of the gentry. [9]
Nor was the gentry royalism confined to the ‘feudal’ north and west. Outside the East Anglian counties, which were effectively tied up by their Parliamentarian leaders despite initial hesitation, no county in England was without a substantial royalist party among the gentry, and across the country the war was widely recognised as a social struggle against the landowning class as a whole.
There were, of course, exceptions to the royalism of the gentry. Without the Parliamentarian gentry (and peers, who were a substantial minority of the House of Lords) the struggle would never have got off the ground. These gentry fall into two, probably overlapping, categories. First, there was a group of two or three great ‘connections’ excluded from power by Charles I, who saw themselves as an alternative leadership of the nation which had to be forced on the king (all other methods having failed) by a show of arms. These included the aristocratic generals who in 1644 were accused of not wanting an outright victory.
The other group who supported Parliament were from the lesser gentry (such as Oliver Cromwell himself), often with a commitment to the Independent, parochial-congregationalist form of Puritanism, and with a surprisingly deep hostility to aristocratic domination. They were to play an extremely important part in the revolution, but their prominence has blinded many historians to the conservatism of the gentry as a whole.
A serious re-examination of the role of the gentry by Marxists could disarm the ‘New History’ completely and refocus our attention where it rightly belongs: on the bourgeoisie and the exploited classes.
 
The bourgeoisie
The English bourgeoisie had not prepared or initiated the crisis of 1640 to the extent that the gentry had. They enjoyed little direct political influence, Parliament and the counties being dominated by the gentry.
Despite certain issues which could unite most of the bourgeoisie, such as customs duties, the main concern of most sectors of the merchant and manufacturing classes was corporate privilege. The largest and most powerful bourgeois institution, the Corporation of the City of London, regarded its own privileges as paramount, and was prepared to negotiate its own compromises with the monarchy. The privileges of competing interest groups disunited the bourgeoisie, for they were often readier to see other sections as the main enemy rather than the system as a whole. [10]
In the pre-revolutionary decade of the 1630s, the bourgeoisie showed distinct signs of being bought off by Charles I’s plausibly mercantilist policies: it should not be forgotten that absolutism was a system which offered the bourgeoisie a deal, and to many it may have seemed an acceptable one. [11] The availability of social promotion through wealth – the passage of merchant families into the gentry – probably had a depoliticising effect, the permeation of the existing system by individuals diverting attention from the class issues.
When the Civil War came in 1642, there were royalist bourgeois just as there were Parliamentarian gentry. Virtually the whole of the existing leadership of the City of London had to be ousted to bring the City on to Parliament’s side; the Newcastle coal cartel, the Corporation of Chester (still a major port), and some of the Bristol merchants supported the King; even the merchant clothiers of Leeds (who were big entrepreneurs compared with the master artisans of neighbouring Bradford) were initially royalists. [12]
All this has led not only the New Historians, but even some Marxists, to dismiss the pre-industrial bourgeoisie as a revolutionary class, redefining them as part of the ‘ruling elite in late feudal society. [13]
Of course the bourgeoisie was split in 1642 – Charles I was not so incompetent that he could not buy off anyone at all – but the majority were clearly on the side of Parliament. If the cream of London’s merchant community proved delinquent, there were plenty of merchants and manufacturers (the description of these as ‘second rank bourgeoisie’ is misleading, for they were all big businessmen) to take over the City. The merchants of provincial ports (with the exception only of a few concessionnaires) blamed a hundred years of London dominance on royal policy; most cloth manufacturers similarly resented the attention paid to London commercial interests over local manufacturing, especially in the West. In certain provincial towns such as Birmingham, centre of the arms manufacture, and Northampton, specialising in boots and horse-trading, there was not a moment’s hesitation. [14]
There was not a straight split between mercantile and manufacturing capital in the Civil War, though provincial manufacturers do seem to have been most enthusiastic for war in 1642. The most revolutionary section of the London bourgeoisie included several individuals with manufacturing as well as trading interests, but what distinguished them more clearly was interest in the newer colonial trades which brought them into a clash with the monopolies of some of the older trading companies. [15] Trading and manufacturing activities were not at this time very distinct: individual capitalists tended to spread their interests, and trading in manufactured products could be the prelude to acquiring an entrepreneurial interest in their production.
Some backtracking by the bourgeoisie took place during the course of the revolution. In 1646–7, the London bourgeoisie tried to mount a full-scale counter-revolution which could have resulted in the victory of the Presbyterian party and the return of the King. It has been claimed that this was because even the ‘new men’ in the London leadership of 1642 were more sympathetic to the King all along. But a close study of religious and social politics in London during the Civil War has shown that a substantial section of the London bourgeoisie were genuinely committed to the presbyterian form of church government (just about the only people in England who were), because they saw it as a bulwark against social anarchy. In 1647, they were prepared to compromise with the King (in the vain hope that he might compromise with them in turn) rather than give Independency in the City and army its head. Only a militant minority of the bourgeoisie, in London and elsewhere, supported the revolution of 1649, when the King was executed, but they rallied to support of the republic once it was established, and the Commonwealth of 1649–51 is recognised as the most bourgeois government in English history before 1906. [16]
The tactics of the bourgeoisie were shaped by the fact that they were fighting on two fronts: against reaction from above and radical revolution from below. Their economic and political aims were essentially moderate, appropriate to the pre-industrial economy rather than to the aggressive free-trading industrial capitalism of the future. They did not wish to do away with all privilege, corporate organisation and state direction. The merchant Lewes Roberts put it neatly in 1647: ‘A few privileges, a little protection, a fair aspect and a gentle encouragement’ was what the bourgeoisie expected of Parliament. [17] In 1642 they recognised revolution, which had come upon them rather unexpectedly, as the best way to achieve their aims, but they retained their fear of going too far and encouraging others to fight for a different kind of revolution, one which might put obstacles in the way of the development of capitalism.
 
The revolt of the exploited classes
The vanguard of the revolution in 1642 was neither the gentry nor the bourgeoisie, but those classes which in late feudal society were exploited, or threatened with exploitation, by both. Brian Manning has described how the political situation was transformed between 1640 and 1642 by a massive popular revolt: it was this that polarised the gentry and bourgeoisie into those who thought they could take over and control the upsurge and those who saw support of the king as much the lesser evil.
Peasant revolts, refusal of rent, the ransack of great country houses, and cries of ‘Bread’ mingled with those of ‘Justice’ – all these took place in the English Revolution as well as in the French. In so far as they have been noticed at all, these scenes of popular violence have traditionally been regarded as stage-managed by the Parliamentary leaders, but it is clear from Manning’s account that the leaders of the ‘popular party’ had taken the lid off a cauldron of class struggle which they had not brewed and could hardly keep from engulfing them altogether. [18]
Who were these people who forced the bourgeoisie and the gentry minority into revolution, and what were their struggles? The masses who revolted in 1640–42, and the radical political movements to which this revolt gave birth, have been variously described by Marxists as ‘the petty bourgeoisie’, ‘the middling sort of people’, ‘independent small producers’ and ‘plebeian elements.’ ‘Petty bourgeoisie’ is misleading, for it suggests a mere junior division of the bourgeoisie with essentially the same interests. ‘The middling sort’ was used at the time, and has been used ever since, to blur the distinction between the bourgeoisie and their allies from the lower classes. ‘Plebeian’ has the same effect, and it seems pointless to borrow a term from Ancient Rome which meant simply non-aristocratic.
Many of those who took part in the revolt of 1640–42, in the New Model Army during the war and in radical movements later, were indeed independent small producers. In feudal society, the small producer enjoyed ownership or possession of the means of production, and wage-labour was typically a temporary or supplementary source of livelihood – for the near-landless peasant family, for the journeyman on his way to being an independent master craftsman, and even for domestic servants, who saved their wages for marriage and a household of their own. Under capitalism, wage-labour has become the norm, and the independent small producer exists only in competition with large-scale capitalist production. England in the seventeenth century was in transition from feudalism to capitalism, and the separation of the labourer from the means of production was the crucial issue for the development of the capitalist mode of production. As Marx recognised, this proletarianisation of the labour force preceded the accumulation of capital on a large scale: it was the essence of ‘so-called primary accumulation’ or ‘the first revolutionising period of feudal production’. [19]
The independent small producers were therefore being divided into potential exploiters of labour on a larger scale, and exploited labour losing its former independence. In so far as such small producers saw themselves as potential capitalists, there was no problem about the bourgeois revolution: their main enemy was the system of privilege and monopoly which prevented them from competing freely to appropriate the surplus value of others’ labour. But in so far as small producers could see themselves becoming exploited labour, they were resisting the development of capitalism as well as the continuation of feudalism.
Both these tendencies existed in the revolt of the small producers in the 1640s; but it is only as a revolt against exploitation that it helps to explain what happened once the war was over. First of all, however, it is necessary to show the background to the revolt in the social conflicts of the previous forty years.
In the countryside, the long transition from feudal to capitalist exploitation was not proceeding smoothly, despite the absence of major peasant revolts for about a century. Anti-enclosure riots took on a new lease of life in the early seventeenth century, with major outbreaks in 1607, 1621 and 1631, while the draining of the Fenlands by capitalist contractors to the benefit of the feudal proprietors built up a huge head of peasant resistance which was released explosively in 1640. The polarisation of agrarian society into better-off commercial farmers and landless or near-landless labourers was breaking up the old peasant community into mutually hostile classes. Even in the ‘backward areas’, rural society was not so harmonious as is often imagined: once the Civil War started there were tenants even in the North and West who fought for Parliament against royalist landlords, and there was widespread refusal of rent. [20]
In the towns and in rural industry, the economic crisis of 1639–40 brought to the surface the growing dependence of the artisan on merchant and manufacturing capital. Already in many towns there was a history of organised resistance by craftsmen to the oligarchies of merchants and manufacturers who monopolised political and economic power, while in the Livery Companies of London, rank-and-file craftsmen demanded an end to the privileges of big employers. In East Anglia, where most clothworkers were dependent on merchant entrepreneurs, the latter petitioned the King in 1642 because ‘the cries for food of many thousands of poor, who depend on this trade, do continually press us, not without threats, and some beginnings of mutinies.’ [21]
It is often asserted that the working class as such took no part in the English Revolution, either because it was too small or because economic dependence and extreme poverty made wage-earners passive. The number of proletarians was in fact very large, and not confined to London. Already in the 1520s wage-earners amounted to over a third of the population of the largest provincial towns. In 1688, Gregory King put the proportion of labourers’ families in the population at 26.8%, and ‘cottagers’ and ‘paupers’ families’ (many of whom would be wage earners) at 29.4%; the figures for the 1640s would probably be a little lower, since proletarianisation went on increasing during and after the Civil War. The number of propertyless was even greater than the number of actual wage-earners, for unemployment, underemployment and the destitution of small producers were widespread. [22]
It is clear that despite the protestations of the ‘middling sort of people’ and Parliamentarian leaders that all their supporters were respectable householders, large numbers of wage-earners must have taken part in the riots and demonstrations of the period. Unfortunately, the bias of contemporary propaganda is compounded by that of recent historians, both Marxist and non-Marxist, who seem determined to belittle working-class participation. [23]
The main targets of popular violence in 1640–42 were the King, the bishops and the royalist aristocracy and gentry. Parliamentarian propagandists worked hard to keep these targets on line. There were anxious moments, however, especially in Essex when the Colchester mob acquired a taste for ransacking country houses and seemed disinclined to draw the line at royalist country houses. Clothworkers’ economic problems were blamed on the bishops (of all people): one petition after another demanded the exclusion of the bishops from Parliament as a cure for the decay of trade and falling wages. What would happen when the bishops, the lords and even the King fell but exploitation still grew, was the problem in store for the Parliamentarian leaders.
 
Puritanism: the limits of ideology
Religion has long been regarded as the binding force which held together the complex class alliance of the Parliamentarians in the Civil War. Paradoxically, it was also what divided the wartime allies as soon as victory was in sight: almost before the first Civil War was over, Puritanism began to disintegrate into competing tendencies.
What, then, was Puritanism? It has recently been stressed that as a movement, Puritanism came into existence only in the 1630s, in opposition to Laud’s attempt to force the Anglican church into an exclusively hierarchical, anti-Calvinist, sacramentalist and ceremonial mould. There was no direct connection between the Presbyterian movement of Elizabeth’s reign and the Puritanism of the 1630s; in the intervening period, there had been no organised opposition within the Anglican church because the official policy had been one of integration and comprehension. The Puritan movement of the 1630s also differed from the earlier opposition in that it was a substantially lay movement, and was broader and more heterogeneous. Opposition to Laud’s policies united under the banner of Puritanism a wide variety of aims and opinions, from those of conservative Calvinists with no objection to bishops in principle to sectarians who recognised no true church but their own splinter group. [24]
Yet many writers, including the Marxist mainstream, have identified Puritanism as a coherent body of opinion, relating to political opposition and social reform, as well as to religion, morality and church government, existing from some time in the sixteenth century until well after the Restoration in 1660. For Marxists, as for Weber, the core of this body of ideas is an ideology of the rising bourgeoisie. Though Weber’s treatment of English Puritanism is superficial in the extreme, being based mainly on the writings of one Puritan minister looking back after the Restoration, the major Marxist writers have agreed with his basic identification of Puritanism with the ‘spirit of capitalism’. In so far as there has been any shift, it is towards stressing the particular appeal of Puritanism to the ‘middling sort’ or ‘industrious sort of people’, the independent small producers. [25]
Clearly, there is plenty of material to be found in English Protestant writing of the century or so before the Civil War which fits the classic definition of Puritanism: the doctrine of the calling, which placed a spiritual value on economic activity; the hard-work ethic of ‘godly discipline’; the stress on the individual conscience; and the doctrine of an inner, spiritual elite which challenged the privileges of the existing aristocracy.
Yet within the Puritan tradition, as within the actual movement of the 1630s, there were widely differing views of society, let alone of church government, which would seem to suggest that there were all along several distinct class positions within Puritanism. Almost every doctrine identified with Puritanism meant different things to different classes.
There was, for example, a gentry and even aristocratic Puritanism which had little or nothing to do with the supposedly capitalist spirit of English landowners. English landed gentlemen, like the French feudal nobility of the previous century, identified themselves with the ‘godly magistrate’ of Calvinist tradition, and Puritanism therefore became for them an additional argument in favour of their traditional role as ‘natural rulers’ of the countryside. Among the traditions they were defending were their role as parish patrons with the power to appoint the clergy, and the role of Parliament in legislating religious settlements since Henry VIII. They saw Laud’s attempt to revive the authority of the bishops and clergy as a dangerous innovation for the Anglican church. After all, as one Puritan peer put it, many of these clergy, and even bishops, were ‘ex faece plebis ...’ of the lowest of the people (literally ‘from the shit of the people’). Many of the royalist gentry continued to press for ‘godly reformation’ even though they supported the King, and the same demand is found in some of the Clubmen’s revolts of 1645. [26]
The Puritanism of the bourgeoisie was more or less of the classic type. Anti-hierarchical and anti-aristocratic, bourgeois Puritans saw the responsibility for discipline in society properly belonging to themselves as elders of congregations, members of town corporations and organisers of a system of poor relief which encouraged hard work and discouraged idleness. The London bourgeoisie especially favoured the Presbyterian system of church discipline, with its tight moral and social control.
But some ‘bourgeois’ Puritan ideas were to prove double-edged, and go some way towards providing an ideology of resistance to capitalism. One was the celebrated ‘protestant ethic’ of hard work and devotion to the secular calling. The importance of this set of ideas to early modern capitalists, before the industrial revolution, has never been adequately expressed. It had little or nothing to do with the future discipline of the factory or the fact that machines and mines require unbroken work: ideas do not anticipate material reality, and large-scale investment in such means of production was a rarity in seventeenth-century England. [27] It had everything to do with the fact that mercantile capitalism in this period was moving towards the manufacturing stage – that is, it was beginning to appropriate surplus value directly from the small producer – without having discovered the technological means to seize control of the production process itself. It was impossible to impose work-discipline by force on dozens or hundreds of cottage workers at a time, all the less so if they were scattered over a rural area, unlike the Flemish ‘factory towns’ of the middle ages. The ideology of discipline and self-regulated hard work was basically a productivity drive in the interests of merchant capital. The ‘wasted’ labour time of pre-industrial society, with its slow and halting rhythms of work, must be put to good productive use so as to increase surplus value and the capitalist’s profits.
But to the small independent producer, the flood of tracts and sermons on the dignity of labour, the ungodliness of rich idle drones, and the importance of self-discipline, could carry another message. If the small producer was such a morally and socially valuable member of society, why should he be exploited? Should his independence not, rather, be protected and guaranteed against wage-slavery? The Leveller ideal was the small, independent producer, and the Diggers showed a horror of wage-slavery, which carried the ‘Protestant ethic’ to a different class conclusion from the one for which it originated. The Ranters, of course, went much further – to them the hireling was simply a fool – but their challenge grew out of that same Protestant individualism, that reliance on inner conviction, to which the Puritan writers had seemed to appeal. [28]
Puritans of different classes also differed in their views of democracy, in both church and state. It has been argued that Puritanism as such created modern radical politics – an argument which starts off by explicitly denying the importance of ‘tiny sects on the left wing’. [29] But there were many different Puritan views on church government and its relation to the state, hardly any of them – outside the ‘tiny sects’ – bearing any direct relationship to modern ideas of democracy. This was because – again outside the ‘tiny sects’ – all Puritans were Calvinists, who believed in an inner elite of those predestined to be saved. Each form of church government was defended sometimes as a model of ‘liberty’ and sometimes as ‘aristocratical’ (in the sense of allowing the true aristocracy of the spirit to rule). Most gentry and bourgeois Puritans, including Oliver Cromwell in his first speech to the Long Parliament, explicitly denied that parity in religion had any connection with parity (equality) in the state. [30]
The Presbyterians were the most clearly elitist of the Puritans. Their elders were to be chosen from among the most substantial members of the congregation, with control from above in a series of regional councils dominated by the clergy. The congregation had only a veto over the minister proposed by the local classes, and ultimately lay control was assured by control by Parliament, not by the laity at the grass roots. This was to be a national, established church, with no toleration of alternatives and with the power to excommunicate. This was the position of the big bourgeoisie in London, and of some of the gentry.
The Independents, on the other hand, stressed the autonomy of the congregation; they also had a system of lay eldership drawn from the more substantial members. But there were within Independency two class positions, not one. The first is the position of the Independent gentry, who saw the autonomous congregation as essentially the parish congregation within a national, established church under Parliamentary control; toleration they regarded as a necessary exercise of charity towards harmless minorities. Most of the Independent gentry found a modus vivendi within the weak Presbyterian system set up by Parliament in 1646. What they could not accept was any break-up of the parish by abolishing tithes, as the Barebones Parliament proposed to do. The parish was the centre of rural life, of local government and of gentry influence: its autonomy would suit the Independent gentry very well, but its disappearance not at all. [31]
The other wing of Independency was urban and bourgeois. It had its roots in the ‘gathered churches’ of London, whose membership was voluntary and which had an ambiguous attitude to co-existence with the parish system. The members of these churches were said to be well-heeled citizens and they were accused of ‘scumming the parish congregations of most of their wealthy and zealous members’, and they seem to have solved the problem of equality within the congregation by discouraging social inferiors from joining. Their ministers did their best to maintain the ambiguity of their position, allying even with the Presbyterians for a while. ‘Accommodation’ (toleration) within the established church was what they hoped for, and what the Independent gentry were prepared to allow them. They were not committed to democracy in the state, and did the Levellers a great deal of damage (as will be seen below) by denouncing them in the summer of 1647.
The openly sectarian congregations of London, on the other hand, called for complete voluntarism in religion. Leaders of wholly separatist congregations, such as the formidable Katherine Chidley, would have no truck with the established ministry or even with parish church buildings. They recruited women, servants, apprentices and minors without the permission of fathers, husbands and masters. Their preachers were ‘gifted’ members of the congregation, and their meetings were often free-for-all discussions. It was from this milieu that the leaders of the Levellers, Diggers, Ranters and Fifth Monarchists came, though their close relations with the semi-separatist churches gave them a much broader field to work in. [32]
’Puritanism’, therefore, was and is a cover-all term for views which in reality could be not only different but antithetical. As an ideology, Puritanism certainly aspired to ‘autonomy’: it was presented as a set of principles and aspirations in the interests of all classes, ‘above society’. In the political crisis of 1640, it did succeed in uniting diverse elements in a common platform of opposition to the King, but the effect did not last long. Puritan ideology was not the arbiter of class conflict but its slave: each class tried to appropriate its whole being and make it work entirely for it.
The final result was the abandonment of attempts to use religion as a political platform for a long time to come. By 1660, Puritanism was dead and religion was retiring to its place in private life. Though class affiliations to particular churches (Anglican and Nonconformist) remained, religious belief came to be seen as a concern of the individual, irrelevant to political and economic life.
 
Anti-capitalist struggle
The emergence of democratic ideas required in the end a break with Puritanism. Political reform had to become not just a means to enable the godly elite to rise to the surface, but an end in itself.
The negative demonstration of this is provided by the Fifth Monarchists, a millenarian group prominent in the Barebones Parliament of 1653. Their political perspective was simply elitist: the godly rulers might as well be selected by the godly general, Cromwell, as chosen in any other way, because any electoral process would give equal rights to sinners with saints. Yet the Fifth Monarchists had, it appears, substantial support among artisans, labourers, journeymen and servants. Spiritual elitism does have its radical side: the saint is as likely (and perhaps even more likely) to be a weaver as a lord. It also emerged in the course of the Barebones Parliament that many Fifth Monarchists saw the task of the chosen few as being to implement radical social reforms: the regime that was to await the Second Coming of Christ was to be an era of social justice, equality, and even a redistribution of property according to some. The Barebones Parliament rapidly collapsed, because the spiritual elitism which had endeared the Fifth Monarchists to Cromwell had concealed more than it revealed. [33]
The Levellers, however, broke with Puritan politics and even with Puritan language to develop a secular and democratic perspective. Their main social base was the independent small producer, and their most important achievement was their intervention in the army in 1647, which forced Cromwell and the army officers at least to listen to them for a few months. Their programme, designed to separate political power from wealth, foreshadowed the nineteenth century People’s Charter, and their organisation in the City of London on a ward-by-ward basis – with weekly subscriptions, a central committee, a regular newspaper and door-to-door canvassing – was the seed from which all grassroots organisations were to spring. [34]
Yet the reputation of the Levellers has fallen low in the ‘orthodox’ Marxist version in the last twenty years. The view that they were not such radical democrats after all, that they would have denied the vote to the whole of the working class, and that their political theory foreshadows bourgeois rather than socialist thought, originated with C.P. Macpherson in 1962. It is still propagated by Christopher Hill among others. Coupled with this is the idea that Leveller democracy was premature because the potential electorate was backward and even reactionary. [35]
On the question of the franchise, it has been shown several times over that the Levellers did not in general regard wage-earning or poverty as a disqualification from voting – whatever modifications and compromises may have been attempted by individuals on particular occasions. It has also been shown that the idea of a wider franchise did not come out of the back of the Levellers’ heads: their achievement was to generalise and provide a theoretical justification for a struggle which had been going on for at least forty years in particular disputes over particular elections to wring recognition of householders’ rights out of Parliaments anxious to prove they had popular support. [36]
The Levellers’ stress on economic independence and the rights of small property was not anti-working class. On the contrary, it shows an acute awareness of the problem of proletarianisation, which emerges in their writings on general social problems. The poor should be rescued from their propertyless state by returning to them the charitable endowments stolen by the rich and the clergy; the Fens should be drained to the benefit of the poor and not the rich; the poor should elect their own commissioners to provide for them. ‘It is very strange to my understanding,’ said a Leveller pamphleteer, ‘that one man should do the work, and another man receive the wages; I mean, that the honest clothier who has toiled much in the making of his cloth ... is cheated of the fruit of his labour.’ The Levellers wanted to restore independence to as many as possible of those who had lost it; to assume that the ‘the propertyless found the Leveller programme inadequate’, as most Marxists have done, is to forget the appeal of small property (especially in land, as in twentieth-century revolutions) to those who have not got it. [37]
The Levellers’ idea of a just society was one in which the rise of capitalism would be stopped dead in its tracks, without return to feudalism. It is a commonplace among Marxists that such a society could not survive: competition among small property owners would polarise society into the exploiters and the exploited, given a market for commodity production such as certainly existed at the time. Yet the Levellers seemed unaware of this. They did not explicitly approve of competition, and they clearly had a very broad notion of unfair competition (‘monopoly’) extending far beyond the conventional criticisms of courters’ monopolies. Their stress was on a decent livelihood for all rather than the untrammelled pursuit of profit. Yet none of them suggested an upper limit on private property (an idea current at the time) as a solution.
This was because the Levellers thought they had found the answer to exploitation in a redistribution of political power. They assumed that it was political power that gave the rich economic power, and not vice versa. Their various proposals for annual elections, bans on re-election, and special commissioners to hear complaints against elected representatives, were designed to prevent the concentration of political power.
The use the Levellers made of conventional political ideas such as the social compact and the sovereignty of the people was also a radical departure from their mainly symbolic use by the apologists of the republican regime such as Milton and Cromwell. The most radical of the republicans were prepared to say that Charles I had broken his ‘trust’; only the Levellers were advocating starting all over again with a new social contract which would be an actual document to be signed by all citizens. For bourgeois political theory, the state of nature, social contract or compact, and the sovereignty of the people were convenient social myths; for the Levellers they were real.
It is wrong to see the Levellers as simply the most revolutionary section of the bourgeoisie. Both their social criticism and their political principles were opposed to the continued growth of capitalism. That the reforms they proposed could not have stopped the development of capitalism in practice is another matter. The least that can be said of the Levellers is that they made a long-range social forecast of an era of exploitation, oppression and imperialism, and tried to stop it from happening. In doing so, they left a legacy of organisational and political principle which bore fruit in the development of Chartism and the nineteenth-century working-class movement. They deserve, at the very least, our recognition of their struggles.
The Diggers, or True Levellers, struck more fundamentally at the heart of all class society, with their assertion that private property is the greatest of evils. It is wrong to dismiss the Diggers as backward-looking ‘agrarian communists’. Their great achievement was to go beyond medieval ideas of the redistribution of wealth to propose the continuing creation of wealth by collective production. In Winstanley’s fullest account of the ideal society, there are towns and urban crafts as well as village communities; his vision of future possibilities – exchange without buying and selling, the equalisation of education, a do-it-yourself legal system and the freeing of technical knowledge from the constraints of patents of invention – invites comparison with recent Utopian science fiction. [38]
The Diggers’ tactics of cultivating the common land and inviting all to join their communities were neither idealistic nor completely pacifist. First of all, it is important to realise the significance of the common lands as potentially cultivable and productive: the seizure and improvement of commons and wastes by the landlords was the first stage of the eighteenth century agricultural revolution in England. Digger farming on the commons was modern: they cultivated intensively and included root vegetables, as the Dutch did. Secondly, squatting and unofficial encroachment on the commons had long been a traditional resort of impoverished peasants trying to ward off proletarianisation: the Diggers provided a theoretical justification and an open invitation which was certainly taken up by poor villagers in the areas where Digger settlements appeared. [39]
It is also necessary to see the consequences of cultivating the commons as the Diggers saw them. Their appeal was to wage-labourers to give up ‘slavery’ and discover the benefits of freedom. If the poor responded by ceasing to work for the rich, even the landlords would be forced to join in the end, for their vast estates would be no use to them without labourers to work for them. Even when Winstanley, after the smashing of the Digger communities in 1649–50, addressed an appeal to Cromwell to allow the communities to exist alongside conventional society, he must have been thinking of the eventual consequences in similar terms.
Recent attacks on Winstanley have included the assertion that he was merely an incompetent businessman with a chip on his shoulder, and an attempt to depict the society described in The Law of Freedom as totalitarian. [40] The first point is deliberately perverse: the significance of Winstanley’s failure in business is that it led him to question the ideal of the ‘successful man’, and to dismiss current business practice as ‘cheating and cozening’. The accusation of totalitarianism is based on Winstanley’s detailed prescriptions, in The Law of Freedom, for social and moral control to preserve the values of the new society and prevent any return to the old. What matters, in such a system, is who controls; and it is clear in The Law of Freedom that Winstanley is concerned with abolishing the state and ensuring that control is exercised by the whole society, and not by ‘separate bodies of armed men, prisons, etc.’ as in Lenin’s definition of the state. (Incidentally, both the Levellers and the Diggers were vehemently opposed to prison, that rising bourgeois form of punishment.) All officers would be elected annually, as Winstanley says, so that ‘whereas many have their portions to obey, so many may have their turn to rule’. [41]
Winstanley’s other great achievement is to have undermined the Puritan conception of God. Starting with a conviction of his own inspiration by God, he learned in the end to describe that inner guidance, common to all men and women, as Reason; and to denounce the idea of a personal God ‘up above’, and of a heaven and hell after death, as deceitful inventions of the self-seeking clergy.
Disbelief in conventional religious ideas was common among the poor in the seventeenth century. Intellectual historians may insist on a distinction between fully-fledged philosophical atheism and the ‘blasphemous scoffing’ which is supposed to be all the poor were capable of; but this sturdy, vulgar scepticism shows a certain amount of grassroots resistance to the Puritan code of sin and guilt, which both Winstanley and the Ranters tried to reconcile with ‘true religion’. [42]
The Ranters were a kaleidoscope of wandering and shifting groups rather than a sect or organisation. Drawing on the medieval tradition of the ‘free spirit’ or antinomian heresies – the idea that true grace and understanding raise the individual above the moral law – they transformed what in the past had been a theory of small groups of ‘amoral supermen’ into a revolutionary self-transformation available to anyone.
Ranters scorned the Puritan restrictions on sex, food and drink; they maintained the innocence of children and of nakedness; they challenged Puritan tyranny over the psyche by ostentatiously breaking the taboo on swearing; their formal recantations could not be trusted because they could justify lying; and their leaders’ rootless lifestyle flew in the face of the Protestant work ethic. They were probably not very many – it is as hard for us to tell as it was for contemporaries – but they travelled widely and they terrified the rulers of the early 1650s. [43]
Discussion of strategy and tactics was not the Ranters’ strong point. Many were sympathetic to the Digger movement, and some joined Digger communities. For Winstanley, their extreme individualism, rejection of work and of the family made it hard to accept them, and he specifically warned women against Ranter promiscuity, which left them literally holding the baby.
Winstanley’s view of the family may seem to us the most conservative thing about him. In the only conceivable model for Winstanley’s communities, the Hutterite settlements in Moravia, the family had been abolished along with buying and selling and private property, and it may seem strange that Winstanley did not go that far. [44] In part, his position may be explained by the fact that the family household was at the time the principal unit of production; but he shows no general inclination to be bound by current economic or social forms. The explanation probably lies more in the destruction of family life among the poor by pauperisation and the hiring out of poor children as servants from an early age. Women and children ‘on the parish’, men unable to earn a living wage without leaving home, and the parents of pauper apprentices, probably felt degraded enough to feel that family life would be an improvement. Winstanley’s offer that ‘every man’s wife and every woman’s husband (are) proper to themselves, and so are their children at their dispose till they come of age’ might therefore have some appeal. [45]
How are we to explain anti-capitalist struggles in the English Revolution? I have tried to show that these were real, material struggles, not the invention of a few ‘advanced’ political philosophers. The conditions for a successful socialist revolution did not exist, but the aspiration towards some kind of revolution that would free the labourer and the artisan from capitalist bondage was already born. Perhaps the defeat of the Levellers and Diggers was inevitable, but that does not mean we have to cheer on those who brought it about, such as Oliver Cromwell.
 
Oliver Cromwell
Many Marxists have shown a great deal of sympathy for Cromwell. ‘If Cromwell had not shot down the Levellers,’ writes Christopher Hill, ‘someone else would no doubt have done it. But in fact it was Oliver who did: it is part of his historical achievement.’ Cromwell’s actions are defended sometimes because it was, after all, a bourgeois revolution (though Cromwell was never a member of the bourgeoisie); or because a ‘revolutionary dictatorship’ was necessary to preserve the gains of the revolution from a backward and reactionary populace. [46]
This justification of the dictatorship of an individual or small group (which has been used also in relation to Robespierre in the French Revolution) can lead only to an abstract procession from Cromwell through Robespierre and Stalin to Babrak Karmal; it evades entirely the question of which class controls the state. Indeed, it seems to be used mainly as a justification for Stalin: it is no accident that Hill thinks perhaps Stalin understood Cromwell best. [47]
Oliver Cromwell was in so many ways an idiosyncratic person that it is easy to concentrate on his personality as the explanation for the part he played. He was, for example, a thoroughgoing pragmatist: forms, such as monarchy or the republic, were not matters of principle with him, and he could manage to combine apparently revolutionary forms with stolid conservative content and vice versa. He also had the personal peculiarity of continuing to believe in the unifying power of religion long after everyone else had recognised their class enemies masquerading as saints (and even after he had recognised quite a few himself). The breadth of his commitment to toleration was unusual; it could have caused him more trouble than it did.
It should be remembered that Cromwell was not personally in control of political developments until 1653. Although for long periods a high-ranking officer in the army and prominent member of Parliamentary committees, there were periods (for example, his eleven months out of the army in 1646–7) when he was not in the front rank of Parliamentarian leadership. His part in the confrontation with the Levellers in 1647 was outstanding; but when it came to Pride’s Purge in December, 1648, he kept at a distance until it was clear the venture was going to be successful. His first attempt to take supreme charge of affairs in 1653 was the disastrous Barebones Parliament affair; only with the army officers’ Instrument of Government in December 1653 did he become head of state.
What was Cromwell’s social base? Whom did he represent? The role of the individual in history should not be underestimated, but in the case of Cromwell it usually eclipses these questions completely.
Cromwell was a member of the lesser gentry who had a particularly close relationship to the army officer corps, which had originally been of that same class but had come to include many who had risen from the ranks. Cromwell’s political career was in one way a balancing act between these two social groups. In 1647, when Cromwell was sent by the Parliamentary Independent party to sort out the Leveller problem in the army, he put himself at the head of the officers (though he had not held a commission for nearly a year), detached them from the Levellers (with the help of the London Independent ministers), and marched into London to prevent a Presbyterian takeover. But in 1648, when the army officers still wanted a new constitution, Cromwell and what was left of the Parliamentary Independent party insisted on the Pride’s Purge solution, in which the fiction of an unbroken constitution was maintained, even though the Commons was purged, the Lords abolished and the King executed. Both in Parliament and in the counties, it was members of the lesser gentry who carried out this ‘constitutional revolution’. [48]
What the bourgeoisie needed in 1648–9 was an arbiter to save it from royalist restoration on the one hand and revolution from below on the other. The arbiter was not just Oliver Cromwell but his party and his class – the Parliamentary Independent party, based on the lesser gentry, who had stuck with the revolution from 1642 on, who had founded the Parliamentarian army and taken over the County Committees as the old upper crust dropped off; who were needed to run the country because the bourgeoisie did not yet have a reliable enough state machinery.
The problem because acute again in 1653: the Rump of the Long Parliament (to which many members had returned in the months after the purge) had made quite a success of running commercial and foreign policy to the satisfaction of certain sectors of the bourgeoisie; but it was becoming ever more isolated from the rest of the country. After the false start of the Assembly of Saints, Cromwell accepted his role as the restorer of gentry co-operation with the regime: ‘settlement’ became his favourite word, and by the time of his death he had almost succeeded in reuniting the gentry opposition of 1640 in the counties. It was the army officers, kept in check during Cromwell’s lifetime as Protector, who destroyed the regime after his death by seizing power without being able to agree on what to do with it. The army officers’ social roots were still too shallow for them to hold the balance of power. [49]
What was it that enabled a section of the lesser gentry, by no means typical of their class, to play this balancing role in the English Revolution? The traditional answer is that they were motivated by religious enthusiasm – but gentry Independency was more a matter of paternalistic parish leadership than high inspiration. It is now quite certain that they did not join the revolution because they were in economic decline; but it is hard to prove that it was because they were the most economically progressive sector, as some Marxists maintain. [50] Perhaps the answer lies in an anti-aristocratic tradition among lesser landlords that goes quite far back into feudal times, when both sides in the various struggles between kings and barons sought to use the ‘knights’, as they were then, in their own interests. Whatever the origins of this resistance to aristocratic politics, it enabled this section of the lesser gentry to co-operate with the bourgeoisie and relieve them of a great deal of the dirty work of revolution.
Cromwell’s position as a member of the Independent gentry explains how he could play a role which was at least as reactionary as it was revolutionary. The service to the bourgeois revolution which earned him his high place as an individual was his smashing of the Levellers between 1647 and 1649. The long-term gains for the bourgeoisie were preserved, but the classes who had taken the lead in fighting for a new order, the exploited classes, were the losers.
 
Conclusion
The embattled position of Marxism has hindered the development of Marxist understanding of the English bourgeois revolution for long enough. The reflexes of the siege mentality – uncritical defence of ideas or personalities because of their long-standing identification with the Marxist cause, and the refusal to even examine anything new revealed by a hostile source – have not helped our understanding of class struggle in the past or the present.
The restoration of Marxist theory to the history of the revolution is an essential requirement. This is a historical field in which theory has disappeared perhaps more completely than in any other. The mechanical orthodoxy of the Stalinist period was followed by a period of adaptation to bourgeois academic ‘standards’ in which theory was apparently regarded as too provocative to mention. This has now been overtaken by the ‘poverty of theory’ debate in which some Marxist historians are claiming lack of a theoretical perspective as a positive virtue. A full and free discussion in explicitly Marxist terms is the touchstone by which both old ideas and new ones must be measured.
Ironically, the absence of theoretical discussion has not brought Marxist history in this field any closer to the masses. Hill’s The English Revolution, 1640 and The Century of Revolution (1961) are still the most widely read Marxist accounts among ordinary socialists.
The Marxist tradition needs rearming – with good proletarian weapons of class struggle. The right-wing weaponry must be closely studied and immobilised; pieces of our own equipment which have rusted into the ground will have to be replaced. But above all, Marxism must get on to the offensive again, and rejoin the main army of the class struggle.

Notes
1. L. Stone, The Revival of Narrative, Past and Present (1979).
2. D. Pennington and K.Thomas (eds.), Puritans and Revolutionaries. Essays in Seventeenth-Century Historiography Presented to Christopher Hill (1978), p. 32.
3. C. Russell, (ed.) The Origins of the English Civil War (1973), p. 32.
4. M. MacEwen, The day the Party had to stop, Socialist Register, 1976.
5. R.H. Tawney, The Rise of the gentry, 1540-1640, Economic History Review, XI
6. P. Anderson, Origins of the present crisis, New Left Review 23 (1964), p. 28.
7. R. Ashton, The English Civil War. Conservatism and Revolution, 1603–1649 (1978), pp. 43–70, 254–287; J.S. Morrill, The Revolt of the Provinces. Conservatives and Radicals in the English Civil War, 1630–1650 (1976).
8. K. Marx, Surveys from Exile (ed. D. Fernbach, 1973), p. 254; Capital, III (Moscow 1966), pp. 782–813.
9. Morrill, op. cit.; D. Underdown, Pride’s Purge (1971); D. Brunton & H.H. Pennington, Members of the Long Parliament (1953).
10. B. Pearl, London and the Outbreak of the Puritan Revolution (1961), pp. 69–106; B. Supple, Class and social tension: the case of the merchant, in E.W. Ives (ed.), The English Revolution, 1600–1660 (1968).
11. H. Kearney, The Eleven Years’ Tyranny of Charles I (Historical Association, 1962).
12. Pearl, op. cit.; B. Manning, The English People and the English Revolution (1978), p.232.
13. Manning, ibid., p. 9; J. Merrington, Town and country in the transition from feudalism to captialism, New Left Review 93 (1975).
14. R. Brenner, The Civil War Politics of London’s merchant community, Past and Present 58 (1973), pp. 53–107; Pearl, op. cit., pp. 202–3; Ashton, op. cit., p. 85; Manning op. cit., pp. 219–221; A.H. Everitt, The County Community and the Great Rebellion (1969), pp. 13–14.
15. Brenner, op. cit., pp. 53–107.
16. Pearl, op. cit., p. 284; London’s counter-revolution, in G.E. Aylmer (ed.), The Interregnum: The quest for Settlement (1974) pp. 29–56.
17. Supple, op. cit., p. 142.
18. Manning, op. cit., passim.
19. Marx, Capital, (Moscow 1961–66), I, pp. 713–716; III, pp. 323–337.
20. Manning, op. cit., pp. 128–154, 202–215; A. Everitt, Farm Labourers, Agrarian History of England And Wales IV (ed. J. Thirsk, 1967), pp. 326–465.
21. M. James, Social Problems and Policy during the Puritan Revolution (1930), ch. 5; Manning op. cit., pp.120, 164–169.
22. P. Clark & P. Slack, English Towns in Transition, 1500–1700 (1976), pp. 111–113; S. Pollard & D.W. Crossley, The Wealth of Britain (1968), p. 154.
23. C. Hill, The English Revolution, 1640 (1940), p. 51; L. Stone, The Causes of the English Revolution (1972), p. 145; B. Manning, Religion, Politics and The English Civil War (1973), pp. 82–123.
24. C.H. George, Puritanism as history and historiography, Past and Present (1968), pp. 77–104; N. Tyacke, Puritanism, Arminianism and Counter-revolution, in C. Russell (ed.) Origins of the English Civil War (1973), pp. 119–142.
25. M. Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1967); R.H. Tawney, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism (1926); C. Hill, Society and Puritanism in Pre-Revolutionary England (1964)
26. M. Walzer, The Revolution of the Saints (1966), pp. 66–92, 232–268; C. Cross, Church and the People, 1450–1660 (1976); Ashton, op. cit., p. 118; Morrill, op. cit., pp. 48–50, 110–11.
27. Cf. Hill, Society and Puritanism, p. 142.
28. C. Hill, The World Turned Upside Down (1975 edn.) pp. 184–230.
29. Walzer, Revolution of the Saints, p. x
30. B. Manning, Puritanism and Democracy, in Pennington & Thomas, op. cit., pp. 139–160.
31. C. Cross, The Church in England, 1646–1660, in Aylmer, op. cit., pp. 99–120.
32. M. Tolmie, The Triumph of the Saints. The Separate Churches of London, 1616–1649 (1977).
33. B.S. Capp, The Fifth Monarchy Men (1972).
34. The best general account is still H.N. Brailsford, The Levellers and the English Revolution (ed. C.Hill, 1961 and 1976).
35. C.B. MacPherson, The Political theory of Possessive Individualism. Hobbes to Locke (1962), pp. 107–159.
36. A.L. Morton, Leveller Democracy, fact or myth?, The World of the Ranters (1979 edn.). pp. 197–219; J.C. Davis, The Levellers and democracy, Past and Present 40 (1968), pp. 174–180; R. Howell & D. Brewster, Reconsidering the Levellers: the evidence of the Moderate, Past and Present 46 (1970), pp. 68–86; K. Thomas, The Levellers and the franchise, in Aylmer op. cit., pp. 60–66; D. Hirst, The Representative of the People? Voters and Voting in Early Stuart England.
37. Manning, English People, pp. 303, 314–5, 319.
38. Hill, English Revolution 1640, p. 52; Hill, World Turned Upside Down; G. Winstanley, The Law of Freedom and other writings (ed. C. Hill, 1973), pp. 273–289; N. Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium (1970), p. 217.
39. Hill, World Turned Upside Down, p. 130; K. Thomas, Another Digger Broadside, Past and Present 42 (1969)
40. J.C. Davis, Gerrard Winstanley and the restoration of true magistracy, Past and Present 70 (1976), pp. 76–93; J. Alsop, Gerrard Winstanley’s later life, Past and Present 82 (1979), pp. 73–81.
41. Winstanley, Law of Freedom, pp. 320–321.
42. G.E. Aylmer, Unbelief in seventeenth century England, in Pennington and Thomas, op. cit., pp. 22–46.
43. Cohn, Pursuit of the Millennium, pp. 148–186, 287–330; Hill, World Turned Upside Down, pp. 184–230, 314–323.
44. C.P. Clasen, Anabaptism, A Social History, 1525–1618 (1972), pp. 260–274.
45. Winstanley, Law of Freedom, pp. 303–4; A. Clark, Working Lives of Women in the Seventeenth Century (1919).
46. C. Hill, God’s Englishman: Oliver Cromwell and the English revolution (1970), pp. 206–210, 262.
47. Ibid., p. 269; A. Soboul, Some Problems of the revolutionary state, Past and Present 65 (1974).
48. Underdown, Pride’s Purge, pp. 106–360; Underdown, “Honest” radicals on the counties, 1642–1649, in Pennington & Thomas, op. cit., pp. 186–205.
49. D. Underdown, Settlement in the counties, 1653–58, in Aylmer, op. cit., pp. 165–182; A. Woolrych, Last quests for a settlement, 1657–1660, ibid., pp. 183–204.
50. G. Batho, Noblemen, gentlemen and yeomen, and P. Bowden, Agricultural prices, farm profits and rents, in Agrarian History IV, pp. 276–305, 593–695.
 



It is strange indeed to find Peter Ibbotson (IS 26), who would presumably call himself a Marxist, advocating educational reforms which ‘would not create a classless society, but ... would abolish class consciousness based on criteria other than pure and realised ability,’ a situation in which the office messenger ‘would have only his own shortcomings to blame’ for his place in society. Of course all Marxists must support the demand for comprehensive education – to do otherwise would be, as Comrade Ibbotson points out, lunatic – but we must not suppose that such reforms within a capitalist framework necessarily point in the direction of social revolution. It is now being claimed by some sociologists that the reverse is possible: the elimination of class consciousness and the reconciliation of members of the exploited class to their plight, on the lines described by Comrade Ibbotson. If substantial reforms in housing, slum schools, etc, could also be achieved, so much the better – we could have a happy capitalist meritocracy in which everyone would know his place, and
the company director could feel as confident that he exploits the workers as the natural reward of his own ability, as the workers are convinced that they deserve to be exploited. In a socialist society, education will be ‘comprehensive;’ that is, everyone will have an equal opportunity to develop his own abilities and initiative. But it will not be socialist education until the proletarian revolution has been achieved and the socialist society established. Education has a large part to play in the development of working-class confidence and the training of revolutionaries, but so long as it is education within a capitalist society it will be capitalist education. The greatest educational reforms may be expected to follow the revolution, not precede it: for example, a vast extension and rationalisation of higher education is necessary in this country, but is inconceivable within the present system. (Even in nineteenth-century England, the extension of primary education followed the successive extensions of the franchise.) It is a great temptation for Marxists in the teaching profession to concentrate on educational reform and feel that they are getting somewhere by this activity alone. But without working-class power educational advance will be totally inadequate, perhaps even pernicious, as the above arguments seem to suggest. Marxist teachers must play their direct part in the revolutionary movement in other ways.
Lenin’s father did a great deal to improve education in the province of Simbirsk; but it was his son, developing Marxist theory and fighting alongside the Russian proletariat, who was the revolutionary.



Introduction

1. The landowners’ conservative revolution

2. Merchants and manufacturers

3. The rise of capitalism

4. Popular struggles and the development of the crisis

5.Revolution and class conflict

6. Religion and revolution

7. Class and Puritanism

8. Presbyterians and Independents

9. Separatism, heresy and freedom

10. The politics of the Levellers

11. Leveller organisation and the army

12. Gerrard Winstanley and communism

13. The Digger experiment

14. The Ranters

15. Oliver Cromwell and a world made safe for capitalism

16. ... stage 2

17. Revolution and empire

18. On the side of history?

Further Reading


Introduction
THERE IS A MYTH that revolutions are somehow un-English, that English history has developed by gradual evolution, without sudden or violent transformations, by a process of compromise and co-existence.
Yet everyone is taught in school that in the mid-seventeenth century state power in England was seized by violence. There was a bitter civil war from 1642 to 1645, King Charles I was executed in 1649, and monarchy was replaced first by a republic or ‘Commonwealth’ (1649–53) and then by the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell (1653–8). What was this if not a revolution?
Many attempts have been made to explain it away. The present favourite among English academics is that it was a result of a misunderstanding and miscalculation among a political elite. These men were not ‘wild-eyed fanatics ... they were men of substance and wealth, men of broad acres with a stake in the country,’ writes J.H. Hexter. They were ‘for the most part deeply conservative men who sincerely believed they were defending ancient and traditional rights,’ says another historian, R. Ashton.
So if the revolution cannot be made to disappear entirely from history, perhaps it can be reclaimed for the Tory Party as the work of honest but confused Conservatives!
But this is a complete distortion. No revolution is a single, simple process; no revolution is finished by the same leaders or even by the same class that began it. Revolutions hardly ever begin without a split in the existing ruling class, some calling for concessions to change and others for die-hard resistance. To take this initial split in the ruling class as the whole revolution itself is seriously to misrepresent it.
In revolutions people and events are transformed very rapidly. Ideas, aspirations and actions which would have seemed impossible a year or ten years earlier suddenly come within the grasp of masses of people. The French bourgeoisie – middle class – threw off centuries of accommodation to feudal society in just two years between 1787 and 1789; workers in Hungary in 1956 and in Poland in 1980 took actions which they as well as others would have thought inconceivable a few months earlier.
That is why the English Revolution of 1640–1660 must be examined from start to finish – what people said, what they did, during the revolution – if we are to grasp what it was about.
 
1. The landowners’ conservative revolution
THE REVOLUTIONARY CRISIS BEGAN in 1640, when Charles I was forced to summon parliament, after an eleven years’ gap, to deal with the grievances of the land-owning class.
Parliament, which did not meet regularly as it does today, consisted of the House of Lords, where landowners with noble titles (peers) all sat in person; and the House of Commons, where landowners without titles (known as the gentry) sat as representatives of the towns and shires. The landowning class was divided by many other distinctions of wealth and title, but the near-unanimity with which they confronted the king in 1640 is remarkable. The ‘Country Party’, as it was called, was massive, extending from earls and barons down to the ‘parish pump’ gentry who were lords of only one or two manors. The ‘Court Party’ was reduced to little more than a circle of royal favourites and merchants whose support the king had bought by granting monopolies in various branches of trade.
The dispute between the landowning class and the king was basically about the distribution of power between them. Neither the king nor the land-owners wanted a radical transformation of society nor the dominance of any new class. The old feudal landowning class had ruled the counties, as Justices of the Peace and other officers, in partnership with the monarchy for over a century and a half, and they had no desire to see the balance changed. They thought of themselves as the ‘natural rulers’ of society.
But Charles I, like his predecessors Elizabeth and James I, had been trying to step up central control in order, as he saw it, to cope with the problems of a changing society – problems of law and order, of religion and of finance. One feature of the partnership between king and land-owners had long been that land was undertaxed, and only parliament could increase the taxes. Bankruptcy now forced Charles I to call parliament in 1640, bankruptcy caused by a taxpayers’ strike when Charles embarked on an unpopular war against the Scots.
The leaders of the opposition – who were peers, gentry and their ambitious lawyers – were eager for a confrontation with the king. They insisted on a number of constitutional reforms: limiting the king’s powers of discretion (‘the royal prerogative’), abolishing certain royal courts, recognising the necessity for regular parliaments, and so on.
If possible, these people wanted power for themselves: they would gladly have stepped into the shoes of the existing royal favourites, and the king would have received massive support if he had accepted them. But Charles wanted to retain his freedom of choice. He soon made it abundantly clear that he could not be trusted to pursue policies more satisfactory to the landowning class without some kind of coercion. By 1642 the opposition were prepared to use military force.
During the process of parliamentary debate and manoeuvre, however, the situation outside parliament had been transformed. The broad-based ‘Country’ opposition of 1640, which had for a time involved the landowning class throughout most of the country, had melted away. Many had consciously transferred their allegiance to the king, and now became the nucleus of a royalist party that had not existed in 1640; others tried to stop either side from mobilising and promoted ‘neutrality pacts’ in their areas; many simply kept their heads down until the advance of one or other of the armies in the next three years made commitment inevitable.
If it had been left to the land-owning class, there would have been no civil war. The opposition politicians in parliament would have been left without support outside the one or two areas which they had tied up in advance by their own powerful networks of patronage.
But it was not left to the landowning class. Other classes and other conflicts had entered the arena, conflicts which meant there was no turning back. For the parliamentary leaders, by their attempts to rally support outside their own class, had encouraged the release of all the pent-up bitterness of class conflict.
 
2. Merchants and manufacturers
THE MERCHANT CLASS did not show an altogether united response to the political crisis. The richest merchant groups, like the landowners, opposed the king in 1640 but had doubts about the escalation in the next two years. They readily attacked the trading monopolies that Charles I had granted to his hated courtiers from outside the London merchant community, but were equally concerned to defend their own monopolies – such as the East India Company’s charter or the Newcastle Hostmen’s monopoly of coal exports.
Nevertheless it was the merchant community, particularly the merchants of London, who precipitated the crisis of 1640 by refusing to lend any more money to Charles I for his unpopular war.
In London, the crucial seat of merchant wealth and power, the City government was taken over in 1641–2 by a new set of merchants who were more generally sympathetic to the opposition. These were mainly very wealthy men, not part of the previous ruling clique, but with extensive interests in the new Atlantic and colonial trades or in provisioning and manufacturing, rather than in the East India or Mediterranean trades like their predecessors. When parliament started to raise an army in the early months of 1642, the wealth of the City guilds and corporations was at its disposal.
Manufacturers supported the war with far less hesitation than the merchants. Cloth manufacturers in the West Country had long-standing grievances against the attempts by the monarchy, in alliance with the London merchants, to regulate the quantity and quality of cloth they produced. In East Anglia, manufacturers of lighter cloths claimed that the king’s foreign and financial policies were to blame for periodic crises in their export trade. In other industries, such as metal manufacturing in the Midlands (which produced iron, steel, nails, ironmongery -and arms) or the Northampton boot and shoe area, leading manufacturers were quick to support parliament. In Birmingham a certain Mr Porter declared that his blade mill would produce swords only for parliament, and later mobilised his workers in defence of the town against Prince Rupert’s army in 1643.
 
3. The rise of capitalism
THESE MERCHANTS and manufacturers represented the new wealth of capital, wealth based, not on feudal rights over land and peasants, but on profits made from the goods produced by wage-workers.
The old-style merchant wealth of feudal times, based on luxury trades and the high profits of distant and dangerous voyages successfully accomplished, was giving way to a more direct intervention by merchants in production. Their wealth began to depend on exports – cloth, coal, arms – or on the new colonial commodities, sugar and tobacco, which were produced on slave estates in the Caribbean and North America. They encouraged specialisation and the regional concentration of production – such as cloth in East Anglia and the West Country, pots and pans in the Midlands -for internal exchange as well as for export.
The manufacturers organised such specialised production, not by building factories to employ workers in, but by getting control over production in the craft workers’ households. A manufacturer who supplied the raw materials and collected the finished goods at a fixed price needed very little capital to start with, but could make dozens or hundreds of formerly independent households dependent upon him for their livelihood.
This process, of reducing all the workforce to the level of wage-labourers, began at least two centuries before the industrial revolution and Marx called it the ‘primitive accumulation of capital’.
The new wealth of capital was also slowly beginning to transform the land. Under the feudal system, the landlord could make the peasant do unpaid work and pay rent either in produce or in money, while all matters concerning tenancy were settled in his own manor court presided over by his own agent. Although by 1600 the peasants were no longer serfs (that is, they were personally free), and they rarely had to give their labour unpaid except at harvest time, there were millions of ‘copyholders’ whose tenure of their family plots was still feudal. They could inherit, but had to pay the lord (usually with the family’s best beast) for the privilege.
Sixteenth and seventeenth century landlords, faced with rising prices, had raised their income from land using both feudal methods and new, capitalist ones. They used the manor courts to raise rents or transform the ‘best beast’ tax by levying payment in money instead, to evict squatters from common land in order to enclose it, or to persuade tenants to exchange their strips of land with one another so as to provide areas for enclosed cultivation or sheep-farming. The largest and best plots of land were then taken outside the feudal system and leased to commercial farmers for market rents.
This process of land ‘improvement’ was dividing the English peasantry into a few better-off farmers (yeomen) and a mass of landless or near-landless labourers. The impoverishment of the labourers, not only of land, but also of common rights, participation in the manor courts, self-respect and standing in village society, created in many places a pool of bitterness which overflowed into open rebellion in 1640–42.
 
4. Popular struggles
THE COUNTRY GENTLEMEN’S opposition of 1640 made a deliberate bid to win support from all classes, including those not previously regarded as part of the ‘political nation’. There were two general elections in 1640. The first, in April, elected what came to be known as the ‘Short Parliament’ – for another election followed in October, bringing the ‘Long Parliament’. During these elections, the first for twelve years, candidates opposed to the king and his court often tried to mobilise the largest possible number of voters, interpreting as broadly as they could the laws about who could vote – which varied from town to town and in the counties were open to various interpretations.
Hearing that a parliament was to be called to settle the people’s grievances, many people took matters into their own hands. There were anti-enclosure riots in over half the counties of England, and a nationwide wave of illicit hunting in private deer-parks. At Buckden in Huntingdonshire, a crowd of hundreds of women and boys threw down the Bishop of Lincoln’s hedges and fences and answered the Justice of the Peace who came to investigate ‘only with contemptuous words’. In the Fenlands of East Anglia and Lincolnshire, there was a more-or-less general rebellion against the draining of the swamps on the orders of landowning courtiers. The swamps were a rich source of common rights such as fishing and fowling, on which the poor depended.
As the parliamentary parties polarised into Royalist and Parliamentarian, there was a widespread refusal to pay rents to Royalist landlords. The tenants of several Royalists in Somerset even petitioned parliament to be allowed to pay their rents as a contribution to the war effort rather than to their landlords.
In Essex and Suffolk, crowds drawn from Colchester and the many surrounding cloth-producing towns and villages attacked the country houses of Royalist and Catholic lords, seizing arms and horses, drinking all the beer and wine, carrying off curtains and feather beds, destroying Italian gardens (a prime symbol of seventeenth-century aristocratic culture) and tearing up estate documents. For a few days in August 1642, the mere suspicion that a gentleman was a Royalist was enough to arouse the crowds, and some managed to escape only by ‘speaking well of the parliament’.
In London, the smaller merchants, shopkeepers, craftsmen and apprentices accompanied the main points of the acrimonious proceedings in parliament with large demonstrations. In May 1641 ten to fifteen thousand citizens were said to have gathered at Westminster, calling for the execution of the king’s hated favourite, Strafford. The MPs got so nervous that on 5 May, when part of a gallery collapsed under a fat MP, they thought they had heard a shot and the House was in uproar!
In late December 1641, crowds armed with clubs and swords called for the expulsion of the bishops from the House of Lords. On 27 December they ‘made a lane in both the Palace Yards, and no man could pass but whom the rabble gave leave to.’ In a demonstration outside Whitehall Palace, a shocked gentleman recorded, ‘they talked treason so loud, that the king and queen did hear them.’
This mobilisation of the people had a decisive effect on the attitudes of parliamentarians and the propertied classes. For some, popular violence (and rumours of more) confirmed their conservatism, and they became wholehearted supporters of the king, for ‘law and order’ against what they saw as the threat of anarchy.
For some Parliamentarians, however, the threat of royal tyranny was the greater danger. They defended popular mobilisation, dealt leniently with rioters, and pressed for concessions to popular demands. They had started the confrontation with massive support from the landowning class, and since that support had dwindled away they were quite prepared to rebuild their base with support from other classes.
Relations between the king and the opposition broke down completely in the spring of 1642. In October 1641 the Irish had risen in rebellion against English government and the colonisation of the North of Ireland. Both king and opposition wanted to smash the rebels (many London merchants were up to their necks in land deals in the North of Ireland), but neither side could trust the other with an army. So two armies were raised, one by parliament and one by the king, and in August 1642 they took the field against each other.
While the gentry in many counties were still trying to avoid obeying the orders of either side, the working people of London -men, women and children – rushed to defend their city. The ‘trained bands’ of apprentices and craftsmen halted the king’s first advance on London, and in the next few months the city was fortified with massive earthworks. The guilds and companies marched out to the fields with their craft banners to dig and embank, including ‘a thousand oysterwives from Billingsgate ... all alone, with drums and flying colours.’
As the Royalist forces advanced through the West Riding of Yorkshire in December 1642 the wealthy merchant corporation of Leeds saw fit to surrender, but the spinners and weavers continued to support parliament, and the artisan clothiers of Bradford and Halifax organised armed resistance.
 
5. Revolution and class conflict
THE PARLIAMENTARIAN LEADERS of 1642 were those who did not fear popular support. They were convinced that it was all in the best interests of the landowning class and the existing order of society. The ‘liberties’ of the landowning class and their parliament were identified with the general ‘liberty’ of the people of England; that the one meant privilege, and the other might mean the destruction of privilege, did not seem to bother them.
Was popular unity in the English Civil War a fact or an illusion? Was the Parliamentarian leadership ‘turning the mob on and off like a tap’, as the historian J.H. Hexter has claimed, or was it simply papering over the cracks of class conflict?
Slowly but surely, from the beginning of the war, the Parliamentarians split apart. First the aristocrats who led the army – such as the Earls of Essex and Manchester – began to hang back, appalled at the prospect of having to fight the war to a conclusion. A faction was organised in parliament to get rid of them (one of its most important members was a country gentleman and officer named Oliver Cromwell) and the New Model Army, based on fighting efficiency rather than inherited rank, and a national organisation rather than regional allegiances, was created to win the war.
As soon as the war was over, late in 1645, the London bourgeoisie began to press their own political program me. They wanted lands belonging to bishops and Royalists to be sold to finance government. They wanted an authoritarian church settlement without bishops. They wanted the crushing of the Irish, a task which had been somewhat neglected since 1642, and they wanted an independent military force based on London and under their control instead of the New Model Army.
By 1646 the ruling group in London was considerably to the right of those who had come to power in 1641–2. They were prepared to organise, together with the more conservative MPs, to get rid of the New Model Army and make peace with the king on their own terms. Their efforts came to a climax in July 1647 with the invasion of parliament by a mob of apprentices who held the MPs prisoner until they agreed to hand over control of the London militia to the Lord Mayor and aldermen.
But this attempt by the London bourgeoisie to organise their own coup failed for two reasons. One was that it encouraged a resurgence of out-and-out Royalism in London, which was a danger to all who had supported parliament since 1642. The other was that their attempts to remove the obstacle of the New Model Army led to the radicalisation of the soldiers themselves.
Asked to disband without arrears of pay or legal indemnity for their actions in war, the soldiers faced destitution, imprisonment for debts incurred while in the army, or even hanging for horsestealing by magistrates hostile to the parliamentary cause. Officers and men decided to stand together and petitioned parliament for redress of these grievances. The more parliament rejected their petitions and enlarged its plans for disbanding the army, the more radical the soldiers became. In April 1647 they elected ‘agitators’ to represent them to the generals and to parliament. By August the army, acting together, had seized the king and marched on London.
Within the army conflict developed between those who, in alliance with those London radicals known as the Levellers, wanted to move on and set up a new constitution and radically reform society, and those who feared just that. At the Putney Debates in November 1647, Cromwell and the generals decided to reject all radical constitutional proposals and abolish the democratic army council which had been set up in June. This led to a series of mutinies, the last of which was not crushed until 1649 at Burford.
In 1648 the outbreak of a conservative threat from below – the Clubmen risings, which were peasant revolts against both sides in the war in defence of ‘ancient liberties’ – led to a renewal of civil war, and for a time unity was reinforced on the Parliamentary side. But in the winter of 1648–9 the Parliamentarians again had to face the problem of class conflict, and the question whether the revolution was to go forward, turn back, or stop where it stood.
Before looking at what happened, we must examine the role that religion played in the crisis, and the birth of the first radical movements in English history.
 
6. Religion and revolution
NOWADAYS, religion would seem a very arbitrary basis for political choice, because religion is seen as essentially a private matter, a matter of conscience rather than the concern of the state, and so not a political matter.
But this attitude is a result of the revolution of 1640–60. At the outset of the civil war, all but a very few of the participants regarded enforcement of the ‘true’ religion as an essential part of law and order, one of the principal and most controversial functions of the state. The Reformation had destroyed the authority of the Pope in England, but the state had replaced him as the final arbiter in religious matters, so the question of who controlled the state was inevitably bound up with religious questions. Those who fought the English Civil War fought over how the state should implement Protestantism.
Religion, and especially the question of church government, became an inflammatory issue because of the way in which Charles I and his Archbishop of Canterbury, William Laud, used the system of bishops. Many Protestants, including the leaders of the French, Dutch and Scottish reformed Churches, considered bishops an evil papist institution contrary to the word of God. As Charles I encouraged Laud to enforce elaborate ceremonies, persecute dissidents and decrease the role of the people in the church, he made enemies of more and more of his subjects.
The name commonly given to the religious opponents of Archbishop Laud is ‘Puritans’. The word was at first deliberately used to try to amalgamate mild opponents of Laud’s policies with those who opposed the Anglican Church on more fundamental and radical grounds. But by 1640 the name was accepted with pride by many of Laud’s opponents – he had succeeded in uniting the opposition by persecuting everybody equally harshly.
Opposition to the Anglican Church went right back to its foundation in the reign of Elizabeth in 1559. Many Protestants even then thought that although the Anglican settlement was satisfactory in theological doctrine (officially it followed the teachings of the Genevan reformer John Calvin), it was very imperfectly reformed in ceremonies and discipline, since it preserved the skeleton of the Catholic Mass as its main service, and left the structure of bishops and church courts untouched except that they were controlled by the king instead of the Pope.
One of the most powerful traditions of opposition to the Anglican Church was reform from within. Puritan reformers did not wish to set up a rival church, but to change the existing one. Yet their practice varied according to the circumstances, and by 1640 many ‘reformers from within’ had been driven to the point of leaving the church – mainly for exile in the Netherlands or America.
The importance attached to the Bible, preaching, and lay participation in the affairs of the church were also common themes in the opposition to Laud, who stressed the service book, formal prayer and clerical hierarchy. Yet the practical meaning attached to each of these could vary enormously. The Bible may be the word of God, but who is to explain what it means? University-educated clergy? The lay Christian well-instructed? Or any labourer, peasant or woman who can read it? Preaching may be more important than formal prayer, but who is to be allowed to preach? And lay participation could mean anything from that of the paternalistic lord of the manor to grassroots democracy for the whole congregation.
Puritanism was a united movement only when in opposition. Deep divisions – often concerning radically different meanings that might be attached to the same phrase, such as ‘the godly people’ – did not simply emerge under the strain of war, they were always there. To identify Puritanism with one set of views, or one class position; to find the ‘typical’ or ‘average’ Puritan in the middle-class merchant or the independent small craftsman; to say that Puritanism was ‘essentially’ reform from within, or any one thing to the exclusion of others, obscures the issue.
The issue is, of course, the nature of ideology in general and of religious ideology in particular. What ideas make people believe they can act to change the world, and what ideas prevent them from even trying? This is why revolutionaries have always been fascinated by the effects of Puritanism in the English Civil War.
 
7. Class and Puritanism
FOR THE LANDOWNERS, Puritanism was away of identifying themselves as the ‘godly magistrates’ of the Protestant tradition. As such, it appealed to many of the peers as well as the gentry. Luther and Calvin, the founders of Protestantism, had laid the burden of responsibility for the godliness of society on the magistrates, in order to evade the question of whether Protestant peoples had the right to rebel against Catholic monarchs. The landowners’ Puritanism stressed the medieval rights of patronage that landowners held over parish churches, and insisted on the right of parliament, rather than the monarch and hierarchy of the church, to decide church policy and government. This type of Protestantism was not incompatible with feudalism; indeed, in France in the previous century it had been used mainly by backward-looking feudal nobles against the attempts of absolute monarchs to deprive them of their traditional independence.
The Puritanism of the bourgeoisie, however, was closely related to the rise of capitalism. It was an assertion of the middle-class values of thrift and accumulation against both the decadence of parasitic aristocrats and the squalor in which the poor often lived. Sober living and careful accounting, for middle-class Puritans, added up to long-term prosperity rather than ostentatious spending.
The middle-class Puritan stress on the duties of the father, as head of a household which included servants and workers as well as wife and children, brought patriarchy to the level of production. It was the counterpart of the centralised state, eliminating the old feudal hierarchies of lords and clergy in between. The capitalist morality of sex – the role of the woman being that of child-bearing property and obedient helper in the family business – was to be enforced through rigorous training of the conscience and the elimination of all ‘worldly’ distractions and enjoyments.
This kind of Puritanism opposed the old church and state hierarchies with the confidence of a secret elite: the ‘elect’ chosen by God for salvation. Though no one could be sure of his or her salvation, it was easier to identify the damned by their vices – typically the vices of the aristocracy and the poor.
Such views were in a sense very democratic, upholding the rights of the godly citizen against the old system of privileges based on birth; but at the same time they were highly authoritarian, for everyone else must be made to conform to the standard of the godly elect for the sake of social order.
Above all, the Puritanism of the bourgeoisie stressed the godly duty of hard work. Waste of time, waste of opportunities to contribute to society by productive work, were regarded as serious sins, and persistent poverty was taken as a sign of moral failing. The rich could, however, improve the prospects of the poor by providing work for them: the investment of capital in employing artisans or labourers was therefore seen as a Christian duty.
The need for labour discipline was strongly felt by employers in a society with more and more wage earners, but few or no factories. The ‘putting out’ system of manufacture, in which the employer supplied the materials and collected the products through an agent, allowed plenty of room for ‘idling’ and ‘cheating’, by which the small producers tried to redress the balance between themselves and the manufacturer. Because on-the-spot supervision was impractical, only self-discipline could provide the answer.
But this Puritan stress on hard work as a Christian duty was double-edged. From the point of view of the merchants and manufacturers, it justified their intervention in production in terms of the ‘Christian duty to create wealth’. But from the point of view of the small producers, it reinforced the value they placed on their own freedom and independence. If productive work was the Christian’s highest duty, then should not the Christian producer be protected from exploitation and oppression? Was it not unchristian to take advantage of and deliberately to impoverish honest craftsmen and their families? When religious radicals drew such conclusions they were following an alternative class logic to the ‘Protestant ethic’ of the bourgeoisie.
The democratic aspect of Puritanism was also elastic, though not capable of stretching the whole way. The further down the social scale the Puritan, the more democratic the remedies that seemed necessary to protect the ‘elect’ from oppression. But so long as the Calvinistic idea of predestination – the separation of humanity into those predestined to be saved and those to be damned – persisted, a theory of universal human rights was not possible, for somewhere a line had to be drawn between saints and sinners. Those who arrived at truly democratic positions during the revolution – including the Levellers and Diggers – did so by breaking with the Calvinist tradition of Puritanism.
 
8. Presbyterians and Independents
THE CLASS DIVISIONS among the Puritans began to emerge at the end of the war, in the form of controversies over church government which may seem to have little meaning today, but which were vital at the time. There were two main parties to the disagreement among the Puritans, the Presbyterians and the Independents, or Congregationalists. Three hundred years later, in the 1960s, these actually joined together to become the United Reformed Church. But they could not even agree to differ, let alone unite, in the 1640s. This was because the only thing on which they did agree was that there must be one form of church for the whole of society.
Church government was a question of state power and how it should be used. Religion was not a matter of individual choice but a social obligation. Church government was frequently referred to as ‘discipline’, and it was exactly that – a vitally important means of social control; in fact it was virtually the only ideological apparatus the state had.
Presbyterianism, as practised in the Netherlands, France and Scotland, was a system of church government that gave control to the rank-and-file clergy, with a few select members from among the better-off parishioners acting as lay elders. The clergy met in synods and assemblies to ordain new ministers and exercise discipline among themselves. For the people, there was great stress on moral discipline, with excommunication as a sanction against unacceptable behaviour.
Many members of parliament disliked the Presbyterian system because of the power it gave to the clergy. They feared, as Milton put it, that ‘new presbyter was but old priest writ large.’ But at an early stage in the war, the Parliamentarians had committed themselves to an alliance with the Scots, which included a promise to reform religion along Presbyterian lines as the Scots had done since their rebellion against Charles I in 1638.
The section of English society which stood most consistently for the full Presbyterian system, most furiously opposed to all modifications and most intolerant of diversity, were the London Presbyterian clergy and their supporters among the merchant elite. From 1646 the Common Council of London, which was the City’s ruling body, consisting of substantial merchants and master craftsmen elected by the freemen of the wards, organised the petitions and demonstrations (and in 1647 the mobs) which put constant pressure on parliament for a Presbyterian system, an end to toleration, and the smashing of their opponents in parliament and the army.
There is no question that at the start of the revolution, Presbyterianism was a revolutionary position. It expressed the determination, particularly among the bourgeoisie, to replace the existing church completely once and for all, to tear up the system of bishops ‘root and branch’, as a London petition of 1640 put it.
But with victory and the possibility of carrying out the Presbyterian programme, all its conservative implications came to the fore – its intolerance, its rigid, authoritarian brand of Calvinism, and the weight it gave to ‘substantial citizens’ as elders in the government of the church. Indeed it was so conservative that it became dangerous to the Parliamentarian cause, and nearly sold out the revolution altogether in 1646–7, when counter-revolution was prevented only by the march of the New Model Army on London.
Why were the London bourgeoisie prepared to go to the very brink of counter-revolution for a Presbyterian settlement? The reason, as they explained in many petitions and manifestos, was their fear of social anarchy. The ending of censorship and persecution in 1641 had led to the flourishing of a huge variety of religious opinions and practices, above all in London. Anti-Calvinist views appeared in print, congregations formed and reformed both inside and outside the parish churches, and some dispensed with clergy’ and service books altogether, having lay preachers or spontaneous contributions by the congregation.
One of the Presbyterian ministers, Thomas Edwards, wrote a famous series of pamphlets titles Gangroena, describing sixteen sects and 271 errors which ought to be suppressed. Toleration, he claimed, led to error, error to heresy, and heresy to atheism and social chaos. In the second and third editions of Gangroena, Edwards included information from all over the country sent in by other anxious Presbyterians.
The main alternative to Presbyterianism was called at the time Independency. Its modern name is Congregationalism, because it is a system of self-governing congregations – with the emphasis on system. Most Independents wanted to retain the parish system as it existed, but with each parish free to choose its own minister and form of worship under the general supervision of parliament and the magistrates. In this form, Independency was particularly attractive to the country gentry, whose sphere of influence was the parish.
The other side of Independency was the existence, mainly in London, of ‘gathered churches’, that is, congregations that were not parishes (though they often met in parish churches) but voluntary associations bound together by an agreement or ‘covenant’. Many of these gathered churches, which had sprung up illegally under Laud in the 1620s and 1630s, were led by ordained ministers and substantial citizens who did not wish to destroy or replace the parish system; they saw themselves as seeking ‘accommodation’, or toleration, within a national church.
Independency in religion, therefore, provided a bridge between the parish gentry in parliament (such as Oliver Cromwell) and those of the London bourgeoisie who rejected Presbyterianism. The church established by law in England in 1649 was Independent in structure: it had some Presbyterian features, such as ministers’ meetings, but was under the control of a parliamentary committee.
Some Independents felt more strongly than others about toleration – both the poet John Milton and Oliver Cromwell expressed principled opposition to any persecution of people for religion. But wherever they drew the line under freedom of opinion, all the Independents believed that the state had a duty to establish and maintain some kind of orthodox religion, however broadly defined. (Cromwell’s state church, for exam pie, was run by a committee that included Independents, Presbyterians and Baptists).
‘It is an undoubted maxim,’ said the 1644 manifesto of the London Independent ministers, the Apologeticall Narration, ‘that it belongs to Christian magistrates in an essential manner to be the authorises of reformation.’ They particularly insisted on an official system of financial support for the state church. Though many Independents criticised the existing system of tithes, they opposed the abolition of tithes until something could be found to take their place.
The really radical ideas on toleration and the freedom of religion from state interference were found not among the Independents but among the sects, Thomas Edwards’ bugbear, which were known as Separatists.
 
9. Separatism, heresy and freedom
SEPARATISTS did not believe in any churches other than voluntary associations of believers. Though this sprang perhaps from Calvinist elitism – the elect, who were small in number, having the right to break off relations with everyone else – the conclusions which Separatists drew from the English Revolution were libertarian, individualist and politically radical. It was from among such people that the Levellers, Diggers and Ranters emerged.
Separatist congregations in London had experimented with lay preaching, open debate and discussion instead of formal services, even women’s meetings and women preachers, which drew curious crowds to Thomas Lambe’s congregation in Bell Alley. They were accused of recruiting women without their husbands’ consent and servants without their masters’. They would have nothing to do with parishes or even church buildings, which they considered tainted with popery.
The first to make the Separatist position clear, in 1641 when the Independent ministers were trying to keep quiet and manoeuvre for recognition by the Presbyterians, was Katherine Chidley. In her Justification of the Independant Churches of Christ, she laid blame for religious differences fairly and squarely on the established church: ‘Now there must needs be a disagreement between Lambes and Wolves but the Lambes are not the cause thereof.’ She went out of her way to defend the right of working people to choose for themselves, ‘whether they be Taylors, Felt-makers, Button-makers, Tent-makers, Shepherds or Ploughmen or what honest trade so ever’, and spoke out for a woman’s right to choose in religion, for a husband ‘hath authority over her in bodily and civil respects, but not to be a lord over her conscience’.
Katherine Chidley was a haberdasher’s wife who had been expelled from the parish church in Shrewsbury in the 1620s for refusing the attend the superstitious and degrading ceremony of ‘churching’ after childbirth. She and her husband (who clearly supported her and is referred to as ‘my faithful yokefellow’ in one of her works) moved to London and joined one of the Separatist congregations which led an underground existence during Archbishop Laud’s rule.
According to Thomas Edwards, who called her ‘a brazen-faced, audacious old woman’, she took great delight in heckling preachers who preached in parish church buildings, with their old Roman Catholic associations. After her husband’s death she took over his business, selling stockings in bulk to Cromwell’s army in the 1650s, and her son, Samuel, became one of the leaders of the Levellers.



‘When women preach and cobblers pray,
The fiends of hell make holiday’



wrote a Royalist poet of the situation in London in the early 1640s. Men such as Thomas Edwards were convinced that freedom of opinion and religious practice would lead to the destruction of all religion – to free thought and atheism. How far did freedom of religion go in the English Revolution? Did it go beyond religion itself and challenge the basis of Christianity?
The charge of atheism was frequently made against William Walwyn, a Leveller merchant. Yet Walwyn’s beliefs were much closer to modern Christianity than those of the mainstream Puritans. He believed that if all Christians would only accept ‘That it is the bloud of Christ, which cleanseth us from all sinne; this evangelical truth of its own nature would instantly set man on work to do the will of him, that hath so loved him.’ His charge against the clergy was that they led people away from simple Christian truth, encouraging people to believe they were saints ‘for being of this or that opinion ... or for looking more sadly or solemnly than other people, or for dressing themselves in a peculiar manner... or for sucking in and sighing out reproaches, and slanders against their neighbours.’
‘I carry with me in all places,’ wrote Walwyn, ‘a Touch-stone that tryeth all things, and labours to hold nothing but what upon plain grounds appeareth good and usefull: I abandon all niceties and useless things: my manner is in all disputes reasonings and discourses, to enquire what is the use: and if I find it not very materiall, I abandon it, there are plain usefull doctrines sufficient to give peace to my mind’ (A Whisper in the Eare of Mr Thomas Edwards).
Walwyn, an old-fashioned merchant who believed in commercial skill, not exploitation, was a free thinker, but not an atheist.
Yet even this was enough to send respectable merchants and London ministers into a paranoid rage. It was not Puritanism that was modernising, rationalist and freedom-loving; on the contrary, it was the adversary of Puritanism, individualistic Separatism, that brought religion into the modern world. And that tendency flourished, not among the merchant elite and other wealthy citizens, but among small merchants and shopkeepers, artisans, women, apprentices and servants, who challenged the new authoritarianism as vigorously as the Puritans had challenged Archbishop Laud.
 
10. The politics of the Levellers
OUT OF THE Independent and Separatist congregations of London there emerged in 1646, under attack from the Prebyterians, a movement for religious toleration. As the Presbyterians organised for their attempted coup in 1647, it became evident that this movement would have to defend civil liberties as well, for one of its leaders, John Lilburne, was thrown into prison for his writings. And as the soldiers of the New Model Army began to organise spontaneously in their own defence against disbandment, a group of those active in the movement turned to address the army and work among the soldiers for a new constitution that would guarantee both religious and civil liberties. This is the group known to their contemporaries and to history (though they disliked the name themselves) as the Levellers.
The Levellers demanded a constitution that would guarantee equality. Equal electoral constituencies, annual elections, and the abolition of property qualifications for voting – these would lament, with king and lords abolished.
Much attention has been concentrated on the question of voting in all the various versions of the Leveller proposals, but the fundamental point was to prevent the concentration of political power in the hands of a few. Not only annual election, but a ban on re-election was part of the programme ‘for avoiding the many dangers and inconveniences apparently arising from the long continuance of the same persons in authority’. The alternative was to distribute offices and positions of trust – at both national and local level – among as many people as possible, ‘that all persons may be capable of subjection as well as rule’.
This was not just a ‘foreshadowing’ of modern democracy, it was an alternative to what Marxists are fond of calling, glibly but correctly, ‘bourgeois democracy’.
Further, democracy was not for the Levellers an end in itself. It is clear from many of their pamphlets and other publications that what they saw as the great evil in society was the concentration of economic power in the hands of the rich. The complaint of the poor against the rich is a common theme:
‘Look about you ... see how coldly, raggedly and unwholesomely they are clothed; live one week with them in their poor houses, lodge as they lodge, eat as they eat, and no oftener, and be at the same pass to get that wretched food for a sickly wife, and hunger-starved children; (if you dare do this for fear of death or diseases) then walk abroad, and observe the general plenty of all necessaries, observe the gallant bravery of multitudes of men and women abounding in all things that can be imagined; observe the innumerable numbers of those that have more than sufficeth,’ wrote William Walwyn in 1643.
The cause of all this is clearly identified as exploitation. Though monopolies and taxation are also blamed, especially the Excise Tax which weighed so heavily on the poor consumers, there is, it seems, a basic injustice which lies at the root of it all.
‘When with extreme care, racked credit and hard labour, ourselves and our servants have produced our manufactures, with what cruelty have ye wrought, and still work upon our necessities, and enrich yourselves upon our extremities, offering yea frequently buying our work for less than (you know) the stuff whereof it was made cost us; by which the like unconscionable means in grinding the faces of the poor, and advancing yourselves upon our ruins, most of you rich citizens come to your wealth,’ wrote the author of England’s Troublers Troubled in 1648.
‘You of the City that buy our work ... will give us but little or nothing for our work, even what you please, for you know we must sell for moneys to set our families on work, or else we famish,’ said another pamphlet, The Mournfull Cryes of Many Thousand Poor Tradesmen.
The Levellers were explicitly putting the case of the craftsman, formerly independent but now reduced to producing piece work for the merchant capitalist. Does this mean that they were unsympathetic to the labourer or wage-earner?
It has often been argued that because on some occasions the Levellers (or some of them) modified their demand for votes for all adult men to exclude ‘servants and almstakers’, they regarded the working class as disqualified from the political rights they claimed for the craftsman; the reason being that a master (employer) could influence a servant’s vote, thus reintroducing the concentration of political power.
The Levellers regarded economic independence – the right to the fruits of one’s own labour – as a basic human freedom, and in fact never recognised the name ‘Levellers’ because they did defend private property.
But it was an essential part of their programme that the opportunity for economic independence ought to be available to all. On the land, the feudal tenure of copyhold ought to be abolished, rather than simply denying the vote to copyholders. Similarly, poverty ought to be abolished by providing the poor with the means of independence. The hold of property owners over those dependent on poor relief ought to be broken by giving the poor control over charitable funds themselves; the Fens ought to be drained for the benefit of the poor; trade ought to be ‘improved’ so as to provide the poor with more work – and so on.
Before the rise of capitalism, wage earning was a common but usually temporary status. The journeyman, employed by a master craftsman (like ‘our servants’ in the petition quoted above) could hope to become a master craftsman himself in due course. The smallholder and his family on the land sought wage-labour or craft work as a supplement to the food they grew themselves. Even domestic servants were normally young, unmarried men and women saving from their wages to marry, in their mid-twenties, and set up an independent household of their own.
In the seventeenth century, the growth of lifelong wage slavery, the permanent loss of independence, was a greater grievance for the workers than the existence of the master craftsman’s small workshop with his one or two employees.
The Levellers, therefore, were opposed to the essence of the rise of capitalism in this period – the creation of a property-less, dependent labour force. They wanted to restore control over their own existence to those who had lost it, and if anyone should doubt the powerful appeal of such a programme to the dispossessed, they have only to think of the enthusiasm landless agricultural labourers have shown for small property in twentieth-century revolutions.
While rejecting the new capitalist exploitation, the Levellers showed no nostalgia for feudal society. They condemned everything about it – monarchy, nobility, tithes, clergy and lawyers. They wanted an alternative society of free, independent small producers. And they thought they had identified the solution that would guarantee this: equalisation of political power.
 
11. Leveller organisation and the army
THE WAY IN WHICH the Levellers organised made them the first grass-roots political party in English history. Organising petitions, canvassing support from door to door, mobilising demonstrations and processions – this was the focus of their activities. Their object was most clearly to politicise their audience as well as mobilise them. The purpose of circulating a petition, said John Lilburne to a meeting in Mapping, was ‘to inform the people of their Liberties and Priviledges; and not only to get their hands to the petition, for (said he) I would not give three pence for ten thousand hands [signatures].’
They had an organisation in each ward of the City of London, weekly subscriptions ranging from sixpence to half a crown according to income, two treasurers (the Levellers also had a systematic distrust of corruptible human nature), and a central committee of twelve who met three times a week in the Whalebone Tavern.
Because the Levellers saw the artisan or peasant household as the basic productive and political unit of society, they did not demand political rights, such as the vote, for women. But they did demand civil liberties, such as freedom of conscience, and they organised women’s petitions and demonstrations. It is no surprise to find Katherine Chidley, who first took up the pen in defence of freedom of conscience in 1641, leading one of the last Leveller demonstrations in London in 1653 demanding the release of John Lilburne from prison.
The Levellers were quick to recognise the importance of the revolt of the soldiers of the New Model Army in the spring of 1647.Here were men, drawn from the peasant, artisan and labouring classes, who had believed in a general way that they were fighting for liberty and justice, yet when they tried to present a petition for their own legitimate demands for arrears of pay and legal indemnity, they found their basic liberty denied.
Leveller writings soon found an enthusiastic audience among the soldiers, and there is no doubt that the events of 1647 – the Solemn Engagement of the Army not to disband in June, the seizing of the king and the march on London, were very much influenced by the Levellers. But there were limits to Leveller influence in the army, which they were unable to overcome.
The main problem was that though the officers and men had stood together from April to October, and generals such as Cromwell had the last resort, held the real power. When the Levellers proposed that the army take the responsibility of setting up a new democratic constitution in the autumn of 1647, this Agreement of the People was debated in the Army Council at Putney. In the course of the debate, Cromwell, Ireton and the other generals began to realise what the Levellers were proposing – indeed they saw further than the Levellers themselves, for they were convinced that private property would not survive in a radical democracy. They brought an end to the meetings of the representative Army Council, reimposed their own control, and refused to put the Agreement of the People to the army rendezvous at Ware in Hertfordshire.
There was substantial support for the Levellers among the soldiers: two regiments mutinied at Ware, and there were further mutinies up to that at Burford in May 1649. Again and again the appearance of sea-green ribbons or Leveller slogans – such as ‘England’s freedom: Soldiers’ rights’ – in the hats of the rank and file signalled the persistence of radical democratic ideas among the soldiers. But never again were the Levellers able to win or keep the support of enough of the men with enough of the resolve to go ahead and overthrow the generals and the old constitution.
How far Leveller tradition lingered on among soldiers and ex-soldiers during the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell and after the Restoration of the monarchy is not clear. Never again did Levellers organise a successful military presence. Yet it was with a typically military metaphor that Richard Rumbold, one of the last of the Levellers, went to the scaffold in 1685 for his part in Argyll’s rebellion against James II. ‘I am sure,’ he said, ‘that there was no man born marked of God above another; for none comes into the world with a saddle on his back, neither any booted and spurred to ride him.’
 
12. Gerrard Winstanley and communism
THE GROUP KNOWN to history as the Diggers preferred the name True Levellers. Unlike the Levellers themselves, who rejected the title, they believed that a redistribution of political power was not enough to end exploitation and oppression. True freedom, they argued, consisted in the abolition of private property.
‘In the beginning of time,’ said their manifesto, The True Levellers’ Standard Advanced, ‘the great creator Reason made the earth to be a common treasury... for man had domination given to him, over the beasts, birds and fishes; but not one word was spoken in the beginning, that one branch of mankind should rule over another.’ Sin, or ‘selfish imagination’, has led to private property and the domination of the many by the few: ‘and that earth, that is within this creation made a common storehouse for all, is bought and sold and kept in the hands of a few, whereby the great creator is mightily dishonoured, as if he were a respecter of persons, delighting in the comfortable livelihood of some, and rejoicing in the miserable poverty and straits of others. From the beginning it was not so.’
The Digger programme, announced in this pamphlet of 1649, calls for an end to private property, money, and wage slavery:
‘This declares likewise to all labourers or such as are called poor people, that they shall not dare to work for hire for any landlord or for any that is lifted up above others; for by their labours they have lifted up tyrants and tyranny; and by denying to labour for hire they shall pull them down again.’
With no one left to work for them, said the Diggers, the private property of the rich will be no use to them, and they will be forced to join the new society in which ‘bondage shall be removed, tears wiped away, and all poor people by their righteous labours shall be relieved and freed from poverty and straits.’
In a sense, the Diggers stood in the tradition of agrarian communism, which had often appeared in medieval heresies and revolts. But they also went far beyond that tradition, for Gerrard Winstanley, one of the authors of The True Levellers’ Standard Advanced, was the first communist to see further than the redistribution of property and envisage a system of communal production, for both town and country, which would open the way to continuous improvement and the progress of society.
Gerrard Winstanley was born a draper’s son in Wigan, Lancashire, and apprenticed to a merchant in London. But when his apprenticeship was over, he failed in business, finding that ‘a man shall sooner be cheated of his bread than get bread by trading among men, if by plain dealing he put trust in any.’ Reduced to working as a cowherd in Surrey, he became familiar with the hardships of the poor, and this, combined with his disgust at the competitive standards of commercial capital, led him to a critique of both landed and monied property.
After the destruction of the Digger communities of 1649–50 by the army and the magistrates, Winstanley addressed a final appeal to Oliver Cromwell, in which he described in vivid detail the alternative society which they believed could replace the existing one based on private property.
In this alternative society, production and exchange would be carried on without private ownership and without money. Winstanley was insistent on this, and argues it out in full:
‘... the earth shall be planted and reaped, and the fruits carried into barns and store-houses by the assistance of every family ... Every tradesman shall fetch materials ... from the public store-houses, to work upon without buying and selling, and when particular works are made, as cloth, shoes, hats and the like, the tradesmen shall bring these particular works to particular shops, as it is now in practice, without buying and selling. And every family as they want such things as they cannot make, they shall go to these shops and fetch without money, even as now they fetch with money ...’
The enforcement and supervision of such a system would require many local officials, and like the Levellers Winstanley insisted that these should be directly elected every year with no re-election, ‘that whereas many have their portions to obey, so many may have their turns to rule.’ Everyone over forty would have an equal chance to hold office, and everyone who survived to sixty would automatically become a ‘general supervisor’. The elected officials were to include a ‘soldier’ or policeman in every community: it is clear that in Winstanley’s community the state (precisely in Lenin’s sense of ‘separate bodies of armed men, prisons, etc.’) would cease to exist.
Among many safeguards thought out by Winstanley in his book, The Law of Freedom, was equal education. ‘One sort of children shall not be trained up only in book learning and no other employment, called scholars... for then through idleness and exercised wit therein they spend their time to find out policies to advance themselves to be lords and masters above their labouring brethren ... which occasions all the trouble in the world.’
The basic unit of society was, for Winstanley as for the Levellers, the productive household. ‘Every man’s wife and every woman’s husband [are to be] proper to themselves, and so are their children at their dispose till they come of age.’ From the point of view of present-day women, this may not seem very advanced, but Winstanley was not simply being conservative. In the harsh life of the poor in seventeenth-century England, families were constantly being destroyed and broken up. With wages in general too low to support whole families, fathers often left home to look for work and never returned, leaving their wives and children dependent on parish relief; as soon as the children were seven they were apprenticed by the parish. Even if not ‘parish apprentices’, most poor children were sent into service in another household from between the ages of seven and ten until they were old enough to marry. Small wonder that the productive family household based on ties of affection might seem to the poor a haven by comparison with real life.
Winstanley’s thought was outstanding in other ways, including his treatment of religion. When, in the first passage quoted above, he referred to ‘the great creator Reason’, he was carrying the free thought of the London Separatists to one of its logical conclusions. For Winstanley, the idea of a personal God had been so corrupted by the clergy, ‘imaginary hypocrites, that worship they know not what, except as their fancy tells them,’ as he described them in Fire in the Bush, that it might as well be abandoned in favour of practical knowledge, ‘for to know the secrets of nature is to know the works of God; and to know the works of God within the creation is to know God himself, for God dwells in every visible work or body,’ as he wrote in The Law of Freedom. This is pantheism – the belief that God is a universal presence in nature – but its consequences are not so different from materialism.
For example, what is sin? ‘I speak now,’ Winstanley wrote in The Law of Freedom, ‘in relation between the oppressor and the oppressed; the inward bondages I meddle not with in this place, though I am assured that, if it be rightly searched into, the inward bondages of the mind, as covetousness, pride, hypocrisy, envy, sorrow, fears, desperation and madness, are all occasioned by the outward bondage that one sort of people lay upon another.’
It is pointless to argue whether Winstanley did or did not ‘believe in God’. I think that any materialist who reads this passage would agree that Winstanley had a basic grasp of what the world is all about.
 
13. The Digger experiment
THE DIGGER COMMUNITIES failed, overwhelmed by superior force. They never managed to mobilise support in more than a few areas. Yet there were at least a dozen of them, in ten counties, and perhaps more that we do not know of. Where they existed, they seem to have attracted the support of the village poor, as lists of names that have survived in Northamptonshire show. In Enfield, Middlesex, they seem to have left a legacy of ideas concerning co-operative schemes for helping the poor, and resistance to the enclosure of the royal forest at Enfield Chase.
The communities on the common were, as The True Levellers’ Standard Advanced shows, part of a grand plan for the gradual but total withdrawal of labour by all wage-earners, and possibly all feudal tenants. The common lands were uncultivated areas used by villagers for pasture for their animals and gathering firewood; many poor families without land survived by building huts on the common and keeping a few animals. The legal position of common land was that it belonged partly to the lord of the manor and partly to the manorial tenants. The rights of poor squatters on the commons were customary but not recognised by the law.
The process of taking common land into private ownership had begun with the sheep-farming enclosures of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The enclosure of the commons for arable farming, already begun in the seventeenth century, was to continue on a large scale in the eighteenth as the first stage of the ‘agricultural revolution’ which marked the triumph of agrarian capitalism in England. By this process, enormous areas of waste land were made productive, but at the expense of the poor.
The Diggers advocated the transformation of waste land into productive land by and for the poor. They farmed small plots intensively, growing root vegetables and manuring the soil after the best contemporary model, the small and progressive farmers of the Dutch Republic. Squatting on the commons, a traditional remedy for poverty, was to be turned into a great positive movement for the transformation of society.
The tactic of withdrawing from existing society and setting up parallel communities was not as idealistic as it sounds. The plan was to cause the collapse of the old society by a slow-motion withdrawal of labour. Nevertheless, the Diggers were explicitly pacifist (‘We shall not do this by force of arms, we abhor it’) and they did not see the need to destroy the existing state in order to create the new society. Their pacifist stance was not only unrealistic in a society which had just undergone a military coup; it was unrealistic in any circumstances.
The Diggers, therefore, stand at the beginning of the tradition of anarchism as well as that of socialism. The Levellers were clear about the need to scrap the old state but less clear about the nature of the alternative society; the Diggers seem to have got it the other way about! And in the end their communities were physically broken up, their houses burned and their crops destroyed by troops of soldiers under orders from the local ‘state’, the magistrates and landowners.
 
14. The Ranters
BOTH THE LEVELLERS and the Diggers were part of the challenge to Puritanism, but perhaps the most radical challenge in terms of ideas came from a group of people who personified the nightmares of Thomas Edwards and the London bourgeoisie. They are usually known as the Ranters, though there was no party or organisation of that name. Small groups did exist – Lawrence Clarkson was introduced to ‘a people called My One Flesh’ when he came to London – but they were very fluid, and individuals drifted from one to another around the country.
The central feature of the Ranter position was denial of the Puritan moral code. They started from the position that had existed among small groups of heretics in the middle ages, that the ‘inner light’ of direct experience of God freed the soul from the normal rules of behaviour.
‘Sin hath its conception only in the imagination,’ wrote Lawrence Clarkson in 1650. ‘What act soever is done by thee in light and love, is light and lovely, though it be that act called adultery ... No matter what Scripture, saints or churches say, if that within thee do not condemn thee, thou shalt not be condemned.’
If confined to a narrow elite of the ‘enlightened’, such theories were, of course, rather different from any general statement such as that people should be guided by their own consciences. But the Ranters were not narrow elitists, they were egalitarian: ‘Behold, behold, behold, I the eternall God the Lord of Hosts, who am that mighty Leveller am coming ... to Levell in good earnest, to Levell to some purpose, to level with a witnesse, to Levell the hills with the Valleyes, and to lay the Mountaines low ...’ wrote Abiezer Coppe in A Fiery Flying Roll in 1649.
The Ranters associated the new age of spiritual enlightenment with the overthrow of the rich and powerful and the triumph of the exploited and oppressed.
The Ranter challenge to Puritan tyranny over people’s minds could be dramatically direct. Abiezer Coppe, a parson’s son who had suffered in his youth from a compulsive desire to swear, later cured himself (and presumably many of his audience!) by swearing from pulpits. According to one report he ‘assumed the pulpit in a noted Church in London, and in a most wicked manner blasphemed and curst for an hour together, saying a pox of God take all your prayers, preaching, reading, fasting, etc’
Like Winstanley, most of the Ranters were pantheists – they saw the presence of God in all creation. The consequences, for them, were that food, drink and tobacco should be enjoyed as gifts of God. ‘My spirit dwells with God, sups with him, in him, feeds on him, with him, in him,’ wrote Coppe, and one Ranter shocked an observer by calling a pipe of tobacco ‘this goodly creature’.
The Ranter attitude to sex was a rather strange combination of high-minded mysticism and straightforward promiscuity. They were notoriously hostile to the family, and formed wandering and temporary liaisons with one another.
‘Give over thy stinking family duties ...’ wrote Coppe. Clarkson, in his autobiography written in 1660, when he had left the Ranters and joined the severe sect of Muggletonians, described a meeting he attended when he first came to London. ‘I pleaded the words of Paul ... that there was nothing unclean but as man esteemed it ... and therefore till you can lie with all women as one woman, and not judge it sin, you can do nothing but sin ... Sarah Kullin being then present, did invite me to make trial of what I had expressed ... she invited me with Mr Wats in Rood Lane, where was one or two more like herself, and lay with me that night.’ But, said Clarkson, he never forgot the Baptist wife he had married in Suffolk: ‘I was still careful for moneys for my wife, only my body was given to other women.’
What makes the Ranters significant, despite the obscure theological origins of their ideas, is that their standards were not so different from those of ordinary working people. Apart from a small layer of the better-off, peasants and labourers took little notice of Puritan sermons, followed their own traditional standards of sexual morality, frequented alehouses oftener than churches, and expressed cynicism about the whole elaborate structure of theology. Probably the majority of the population (and even more probably the majority of the propertyless) were as yet untouched by Puritan morality and the work ethic.
A Hackney bricklayer denies the divinity of Christ; a Somerset seducer tells his girlfriend not to worry about heaven and hell; a Wiltshire villager says he ‘would sell all religions for a jug of beer’, and another that ‘if a man had a good fortune and did live well, that was heaven; and if he lived poor and miserable, that was hell, for then he would die like a cow or horse.’ This may not be materialist philosophy at work, but it was something that Puritans feared almost more than Popery itself – the blasphemy of the poor; uneducated, unsophisticated, and unintegrated into the society of hard work and profits.
It is as difficult for us to tell how many Ranters there were as it was for contemporaries. They are mentioned, usually by hostile sources, as present in more than twenty different places in the early 1650s. According to George Fox the Quaker, a Justice of the Peace told him that if it had not been for the Quakers, ‘the nation had been overspread with Ranterism and all the Justices in the nation could not stop it.’
The Ranters flourished for a few brief years from about 1648; by the mid-1650s they had all but disappeared. They were largely swamped by the rise of the Quakers, who preached egalitarian ‘inner light’ doctrines and rejection of conventional social distinctions but without turning the Puritan personal morality on its head. Ranterism was not so much a product of despair at the failure of social revolution (all the leading Ranters explicitly rejected Leveller and Digger tactics from the beginning, though they were sympathetic to their aims) as the spread of the Quakers was a reaction against the revolutionary optimism of the Ranters.
 
15. Oliver Cromwell and a world made safe for capitalism
ALMOST from the outset of the Long Parliament in 1640, as we have seen, the block of classes which opposed Charles I – disaffected peers, landed gentry, merchants, manufacturers, artisans, peasants and wage labourers – began to fragment. The opposition itself became a kaleidoscope of class conflict, and even the weapon forged to re-unite the remaining opposition for war in 1645, the New Model Army, proved double-edged. But the revolution did not fail, it did not collapse in confusion as did a similar revolt in France at almost the same time. The English Revolution succeeded, paradoxically, because it was stopped.
Who set the limits of revolution? Who pulled it together and ensured its success? Traditionally one man, Oliver Cromwell, has been given the credit, and it is true that his personal role – like that of Lenin in the Russian Revolution of 1917 – was crucial. If Cromwell, or someone with the same background and political positions, had not been there and taken the actions he did, events would no doubt have turned out rather differently.
But no one individual can bend history to his will. It was the class and the party that Oliver Cromwell belonged to that were crucial, which set the limits of revolution, at the same time driving it to a climax – the execution of the king – and stopping it from going further.
Cromwell was a member of that section of the lesser gentry who did not desert the Parliamentary opposition between 1640 and 1642. These were those smaller landlords who saw royal interference and the church hierarchy as greater evils than popular resistance. They did not like the king or overmighty nobles intervening in their parishes and manors, disturbing what they saw as good relations with the peasants and townspeople. Nor did they like bishops dictating doctrine and services to the parish clergy, for as patrons of the parish churches they considering it their own right and duty to choose and supervise the ministers.
Men like Cromwell were lords of manors, Justices of the Peace, and Members of Parliament. They were often related to the larger and more powerful landowning families. Cromwell himself had eleven cousins and six other relations in the Long Parliament at its start in 1640. Though there was sometimes not much difference in wealth between a small lord and a rich yeoman farmer, the gentry were distinguished by birth, status and power: they expected to be recognised as the local ruling class.
Such small gentlemen formed the backbone of the Independent Party. Forced to organise in parliament by the much more sophisticated Presbyterians under Denzil Holies in 1646–7, by late 1648 the Independent Party formed a block linking the smaller and less conservative gentry in parliament, the army officers who had smashed the Leveller challenge, and a scattering of men throughout the country who regarded themselves as godly radicals – that is, those who were against surrender to the king but not for a social revolution – including some sections of the London merchant class.
It was the Independent Party which took the crucial steps: rejected the idea of a new constitution, yet purged parliament and had the king tried and executed. The choice of actions and justifications was crucial. Unlike the French Revolution of 1789, the English Revolution was never officially justified as a revolution. Parliament was not abolished; there was no Constituent Assembly (though some of the officers, including Cromwell’s son-in-law Henry Ireton, would have preferred this); no sweeping away of the old system of government and rational planning of a new one. The myth was upheld that the constitution of England could not be changed, only purified.
Why was all this charade necessary? Not all of the revolution’s supporters were so unwilling to recognise the new order for its own sake – Milton, for example. But the English bourgeoisie was not yet strong enough to rule alone. Alone, it could not take decisive action to stop the danger of social revolution from below – it had tried and failed at the time of the Presbyterian coup of 1646–7. Alone, it could not maintain law and order throughout England, because it did not have the network of connections: there was no real state bureaucracy in England before the revolution, only the amateur gentlemen Justices of the Peace. Nor did it have the roots to create a new bureaucratic class. Fortunately, the Independent Party had just what it needed – its own contingent of amateur gentlemen.
In the revolution of December 1648 to January 1649, Oliver Cromwell was merely a figurehead, and a somewhat reluctant one at that. A Colonel Pride and his troopers, with the agreement of the army officers, purged parliament of the majority of its members, who wanted compromise with the king. Cromwell did not openly declare his support for the purge until it was clear that it was going to succeed – he refused even to appear in London until he felt it was safe to do so, on the evening of the first day of Pride’s Purge (6 December 1648). He hesitated over the execution of the king, finally accepting it as the only practicable course of action. But his support gave the revolution prestige and credibility among the gentry as well as in the New Model Army.
What Cromwell was really good at was winning battles and massacring opponents in the name of God. So from 1649 to 1651 he did mainly that – in Scotland, but especially in Ireland, where the people of Drogheda and Wexford were slaughtered because their countrymen had dared to take back the land that was their own from the ‘Saints of God’ who had settled it.
 
16. ... stage two
IN 1653, CROMWELL returned to the centre of the political stage. The Rump Parliament, that is those who remained or returned to the House of Commons after Pride’s Purge, had ruled by a system of committees since 1649, and had at first been a very successful and very bourgeois government. More centralised than ever before in English history, it had taken into account the needs of commerce, manufacturing and colonialism, and satisfied a long-standing demand for a war of commercial rivalry with the Dutch.
The Rump Parliament’s base in the country, however, was becoming narrower all the time. Often, it had the support of only a handful of individuals with no firm roots in any class. Even though the Levellers’ mass support of 1647–9 had been smashed, there were still demands for the further reform of society in the interests of the poor rather than the new rich.
Above all, the army grew restive and dissatisfied with this narrow government, especially as the Rump tried to hang on to power by postponing or rigging a new general election. The soldiers began to turn towards the millenarian Fifth Monarchy movement, which was already enjoying considerable success among London journeymen and West Country weavers. Apparently without social and economic content, the Fifth Monarchy movement demanded ‘Godly Rule’ as a solution to re-unite the nation; and it was prepared to regard Oliver Cromwell, the wielder of God’s sword against the Irish and others, as a potential Godly ruler.
So Cromwell took charge of the movement of discontent, and led the army in to dissolve the Rump Parliament by force. An ‘Assembly of Saints’, chosen by a committee of officers, was set up in its place; its enemies called it the Barebones Parliament after Thomas Barbon, a London merchant and Independent who was one of the officers’ nominees.
But Cromwell misunderstood the Fifth Monarchist ‘saints’. The movement was, it is true, anti-democratic and therefore distinct from radical movements such as the Levellers and the Diggers. Fifth Monarchists regarded elections as quite the worst way of selecting leaders, because the ungodly must participate in elections on an equal basis with the godly.
But while the Fifth Monarchists that Cromwell knew personally were rather conservative army officers who identified godly rule with law and order, many of the rank and file ‘saints’ were lower-class preachers who saw the task of the Assembly as levelling the way for the coming of Christ by radical social reforms. The Barebones Parliament passed laws for civil marriage registration (abolishing the distinction between the established church and other churches), the relief of those imprisoned for debt, and the protection of infants and the insane. They then considered Bills for the abolition of the Court of Chancery, as a first step in overhauling the complicated and expensive legal system, and the abolition of tithes.
The godly leaders, and especially Cromwell, were outraged and disillusioned. The godly rank and file were no less outraged by what they saw as betrayal by theft chosen leaders. Fortunately for the leaders, the Barebones Parliament had a built-in conservative majority, who took advantage of a morning when the more enthusiastic saints were at a religious rally, dissolved themselves as an assembly, and handed power to Oliver Cromwell in person.
Cromwell and the army officers once again held the fate of the English Revolution in their hands. There were few real choices open to them. What they did was return to the old alliance of bourgeoisie and lesser gentry to restore law and order. The old constitution was brought back, the House of Commons restored with a new franchise making property qualifications on the whole higher and clearer, and eventually, in 1657, a Second House was set up to accommodate the new elite attracted to Cromwell’s Court. Cromwell had believed since 1651 that ‘a settlement with something of the monarchical in it’ was the answer, and under his Protectorate monarchy was restored in all but name.
In the counties, the gentry who had dropped out of the struggle against Charles I in 1649, in 1645, even in 1642, were reassembled. Except for the period following Penruddock’s attempted Royalist rising in Wiltshire, when Cromwell tried to use the army major-generals to supervise local government, the counties were run once again by their old rulers, the gentry.
But the Protectorate did not restore the old society. Feudal land tenure had been formally abolished, giving landlords absolute property rights over their tenants, and the law of the land made a great leap in the direction of bourgeois property rights. During their temporary exclusion from politics, many of the great landowners had turned to ‘improving’ their lands, and wealth was mobilised by an unprecedented amount of buying and selling of land. The gentry acquired many new recruits, as younger sons and army officers made fortunes in land. London goldsmiths and legal clerks began to do banking business, and some of the wealth flowed from land into trade.
Cromwell’s foreign policy secured English interests in North America and the Caribbean, and the conquest of Jamaica was followed by the setting up of sugar plantations and the import of slaves there. Sugar and tobacco, which had been luxuries before the revolution, were well on their way to becoming goods of mass consumption by its end.
Even the London marriage market – an important institution for the transfer of wealth between land and trade – was established during Cromwell’s rule, with young people of the gentry and the aristocracy encouraged to participate by the new romantic literature of upper-class courtship which began to appear in the 1650s. The aristocracy had to dispense with their expensive style of ‘open house’ and hordes of servants, and turned instead to a more private type of luxury in which the family was transformed into the inward-looking nuclear unit more familiar among the bourgeoisie.
Cromwell’s rule was about making the world safe for capitalism – safe from absolute monarchy and feudal domination by the landed class, but safe also from any threat of destruction from below. Cromwell showed that monarchy could be tamed, landowners could recognise that profitability mattered more than political faction, artisans could be lured into competition instead of solidarity, and the propertyless bludgeoned into submission.
The Restoration of the monarchy in 1660, which brought back the son of Charles I as Charles II, happened because after Oliver Cromwell’s death no one could handle the army officers. Though there was now no hope of a popular rebellion, the officers were still a new enough social group, with shallow enough roots, to attempt to refuse integration into the new society. Very few of the old royalists were restored with Charles II, however: Cromwell’s courtiers and Cromwell’s servants filled the new titles and posts under the restored monarchy.
There was for a period a ‘High Church’ reaction against Puritanism, and bishops were permanently restored. But from the failure of the Assembly of Saints in 1653, religion had been abandoned by all parties as a guide to political action. Many of the Puritan clergy submitted because, as one of their number, Richard Baxter, said, ‘better bishops than no discipline’. The aim of one comprehensive church for the whole of society was also abandoned. One church, the Anglican Church, was specially privileged, but the right of rival churches to co-exist was recognised.
 
17. Revolution and empire
NOT ONLY English society was made safe for capitalism by the outcome of the English Revolution: the repercussions were world-wide. The revolution occurred at a crucial stage in the development of English imperialism, and set the seal on a pattern of empire-building which was to guarantee the success of English merchant capitalism and so prepare the way for the industrial revolution.
Ireland was the testing ground for this imperialism, and it was closely linked to the class struggle in England at every stage of the revolution.
The idea of colonising Ireland by replacing the native population with English settlers had emerged in the sixteenth century when the monarchy was trying to turn its medieval overlordship in Ireland into more direct rule. The Protestant reformation and the interest of foreign Catholic powers in Ireland as a back-door route by which to attack England made the English ‘security’ problem acute; especially as the Old English in Ireland – the descendants of the medieval English barons – identified more with the Irish people and the Catholic Church than with the Tudor monarchy.
The exercise of ‘planting’ colonies was justified, for the English, by tales of the savage and treacherous nature of the Irish, based chiefly on the fact that they resisted the imposition of English rule. By the early seventeenth century, an English judge was arguing for the ‘civilising mission’ of England in Ireland in the same terms as were beginning to be used by English colonists against the native population of North America: ‘Now civility cannot possibly be planted among them, but by this mixed plantation of civil men ... for if they themselves were suffered to possess the whole country ... they would never (to the end of the world) make townships, or villages, or improve the land as it ought to be.’
The English knew and cared little about Irish history.
Major plantations (colonies) were established in all four provinces of Ireland before 1640, by which date 41 per cent of Irish land was in English hands. Irish landowners were expropriated, at first as a punishment for acts of rebellion. By the time of Strafford, who governed Ireland for Charles I and extended the plantation policy to the remote province of Connaught, the English government was simply refusing to recognise any previous legal title to Irish land as valid. Strafford thus succeeded in driving the Old English to join the native Irish in rebellion in 1641.
It was this rebellion, which began in Ulster, that brought the crisis in England to a head, for neither king nor parliament would trust the other to raise an army to suppress it. A fundamental conflict over sovereignty – the question of who ultimately controls the armed forces of the state -was inevitable.
The plantation policy had also embittered relations between the king and the London merchant class. The charter awarded to London merchants in 1609 to colonise the whole county of Coleraine, now renamed Londonderry, had run into the same problem as all previous plantations except those in eastern Ulster, to which Scottish peasants had emigrated in large numbers. Everywhere else there had never been enough actual settlers to take over the land: the ‘planters’ became landlords but Irish tenants and labourers still farmed the land. The king was displeased, but the London merchants were happy to profit from rents and trade without having to provide many settlers. After a long and bitter case in the Star Chamber court – which helped to ensure its abolition in the very first stages of the revolution – the London merchants’ charter was revoked in 1635.
As the Irish rebellion of 1641 spread and no army was sent to crush it, arguments for the total expropriation of the Irish grew. All the Irish, whether actual rebels or not, were to be considered guilty by association: ‘There is not many, (nay I may more truly say) very few or none, that is a native of Ireland and of the Romish religion, but he is either publicly in this action, or privately in his heart, as assistant or well-wisher to it,’ wrote Dean Henry Jones, a collector of the wildest atrocity stories from Protestant settlers.
During the period of civil war, parliament raised money from ‘Adventurers’ (investors) who were mainly merchants, and especially London merchants, by offering as security Irish land that was to be expropriated in the future, and as the war in England drew to a close, a new solution began to emerge to the problem of finding settlers.
Since 1642, some of the pro-English forces in Ireland had been paid in grants of land instead of money. This grew into a grand new scheme: why should not the soldiers of the New Model Army, when the war was over in England, both reconquer Ireland and themselves become the settlers who had been lacking from earlier schemes?
It was undoubtedly this that aroused the anxiety of the soldiers in 1647 over disbandment, arrears of pay and indemnity – for the vast majority did not wish to re-enlist for Ireland and possibly commit themselves to becoming colonists. They wanted to go home to their farms and trades.
Leveller propaganda thus struck a real chord among the soldiers, for the Levellers argued against the conquest of Ireland on principle. The text of a leaflet published in the Leveller paper, The Moderate, asked: ‘Have we the right to deprive a people of the land God and nature has given them and impose laws without their consent? ... How can the conquered be accounted rebels, if at any time they seek to free themselves and recover their own?’
The defeat of the Levellers and the triumph of the Independents in 1649 brought about the coercion of soldiers into settling Ireland, for the new republican government ruled that those who re-enlisted should be paid only in Irish land. The Independent victory also put Cromwell himself at the head of the army which rapidly and bloodily reduced the Irish people to submission in 1649.
It was after Cromwell’s seizure of power in 1653 that the policy of expropriation in Ireland was extended in principle to the whole of the native population, who were to be ‘transplanted’ to the reservation in Connaught. This policy was never fully implemented entirely, but many thousands made the bitter trek westwards in the winters of 1653-4 and 1654-5 – an experience echoed in the nineteenth century tragedy of the native Americans.
Thirty-five thousand soldiers were given land in the late 1650s, but by 1670 only 7,500 of these remained in Ireland. The chief long-term beneficiaries of the Irish land grants were the ‘Adventurers’, who were still more interested in rents and trade than in settlers. By 1688, 78 per cent of Irish land was in English hands.
Tens of thousands of Irish people were also transported right out of Ireland – to Barbados, where the introduction of sugar plantations in 1642 had increased the demand for labour. Several thousand slaves had been imported from Africa, but ‘bondservants’ were also supplied to the planters by a new policy of sentencing criminals, dissidents and Irish to transportation. The transportation policy included rounding up Irish women, guilty of no ‘crime’ but being Irish, to serve as wives in Barbados. Henry Cromwell, Oliver’s son and governor of Ireland in the 1650s, admitted doubts as to the morality of this but soon resolved them: ‘Concerning the young women,’ he wrote, ‘although we must use force in taking them up, yet it being so much for their own good and likely to be of so great advantage to the public ...’ It was done.
Small wonder that the Irish in Barbados joined the African slaves, who had already attempted rebellion in 1649, in a bitter revolt in 1656, which was brutally suppressed.
Before 1642 English settlements in the Caribbean had been a combination of mostly unsuccessful colonies of small farmers with buccaneering bases for naval warfare against the Spanish. Sugar cultivation in Barbados, followed by a similar transformation in Jamaica after its conquest by Cromwell’s navy in 1655, meant that merchant capital replaced gentlemen adventurers as the main driving force in the colonisation of the Caribbean by the English.
Slavery had not yet come on a large scale to the mainland American colonies, but the expropriation of the native inhabitants had begun, and Virginia was producing tobacco as a cash crop on large estates worked by bondservants from the 1620s. The New England colonies, which began as settlements of Puritans fleeing Archbishop Laud’s persecutions, were developing trade in fish and timber during the civil war in England, and prosperous merchants began to appear among the colonists, at first to the disapproval of the Puritan ministers.
In 1651, as part of a policy of reducing Dutch trading competition by force, the republican parliament in England passed a Navigation Act which was to ensure the economic subjection of all the American colonies to English commercial interests. All exports from the from the colonies were to be carried in English ships, and the restrictions on trade with other nationalities were further stepped up by the later versions of the Act passed after the restoration of the monarchy in 1660.
Outside Ireland, the British Empire was still tiny, but by 1660 the basic lines of imperialist policy – expropriation, plantation, cash crops and subordination to English profits – had been laid down for the next two hundred years.
 
18. On the side of history?
THE RESTORATION preserved the revolution that made England safe for capitalism, and set the seal on the defeat of the popular revolution that had tried to strangle capitalism in its cradle.
And quite right too, many Marxists have said. For after all, the material conditions for a socialist society, or even a more democratic capitalist society, had not yet arrived. Such developments had to await industrialisation, with its collective production, sufficient food supplies for an urban society, or just enough wealth to be worth sharing. Industrial capitalism as it began to develop in England from the late eighteenth century onwards was, they say, an inevitable stage in the development of society. It was progressive in its own time; emerging capitalists were ‘on the side of history’ and their opponents were backward-looking and obstructive.
It is necessary to make it absolutely clear that the Levellers and Diggers were not backward-looking. They were bitterly opposed to all the institutions of feudal society, and fought them with more enthusiasm and courage than most of the bourgeoisie. Nor were they opposed to economic development: though they could not foresee the technological changes that would lead to the reorganisation of production in the industrial revolution, they constantly argued that true equality was possible only in conditions of plenty, and that existing society was putting obstacles in the way of prosperity for all.
The ideas of the Levellers and the Diggers came from a class at the crossroads of history. Known to Marxists as the ‘petty bourgeoisie’, they had been in feudal society the producing classes of artisans and peasants. The rise of capitalism divided these classes into capitalists and workers. Those who prospered would do so at the expense of their fellow peasants and artisans; those who did not prosper would become propertyless workers, the future industrial and agricultural working class. The Levellers and Diggers represented artisans and peasants who rejected this internecine strife among the producing classes in favour of solidarity against the exploiting classes.
They also represented the propertyless workers, of whom there were a large number: in 1688, Gregory King put the proportion of labourers’ families in the population of England and Wales at 26.8 per cent. When the families of ‘cottagers and paupers’, many of whom were wage-earners or unemployed, are added, the proportion is over 56 per cent.
It is true that the status of wage-earner was hated and despised in seventeenth-century England. The ‘hireling’ was regarded with contempt and suspicion by all ‘freeborn Englishmen’, and self-respect was linked very strongly to the idea of small, independent property. In this situation, the working class would certainly have problems about seeing itself as a class with specific class interests. The result was that workers recognised themselves not positively as ‘the working class’ but negatively as those who should be self-respecting, independent small producers but were not. As such, they were capable of recognising their common interests in opposition to exploitation and competition. It is clear that many propertyless workers did support the Levellers and Diggers, though recent historians have been anxious to play this down in favour of the more respectable ‘petty bourgeois’ supporters.
The question about the Levellers and Diggers should be, not ‘do they stand on the side of history?’, but ‘on which side of history do they stand?’ There are two sides to the development of capitalism, the capitalist side and the workers’ side. In championing the cause of the producer against the exploiter the Levellers and the Diggers stand firmly on the side of socialism and therefore of progress.
It is perhaps also true that by their existence and their struggles they gave point and direction to the bourgeois revolution in England, which was after all a very early bourgeois revolution, occurring when capitalism had only just begun to intervene in production on any scale. It is doubtful whether the English bourgeoisie would have had much motivation to stay with the opposition to Charles I had they not felt that there was a task to be carried out – the prevention of ‘anarchy’, idleness and disorder in society -which the monarchy was incapable of performing. Indeed, by his insistence on the formalities of poor relief, Charles I had convinced many employers, especially in cloth-producing areas where crises were frequent, that he was completely unsympathetic to the needs of capital; and by prosecuting landlords for enclosure and de-population Archbishop Laud had convinced many that the monarchy was also insensitive to the property rights essential to the development of profitability in agriculture.
A bourgeois revolution is always, for the bourgeoisie, a fight on two fronts – against the remnants of the old feudal society and against the resistance of the workers to being exploited. It is both progressive and reactionary at the same time. In the English Revolution, where the bourgeoisie depended so much on an alliance with the petty landlords, the reactionary features of the revolution were perhaps more prominent than in later bourgeois revolutions: there were few concessions to equality or democracy, and none at all to the rights of peasant small property, as happened in the French Revolution 150 years later.
In fact official, academic history in England does not even recognise the revolutionary tradition of 1640–60, but makes it out to be the work of conservative landowners.
It is time that the tradition of the English Revolution was reclaimed, and it can be reclaimed only by the working-class movement of today. It is a tradition that runs from the Levellers and Diggers through the Chartists and the rise of the trade union movement, through the popular democratic movements of 1832 and 1848, late nineteenth-century radicalism, the rise of the Labour Party and the development of the revolutionary socialist alternative, to our own struggles today.


Further reading
1. General
Christopher Hill’s The English Revolution 1640, first published in 1940 as part of a Communist Party educational series, is more readily available in its 1955 edition. Though it has influenced a whole generation of Marxists, it is now very inadequate, particularly on the gentry, the Levellers and the Diggers. But the same author’s The World turned Upside Down (1972) is essential reading for anyone trying to rediscover the revolutionary tradition in English history.
The best general account of the Levellers is still H.N. Brailsford’s The Levellers and the English Revolution (edited by Christopher Hill, 1961). A.L. Morton’s The World of the Ranters has much about the Levellers as well as the Ranters, and includes a marvellous essay on William Walwyn.
Far and away the best recent book on the English Civil War, written from a more-or-less Marxist point of view, is Brian Manning’s The English people and the English Revolution (1978). The account given in this pamphlet of the part played by popular struggles in the 1640–2 crisis is taken largely from Brian Manning’s book.
But perhaps the best way of recovering the revolutionary tradition is to go straight to the works of Gerrard Winstanley in The Law of Freedom and other writings, edited by Christopher Hill (Penguin, 1973). They are perhaps surprisingly readable to a modern socialist: begin with The Law of Freedom in a Platform.
For an outline of the academic controversies surrounding the English Civil War, see Norah Carlin’s Marxism and the English Civil War in International Socialism (2 : 10, 1980).
 
2. Class Conflict and the English Civil War
For the past twenty years, this subject has been approached more frequently and more originally by the right than the left. Much can be learned from such studies, however, if critically read. Classic anti-Marxist statements are J.H. Hexter’s The Reign of King Pym (1941) and P. Zagorin’s The court and the country (1961). More recently Robert Ashton has tried to pull together all the arguments in The English Civil War: Conservatism and Revolution (1978); and J.R. Morrill has brought together a thought-provoking collection of material on what the gentry actually did in the 1640s crisis in The Revolt of the Provinces: Conservatives and Radicals in the English Civil War 1630–1650 (1976).
The least conservative and the most useful reinterpretation of the civil war as the outcome of class conflict, however, is D. Underdown’s Pride’s Purge (1971) – which deals with the whole conflict from 1640 to 1649 and not just the event of the title.
 
3. Religion and Radicalism
Readers of R.H. Tawney’s Religion and the Rise of Capitalism (1926) and Christopher Hill’s Society and Puritanism in Pre-revolutionary England (1964) will see that I am calling for a re-examination of Marxist views on the relationship of religion and radicalism. This is largely on the basis of the study of the Independents and the Separatists, and their relationship to the Levellers, provided by Murray Tolmie in The Triumph of the Saints: The Separate Churches of London 1616–49 (1977). B.S. Capp’s The Fifth Monarchy Men (1972) also contributed to my rethinking.
On the role of the Levellers in relation to the New Model Army, Mark Kishlansky’s The Rise of the New Model Army (1979) is bound to prove a seminal book, though hostile to the Levellers.
 
4. Ireland
The story of the sixteenth and seventeenth century colonisation of Ireland is little known in England. Peter Beresford Ellis’ Hell or Connaught! The Cromwellian Colonisation of Ireland 1652–60 (1975) is a vivid account, while K. Bottigheimer’s English Money and Irish Land: The ‘Adventurers’ in the Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland (1971) deals with the sixteenth and early seventeenth century plantations as well as having a computer analysis of investors in the 1642 scheme.
 



ONE OF the most depressing spectacles on the left in the 1980s is the debate on “who is the most oppressed”. This has broken out many times in the women’s movement and has surfaced again in the campaign for lesbian and gay rights.
Are lesbians more oppressed than straight women, or than gay men? Surely such questions are unanswerable. Oppression cannot be quantified even in the way that exploitation at least theoretically can, being a matter of hours, wages, profits, and so on. So why are they being asked?
The immediate political reason for these debates would seem to be the issue of organisational autonomy. If all men are oppressors of women, straights of gays, gay men of lesbians and so on, then, it is argued, they cannot unite in a single organisation.
One result is increasing fragmentation and confusion, at a time of major attacks on working class living standards and individual liberties. The Tory government certainly sees its own efforts as one struggle even if its victims don’t.
Another result is that the “oppressors within” – men in a socialist organisation, straight women “collaborators” in a feminist one, and so on – come to be treated as more bitter enemies than any on the other side, simply because they are more available.
Class struggle is a unifying force. It is the one thing that all workers have in common, whatever their country, their industry, their gender, colour or sectional interests. Oppression, on the other hand, divides by its very nature.
But there is one institution of capitalist society which plays a specially important part in dividing the oppressed from one another. This is the family, which seems to have a special capacity for creating conflicts and antagonism both inside and outside its actual circle.
There is no doubt, for example, that marriage is a very oppressive institution for women, perhaps it could be said that in a male dominated society almost all sexual relations with men are oppressive for women in some way. Yet lesbian women do not benefit from
being “free” of the specific oppressions, such as economic dependence and treatment as sex objects, that heterosexual women experience in these relationships.
Because the family role is the model for women in our society, lesbian’s jobs and pay are no different from other women’s and they suffer the additional humiliation of hostility towards their sexuality – a hostility which many heterosexual women, as well as men, express.
For these two kinds of women to fight over who is worse off, to call each other oppressors or collaborators and to demand organisational separation from each other, is both ludicrous and tragic.
Similar problems exist in the relationship between gay men and lesbians. Until the growth of the gay liberation movement in the late 1960s and 1970s, the experience of the two was almost worlds apart.
The biggest practical difference in most of the Western world was the criminalisation of male homosexuality. In modern times women have not had to suffer the degradation of imprisonment for simply following their own sexuality.
On the other hand, many gay men in the past (and some in the present also) have shown an extreme form of the misogyny which pervades any male-dominated society. Gay men and women have found it difficult to sympathise and identify with each other.
At the same time, many gay couples, male and female, have paired off in relationships modelled on marriage and the family – though perhaps the model for gay men was related more closely to the adultery endemic in bourgeois marriage than to the husband-wife relationship.
That is, gay men tend to have stable partnerships but many additional sexual relationships, whereas for lesbians the tendency has been more towards monogamy. These images of “male” and “female” sexuality – the one predatory and adventurous, the other affectionate and domesticated – are reflected from marriage and the family.
Why is the influence of the family so all-pervasive? It is not because the family is the natural way of life for the majority of human beings, as is often supposed.
As things are, family life is all but compulsory. Everything from housing to holidays, taxation to teapots, is family-sized or else oriented towards the heterosexual couple.
Young women and men who are drawn to members of their own sex are bullied and intimidated out of it, or led to believe that marriage “will solve their problem” or at least conceal it.
The current hysteria about the “promotion of homosexuality” surely suggests that those who have power in our society feel basically unsure of the family’s supposedly universal appeal.
They seem to fear that if young people were only to get a whiff of the idea that homosexuality is not sinful, that they might actually be happier with a partner of their own sex than with a husband or wife, the family would collapse as an institution.
If only it was as simple as that! But the collapse of the family cannot be brought about just by spreading the good news that there are alternatives.
Our capitalist society needs the family to reproduce the labour force and the capitalist way of life and ideology. It will continue to be privileged, defended and even enforced by capitalist ruling classes for as long as they have power. That is, until they are overthrown by a working-class revolution.
 



The Triumph of the Middle Classes
C. Morazé
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 70s.
This book is subtitled ‘a study of European values in the 19th century.’ At first sight it would seem to be an interesting attempt to integrate economic, social and cultural history in a survey of European society, with its expansion into other continents, between 1780 and 1895. Unfortunately, M. Morazé does not know enough about any of these subjects. The book is facile, impressionistic and opinionated, and teems with factual errors. One cannot even say the translation is competent – it consistently has ‘Jacobite’ for Jacobin.
Some of M. Morazé’s opinions are as follows: the French Revolution was entirely due to the failure of the monarchy to provide adequate credit facilities – and the Third Estate was purely and simply wasting its time in discussing other legal and social reforms; the triumph of the 19th century was the rediscovery of ‘the Greek art of proof by reason,’ otherwise defined as ‘science;’ and 1848 saw ‘the definitive failure of socialism.’ Meanwhile, the grand sweep of European society turns out to be a catalogue of the ‘We cannot leave the south without a glance at Sicily’ type.
This book has been taken seriously by at least one eminent English historian in the pages of a quality Sunday. It does not merit even that distinction.
 



EVEN THE BRITISH press, for which Italy is normally a land of comic opera and holidays, has been forced to turn its attention to events there in the last two weeks.
A nationwide wave of strikes and mass demonstrations followed the shooting of two agricultural labourers, striking for higher wages, at Avola in Sicily on Monday, December 2.
Is Italy on the verge of a crisis like the one which shook France in May and June?
The events are not isolated or sudden. In the last year Italy has had a wave of strikes and demonstrations with roots in both working-class and student discontent.
The national economy is prospering, with a high export growth rate and a favourable balance of trade, which builds up currency reserves and benefits speculators and financiers.
 
Corruption
But wages have been firmly held down to enable this to take place, the social services are in a state of neglect, corruption and inefficiency in government are as widespread as ever, and the still-promised educational reforms have failed to materialise.
One-day general strikes, as on November 14, have been called by the three trade union federations (Communist, Catholic and social-democrat) against the inadequacy of the social services, particularly the miserable pension schemes.
More significantly, strikes in particular industries and factories throughout the country have been becoming more militant, such as the northern textile workers’ strike which occupied a factory last summer, or the link-up between Pirelli tyre workers in Milan and Turin who have cut productivity to a third in support of their wage claim.
 
Clashed
The strikers have also been becoming more violent. Avola was the second occasion in a week that the Sicilian police clashed with demonstrating workers. At Palermo on November 26 they broke up 400 metalworkers striking for higher pay.
The armed police (carabinieri) have also been used freely against the student movement, which has grown in size and militancy since the occupation of Turin university a year ago and the wide spread demonstrations before and during the crisis in France.
Increasingly disillusioned with the parliamentary politics of the Socialist and Communist parties, the students have as yet no clear Left-wing leadership. There are many Maoist and anarchist groups, and a hippy tendency of recent growth – enough for the Communist Party to dissociate itself firmly from ‘student extremism’.
The most important recent development is the attraction of high school pupils into the movement. Their city-wide strike in Rome on December 3 followed the surrounding of an occupied school by armed police on November 19, and only incidentally coincided with the protests over the deaths at Avola.
Last week’s protests were, however, an important step forward. They united, for the first time, students and workers in demonstrations all over the country.
The biggest was in Rome, where 50,000 students and workers took part in the second demonstration, on Thursday and the university was occupied.
There were similar protests in most big cities. The unions’ tactic of calling only a few hours’ general strike outside Rome was defied by workers in Pavia.
In Milan and Bologna students and workers marched together, while in Genoa the police used teargas against demonstrators said to have been mainly students. The wealthy audience at a premiere at La Scala, the Milan opera house, was pelted with fruit and ink.
 
Farce
Parliamentary politics have reached a high point of farce and irrelevance. The centre-left coalition of Socialists, Christian Democrats and Republicans is back in office.
Months of argument between the veteran right-wing Nenni (who never wanted to leave the government) and the other four factions of the Socialist Party culminated in a fist-fight at the close of the party congress in October.
The Christian Democrats, also split several ways, refused to carry on with a minority government. So the coalition has been re-formed and the promises begin all over again.
The Communist Party, which holds 27 per cent of the seats in the Chamber and 30 per cent in the Senate, cannot win power by negotiation in a country where the Vatican does not hesitate to intervene to keep it out.
The party is nevertheless devoted to its parliamentary perspective, and even now appears co be reluctant to use its large working-class support in any form of direct action apart from one-day or half-day strikes.
 
Provoked
There are other discontents and frustrations in Italian society. The Church has provoked protest demonstrations not only over birth control, but also its immense wealth, the Vatican’s refusal to pay investment tax, and its interference in national and local politics.
Disastrous floods have again caused death and unemployment in northern Italy this autumn – while two-thirds of the money allotted to flood prevention measures remains in the Treasury.
Italy is in crisis, but it is a long-term crisis. It seems unlikely that events will follow the course they took in May.
There is no single political focus for protest, such as de Gaulle provided in France, in fact, last week there was no actual government to protest against.
The Communist Party, itself divided, is unwilling to play even the role that its sister party played at the start of the general strike in France – perhaps by the very force of the French example, which struck fear into the hearts of party bureaucrats hoping for a peaceful access to power.
The Left is weak and disunited. Students and workers have come together in action (it is interesting to note that the ‘detonator’ in this case was a workers’ and not a students’ clash with police), and this may be a valuable beginning, but where it will lead to remains to be seen.
 



EVENTS IN ITALY emphasise the bankruptcy of moderate Labour Party type politics and place both the Socialist and Communist Parties in an interesting position.
After the general election in May, Nenni’s Socialist Party (reunited only 18 months ago with Saragat’s Social Democrats) withdrew from the centre-left government to “reconsider” its position. The apparent stability of Italian parliamentary politics since 1962, based on a coalition of Christian Democrats, Socialists, Social Democrats (who were a separate party until late 1966) and the small Republican Party, suddenly seemed to evaporate, and after weeks of negotiation a makeshift government of Christian Democrats, “for the bathing season “ has been established.
The decision to leave the coalition by the Socialist Party executive (opposed by the right-wing minority) was prompted by the election results. United Socialist losses amounted to about 25 per cent of the former Socialist-Social Democratic vote in 1963, and there was a substantial “swing to the left,” particularly among the younger voters.
The Socialist Party for Proletarian Unity, which split from the Socialist Party in 1964, took a third of the SP’s votes with it, and the Communist Party received over 30 per cent of the total votes, an impressive score on the home ground of the Roman Catholic Church.
With less electoral support, it is not surprising that the Socialist Party leaders found their position in the coalition impossible. The main role of the coalition, originally presented as the great agency for reform in Italian society, had been to carry through the wage-curbing measures necessary to Italian capitalism following the collapse of the economic “miracle” in 1963–4.
 
Massive
The restructuring of Italian society meant in fact the introduction of economic planning in the interests of big business and not, as promised, in the interests of the underdeveloped areas and backward sectors. There was massive state participation in capitalist enterprises managed according to “strictly economic criteria,” and proposals for an incomes policy in order to achieve economic recovery at the expense of the working class.
But the working class refuses to be fooled and continues to fight. The Italian strike rate is still the highest in the world, surpassing even the United States’ level.
The promised reforms of the administration, social security and education, remain unfulfilled- The centre-left government’s history was noted more for scandals and sensational revelations of corruption and inefficiency in the public service than for its remedies.
The crisis in higher education is acute. Student riots and clashes with the police of the type which sparked off the recent French upheavals have been frequent-events in Italy over the last two years, while the promised university reforms stayed bogged down in parliamentary procedure.
The “protest vote” at the failures of the centre-left shows the electoral appeal of a mass Communist Party such as Italy’s, although its active memberships and industrial effectiveness are in decline. The Party’s election tactics were mainly to appear as broad-minded and respectable as possible – some of their leaflets even bore the portrait of the late Pope John.
Whether the Communist Party could or would provide anything different from the centre-left coalition is another matter. Opinion in the Party is divided. The right wing seem to believe that Communist entry into a coalition government could achieve the reforms promised by the Socialists.
 
Snubbed
The prospect of a coalition in which both Communists and Christian Democrats might play a part went to the head of one party leader, Amendola, in last month’s governmental crisis. His claim of “friendly contacts” between the leaderships of the two parties, and speculation on a possible coalition was heavily snubbed by the Christian Democratic press, and cannot have pleased Catholic workers who chose to vote Communist.
The Left wing of the Communist Party prefers the idea of a united opposition of the left with an alternative programme of structural reforms. This view, though more radical than the manoeuvring of Amendola and his sort, shows commitment to parliamentary politics and conviction that Italy’s problems can be solved within the context of Italian and European capitalism.
It also plays upon the concept of perpetual strength in opposition, a position which insulates the Party from actually having to carry out its “alternative” in the forseeable future. But the illusion seems likely to be continued – the breakaway PSIUP and the left wing of the Socialist Party are attracted to the idea.
Since the elections, the Communist Party has condemned student “extremists” and their ideas of confrontation with the capitalist system, advising [a line of text missing].
 



People’s History and Socialist Theory
History Workshop Series £6.95
This is a fascinating and frustrating book. It must be said, however, that it is not as frustrating as was attendance at the 1979 History Workshop at Ruskin College, Oxford, of which it is an account. Locked out of overcrowded meetings, faced with impossible choices between equally attractive and equally unpredictable speakers, and finally arse-numbed on a hard bench in a freezing cold church for what was billed as the debate of the decade – it would have been reassuring to know we would one day have the Book of the Event.
So what was it about, History Workshop 13? In case you may think the title is a unifying theme, the editor, Raphael Samuel, gives us two separate introductions, one on People’s History and one on Socialist Theory. In case you might think that means the book is divided into two parts, one colourful descriptive history and one lofty theory, it isn’t that either. The fifty-two articles and papers included are, as you might expect, extremely varied, but the detailed reconstruction of working-class life for which History Workshop is justly famous (if often parodied) is not to be found here.
The reason for this becomes clear in Raphael Samuel’s Afterword on the basic aims and orientation of History Workshop. He describes the intention of encouraging worker-historians to research and write, providing an alternative to the system of lectures, tutorials and exams, and of making the annual Workshops ‘a highly political occasion’ – in short, ‘democratising historical practice ... against the dominant bourgeois mode of historiography’. But things have not worked out quite like that for History Workshop, not at all.
Since the foundation of History Workshop Journal in 1975 arguments about theory and matters of principle, some of them deep and bitter, have kept cropping up among the grassroots of ‘people’s history’. History Workshop 13 was evidently an attempt at stocktaking, a decision to give this tendency its head, to let it all hang out and see what happened.
What happened was, firstly, that the proceedings were dominated almost totally by university academics. (Look through the introductions to contributors – almost without exception, the only ones without university jobs are women; there isn’t even a poly represented!) History Workshop has created an alternative academic environment rather than an alternative to academic history, and there is a big difference. This was extremely frustrating for the hundreds of non-academics present, and was criticised by the Ruskin students’ collective before the end of the weekend.
Secondly and as a direct result, the language and style of many of the contributions was directed towards what publishers call ‘the specialist audience’. Contributors felt it necessary to refer to ‘a high level of empirical depth’, or to use ‘acritical’ (sometimes a-critical) as somehow more meaningful than ‘uncritical’. The peak in the book is reached by Andrew Lincoln’s appalling academic Franglais. Some articles are difficult for even an academic to follow if not acquainted with the history of these debates.
Marxism, as might be expected, is a central issue. But the range of attitudes to it is immense. ‘I don’t believe in socialist history. I believe that to use history as a weapon in the political struggle is counterproductive,’ writes Peter Burke. Another contributor quotes with approval the opinion that, ‘Whether a historian inspired by but developing Marx’s thought remains properly Marxist … is a question of no serious intellectual importance whatsoever.’ Well, the net of invitations was cast wide and there’s no harm in that if the thing is meant to be a forum.
But what Socialist Review readers will presumably want to know is, was there a hard core of commuted Marxist history at the heart of it? Where, in all this, is the politics? The answer to this is the most frustrating of all.
Many contributors clearly do regard themselves as committed Marxists, and explicitly discuss the relationship between Marxist history and political activity. But the conclusions they come to (with the exception of feminist ‘fragmentism’) are always negative. ‘Given the political formlessness and difficulties of our times,’ says Ken Worpole, it is better to concentrate on the ‘long-revolution’ which seems to be composed of working class autobiographies. Robert Colls regards the History Workshop forum as ‘a surrogate politics for those depressed by the dismal political options of a country which no longer has a radical movement worthy of the name.’ Bob Scribner, though he admires the ‘People’s History’ work of the German Communist Party in the early 1920s, thinks that, ‘In so far as ... the historian is actively involved in politics, there is a problem of time and resources to carry out historical investigations with the necessary rigour.’
It was, of course, this hesitation with regard to political involvement that Edward Thompson set out to attack in his contribution to the debate on his book, The Poverty of Theory. Bitterly criticised at the time for ‘causing pain’ to other academics by his polemical style and frequent use of the term Stalinism (anyone even remotely connected with the Socialist Workers Party will be amazed by this low pain threshold), Thompson’s tirade is passionate, witty, devastating and shallow. Intellectually, Stuart Hall’s counter-critique carries far more weight: he lucidly rejects both Althusserian philosophy and the vagueness of Thompson’s ‘specificity of history as a discipline’.
But even more explicitly than in this book, Thompson called, on that cold November night in 1979, for academics to get out of their ivory towers and into political activity. At the time, Edward Thompson’s last organised political activity was the May Day Manifesto of 1967–8; but within a year of this debate he was hitting the headlines with the Campaign for European Nuclear Disarmament and Protest and Survive.
And there’s the problem – the clearest and loudest call for political commitment in this book results (however worthy the anti-nuclear cause) only in some vague kind of ‘radical’ politics (‘popular but not populist’ was Thompson’s phrase on the night, not reproduced here) and an organisation designed to mobilise public opinion in general and academics in particular.
History Workshop is not, in all this, the innocent proletarian victim exploited yet again by academic history. From the start, its founders were hostile to revolutionary politics – and in terms frequently as nasty as anything Edward Thompson ever said to Richard Johnson. They thought they could provide a socialist history without politics by concentrating on the ‘grass roots’ and ‘back to the sources’. Instead, they got an academic takeover and the worst kind of populist politics, leading to an obsession with the kinds of ‘theoretical’ questions they wished so earnestly to avoid.
Many of the papers in this book, however, are interesting and provocative. Women readers will be particularly interested in Barbara Taylor’s defence of the Utopian Socialists (compare it with Gareth Stedman-Jones’s critique of them in another section) and Sheila Rowbotham’s attack on the theory of patriarchy. There are articles on socialist history in other countries such as France and Denmark, and some interesting discussion of ‘grass roots’ history in inner-city areas and among the North-East miners.
If there is little hope of converting History Workshop to revolutionary socialism, the stocktaking of 1979 shows that there is, more than ever, a need for an independent organisation for revolutionary Marxist history.
 



THE SHOOTING OF two people – one a bystander – during a battle between police and workers at Battipaglia in southern Italy last week underlines once again the violence of the class struggle in Italy.
Workers’ and students’ demonstrations are frequently turned into pitched battles by the brutality of police and carabinieri. When deaths occur, as at Avola in Sicily last December, it is the demonstrators who are accused of homicide – this ludicrous charge was actually brought against 150 striking labourers at Avola.
Deaths hit the news, but there have been several battles and a number of political arrests in Italy since December. ‘Law and order’ is the excuse of the ruling class for their repressive use of the state machinery, and they point to the threat of direct action by fascist groups if the state fails in its ‘duty’.
This is a real threat in Italy, but the police in fact failed to save Naples University from serious damage by fascists in January.
 
Protest
Last Friday, workers all over Italy responded to the unions’ call for a three-hour general strike in protest at the Battipaglia events. Many – such as the Venice watermen – stayed out for longer than this brief period thought suitable by the leaders of unions such as the General Confederation of Labour (CGIL), which is dominated by the Communist Party.
In Milan, Rome and Florence, protest rallies developed into more street fighting. In Bologna, the Communist mayor pleaded with demonstrators to go home when they sat down on the railway line.
Clearly, the Communist Party and the union leadership wish to keep the anger of Italian workers and students within the limits they set. such as the campaign for legislation to disarm the police.
The role of the Communist Party is similar to that played by its French counterpart last summer – except that the Italian party probably enjoys even less control over militant workers and has its sights more firmly set on parliamentary power.
Disarming the police would not solve Italy’s problems. High unemployment and wide-spread redundancies (like those the Battipaglia workers were protesting against) are made worse by weak government which has lost the respect of sections of the ruling class.
While the Communist. Party works for its parliamentary solution, the workers as well as the students seem to have another answer: to take their politics out into the streets, no matter what brutality awaits them there.
 

