

Bolshevism, Fascism and the Liberal-Democratic State
by Maurice Parmalee
xii+430 pp. New York, John Wiley.
Farewell to Poverty
by Maurice Parmalee
xvi+488 pp. New York, John Wiley.
Mr. Parmalee, former professor of economics, sociology and anthropology, has presented us with a summary indictment of capitalism and various efforts to save this doomed system.
Farwell to Poverty, though a sequel to Bolshevism, Fascism and the Liberal-Democratic State, furnishes the preliminary analysis of capitalism which forms the basis of the author’s criticism of the “rival political systems”.
In the first section, A Critique of Capitalism, the author skillfully utilizes the latest statistics to depict the poverty of the workers, the contrast between the poor and the rich, the debt structure of American capitalism and the development of monopoly capitalism. With this as a background he traces the inevitability of the business cycle, unemployment, imperialism and war. The final chapter of this section summarizes the contradictions of capitalism which reveal its reactionary character.
The Second section, Evolution of the Social Commonwealth, commences with an expose of the futility of the Roosevelt New Deal and other attempts at “planned economy” under capitalism. The experiences of the Soviet Union in planning economy are discussed and utilized for an examination of the workings of a socialized economy.
Gradualism as the means of attaining this society is rejected by the author. In his chapter on the Technique of Revolution he discusses the problem of a peaceful, legal revolution in the United States and concludes that the socialization of economy will have to be achieved by a political transformation which will assume the form of a violent conflict and result in a temporary dictatorship of the “Left”.
He further states that while objective conditions in the United States are ripe for a socialized society the working clas is not yet revolutionary. Economic conditions today are leading to the rapid proletarianization of the middle class “creating a new factor for a revolutionary situation. The professional class also is becoming in part proletarianized. The intellectual class in general is drifting towards the Left. But without a revolutionary proletariat the intellectuals cannot bring about a revolution.” (p.315.)
Will the intellectuals lead the revolutionary proletariat, or will they follow the proletariat? How is the class consciousness of the proletariat to be developed? The failure to answer these questions is a reflection of the author’s lack of contact with the movement struggling for a “social commonwealth”.
Fascism as the political means of monopoly capitalism to prevent its downfall is examined in Bolshevism, Fascism and the Liberal-Democratic State. The well known facts of the rise of the Italian Black Shirts and the German Brown Shirts are repeated. Nothing is added to our understanding of these phenomena. Sufficient attention is not paid to the complex features of Fascism as a mass movement of the middle class or the relation between its rise and the failure of the workers’ parties.
Only a few paragraphs are devoted to the liberal-democratic state (though an entire section is entitled Liberal-Democracy: Europe and America). Liberal-Democracy is seen as corresponding to competitive capitalism and completely outlived and Utopian for a period when monopoly capitalism dominates.
By far the most inadequate section of the book is the section on Bolshevism. Though obviously sympathetic, Mr. Parmalee fails to understand it either as theory or practise. He accepts the erroneous view that the Russian revolution of November 1917 “was not made by the people”, that “the masses were not revolutionary. Lenin himself was under no illusion on this score” (p.30).
Proof? A section of the workers, the railroad men, were against the Bolsheviks. The peasants supported the Left Social Revolutionists – which merely showed the limited revolutionary character of the peasantry at the moment. Compromise was necessary with the Social Revolutionists and Mensheviks – as part of the further education of the peasants who had already undertaken revolutionary action against the landlords.
The reference to Lenin is based on a speech he made six months before the insurrection, on May 10, 1917 in which he stated that “the proletariat is not yet sufficiently organized and enlightened; it has still to be instructed” (p.31). A task which the Bolsheviks took seriously and therefore accomplished by November!
Mr. Parmalee, in another chapter, agrees with those who contend that the dialectic should be buried among the ancient fossils. Nor would anything be lost.
“Marx and Engels themselves and the two greatest Bolshevists, Lenin and Trotsky, have made comparatively little use of the Hegelian-Marxian dialectic in their analysis and interpretation of historical and social phenomena.” (p.47.)
This makes sense only if one has the most grotesque picture of what the Marxian dialectic method is. Which is precisely the picture that Mr. Parmalee has ... and bolsters up by reference to the Russian Stalinist “philosophers” and “scientists” whose studies are dependant on the mometary needs of the Soviet bureaucracy.
What Mr. Parmalee and others have failed to understand is that the struggle between “Trotskyism” and Stalinism is the struggle between Bolshevism, (Marxism) and anti-Bolshevism in respect to fundamental theory as well as practise. Trotsky is recognized by the author as one of the two leading Bolshevik theoreticians. He quotes him on several occassions, including an attack on Stalinism.
Yet he does not appreciate the full import of the struggle against Stalinism. He writes that as a result of the acceptance of the theory of socialism in one country alone “Trotsky was exiled, and Russia withdrew temporarily from attempting to arouse a world revolution in order to develop itself internally” (p.170). However, “it is expected that if and when the appropriate time comes, it [the Soviet Union] will resume the offensive in behalf of a world revolution” (p.171).
Here the author abandons even the semblance of a critical approach and presents the aims and achievements of the Communist International as they are presented in the official publications. A rather naive treatment which results in a distorted picture of the Comintern.



The present world economic crisis and the pre-revolutionary crisis of British capitalism has had a marked effect on the entire English labor movement. This is particularly true of the traditionally left reformist party, the Independent Labour Party. A gauge of the growing maturity of a revolutionary crisis can often be found in the changes which the parties of socialist centrism undergo. These changes are seldom fundamental; they are rather changes of form and modes of expression.
To the party of J. Keir Hardie, which, immersed in the “practical” political tasks of the day, scoffed at the German theoreticians, Marx and Engels; the party which produced leading spokesmen for the House of Lords, the bourgeois prime minister, MacDonald, the aspiring Fascist, Mosley – suddenly, at Bradford last August proclaimed itself the party of revolutionary Marxism! The I.L.P. withdrew from the Labour Party, which it had built, on the grounds that its parliamentary representatives were refused to criticize and vote against the Labour Party caucus in parliament. This led to the organization of the Socialist League by those who wanted to continue the old policy, among them such leaders as H.N. Brailsford and Fred Henderson.
Up to the formation of the Communist party (1920-21) the Independent Labour Party contained some of the best revolutionary socialists in Britain. Such an outstanding spokesman of the present Communist party as R. Palme Dutt a Left Centrist of high calibre, got his training in the I.L.P. After the World War, the Independent Labour Party made advances towards the Communist International; addressed a number of fundamental questions to it. The reply drafted by Lenin, made even the more “radical” leaders lukewarm. Supporting the view of a democratic or parliamentary “revolution” to attain socialism, criticizing the Labour Party’s open collaboration with the British imperialists, and permitting wide differences of opinion and action within the party, the Independent Labour Party has succeeded in keeping thousands of militant workers from the Communist party.
Despite this, the I.L.P. in recent years lost many members. The following figures speak for themselves:



1909


—


28,000




1914


—


20,000




1919


—


32,000




1921


—


37,000




Aug. 1932


—


12,000



Since the Bradford Conference (Aug. 1932) the membership has further declined. At the same time a deep ferment developed in the ranks. The Revolutionary Policy Committee, a group formed months previously, continued to issue its own literature and hold meetings, some of which were advertized in the official organ of the I.L.P! In London and Lancashire, especially the influence of the R.P.C. was strong. The leaders of this group, Jack Caster, C.K. Cullens and others – most of them intellectuals – call themselves Leninists. In the divisional conferences held last February they presented their program: for stricter discipline in the I.L.P., for a revolutionary policy, the immediate organization of workers’ councils (Soviets) which would develop into a counter parliament, and for an approach to the Third International for collaboration. At the London and South Divisional and Lancashire Conferences their proposals were accepted. At the latter conference a resolution for immediate affiliation to the Comintern was rejected.
The belated manifesto (March 1933) of the Communist International for united front against Fascism was hailed by the I.L.P. as a vindication of its viewpoint. It had participated on Feb. 4th in the Left Socialist Parties’ conference at Paris which appealed to the Labor and Socialist International and the Comintern for united front against Fascism. A. Fenner Brockway wrote:
“The greatest significance attaches to this manifesto because of the recommendation to the Communist Parties to cease the attacks upon other sections of the working class if a basis of united action can be found.” (New Leader – 3-10-33 – Emphasis in original)
The I.L.P. addressed an invitation to the C.P., the Labour Party, the Co-operative Party and the Trade Union Congress for united front on a definite minimum program against Fascism and the capitalist offensive at home. Only the Communist party accepted and a number of demonstrations have been held throughout the country by joint committees. The “recommendation” of the Comintern was swallowed by the robot leaders of the British C.P. who quickly forgot that “This demand of the I.L.P.’ers, whether locally or nationally, for the dropping of criticism is a demand which must be mercilessly fought.” British Daily Worker, 8-13-32.
The I.L.P.’s forty-first annual conference, last April, met under such conditions: a sharp crisis in British imperialism, the victory of Fascism in Germany, a steady decline in membership, growing sentiment towards Communism in its own ranks and the beginning of united front action between the Communist Party and the I.L.P. The address of Brockway on the effect of the decisions of the Bradford conference, the need for an extra parliamentary institution, workers’ councils, to unite the working class for the overthrowing of capitalism and the subordinate role of the bourgeois parliament was acclaimed by the Conference. A resolution to support the unemployed organization led by the Communist party, the N.U.M.W., was carried overwhelmingly after some dispute’.
A sharp fight occurred on the question of international affiliation. The National Council of the I.L.P. recommended disaffiliation from the Labour and Socialist International. A resolution was introduced supporting disaffiliation and instructing the National Council “To approach the Secretariat of the Communist International with a view to ascertaining in what way the I.L.P. may assist in the work of the International.” The mover of the resolution made it clear that he was not asking for affiliation to the Communist International but collaboration in whatever form is agreed upon. John Paton, secretary of the party, supported the National Council’s view and polemised against the resolution calling for approach to the Comintern. Jack Gaster defended the resolution. The vote was very close. The resolution carried by a vote of 83 to 70.
Another resolution, which embodied the full program of the Revolutionary Policy Committee, offered a new constitution for the party. It emphasized the function of the workers’ councils and the subordinate role of the parliament. It was then strongly opposed by the old guard, particularly F.W. Jowett, who stated that the I.L.P. was asked to achieve power by civil war. He stated that the I.L.P. should aim to achieve socialism by parliamentary means. The leaders of the R.P.C. supported the new constitution. According to the New Leader report of the proceedings (4-21-33) “by 90 votes to 8, (the) Conference rejected the vital section of the new Constitution.” Apparently the most ambiguous terminology was desired!
An interesting part of the Conference was the attempt to introduce stricter discipline in the I.L.P. A motion to introduce a probationary period in which the applicant for membership would be tested was rejected. Further an amendment was introduced “safeguarding pacifists from disciplinary action on account of their objection to take part in war, was withdrawn on an understanding from John Paton that the N.A.C. would accept its intention!” A truly revolutionary socialist party!
A resolution for united front action with the C.P., Labour Party, etc., was adopted after some dissension. The new national council although containing supporters of the Revolutionary Policy Committee like Jack Gaster is in the main controlled by the Brockway-Maxton tendency in the I.L.P.
The Comintern had replied to the request of the I.L.P. for collaboration. Instead of issuing a programmatic declaration so as to win the revolutionary workers within the I.L.P. to Communism, the Stalinist bureaucracy has confined itself to merely welcoming the step and declaring its readiness to collaborate with the I.L.P. A most excellent opportunity missed to educate the ranks of the I.L.P. But Stalinism, once again taken by surprise, is uncertain as to the next steps; it is in a quandary.
The American Stalinists claim the results of the I.L.P. conference and particularly the resolution to approach the C.I., which they incorrectly interpret as application for membership, as a victory “for the united” front policy of the Communist Party of Great Britain. (Daily Worker – 1-17-33) What sheer nonsense! In the last few years, the British party carried on the craziest zig-zags of any section of the Comintern. Subordination to the “Lefts” during the British miners’ and general strike in 1920; its constant changes on the parliamentary field which were understood by no one; suddenly the third period with its “independent” leadership of strikes and the building of new unions; then the famous Charter campaign which was an attempt of a united front mass movement which was still-born, its policy of falsification, etc., alienated the best sections of the I.L.P. from the British party. The proof is the fact that few of them were won for the party.
In the columns of the Labour Monthly a discussion has been going on for some time on Communism and Left Socialism, of some value. But the practical activities of the party (with the exception of its unemployment work which has been fruitful) negated most of the gains made in that manner. In more recent times the Communist Review has contained articles which attempt to discuss the problems of the Left Socialists. But the influence of the British Party on the Independent Labour Party or the Revolutionary Policy Committee is negligible.
The tendency towards Communism in the I.L.P. is due primarily to the awakening of the more conscious elements within it to the impasse in which British imperialism and world imperialism finds itself today. It appears paradoxical that at a time when Stalinism has failed miserably in Germany these elements approach the Comintern. From one point of view it shows their own political immaturity, from another and more fundamental view, is is an indication that they correctly do not identify Communism with Stalinism.
The view of the more advanced workers in the I.L.P. – and they are unfortunately in a very small minority – is expressed in a statement [1] issued by four members previous to the I.L.P. conference. These comrades clearly state that the place of all revolutionary workers is in the Communist party. They point out that the I.L.P. is a social democratic organization and cannot be reformed; that the Revolutionary Policy Committee course in this direction is false and futile. They further point out that the present Communist party has a number of serious shortcomings which require discussion. They innumerate the theories and policies upon which they cannot agree: the theory of socialim in one country, the policy of the united front from below, the policy exemplified by the Amsterdam anti-war congress, and the absence of party democracy. They call upon the I.L.P. members to join them in this struggle.
The Left Opposition comrades, who have recently issued a printed organ, Red Flag, have a great task on their shoulders: to win the revolutionary workers of the I.L.P. for the Communism of Marx and Lenin, to educate the members of the Communist party along the line of the Left Opposition. On the basis of the lessons of the British General Strike and the Anglo-Russian Committee, the recent teachings of the German events, the program of the Left Opposition on the colonial question and in the Soviet Union, our comrades in Great Britain should forge ahead rapidly.

Footnote
1. This statement will appear in the forthcoming issue of The Militant. – Ed.
 



“Lenin lives in an imaginary world in which he mistakes the creations of his mind for realities.”
“It would seem that Lenin’s ‘radicalism’ only blocks the road of the Russian Revolution by calling forth a reaction by adding to the disorganization of a country shaken to its foundations. Here, as ever, Lenin’s tactics, seemingly extreme, are in reality weakening the strength of democratic Russia.”
The Menshevik who penned the above lines (in Asia – Dec. 1917) is none other than the present Stalinist knight in the struggle against “Trotskyism”, Moissaye Olgin.
His latest miserable attempt to carry out the teachings and dictates of Stalin takes the shape of a review of the collection of Lenin’s writings from the July Days 1917 to the October revolution recently put out in two volumes, Towards the Seizure of Power, by International Publishers) in the theoretical organ of the American Communist Party, The Communist (May and June 1933.) The occasion is utilized for an attack on the views of the Left Opposition and comrade Trotsky’s History of the Russian Revolution.
In typical Stalinist fashion Olgin confuses the relation between the democratic and the socialist revolution and the theory of the permanent revolution.
To appear objective, Olgin quotes a lengthy – and we may add, representative – section from Trotsky’s History and comments: “Every sentence of this declaration is just the opposite of historical truth and only reveals Trotsky as what he is – a falsifier of history”. No less! Let us requote the section.
“From the year 1905 the Bolshevik party had waged a struggle against the autocracy under the slogan ‘Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat and Peasantry’. This slogan as well as its theoretician, Plekhanov, stubbornly opposed the ‘mistaken idea of the possibility of accomplishing a bourgeois revolution without the bourgeoisie’. Lenin considered that the Russian bourgeoisie was already incapable of leading its own revolution. Only the proletariat and peasantry in close union could carry through a democratic revolution against the monarchy and the landlords. The victory of this union, according to Lenin, should inaugurate the democratic dictatorship, which was not only not identical with the dictatorship of the proletariat, but was in sharp contrast with it, for its problem was not the creation of a socialist society, nor even the creation of forms of transition to such a society, but merely a ruthless cleansing of the Augean stables of medievalism. The goal of the revolutionary struggles was fully described in three militant slogans: Democratic Repubic, Confiscation of the Landed Estates, Eight-Hour Working Day – colloquially called the three whales of Bolshevism”. Leon Trotsky – History of the Russian Revolution, Vol. 1, page 314)
“Every sentence” a historical untruth? Olgin raised the question of Lenin’s view of the hegemony of the proletariat in the bourgeois democratic revolution in order to prove that the latter saw in this the transition of the democratic into the Socialist revolution. He quotes a number of writings from Lenin to prove this contention. But the basic questions still remain: is it true that Lenin before 1917) considered the “democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry” as the culmination of the bourgeois democratic revolution? Did he understand – as Trotsky in his theory of the permament revolution did – that the solution of the democratic tasks would be solved by the proletarian revolution, through the institution of a proletarian dictatorship? And lastly – how did life itself solve this dispute – in the form of the “democratic dictatorship” or the “proletarian dictatorship”?
Olgin in his polemic against Trotsky quotes Lenin’s Two Tactics of Social Democracy in a Democratic Revolution written in 1906 to prove his contentions. But it is precisely this source that the same Olgin used to prove the exact opposite in 1917. We read:
“In his Two Tactics he (Lenin) said, ‘The stage of Russia’s economic development (forming an objective condition) and the stage of consciousness and progress of organization among the masses of the proletariat (forming a subjective condition intrinsically connected with the objective) makes an immediate complete emancipation of the working class (introduction of socialism) impossible.’ Even Lenin would have to admit that both objective and subjective conditions have not changed substantially since 1905. (Obvious Nonsense – J.C.). Yet here he is, preaching the establishment of socialism in war-ridden impoverished Russia.” (Asia – Dec. 1917 – page 783.)
The quotation from Lenin proves the converse of what Olgin now attempts! We may add that his comment is not above level of his present writings!
When a group of Red Professors edited a History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union under the guidance of the Trotsky killer, Yaroslavsky, several years [ago] they recorded Lenin’s change of strategical line between 1905 and 1917 only to bring on their heads the charges of “Trotskyism”! Yaroslavsky was forced to indulge in “self criticism”. This “Leninist now formulates the question in a new way: “ – the completion of
the bourgeois democratic revolution was a by-product of the socialist proletarian revolution of 1917.” (Communist – Feb. 1932 – his emphasis). This formulation is in direct contradiction to the official Stalinist position on the colonial question.
To get back to Olgin. Many years ago, this gentleman translated a number of Trotsky’s writings from 1905 to 1917 particularly treating with the theory of the permanent revolution. In his preface to Prospects of a Labor Dictatorship in Our Revolution Olgin wrote:
“Whatever our attitude towards the course of events in the 1917 revolution may be, (his are revealed in the quotations from Asia – J.C.) we must admit that in the main, this course has taken the direction predicted in Trotsky’s essays. There is a labor dictatorship now in Russia. It is a labor dictatorship not a ‘dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry’ ... All this had been outlined by Trotsky twelve years ago. When one reads this series of essays, one has the feeling that they were written not in the course of the first Russian upheaval (The essays appeared in 1906 as part of a book by Trotsky, entitled, Our Revolution, Petersburg, W. Glagoleff, publisher) but as if they were discussing problems of the present situation. This more than anything else shows the continuity of the revolution ... Twelve years ago those essays seemed to picture an imaginary world. Today they seem to tell the history of the Russian revolution. We may agree or disagree with Trotsky, the leader, nobody can deny the power and clarity of his political vision.”
The present day fulminations against the theory of the permanent revolution cannot change the essential accuracy of the comments made above!
Olgin however does not reach his real heights until he treats tbe question of the origin of the November insurrection. Here the gentleman finds Trotsky once again guilty of falsifying history. He quotes Trotsky as saying that the idea of an insurrection took form from the moment the order was given for the removal of the troops from Petrograd and the Petrograd Soviet decided to organize a military revolutionary committee. The meeting Trotsky refers to was held on October 22. “The idea did not take form before, because it was not advanced by Trotsky. The father of the idea was, most naturally, Trotsky”. With this attempt at sarcasism, Olgin continues to cite quotations from Lenin where the latter called for insurrection before October 22nd.
Is it possible that Trotsky was unaware of this or tried to hide it? Is it true that even Trotsky first conceived of insurrection on October 22nd? One need but turn to volume III of the History and find a complete chapter on Lenin’s continual proposals for insurrection from July upward! Olgin read this chapter. But he assumes that the readers of the Communist have not and will not do so! Even Olgin can easily understand that what Trotsky means in the quoted paragraph is that the idea of insurrection first took form at that moment among the masses in the Soviets rather than in the minds of Lenin and Trotsky. Further that the idea was then concretized that the Soviet rather than the Bolshevik party directly or a new organ, would be the official instrument of the insurrection – a question not definitely decided up to then. Olgin’s purpose is not the review of history. It is rather that of discrediting and slandering the present day Marxists.
Finally Olgin disputes Trotsky’s statement that the official Stalinist historians present the question of the voting of the Bolshevik Central Committee (on October 23) for insurrection as though the entire party leadership except Zinoviev and Kamenev stood for insurrection. The constant re-writings of the history of the Bolshevik party for the factional purposes of the Stalinists are notorious. Olgin however finds a quotation to serve his purpose. We assume that he picked the strongest available.
“The course on insurrection taken by Lenin, however, met with resistance on the part of some members of the Central Committee, in the first place on the part of Kamenev and Zinoviev.” This reads a history of the Russian party by Bubnov, present Commissar of Education. Who are these others? Not a word. They are revealed when the individuals fall in the bad graces of the present ruling regime, as Kamenev and Zinoviev have on a number of occasions!
For the Stalinist historians to literally confine the disputes (on insurrection and other questions) to Zinoviev and Kamenev alone would require the suppression of about nine-tenths of Lenin’s writings between July and November 1917. This has been found impossible even by the expert Stalinist censors. So they resort to anonymity with regard to the other personages.
The world revolutionary movement will have to purge itself of the falsifiers and revisionists of Marxism, the extensive staff of official “historians” and “theoreticians” exemplified by Moissaye Olgin.
 



TEN YEARS – History and Principles of the Left Opposition
by Max Shachtman
79 Pages. 10c. Pioneer Publishers, New York
At last a pamphlet on the history and fundamentals of the Left Opposition! A serious handicap in educating the newcomers to our movement has been precisely the absence of such a historical sketch. The simplicity and lucidity of style and presentation makes it interesting and informative reading even to the uninitiated.
In reality the pamphlet is a history of the ten-years’ struggle of the Russian Bolshevik-Leninists against Stalinism in the Soviet Union, as well as internationally, in England and in China. The proof that the “Russian Question” is in reality a problem of world Communism is clearly presented by the author’s well-knit story of how the basic theories of the Stalinist bureaucracy flow from the defeat of the West European working class and the logical consequences of these theories in the Centrist zigzag of Stalinism in its policies in the Soviet Union, England and China.
Ten Years commences by a clear explanation of why a militant worker should be interested in the factional struggle which has wracked the world Communist movement the absolute indispensability of a revolutionary vanguard organization of the working class, a Communist party, for the emancipation of the proletariat. Comrade Shachtman then proceeds with the struggle in 1923 for party democracy in the Russian Communist Party. The struggle is placed on the background of the economic and social difficulties of the Soviet Union. This method, of connecting the political conflicts with their social conditions, and the employment of well chosen questions from leading spokesman of the official regime, make the struggles realistic and easily understandable.
The controversies over The Lessons of October, the theory of socialism in one country, the Anglo-Russian Committee and the British General Strike, and the Chinese Revolution, are so analyzed that, despite the brevity of the sections, all the essentials are expounded. The highly complicated problem of the danger of Thermidor and Bonapartism in the Soviet Union is explained in very simple language.
Because of the highly difficult task of condensing the ten years’ struggle of the Left Opposition in a small pamphlet, a number of important omissions are to be expected. In discussing the Opposition’s criticism of the draft of the First Five Year Plan, it is essential to stress the contention of our comrades in 1927 that the Plan of the Stalinists meant industrialization at the expense of the working class, rather than at the expense of the non-proletarian elements in Russia; that the living conditions of the workers should increase with the development of industry. These points cannot be overemphasized: the stupendous gains in production of the First Five Year Plan were achieved, to a large degree, at the expense of the living standard of the workers – to a far greater extent than was necessary.
In speaking of socialist planned economy, it would have been well to include a brief paragraph contrasting scientific planning, with constant check-up and experimentation, as against the bureaucratic planning of Stalinism. In this connection, the reference to Trotsky’s prediction, in Whither Russia on the possibility of a 20% annual increase of production is insufficient. A few words should have been added on how he arrived at this figure; in that way it could be made clear why his figure was realistic and superior to Rykov’s and the State Planning Commission.
The Sixth Congress of the Comintern (1928) is handled inadequately. The “third period” of the Sixth Congress was as different from the “third period” of the 10th Plenum (1929) as the views of Bucharin-Lovestone differed from those of Stalin-Molotov. Comrade Shachtman states in reference to the 10th Plenum of the Executive Committee of the Comintern: “It was the Plenum par excellence of the ‘third period’, the same ‘third period’ which was at first denounced as an opportunistic idea by the Thaelmann-Neumann delegation to the Sixth Congress”. (Page 66)
Hardly! The German Stalinists were not inconsistent! Bucharin’s “third period” stressed the fact that European economy had exceeded its pre-war level the strengthening of capitalism economically; the conflict between the imperialist powers which would lead to war. According to this theory, the “war danger” was the paramount factor which accelerated the class struggle. Who is there who was in the American C.P. in late 1928 who does not recall how every strike was called “a manifestation of the war danger”.
Molotov’s “third period” was a “horse of a different color”. The emphasis was on the weakening of capitalist economy, the growing strike wave a a a result of “inner contradictions” – Lodz (Poland) strike, Ruhr miners strike, etc. The “third period” became the period of the revolutionary upsurge of the masses, the “final period” of capitalism!
The Sixth Congress was compelled to criticize the policy of Communists building workers’ and peasants’ parties. (This did not stop the Stalinists from building such parties in India a few months after the Congress!). The Sixth Congress not only accepted the theory socialism in one country for the Soviet Union, but for the first time divided the countries of the world – and the tasks of the Communists in these countries – according to whether they could build a complete and isolated socialist economy or not! This is important because such is the theoretical basis – despite inconsistencies – for the slogan of “democratic dictatorship of the workers and peasants”
Ten Years was written about a year ago, before the victory of Hitlerism. Comrade Shachtman’s preface briefly explains the consequences of that fatal event. It would be well if the present pamphlet would be followed by others, on Germany, united front, trade union policies and problems of the American workers. Ten Years should be read by all workers who want to understand the conflicts of the past decade in the world Communist movement; so as to better equip themselves in the struggle of today.
Comrades should note a typographical error in the pamphlet. The eighth line of page 6 [of] Ten Years should be the last line of page seven; the last line of page 7 should be the eighth line of page 6.
 



At the call of the Dressmakers’ Joint Board of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, a conference of “radical youth” groups was held in New York, February 3, to aid the union in its organizational drive. Representatives of the Young Peoples Socialist League, the Inter-Collegiate Student Council of the League for Industrial Democracy, the Lovestoneite youth, the Young Circle League and the Vanguard (anarchist) group had a short while previously participated in a pre-conference to arrange for this conference. The Left Opposition youth – the Spartacus Youth Club – was not invited to either gathering. It had an observer at the conference.
After the chairman explained the purpose of the meeting, Max Bluestein, manager of the Joint Board, spoke in glowing terms of the history of the union and the need of the cooperation of the youth assembled to help the union organize the dressmakers. Following this, representatives of the youth groups present spoke.
The YPSL, LID and Young Circle League pledged their support and readiness “to take orders”. The speaker for the Lovestoneites endorsed the campaign and spoke for a “clean, fighting, militant union” which would fight racketeering and organize the youth in the trade. The chairman, an official in the union, greeted this mild and meaningless speech. The spokesman of the Vanguard (anarchist) Group launched into an attack upon the leaders of the A.F. of L. and the ILGWU, and their sell-out policies and agreements. He exposed by direct references fake agreements made in the dress and cloak industry in New York by the ILGWU. He protested at the original refusal of the officials of the ILGWU to invite the youth of the CPLA and the Left Opposition to the Conference. They had finally consented to invite the Musteite youth (but did not do so) and refused to invite the Left Opposition youth. He then proceeded to enumerate the conditions under which his group would participate in the “action committee” which was to be elected: workers’ democracy in the union, the right of revolutionary groups to propagate their views, the abolition of political control, and its conversion into a “revolutionary industrial union”!
The chairman explained that the discrimination against the CPLA youth was accidental, but that the Left Opposition youth was not invited “because we don’t want to bring in unnecessary discussion”.
Julius Hechman, one of the leaders of the Union, replied to the anarchist speech.
It was obvious from Hochman’s speech that gangsters and bribery were too expensive financially, and free aid from enthusiastic youth was needed by the decimated union. Flourishing radical phrases formed the bait with which these labor fakers tried to enveigle the radical youth into their campaign.
The youth conference is an attempt on the part of the Right wing leader’s to mobilize the radical youth of the city in a campaign in competition and against the drive being made by the Industrial Union to organize the dressmakers.
A motion made by a delegate from the Vanguard Group to permit a representative of the Left Opposition Youth to speak to the Conference was “overlooked” by the democratic chairman. Later a motion by a Yipsel to invite representatives from the CPLA youth and the Left Opposition youth to join the “action committee” was carried unanimously. The Young Communist League, the largest working class youth organization in the City, was not invited. This ended the latest move of the ILGWU officialdom which deserves to be watched and upon which we will comment in the near future.
 



The Communist International recently initiated and participated in an international united front against Fascism that even the Stalinist press is silent about. According to the New Leader (April 28, ’33), official organ of the Independent Labour Party of Great Britain an unofficial (!) conference of Left Socialists and Communists was held in Paris on April 25. It was initiated by none other than Henri Barbusse. Socialists from France, Britain and Belgium and Italy were present as well as Communists from these countries (except Italy) as well as from Germany, Czechoslovakia and the United States.
The Left Socialists at the Conference proposed that efforts should be made for a meeting of the Executive Committees of the Labour and Socialist International and the Comintern to consider ways and means of combating Fascism. This the Stalinists rejected. The latter agreed to collaboration between the Left Socialists and the Communists and urged the support of the European Anti-Fascist Conference and the Youth Conference against War and Fascism to be held in Paris on August 5th. (No notice has appeared in the American or international press of the Comintern on the latter Conference!) The Left Socialists agreed to support these conferences on the condition that they were officially invited and permitted to participate in their organization. This was agreed upon.
The Comintern which had rejected a united front against Fascism with the Labour and Socialist International, even refused to openly initiate a conference with the International Committee of the Left Socialist Parties. It again resorted to the back-handed policy of having Henri Barbusse “personally” arrange for such a meeting. Another sign of the much acclaimed independence of the Communist International!
Only a few days after this Conference which, we repeat, was conducted behind the backs and without the knowledge of the Communist and revolutionary workers, the Comintern issued its May Day Manifesto. Therein we read:
“Now we need the united front from below, not negotiations with the top leaders, with Wels and Renaudel. For the leaders of the Second International, negotiations of the officials on top are merely a method of delaying, hindering and disrupting the united front of the working class.”
United front with the Vanderveldes, Adlers and Renaudels before the eyes of the socialist and communist workers – no! United front with the Brockways, Patons and Maxtons behind the backs of the workers, independent of the masses who follow them – certainly! This is the queer logic ol Stalinism brought down to its latest phase.
 



The failure of the German Communist Party to arouse the working class against Fascism is to a large extent explainable by its false trade union policies. When von Papen put through his coup d’état, on July 20th of last year, the party’s call for a general strike met little response in the ranks of the workers. Similarly, on the occasion of the appointment of Hitler as Chancellor of the German Reich on January 30, the call of the Communist party for a general strike found all but the most advanced revolutionary workers, as the Hamburg dock workers, staying on their jobs. A revolutionary party which was able to rally over five millions to its parliamentary banner, could get tens or at best several hundred thousands to respond to its extra-parliamentary action, the general strike.
To understand this one must examine the party’s trade union policies in the past few year’s and its relation to the general trade union movement.
 
The Third Period Policy
At the height of the “third period”, when the social democracy and the reformist trade unions were called “social Fascist” and an integral part of the capitalist state apparatus, the German party organized its own trade union center. (It may be remarked that our American party was instructed to do likewise in the same period – the Trade Union Unity League was formed). On November 15 and 16 at Berlin, the Revolutionary Trade Union Opposition as a center of Red trade unions and opposition groups in the reformists trade unions (which would try to split off locals for the red unions) was formed. The old policy of the Leftist Communist Labor Party, condemned by the Comintern and Red International of Labor Unions under Lenin and Trotsky of forming the General Labor Union which would try to destroy all reformist unions, withdraw the revolutionary and militant elements from the reformist unions, and organize “pure and simple” revolutionary unions – was revived.
The reformist trade union leaders did not at all dislike this policy. The need for struggling with the militants within the trade unions was obviated. Instead of expulsions being necessary, withdrawal of Communist workers took place. Nevertheless the reformist unions did not have any easy sailing.
The General Federation of Labor, affiliated to the reformist Amsterdam International showed a growth of membership up to January 1st 1930.



End of 1928:


  


4,866,926




July 1, 1929:


4,942,984




Jan. 1, 1930:


4,948,267



However, with the intensification of the economic crisis in Germany, the growing unemployment and the failure of the reformist unions to struggle for the workers’ – jobless and employed – interests, hundred of thousands left the unions. In 1930 over two hundred thousand (233,068) workers quit the unions. In the following year, the unions lost 582,000 workers.
Despite this process, the reformist unions succeeded in maintaining their hold over the employed. The unemployed flocked in large numbers to the Communist party and its auxiliaries; the employed and organized remained under the control of the social democrats.
This is substantiated by an article in the Communist International of Feb. 1, 1933:
“In the factories the reformist trade unions have not only not become relatively less powerful, but according to many indications their strength has even grown.” (Page 69)
The Twelfth Plenum of the Executive Committee of the Communist International held in September of last year was compelled to record the practical futility of the party trade union course.
 
Admission of Failure
“In Germany, the red trade unions (metal workers, miners) have failed to organize the struggle against the capitalist offensive and have now stagnated.” (Capitalist Stabilization Has Ended, page 30)
But mere admission of shortcomings is hardly sufficient. The policy of small Red trade unions combined with the slogans of “independent leadership”, that is, leadership in strikes which in practise is independent of the union organizations and the workers themselves and “united front from below” divorced the revolutionary worker’s from the mass of organized labor.
Out of 13,129 local branches of the General Federation about 250 are led by Communist and Left wing groups. Even in branches controlled by the party the workers could not be aroused to the calls for “united front from below”.
“Thus, in the district of Hessen-Frankfurt, the leaders of a number of local T.U. branches controlled by us refused to issue a call for strikes against Fascist terror because, they maintained, ‘as organizations affiliated to the All-German Federation of Trade Unions they must await a strike call from the federation.’” (Communist International, Vol. X No. 2, February 1, 1933, page 73)
The same author, one S. Perevosnikov, give some interesting information which throws light on the present situation.
“At the last Berlin District Conference of the party, it was reveal ed that about 250 delegates (nearly a quarter of the total) voluntarily quit the unions. At a district conference of the party in Elsnitz ninety-nine of 170 delegates were neither in trade unions nor the trade union opposition. In Saxony, of 4,000 party members, only 250 members of the revolutionary opposition.’’ (Page 74)
“Altogether, according to the figures of the National Committee of the revolutionary trade union opposition, 34,000 new members joined and 48,000 left the Opposition during the past nine months.” (Page 78)
Are such conditions due to a “wrong application of the correct line”? Hardly. They are the legitimate fruits of the Stalinist policies.
A decisive turn has to be made. The ultimatist slogan of “united front from below under revolutionary leadership” has to be thrown overboard. The several hundred thousand members of the Red trade unions must return, as a group, to the reformist unions and struggle for the workers’ economic needs and fight for the revolutionary program of the united front of workers’ organizations against Fascism.
Such a change of policy is especially imperative today when according to news reports (New York Times – 3-13-33) thousands of workers are returning to industry. This lays the basis for broad strike movements. The worker’s will struggle for the positions lost in the past period; against worsening of economic conditions, wage cuts, etc. At such a time the revolutionary workers functioning militantly within the reformist unions can further the interests, both economic and political, of the entire class, and a cement a unity of the proletariat that can defeat Fascism and go over the struggle for a Soviet Germany.
 



At the height of the patriotic hysteria of the last World War, when the leaders of the Socialist parties proclaimed civil truce with the capitalists and supported their national master class, a small, but courageous group of revolutionary socialist youth met at Berne, Switzerland, July 1915, to organize the youth of the various European countries against capitalism and war. Undaunted by the war frenzy, in total disregard of the universal chauvinistic public opinion, with the single aim of furthering the movement for the emancipation of the working class, irrespective of personal consequences, these young revolutionary fighters considered the next steps to be taken, and proclaimed the first Sunday of every September International Youth Day – the day of demonstration against capitalist militarism and war.
The Young Communist International, the inheritor of the best traditions of the Socialist Youth International formed at Stuttgart in August 1915 and the militant traditions of the Berne Conference, continued the practise of International Youth Day. In the early years of its existence it succeeded in mobilizing broad masses of young workers on this day as a culmination to its regular anti-militarist propaganda.
Today the heavy clouds of war looms over the entire world. The threat of Japanese imperialism to the Soviet Union, its robber war and conquests in China, the consolidation of German Fascism, the conflicts between the imperialist nations, England vs. the United States, Japan vs. the U.S., Germany vs. France, Austria vs. Germany, and so on, brood an impending massacre. The capitalist nations are reaching an economic and political impasse. It is becoming more and more difficult for them to settle their problems peacefully.
France is armed to the teeth. Japan, England and the United States have been and are increasing their naval forces. Roosevelt is preparing the psychology of the American workers for a war situation. His national labor boards closely resemble those organized during the last war. Through the Civil Conservation Camps, the American bosses represented by Roosevelt’s government are preparing a reserve of several hundred thousand young workers for the new imperialist slaughter.
To counteract this process of militarization of the youth, little effective work is being done. The Stalinist Communist party and Young Communist League gives over to the Barbusses, Sinclairs and Dreisers the leadership of the struggle against war. In the trade unions, which are essential for war or anti-war purposes the Left wing is insignificant.
International Youth Day belongs to the militant and class conscious young workers. To give it real meaning to enshrine it in the hearts of the American youth an orientation of international revolution is necessary. Only on such a basis can an effective struggle against militarism and war be conceived of. The Left Opposition youth will dedicate itself to this and endeavor to carry on the tradition of the handful of bold young fighters who met at Berne.
 



On Labor Day weekend, September 1st to 4th, the “United States Congress Against War” will be held in New York City. The official call of the Congress contains the signatures of the Communist party, a number of organizations which it controls, pacifist groups, the I.W.W., and the Socialist party. Recently the National Executive Committee of the Socialist party withdrew from the united front because of criticism against it contained in the Daily Worker. A few words on how this united front was arranged.
Under the paternal guidance of Henri Barbusse – who will be in the United States for the Congress – Sherwood Anderson, Theodore Dreiser, and Upton Sinclair, members of the American Committee for Struggle against War, issued an appeal for the September Congress. Suddenly an arrangements committee composed overwhelmingly of Stalinist controlled organizations was organized. The Musteites joined in. Under pressure primarily of pacifist friends of Barbusse in the S.P., lead by Jesse Wallace Hughan of the War Resisters’ League, the National Executive Committee of the Socialist party joined the united front on the condition that it be given adequate representation on the arrangements committee. This was soon agreed upon. A number of Socialists, Norman Thomas, Julius Gerber, etc. were added to the Committee; a few more Stalinists were put on.
 
Double Game of Stalinists
In the preparations for the Congress the Stalinists played a double game. In the press they continued their old attacks on, the Socialists, for the consumption of their own members and “others”. At meetings of the arrangements committee they spoke very humbly and even apologized for articles appearing in the Daily Worker attacking the Socialists. This was the picture several weeks ago when the Socialists took the C.P. representatives to task for an article in the Daily and Minor replied by stating that he had not read the article!
Instead of an open appeal to the National Executive Committee of the S.P. by the Communist party for united front against war, the Stalinists employ intermediaries, radical or liberal intellectuals. But this did not help them. The National Executive Committee of the S.P. withdrew from the Congress on the excuse that it was looking for: a criticism of it in the Daily Worker of the Socialist leaders. The arrangements committee replied by appealing to the N.E.C. to reconsider its decision. On August 3rd it decided:
“That this arrangements committee takes the position that in developing the united front no organization which is carrying out the purposes of the anti-war Congress should be attacked by participating organizations on fields of common work. That all participating organizations shall first place before arrangements committee or the sub-committee empowered to act for it, any and all differences of opinion between the participating organizations relative to the U.S. Congress Against War, before making them public. It is understood, however, that every organization shall be perfectly free to urge its own program with respect to the struggle against war. These assurances which the Arrangements Committee will make effective and which was agreed to by all participating groups including representatives of the Communist party should make fruitful cooperation possible.” (Daily Worker – 9-8-1933).
 
Meaning of Non-Aggression Pact
We quote at some length because of the importance of the section. The non-aggression pact could not be more simply written. No criticism “on the field of common work”. Does not this mean no criticism of the pacifism and Socialist action and policies on war? Where differences of opinion arise they should first go to the united front committee. Editors of the Daily Worker take note: before writing critical articles of editorials on the anti-war Congress submit it to the arrangements committee! The Stalinists agreed to, or more accurately inspired – in line with the March 5 Comintern manifesto – the above statement. They have traveled far afield from the policy laid down by Lenin for the Communists at the Hague anti-war conference of the pacifists and Socialists in 1922. Through the Barbusse Anti-War Congress held last August and all the subsequent “anti-war united fronts” they have blurred the line of revolutionary struggle against war in the direction of militant pacifism.
They are now appealing to the Socialist party branches to support the U.S. Congress Against War. J.B. Matthews, a member of the Socialist party who trails along with the Stalinists in its united fronts, has remained on the arrangements committee. One or two Socialist groups may support the Congress, but little more than that can be expected. The sabotage of the leaders of the Socialist party combined with the false course of the Stalinists and their anti-revolutionary position on the united front against war will result in keeping the Socialist workers for the time bring, away from common action with the Communists.
At the U.S. Congress Against War the Left Opposition delegates will present the revolutionary Communist program against war in contradistinction to Stalinist confusionism. Lenin’s teachings on this important sector of the class struggle, his conception of the united front on war and the need of American working class action against Roosevelt’s war program will be raised by the Left Opposition. This will aid in the clarification of both the Communist and Socialist workers and lay the basis for a genuine common action against war and the capitalist offensive.
 



On January 15th 1919, the leaders of the revolutionary German working class, Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht, were murdered in the streets of Berlin. The ruling class of Germany, fearing these two heroic and dauntless fighters, their ability to mobilize the proletariat for the proletarian dictatorship and socialism, called upon the lackeys of the capitalist class, the social democrats, Noske, Schiedeman, Ebert, to stem the revolutionary tide, to murder its outstanding leaders and fighters. The official social democracy carried out these instructions; murdered Liebknecht and Luxemburg, destroyed the Spartacus movement. For the time being it saved Germany – for wage slavery and exploitation. Luxemburg and Liebknecht remain the symbol of proletarian struggle for emancipation; the German and international social democracy continue as the active henchmen of capitalism.
Both Rosa and Karl had, long before 1919, fought the treacherous policies of the social democracy within the official movement. Luxemburg took up the struggle against both the revisionism and opportunism of Bernstein, David, Legien, and Noske, and the academic centrism of Karl Kautsky. Previous to this she had been active in the Polish movement where she fought tooth and nail against the nationalist position of the leaders. Closely in contact with the Russian social democracy she followed the revolution of 1905 with the greatest interest. She recognized the importance of the leading role of the proletariat in the democratic revolution. She wrote a brochure in which she drew some lessons on mass political strikes, trade unions, relations between trade unions and for the German party and international working class from the Russian events.
Luxemburg not only popularised the writings of Marx, especially on economics but wrote a theoretical work which attempts to apply the economic laws discovered by Marx to the stage of the imperialist capitalism (Accumulation of Capital). Her knowledge and treatment of Marxism, not as a dogma but a revolutionary method of penetrating, knowing and transforming social reality, made Rosa one of the few original thinkers the revolutionary movement has produced since Marx and Engels. She actively participated in all phases of the social-democratic movement, women’s work, practical politics, theoretical discussions, anti-militarist and youth work.
It was in the latter two fields that she worked arm in arm with Karl Liebknecht. Both stressed the importance of work within the armed forces – a proposal which sounded Blanquist to the pacifist and ultra-legalistic social democratic leaders. Karl and Rosa fought for the organization of special youth leagues which would attract young workers and students to the socialist movement, educate them in Marxism, struggle against capitalist militarism. Liebknecht in Militarism and Anti-Militarism analyzed the class nature of present day militarism showing its twofold character: against the enemy capitalist nation and colonial peoples; to suppress the working class at home. Luxemburg exposed the sham and hypocrisy of the proposals for disarmament and pacifism under capitalism, and castigated them as “pacifist utopias”. The activity of Rosa and Karl prepared them for the war period role.
The coming of the World War, which like all deep social crises poses the questions of class struggle sharply, found social democratic opportunism develop logically into social chauvinism, social imperialism. The policy of class collaboration during peace time led to support of the bourgeoisie during the war. On the other hand, the advocacy of class struggle, a relentless fight against the capitalist class during “peace” time, found Liebknecht and Luxemburg during as prior to the war in the vanguard of the proletariat struggling against the capitalist conflagration and for proletarian revolution.
Luxemburg and Liebknecht aided by such fighters as Jogisches, Mehring, Levine, organized the Spartacus Bund, unfurled the banner of revolutionary Marxism and proclaimed the struggle against the war, the social democrats, the mainstay of capitalism, and for socialism, Karl hurled the defiant voice of the militant working class in the Reichstag when voting against war credits; in the Kaiser’s army he agitated the soldiers for socialism; in the streets of Berlin at the height of the war in May 1916, he echoed the class interests of the German proletariat. For these actions Liebknecht was arrested and thrown into jail.
Luxemburg had also been incarcerated by the Kaiser’s government; the other Spartacans were issuing illegal literature and conducting other forms of propaganda under the able leadership of Leo Jogisches. Rosa, while in prison, wrote her now famous brochure on The Crises in the German Social Democracy explaining in a scientific manner the reasons for the degeneration of the official social democratic movement, for its war position and the road the Marxists should take.
When the Russian workers overthrew capitalism and established a proletarian dictatorship, Liebknecht and Luxemburg unhesitatingly supported the Bolshevik Revolution. Rosa, while criticizing some of the policies of the Bolsheviks, stressed (in contrast to Kautsky) that they were in the main conditioned on factors independent of their (the Bolsheviks) will and on that basis were justified.
The German revolution of 1918 released Luxemburg and Liebknecht from prison. The Spartacus Bund, which had been part of the Independent Social Democratic Party (the Centrist party of Kautsky, Hilferding, etc.) withdrew and on December 31, 1919, founded the Communist Party of German (Spartacus Bund). The questions of armed insurrection, barricade fighting, the proletarian dictatorship and socialism, in a word, precisely those matters which put horror and fear in the hearts of the capitalists and their labor lieutenants, were illuminated with a lucidity which only a brillant Marxian like Rosa Luxemburg could use. Not fearing to struggle against the stream though only a handful, Rosa and her Spartacan comrades, with faith in the working masses, intransigent in their Marxist principles, with a heroic will to struggle for socialism, launched the organization which will lead the German proletariat to power.
The German Communist Party was founded at a time when street fighting took place in Berlin. In a few days, on January 15th, 1919, Luxemburg and Liebknecht were arrested and shamefully murdered by the social democratic henchmen of the German bourgeoisie. A short time later, Leo Jogisches was brutally killed while in prison. The traitorous social democracy established “order” in Germany. But “order”, “peace”, “stabilization”, cannot be permanently established under capitalism. The class struggle leads inevitably to revolution as shown by Germany today.
* * * *
The Left Opposition considers itself the rightful inheritors of the traditions of Liebknecht and Luxemburg. Rosa more than once was at logger-heads with Lenin and the Bolsheviks. She undoubtedly made mistakes. But in spite of this she remains one of the few Marxist leaders of our times. Her works are almost unknown to the American comrades; most of her critics have never studied them. It is the task of the Left Opposition to publish and make known the writings of Luxemburg so that we will not only be able to judge wherein she erred, but learn a great deal from one of the most brilliant Marxist teachers.
 



The Seventh national convention of the Young Communist League is over. According to reports in the Daily Worker little was analyzed, less was planned, nothing was accomplished. On the basis of this source we can get a picture of the bankruptcy of the Stalinists in the youth movement.
“100% Increase in Membership” boldly proclaimed the Daily (June 25, 1934) in a headline. But the next day it summarized the report of the organization secretary of the Y.C.L. “Marks specially made a sharp attack on the heavy and increasing fluctuation of the League membership, saying that though 15,000 members were recruited since the last convention only 6,000 are still in the League. ‘We have slogans and resolutions about fluctuation, but we don’t take steps to overcome it.’” Nor does the report state what steps were proposed – if any – to overcome this condition.
 
300% Turnover in Three Years
15,000 recruited in three years. A powerful testimony of the fact that wide sections of youth are and can be attracted to a revolutionary youth organization. Add the claimed 3,000 members at the time of the last convention and we get the sum of 18,000 youth. Yet only 6,000 remain. Not a 200% turnover of membership, as we so conservatively estimated in the last issue of the Militant, but a 300% turnover! One will not find that in headlines!
The convention had as it avowed task “the winning of the youth for the struggle for Soviet power”. The struggle for Soviet power is on the order of the day iu all capitalist countries according to the papal board of Stalinism. So it must likewise be in the United States, logically conclude the young American cardinals and bishops.
Precisely what is meant by this nobody knows. Obviously the building of Soviets is not an immediate task of revolutionaries in the United States. If however the vague phrase means winning of the young workers, through their immediate struggles, for the working class dictatorship and Soviet power, that is, for Communism, then the task is not a new one, but rather an old task for which conditions are better than ever before. A big step forward could have been made in the past period of the economic crisis. Why was it not made?
 
Trade Union Policy
“Failure to understand the correct trade union policy in the A.F. of L. and organizing the revolutionary trade unions, he (the trade union reporter) said, accounts for the isolation of the League from the masses of young workers in industry, and especially those entering strike struggles”, reports the Daily Worker (June 26, 1934.)
Not a wrong trade union policy – that would be heresy – but the usual complaint of a “failure to understand” the correct trade union policy which presumably the Communist Party and the Young Communist League have. But what is the policy. The reporter called for the formation of opposition groups in the A.F. of L. and independent trade unions. For what purpose: to split the unions and affiliate them to the new brain storm of the Stalinists, a new independent trade union center, independent of the A.F. of L., independent of the Trade Union Unity League. Independent also of the masses? The reporter did not explain what this repetition about “opposition” groups in the A.F. of L. means in concrete terms.
 
A “Mistake” – Who Made It?
The trade, union reporter did state that “We considered that the U.M.W.A. was completely exposed and could never come back as a force in the bituminous fields of western Pennsylvania. This was absolutely wrong.” Whose mistake was this which led to the isolation of the Y.C.L. from the youth involved in the strike wave? Surely the analysis was based on the trade union policy of the Communist party which the Y.C.L. faithfully followed, of abandoning the A.F. of L. unions, and playing around with pure and simple “red” unions. Is this policy rejected today?
Only on paper. Opposition groups are being formed in the mass trade unions with the aim of building another “independent” trade union center, independent of everything, we repeat, except the Stalinist party.
How the young workers are to be won for unionization was not even discussed. No policy was given.
Nor does the Daily report any discussions on the anti-militarist, anti-Fascist, united front, educational or student work of the Y.C.L. The agenda did contain a point on war and Fascism, but the action of the convention is yet to be reported.
 
Student Youth Problem
Worthy of note is the fact that the student problem was not even put on the agenda of the convention. The National Student League, organized by the Y.C.L., has been constantly changing its program. From a “revolutionary” student organization to an organization based primarily on student issues, to a transitional form pending a unity of the N.S.L. and the Socialist Student League for Industrial Democracy and then into a “mass militant student organization”. Should not a national convention of the Y.C.L. consider this problem? Particularly important is this in view of the fact that no previous national convention of the Y.C.L. in the United States and no convention of the Young Communist International since its second congress (1921) has discussed this problem.
The national convention reports give a balance sheet of complete failure. A convention of an avowedly revolutionary organization which does not even attempt to draw lessons from the decisive events of Germany and Austria, by that omission alone shows its bankruptcy.
 
Need for a New Movement
There is a crying need for a revolutionary youth league which can organize, educate and win the youth for communism. Today this movement can arise only from those who make an integral part of their program and practise lessons of the victories and defeats of the modern working class, particularly from the war of 1914–18 to the recent defeats of the workers in Germany and Austria. It is the movement for the Fourth International and new Communist parties, and a new revolutionary world union of youth, which embodies these lessons and draws the necessary conclusions from them.
The national convention of the Y.C.L., by showing the impotence of Stalinism, also clearly reveals the need for building the Spartacus Youth League as the nucleus of the new revolutionary youth league In the United States.
 



American Socialist Quarterly
– Summer 1934, Vol.3. No.2, 25¢.
THE theoretical organ of the Socialist party graphically depicts the anti-Marxian Centrist muddleheadness of the “Militants”. Maynard C. Krueger, who at the Paris congress of the Labor and Socialist International last August, supported Ehrlich and the Polish Bund in the formula, “dictatorship of the revolutionary party” came home only to be told by Kantorovitch that he voted for a mistranslation! The formula should properly read “dictatorship of the proletariat”.
Now Krueger, in Problems Facing the Party, finds that the term “workers’ democracy” best describes the political transition from capitalism to socialism. As proof that his position is not new, he correctly invokes the inveterate opportunist Morris Hillquitr as his authority.
Hillquit’s formula, “workers’ democracy”, is also favored, in an article Fascism’s Challenge and Socialism’s Answer, by the pacifist-turned-radical, Devere Allen, a Thomasite. It is quite clear that the phrase is an excellent cover for reformists and Centrists.
Allen contends that in a modern industrialized nation it is rarely that the workers can successfully resist or revolt by arms against the capitalists. (The same view can be found in Kantorovitch’s Toward Socialist Reorientation.) Then what will be the answer to capitalist resistance to expropriation? A general strike or “semi-general strike”! This magic formula is a substitute for armed insurrection – as though a general strike in a revolutionary situation can lead to anything but armed conflict or capitulation! If the violent overthrow of capitalism is impossible, socialism is doomed!
Another whiff of Centrist pollution is Haim Kantorovitch’s review of Socialism’s New Start (or Socialism’s New Beginning, as the American translation is called). This exponent of castrated Marxism does not as much as mention the avowed revision of the fundamentals of Marx and Engels by the new German Centrist group. Nor does he take issue with their view of a “party dictatorship” – a conception which he disputed on previous occasions – but which rather implies that they favor the Marxian view of the proletarian dictatorship.
Kantorovitch criticizes the statement of the “New Beginning” group that the German social democracy was never a Marxian party. “... the theoretical literature of prewar social democracy” contained such concepts “as the class struggle, social revolution, and even the dictatorship of the proletariat,” writes Kantorovitch. The theoretical literature spoke of the dictatorship of the proletariat! True enough, it can be found in the writings of Kautsky, Luxemburg, and Parvus – but how about the official program and position of the social democracy? Surely Kantorovitch knows that even the elder Liebknecht, in reply to Bernstein, agreed with this revisionist in repudiating the dictatorship of the proletariat (See Wilhelm Liebnecht’s No Compromise, No Political Trading.)
The review of Thomas’ The Choice Before Us by a “Militant” leader, Murray Baron, concludes that Thomas “subscribed, in part, to the same gradualism and constitutionalism which characterized the European movements” and that the author is not committed “to any definite program for the period of revolutionary transition”. Yet both Thomas and Baron subsequently supported the formula “workers’ democracy” as the Detroit convention.
Among the other items is included an informative article on the history of the American Yipsel movement by its present national chairman, Arthur G. McDowell.



With the whole of Germany oppressed under the iron heel of Fascism, Adolph Hitler celebrated the first anniversary of his appointment as Chancellor of the Reich on January 30th.
One year of bloody rule ... the destruction of the Communist and Social Democratic parties, the wiping out of all trade unions and workers organizations, the persecution of the Jews, the suppression of all opposition in the camp ot the master class: the Nationalist-Monarchists, the Catholic Center, elements in the Protestant church and the storm troops ... tens of thousands in concentration camps, countless others in prisons and jails ... bloody oppression and exploitation – that is the present set-up in the year one of German Fascism.
 
Hitlerism in the Saddle
With unparalleled rapidity, Hitler has consolidated his power. At the end of January 1933 he became Chancellor. On March 5th the German people were terrorized and cajoled to participate in his Bonapartist plebiscite. With the so-called “democratic mandate” of the people he immediately proceeded to illegalize the Communist party – by employing the notorious Reichstag fire as a pretext. Soon the Social Democratic party was suppressed. The trade unions were the next victims of Hitler’s dictatorship. On May 1st the socialist leaders of the unions were arrested, then the funds of tge union were confiscated. Several months later the unions were completely abolished. The factory councils suffered the same fate.
With the militant working class crushed, Hitler took steps against his allies of the Hugenburg-Nationalist camp. The Steel Helmets were integrated with Hitler’s storm troops. The Nationalists were either won over to the fascist party or ousted from the government and all official posts. After one year, Hitler has full control over the entire field unchallenged by any serious force.
What it took Mussolini and his Italian Fascist bands four years to accomplish – and then only after bloody street fights and conflicts – Hitler has accomplished in months. The young Italian Communist Party, despite Mussolini’s desires, could not be suppressed or made illegal until 1926. Trade unions, independent of the caricature Fascist unions, were being built years after Mussolini s victory. The Italian workers fought militantly against the consolidation of fascism.
 
Workers Left Leaderless
An entirely different picture in Germany! The workers with tongue in cheek are compelled to shout: Heil Hitler! Depressed and downhearted, they are still passive and inactive. Hitler’s victory was easy sailing for him – after years of treachery by the Social Democracy and criminal blunders on the part of the stalinized Communist party. The workers were left leaderless during the offensive of Fascism against their organizations, living conditions and very lives.
All this disputes the empty and bureaucratic boasting of the Stalinists. They called the Mueller, the Von Papen and Von Schleicher governments – Fascist. Now any worker can see what a real Fascist regime means! They characterized the Social Democratic party – following their master, Stalin – as “social-fascist”, that is Fascists who use socialist phrases. Fascism and social democracy are twins, they shouted; they are not antagonistic and incompatible.
Life itself has answered their stupid theory. Fascism could not tolerate even the cringing, bootlicking servants of capitalism, Social Democracy. For as is well known Social Democracy had its troops in the mass trade unions.
Within these trade unions, Social Democracy had a free rein. The Stalinists organized their pure, “revolutionary” trade unions isolated from the workers. Despite paper resolutions on work in the mass trade unions, no real work was conducted. How could a revolutionary party be effective in such a developed industrial country as Germany with no support among the organized workers, in the trade unions?
 
The United Front
United front of all workers organizations? Never a united front with social Fascists, was the reply of these self-acclaimed leaders of the workers. The Socialist workers are being won over ... the united front only “from below” is having great success ... the Communist party has as many workers following it – claimed Thaelmann after the elections of July 1933 – as the Social Democratic party ... Hitler could not last for any length of time. Such were the reports spread by the self-satisfied Stalinist apparatus.
By their policies they played into the hand of the Social Democratic leaders and the Fascists. The Socialist leaders were able to keep control over their members; the latter had no confidence whatever in the Stalinists. The Fascists were able to utilize this sharp division within the working class.
The working class of Germany and the workers of the entire world suffered a serious and historical defeat. It is not a question of weeks before the working class movement will once again arise. The small heroic illegal Communist and revolutionary socialist groups functioning in Germany are isolated from the masses. It will take time before the workers once again organize their forces, their trade unions and party.
 
Fascism Doomed
But struggle they will, struggle they must! Fascism cannot solve the crises of capitalism – it can postpone the decisive struggle, it can make the road costlier and harder. The decisive problem is the re-assembling of the truly revolutionary forces for the construction of a new Communist party in Germany – a section of the new international Communist party. Towards this end all militant workers must bend their efforts. By this means the bloody barbarous regime of the German Nazis will be crushed and the way paved for a Soviet Germany.
 



“But the Austrian workers had drawn a lesson from the German events, a lesson that every worker must learn. They chose to die fighting on the barricades rather than to be tortured in the Fascist camps.”
Who penned this unquestionably correct lesson from the German events? None other than those who shout from the roof-tops that the German workers should not have fought, that the Communist party did not have a majority of the workers behind it, that armed resistance to the Fascist mob would have been a putsch! None other than the Stalinist editorial writer of the Daily Worker (Feb. 14, 1934) who only yesterday fulminated against the “counter-revolutionary Trotskyists” who have the audacity to say that the Communist Party of Germany, which had a parliamentary strength of six millions, should have fought a defensive struggle against Hitlerism!
What happens to this bookish strategy of revolution (or rather retreat) of the Stalins, Heckerts and Piatnitskys? These “generals” have clearly (?) explained that without a majority of the workers behind the revolutionary party, armed struggle against Fascism was impossible, futile and counter-revolutionary!
After the German defeat, the American Stalinists were quiet for a few days – Pravda had not yet given them the line! Today they write voluminously – following the Pravda editorials! “The Social Democratic workers of Austria, abandoned by their leaders, are carrying on their struggles with supreme courage and devotion”, writes Pravda (Feb. 14). If it appears that the leaders called the general strike, that some of them are on the barricades, all this must be “overlooked”. They do not like the facts, because they do not fit their theories. So they invent others. “The Social Democratic Leaders Are Alreday Coming to Terms with the Dollfuss Government” runs the subhead of the Daily Worker report of the Pravda editorial (Feb. 14, 1934 – Special Edition). Without any proofs being offered!
“The devoted fighters for their class, the Austrian Communists, are in the front ranks of the present struggle. The small Austrian Communist Party has given thousands of fearless fighters to this struggle, fighters who are leading tens of thousands of workers in heroic struggle,” writes Pravda. That Communist workers are active in the fighting is undoubtedly true: but that the non-existent Communist Party of Austria, wiped out without leaving a trace by the Dollfuss government months ago, is leading the struggle is a lie made out of whole cloth.
What happens to the theory of “social-Fascism”? Like all the spurious theories of Stalinism it goes up the chimney with all their other rubbish. The fact that Social Democracy and Fascism are irreconcilable is once again proved by life itself. This does not disturb the equanimity of the Stalinists: so much the worse for the facts – they still persist in their theory!
The fact that the leaders of the Austrian Social Democracy by their whole course since the World War have paved the way for reaction and Fascism is indisputable. Their support of Dollfuss’ emergency decree was a result of their programmatic bourgeois democratic viewpoint: Dollfuss was the “lesser evil (as compared to the Nazis). This permitted Dollfuss and the Nazis to consolidate their forces. Their threat of a general strike “if and when” legality was violated by Dollfuss was a logical outcome of their “constitutional” program. Instead of putting it on this basis, the bureaucratic Stalinists turn the entire question on its head. Their whole emphasis is placed under the purely secondary consideration of the personal cowardice of the individual leaders of the Austrian Social Democracy.
By such methods the Stalinists are alienating the Socialist workers. instead of clear-cut explanation of the facts – distortions, fabrications, stupid boastings as to the activities of the non-existent Austrian Communist Party. And yet they shout with added emphasis for a “united front with the Socialist workers.” What hypocritical gestures!
The Daily Worker of Feb. 14th carries an appeal of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the U.S.A. for a demonstration that day (Wednesday) before the Austrian consulate at 4 P.M. It appeals to all workers, particularly Socialist workers. The conscientious Stalinist worker is attracted by the apparently militant tone of the call. The Socialist worker reading the appeal grits his teeth at these professional splitters. For the Socialist Party, and several of its sympathetic organizations, had already made public its call for a demonstration for the same day at the same place at 5 P.M.! Not a word of this is mentioned in the Stalinist appeal! No attempt is made to appeal to the New York City Central Committee of the Socialist party for a united front demonstration !
At the demonstration itself the Stalinists behaved in a shameful manner. The misled Stalinist workers shouted “Socialists and Communists unite and fight!” but time after time their leaders disrupted the orderly procession of the demonstrators. Fist fights between Socialists and Stalinists were barely avoided. After some time, through the intervention of a member of the Communist League, the heads of the Socialist and Stalinist steering committees met and agreed to the demand of the Stalinists that their banner be at the head of the parade with the Socialist banners. But even this was not sufficient for the Stalinists.
Various of their leaders, including Norman Tallentire, ran up and down the line of march calling on the Stalinists’ workers to break their lines and get near the beginning of the parade! Here again fist fights were barely avoided.
The Stalinists repel the Socialist workers by such tactics at a time when it is a dire class need that a united front of all workers’ organizations be formed which will rally behind the heroic Austrian working class. Time presses.
 



With the recent struggle of the heroic Austrian workers, and the militant demonstrations of the French masses before our eyes, the historical significance of the Paris Commune of 1871 takes on increased importance. When on March 18th we commemorate the seventy-one days of workers’ rule in Paris we at the same time pledge ourselves to carry on the innumerable struggles of the revolutionary toilers for class emancipation. We gain inspiration for our battle from the Communards of ’71, the Russian Revolution of 1905, the glorious Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, the heroic January days of the German Spartacus in 1919, the courageous battles of the Bavarian and Hungarian workers of 1920, the self-sacrificing struggle of the Austrian workers in 1933.
Through all these events, and countless others, we learn the brutal and murderous character of capitalist rule. To defend the profits of the few, to keep the workers in subjection, to perpetuate capitalism, the modern slave-holding class resorts to the most violent means at its disposal. Those) who dare threaten its power are met by the armed forces which exist for its defense.
 
The Rise of the Commune
The Paris Commune of 1871 arose as a reply to the provocation of the national government of France. The government which had come to power on the basis of the popular republican revolution in September 1870 at the termination of the Franco-Prussian War, secretly planned to disarm the revolutionary Parisian workers organized in the National Guard. The workers responded by abolishing the old officialdom, the bureaucracy and the standing army and making the National Guard, which was open to all workers, the only military force in Paris. The executive and legislative functions of government were united in the Commune.
This revolutionary act was in open defiance of the existing democracy which by universal suffrage had elected the national government of Versailles. Let the worshippers of bourgeois democracy who give lip service to the struggle of the Communards reconcile this “anti-democratic” action with their own fine-spun theories! Their fore-runners, such as Louis Blanc and his kind, self-avowed socialists, were active in the camp of the reactionary Versailles government.
The Commune had proceeded to pave the way to a classless society.
“Its special measures could but betoken the tendency of a government of the people, by the people. Such were the abolition of the night-work of journeymen bakers; the prohibition, under penalty, of the employers’ practice to reduce wages by levying upon their workpeople fines under manifold pretexts – a process in which the employer combines in his own person the parts of legislator, judge, and executioner, and filches the money to boot Another measure of this class was the surrender, to associations of workmen, under reserve of compensation, of all workshops and factories, no matter whether the respective capitalists had absconded or preferred to strike work.” (Karl Marx)
The church was separated from the state, the pawn shops were abolished, plans were made for cooperative production for the benefit of the real producers, the workers.
 
Mistakes of the Commune
Under the conditions these plans were never executed. The Versailles government launched a military attack on the Commune and the foremost task was that of revolutionary defense. Mistakes were made by the Communards, such as the failure to commence a military offensive against Versailles, the failure to take over the national bank and the hurried transfer of power from the Central Committee of the National Guard to an elected Commune. These mistakes, while directly the consequences of the practices of the parties in the Commune, the followers of Proudhon and the Blanquists, were fundamentally, a reflection of the backwardness of the conditions of capitalism for successful working class revolution. The Parisian workers of 1871 were artisans, journeymen, and employees in small factories. A sound revolutionary party, the indispensable weapon for victorious working class revolution, could only develop on the basis of mass production, large scale industry and through varied experiences of class struggles.
Courageously the Parisan workers fought for the defense of their Commune. The forces against them were too great. Thousands were killed on the field of battle. Other thousands, men, women and children were captured, tortured and murdered in the most brutal fashion.
 
Heirs of the Communards
The militant working class inherits the revolutionary traditions of the Communards. The Russian workres absorbing the lessons of this struggle forged the Bolshevik party, organized Soviets, established the Russian Commune, the dictatorship of the working class. The spokesmen for capitalism openly inherit the traditions of the bloody assassinators of the Communards. They do not attempt to hide the murderous character of the suppression of the Paris Commune. They defend the vise of all means which perpetuate capitalism.
It is not through peaceful methods that these bloody oppressors will be overthrown. The American master class will undoubtedly employ the most violent means to continue their bankrupt robber system. American labor history is replete with instances of the use of the armed forces against strikers and! workers’ demonstrations.
 
The Party – the Instrument of Struggle
We must reply by forging our own instrument of struggle, a revolutionary party which through the battles of today can lead the workers to the decisive class conflict. In the present epoch, when all the material conditions are ripe for a socialist transformation of society, it is the revolutionary party, uniting the most advanced and experienced militants, bound by a common program and steeled in a common struggle which is the decisive factor.
The absence of such a party in Germany resulted in the victory of Fascism; in Austria, the bloody slaughter of the militant workers preparatory to a full Fascist regime. Fascism, the most violent weapon of capitalism, is growing in all capitalist countries. At the same time imperialist war looms as an imminent threat to the entire world. Workers’ Russia, the inheritor of the Paris Commune, is in danger of military attack.
The true continuators of the heroic traditions of the Paris Commune have one and only one course to follow: to take their place in the great movement now being carried on for the construction of a world party of revolution – the Fourth International – which can inspire the workers in struggle, give them guidance and leadersihp, insure the final emancipation of the working class, and with it the whole of humanity.
 



Lenin
by R. Palme Dutt
96 pp. London. Hamish Hamilton. 50¢.
Many biographies have been written of Lenin. The book under review, however, has a number of distinguishing traits. The author tells us in the introduction that
“... the study of Lenin’s life and work is only of value, not as an idle exercize in worship or denigration, in academic history or subjective criticism, but as a direct assistance in understanding the objective historical movement and in relation to the urgent world problems and tasks confronting us today” (p.8).
The careful reader approaches the book with a bit of caution; R. Palme Dutt is a leader of the British Stalinist Party! Yet the result is almost amazing. Lenin’s teachings are presented in complete abstraction from the more immediate “world problems and tasks confronting us today”; not a line is devoted to the disputes and events which have wracked the world communist movement for the past eleven years and led to the destruction of the revolutionary Third International; the names of Stalin and Trotsky are completely omitted in a biography of Lenin! Such is the legal Marxism of R. Palme Dutt.
In succinct form the author presents a popular sketch of the main teachings of Lenin, The Epoch of Lenin, The Life of Lenin, The Teachings of Lenin and The Heir of Lenin – the Communist International. The first chapter is reminiscent of the writings of Max Beer. Lenin is placed against the background of the development of Marxism. With broad strokes, the origin and teachings of Marx and Engels are excellently summarized in a few brief pages. The second chapter traces the struggle of Lenin for a Bolshevik party against the Russian “legal Marxists”, the “Economists”, and the Mensheviks. Discussing his defense of revolutionary internationalism during the World War and the Russian October, Dutt emphasizes Lenin’s conception that “the victory of the Bolshevik revolution in Russia was the opening, the first stage, of the world socialist revolution” (p.54).
No less popular is his chapter The Teachings of Lenin. Here he again gives prominence to the internationalist character of Lenin’s teachings. Indicating that dialectic materialism is at their foundation, the author presents Lenin’s views on imperialism, on The Chief Task of Our Times – The World Revolution, the dictatorship of the proletariat, the national and colonial problems, and the tactics and organization of the Revolution.
Nowhere does he openly defend the fundamental Stalinist conceptions. He presents Lenin’s teachings as though nothing had happened to them in the past decade. Let us briefly examine several of these controversial problems.
What has Dutt to say on the theory of completing a socialist society in one country (Russia) alone? In his chapter on the teachings of Lenin, not a word! Yet this, according to Stalin, is a fundamental teaching of Lenin.
But Dutt covers himself in two ways: first, by stating that he cannot cover all the questions, as for example the problems of socialist construction in the Soviet Union and second, by this innocuous reference in his chapter on the life of Lenin :
“In the spring of 1923 came a second and heavier attack. In May 1923, he wrote his last article, on Coöperation, pointing the way forward to ‘the establishment of a fully socialized society’ for which ‘we have all the means requisite’. ‘Of course we have not yet established a socialist society, but we have all the means requisite for its establishment.’ The unequal battle for life and consciousness dragged on over months. On January 21, 1924, he died” (p.61).
Dutt correctly presents Lenin’s article On Cooperation as an incidental writing. Stalin basis his entire revisionist theory on this article. Is Dutt unaware of the dispute and its import? Of course not! He prefers the role of a Legal Marxist in the camp of Stalinism!
In the section on National and Colonial Liberation Dutt does not even mention the Stalinists’ slogan of “the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry”, their conception of the alliance with the colonial bourgeoisie or their attitude towards workers’ and peasants’ parties. In a word, he closes his eyes to the experiences of China and India; he completely disregards the colonial theses of the Third International! For according to the Stalinists the slogan for a non-socialist “democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry” applies to all colonial and semi-colonial countries (China, India, Latin America, etc), to capitalist nations like Spain, and to such an imperialist power as Japan. And Dutt claims to expound the views of Lenin “in relation to the urgent world problems and tasks confronting us today”!
In order to avoid this paramount problem Dutt presents the disputes in the Russian social democracy in 1905 as merely between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks. How about Trotsky’s theory of the permanent revolution, his slogan for a workers’ government? The British Stalinist, Ralph Fox, in his recent biography of Lenin, fulminates against Trotsky on this and other scores. Dutt remains completely silent. Is this a “legal” protest against the historical abominations of Fox and other Stalinist scribblers?
Nor does Dutt fail to avoid the important problems of the trade unions and the united front. Surely such questions deserve at least a paragraph or so in even a brief sketch of Lenin. But to touch these problems would mean to state Lenin’s conceptions as against the Stalinists’ views or openly to avow Stalinism. Dutt preferred silence. Cowardly silence on the burning problems of the day.
The most important event since the Russian revolution and the founding of the Communist International, the victory of Fascism in Germany, is treated in an “optimistic” manner.
“‘Life will assert itself.’ In this basic understanding Lenin proclaimed his confidence in the final victory of the world socialist revolution, despite all reverses and temporary defeats, exemplified today in the temporary rule of Fascism in Germany, which can only pave the way for a new and deeper and finally victorious revolutionary upheaval.” (p.91.)
However, this historically true statement is meaningless unless its author offers a world workers’ party based on revolutionary Marxism which can lead to final victory. Dutt offers the Communist International of today as the “heir of Lenin”. On what grounds? We have seen how he avoids the fundamental disputes in the world communist movement of the last decade. We need but add that he does not quote a single document dated after 1923! Why should one accept the present Stalin-tern as the inheritor of the revolutionary Communist International of 1919-1923?
(In his bibliography Dutt includes Stalin’s writings and the current periodicals of the Third International. Will this be the reply to the “omissions” in the text?)
R. Palme Dutt has been a “legal Marxist” since the epoch of Stalinism. He has deliberately attempted to avoid the burning questions off the day. Not with complete success. After the victory of Fascism in Germany he whitewashed the Stalinist party of Germany for its capitulation. Now, when efforts are being made to build a Fourth International, a world party of revolutionary Marxism, he distorts the views of the Internationalist-Communists in his Labour Monthly by demagogic blending of the Centrist and the revolutionary movements for a new international.
Dutt’s legal Marxism is comparable to the position of Riazanov in Russia up to several years ago. The latter deliberately divorced himself from the burning political questions of the day in order to popularize the works and teachings of Marx and Engels. He abstained from the factional struggles in the Communist party of the Soviet Union and the Comintern but refused to become a mouth-piece for Stalinism or its cult. But even he could not last: he was framed up and exiled to Siberia.
Dutt is in a more difficult position. He is active in the political movement. His doom as a legal Marxist is a matter of a few months or so. He will be compelled to become an open, consistent and vociferous spokesman of Stalinism or be expelled as ... a counter-revolutionist.
Dutt’s Lenin may well be put on the Stalinist index expurgatorius. Some aspiring Stalinist “theoretician” is sure to review it and find “deviations”, “omissions” and “Trotskyist contraband” within it. Dutt will be compelled to repudiate or revise his writing.
In any case, a biography of Lenin not written in the spirit of the great revolutionist is not merely insufficient but dangerous. The legal Marxism of R. Palme Dutt is a scholarly cover for Stalinist revisionism and treachery.



Once again the noted scholar Doonping tries his hand at “Trotsky-killing” in the current issue of the Communist. While ostensibly discussing the present events in China in relation to the Comintern’s policy there, he devotes most of his time to a ruthless (!) attack on comrade Trotsky and the standpoint of the Left Opposition. But to what avail? Has he not informed us that “the revolutionary proletariat and oppressed masses in the colonies can only laugh at the embarrassment and doomed fate of the these renegades”? (Communist, March 1930) Or is he merely trying to develop the sense of humor of the colonial oppressed? Be that as it may.
Some of the points raised have already been taken up in the Militant, in a reply to Doonping’s previous article. I will therefore limit myself to some of the more outstanding arguments presented.
As to the characterization of the present period in China and the stage of the revolutionary movement Doonping repeats the Stalinist fable about 70,000,000 workers, peasants and soldiers being under Soviet rule in China, led by the Chinese Communist Party. He does not explain or mention the “if this is true” of Stalin, or why the official Party press is compelled to quote the capitalist press in Shanghai on the activities of the peasants in China, that is, activities which the Communist Party, is supposed to be leading: Added to this is the unique statement that “the struggle of the proletariat is no longer lagging behind the forward march of the agrarian revolution.” This light-hearted exaggeration is one of the greatest barriers for a real awakening of the revolutionary spirit of the Chinese proletariat by the Communist Party.
* * * *
Comrade Trotsky, immediately following the Sixth Congress of the Comintern wrote a letter to a comrade in this connection (Militant – 3-15-1929, Some Remarks on the Sixth Congress). There Trotsky speaks of the necessity of transitional demands which would correspond to the objective situation, the “Stolypin period of Chiang Kai-Shek”, in order to arouse the masses in preparation for the organization of Soviets and the proletarian dictatorship. Doonping gets excited about Trotsky’s characterization of the period as the “Stolypin period of Chiang Kai-Shek”. This is interpreted as a belief in a long democratic period for China, as “liquidationism,” etc. Anyone who understands even the broad outlines of Trotsky’s theory of Permanent Revolution (even Doonping’s confused notions of it might suffice!) and its application to the problems of the Chinese Revolution knows how false and intentionally dishonest such an interpretation is. The meaning of Trotsky’s phrase is obvious. Just as the period following the defeats of the Russian Revolution of 1905 was characterized by a depression in the revolutionary mood of the workers and peasants; a period of reaction to which the Bolsheviks, led by Lenin, adapted themselves by raising democratic slogans, fighting for immediate economic interests of the workers, consolidating their forces and preparing the ground for the proletarian revolution, – so it is with the period following the Chinese revolution of 1925-27. The duration of the “Stolypin period,” and even certain of its economic characteristics are obviously not identical when applied to conditions and relation of forces as different as those in Russia after 1905 and China after 1927. To be sure, Doonping is not entirely unaware of this simple fact; but he is cautious enough to omit any acknowledgment of it.
* * * *
Doonping even mistakes the official position of the Comintern as expressed both in its activities in China since 1925 and in the colonial theses adopted at the Sixth World Congress. Instead of the activities of the Communists in the colonies being divided into two stages (struggle for a “bourgeois-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry” and then a proletarian dictatorship) as Doonping would have us believe, the Comintern held that there should be three stages. The two mentioned above were preceded both theoretically i.e., on paper, and practically, by a joint national revolutionary struggle of all “anti-imperialist classes” (i.e. the bourgeoisie, the urban petty bourgeoisie, the peasantry and the proletariat, united into one national organization) (the Kuo Min Tang) which was supposed to struggle against foreign imperialism and for a people’s government. For example, the Enlarged Executive Committee meeting of the Comintern in February-March 1926 stated in its resolution on China:
“The Canton government, which is the vanguard in the liberation struggle of the Chinese people, serves as a model for the future revolutionary-democratic order of the whole country. The Communist Party and the Kuo Min Tang should help in every way to extend the work of democratizing on the lines of the Canton government, freedom of speech, press, assembly, etc.” organizing democratic local organs in the various localities, into agrarian reforms. (Impreccor, Vol. VI No. 40, p. 648)
Doonping very carefully omits this and is thereby able to accuse Trotsky of having “democratic illusions”, of being a “liquidationist” and playing the game of the Left Kuo Min Tang! The Stalinists are trying to forget that period of the Chinese Revolution! But their programmatic and strategical position, as elaborated in the Program and Colonial Theses of the Sixth Congress, basically condones such policies and thereby makes possible or rather, inevitable, debacles in India, Latin America, etc. This in spite of the “Left” tactical changes in India today.
Doonping poses the quintessential question: “What is the difference between the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry and the dictatorship of the proletariat if the proletariat plays the leading role in both? And after “proving” how the Opposition confuses the question by speaking of the “democratic dictatorship” as bourgeois democracy, Doonping adds: “The dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry differs from the dictatorship of the proletariat in the same way as the bourgeois-democratic revolution differs from the proletarian dictatorship”! Here is breath-taking profundity for you! An ordinary polemic seems futile against it, until the next sentence is read:
“Just as there are no ‘pure’ types in the revolutionary process, there is neither ‘pure’ democratic-dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry nor ‘pure’ dictatorship of the proletariat. Whether a government is the one or the other depends upon the relative share of the proletariat, peasantry and city poor in the power of the state, as well as the predominant characteristics of the socio-economic policies of the state which are concrete expressions of the stage the revolution has reached.” (Our emphasis, J.C.)
In the “democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry” of Doonping, the proletariat is to have the hegemony, which means that the first distinction (emphasized in the quotation) is done away with, therefore the real difference must apparently lie in the second, that is, “the predominant characteristics of the socio-economic policies.” In other words, since the socio-economic content is anti-feudal (bourgeois democratic), the regime will have to be a democratic dictatorship. Then what were “the socio-economic policies” of the state in Russia following the October revolution? It executed the tasks of the “democratic revolution” in the agrarian revolution, workers’ control, etc. Then why was it a proletarian revolution? In other words, the Comintern superficially calls for the same kind of revolutionary government in China as came into existence in October 1917 in Russia. Yet in one case, it is called the democratic dictatorship, while in the other, the proletarian dictatorship! Doonping does not answer this question and thereby gives no reply to his own rhetorical question mentioned above.
* * * *
However, the quotation above gives him away. For does it not mean that the “democratic dictatorship” is a form of government where the “relative share ... in the power of the state” of the proletariat is unfavorable as compared to the “peasantry and city poor” (read urban petty bourgeoisie, J.C.)? That is precisely the point! The “democratic dictatorship” in real life means either a proletarian dictatorship or “revolutionary” Wuhan government, a Kerensky regime. And this is why today after the October revolution, after the experiences in China – 1925–27 – the slogan of democratic-dictatorship must be rejected. It leaves the door open for workers’ and peasants’ parties,” for integral unity with the petty bourgeoisie of the “Left” Kuo Min Tang for the establishment of another “Wuhan government”, or even worse traps for the proletariat.
* * * *
However for China the question has special significance. The interconnection between the gentry and the city capitalists, the intricate relation between the usurer, – who is one of the chief exploiters of the poor peasantry – and the town and city, the relation between the rich peasantry (kulak) and the poor peasantry the intimate economic and political relations between the native bourgeoisie and foreign capital, make the character of even the first stage of the revolution, anti-bourgeois, i.e. socialist, as well as anti-feudal. That is the agrarian revolution and the democratic revolution in the cities, cannot be carried out without at the same time encroaching on bourgeois property rights. The Comintern leadership, which even as late as the Sixth Congress laughed at the idea of a “kulak question” in China now calls for leadership of the “poor and middle peasants” (as a matter of fact the latter form an insignificant part of the peasantry) instead of its previous slogan of the struggle of the “whole peasantry’’ in the revolution. The Canton uprising of December 1927 was a direct proof of the contention of the Left Opposition; the proletariat in face of the Comintern’s official standpoint, was immediately compelled to make inroads on bourgeois property rights.
Doonping repeats the wisdom borrowed by Stalin-Kuusinen from Kamenev in 1917 about the democratic revolution “peacefully growing into” the proletarian dictatorship. How this is to take place neither Stalin, Kuusinen nor, to drop a few pegs, Doonping tells us. All we are told is that it will not be a “violent revolution”, that there will be “a continuity of ‘government’” with a “gradual progressive shifting of the class forces” (p. 1025) And all this is handed out as Marxism, as Leninism! It runs directly counter to the Marxist view of the role of the state in a revolution; it is almost word for word a repetition of the phrase-mongerings of the “Left” Social Democracy. Even a casual perusual of Lenin’s State and Revolution should make this clear even to a Doonping! A peaceful growing over of the “bourgeois democratic revolution,” characterized by its anti-feudal social content, to a socialist phase can only take place as two stages of the proletarian dictatorship.
Nevertheless let us see how and when this “growing into” is scheduled to take place. The colonial theses states:
“As in all colonies and semi-colonies, so also in China, the development of productive forces and the socialization of labor stands at a comparatively low level. This circumstance, together with the fact of foreign domination and also the presence of powerful relics of feudalism and pre-capitalist relations, determines the character of the immediate stage of the revolutionary movement of these countries. In the revolutionary movement of these countries we have to deal with the bourgeois democratic revolution, i.e., of the stage signifying the preparation of the prerequisites for the proletarian dictatorship and socialist revolution.”
In other words, the present stage is to be a prolonged one, for surely it would take some time for such “minimum prerequisites” for a proletarian dictatorship to develop. This paraphrasing of Kautsky Plechanov, Martov, and Co., about the “absence of minimum prerequisites for a proletarian dictatorship and socialist revolution,” is a result of the logic of the Stalin-Buchaarin theory of national socialism that is, state power should be taken by the proletariat only where it has the possibilities of developing a complete national socialist economy (where it has “the material prequisites for the building of socialism”). We can reply to such arguments in the same manner as Lenin answered the pseudo-Marxists of 1917: Since the entire world has the material prerequisites for socialism (as Kautsky had already stated in 1909, in his Path to Power) the question is not whether an individual country is ripe for socialism, but rather this: Are the conditions present for the leadership of the peasantry by the proletariat so as to make the revolution in that country a link in the chain of the world proletarian revolution? (The Proletarian Revolution and Kautsky the Renegade, Lenin)
At the Sixth Congress the confusion wrought by the Comintern’s theories and policies on the colonial question was especially reflected in the discussion on the question of the so-called “growing into”. Neumann – who at the time of the Canton uprising saw in it the ending of the “bourgeois-democratic” and the beginning of the proletarian revolution, that is, the actual “growing into” – stated that the “mutation” (”growing over”) is a question, of the relation of forces; is “decided by the struggle.” A number of other speakers expressed similar views. This is obviously a repudiation of the “minimum prerequisite” theory. Kuusinen, the author of the colonial theses, polemized against the latter and reiterated the formulation of the theses.
Since then little progress has been made in clarifying the question; on the contrary more confusion has been injected by the “Left” turn after the Sixth Congress. For example an editorial in Pravda stated: “Changsha under the Soviet rule means the proletarian revolution in South China has captured its first big town”! (Our emphasis, J.C., quoted in Daily Worker – 3-16-30) What does Doonping think of the slogan in the October 12th statement of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party: “Long live the socialist revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasants of China”! (My emphasis. – J.C., Daily Worker – 12-2-30) To us this is but an added sign of the confusionist and bankrupt position of the Comintern. And even after Doonping’s article under consideration appeared, peculiarly enough, confusion still exists!
However, nothing seems to deter Doonping! He continues to make logical (!) the illogical; shatters the illusions and false views of the reader! “It is sometimes erroneously assumed that there can only be Soviets in a proletarian revolution” and then he adds that this is wrong because Lenin spoke about the propaganda for the idea of Soviets for the East as early as the Second Congress of the Comintern. Perfect! What happened in 1926–27 to Lenin’s advice on China? In May 1927, that is, seven years after Lenin’s speech, the Plenum of the E.C.C.I., in its decision on China stated: “... With the development of the revolution, when it begins to change from a democratic into a socialist revolution it will be necessary to set up Soviets of Workers’, Peasants’ and Soldiers’ deputies, (as) the slogan of the Party”. And the Stalinist specialist on China at that time commented:
“The proposal to organize Soviets sounds very Left Wing. In the tenth year of existence of the Proletarian Republic we cannot regard the Soviets merely (!) as a form of organization and mobilization of the masses. The Soviets live in the eyes of humanity as an incarnation of proletarian dictatorship. The organization of Soviets can be advocated only when it is a question of undertaking the revolution, under the leadership of the proletariat, with the purpose of establishing a new proletarian government. Otherwise to advocate Soviets is merely playing with words or deception pure and simple.” (War – the Communist International Position, by A.J. Bennett.)
“It is sometimes erroneously assumed”! We are literally at a loss for words. And by whom has this erroneous assumption been made? It was made by the Comintern spokesman of an earlier “period.” And not by Bennett alone, but by the sacrosanct Stalin himself, to saying nothing of the official theses of the C.I. To quote Bennett, then, we would say that not only Doonping but also his teachers in the international Stalinist apparatus are either “playing with words or deception pure and simple.” They are adept at both.
 



The Young Vanguard, the voice of the Left Opposition youth, is henceforth going to appear as a regular monthly section of the Militant. Through these columns we will endeavor to speak to the youth leaguers, as well as to the general working youth, on the problems and tasks of the young workers and their vanguard, the Communist youth; to rally them around the banner of the Communist League of America (Opposition). The need for an organ which would be the “collective organizer” of the working youth, by reflecting their every day life and struggles: by disseminating elementary Marxist education; through articles on fundamental Communist youth tasks and policies, is exceptionally acute today when the potentialities far outstrip the actualities.
To this end, to help the communist youth movement to create such an organ – we make our beginning with a section in the Militant. Readers of these lines should send in contributions. Youth leaguers, young workers, students write!
* * *
On February 5, in Philadelphia, Pa., two members of the Young Communist League, Tess Ryder and Anna Lynn were tried and convicted of sedition. The offense consisted in distributing leaflets for a Liebknecht anti-war meeting to the Philadelphia National Guardsmen. The indictment however is much more serious: It aims at the illegalization of the Young Communist League and through it of all workers organizations. It reads: “Anna Lynn did unlawfully become a member of an assembly, society, or group, called the Young Communist League of Philadelphia, Pa., of which the policies and purposes are seditious.”
Why now, more than ever since the 1919–20 Palmer raids, is the offensive of the bosses intensified, especially against the Communists? Why the taking away of second class mailing privileges from the Young Worker, Vida Obrero, Revolutionary Age and the Young Comrade? Why the attempts to outlaw the Communist movement? The party and league officials answer in unison: Because we are a mass movement; as a war maneuver against the Soviet Union. The first reason has only one weakness – it is untrue. The party still has not gotten completely out of its swaddling clothes. The League is insignificant. The second reason given, while containing some truth, does not however hit the basic point. The attack on the workers’ press, the attempt to illegalize the Communist movement is an organic and inseparable part of the general offensive of the capitalist class against the workers. The bosses, who are trying to get out of the present crises at the expense of the workers – which means lowering of wages, worsening of conditions of labor, greater speed-up, mass unemployment – understand that the workers will make desperate efforts to resist. From this they conclude that a vigorous offensive against the working class, especially the Communist, organizations is on the order of the day. In a word, the possibilities for the growth and expansion of the party and league, due to the deep-growing discontent of the workers exist and all means are and will be taken to crush these organizations, that is, so as to be able more ruthlessly, and unchallenged to exploit the workers. This explains the attack on the League, on the Young Worker, etc.
The workers should answer this challenge with a broad united front. The party and league can lead such a movement only with correct strategy and tactics. The League, especially, is now accorded an opportunity to get out of its sectarian isolation, to make contact with the mass of youth workers, in a word, to become a mass Communist youth league. At present, the calling of youth united front conferences for the defense of the Young Worker, for the defense of comrades Ryder and Lynn should be taken as a first step.
 
Hear! Hear!
The Young Worker of February 16, informs us: “Comrade Minerich, who is now in the Pittsburg district, writes us something which we want to call to the attention of the whole League. A notice appeared sometime ago in this column about two new units in East Ohio. Comrade Minerich, going thru this section, found that the two ‘new units’ were merely hopes; they didn’t exist. We warn the comrades that we will expose every exaggerated report sent into the National Office.” (Pg. 6.) Hear, hear! comrade. We’ll do our bit to enforce this warning!
 



The present pre-conference discussion will have to thoroughly evaluate the work of the period since our last convention, our accomplishments, shortcomings and mistakes, our past and present perspectives and tactics. In this way the second national conference of our League will be able to see clearly our possibilities and tasks.
This article will confine itself primarily to the thesis proposed by the National Committee for the present discussion.
The thesis marks a decided step forward from the platform accepted at our first conference (May 1929). At that time, the first cadres of the Opposition had been expelled from the party and League. Our leading comrades had not yet succeeded in separating themselves from former associations, views, tactics and perspectives which they had held as a group in the party (Cannon group). Our platform was therefore permeated, and understandingly so. with these “vestigials”. It was formulated with references to the former policies of “our group” (Cannon group), the “proletarian character” of the Foster group, etc.
On the important question of the perspective of a long and inevitable period of social reformism and the organization of a national labor party, the thesis states:
“The Left Opposition, at its formative stage, leaned in the direction of this reformist perspective which constituted to a certain extent an uncritical carry-over of the preceding group struggle in the party, prior to the time when the Left wing took shape and was established as a political grouping distinct from all the others in the movement.” (My emphasis – J.C.)
“Leaned in the direction of”? Is there any doubt as to our previous position? The importance of the question requires a more categorical statement of change.
 
Change on Labor Party
It will be recalled that during the first pre-conference discussion and at the conference itself, the leading comrades not only stressed the correctness of the slogan for a labor party, but offered as their strongest argument its so-called “inevitableness”. Our platform stated: “ – the propaganda slogan (of a labor party) must be really revived and as soon as it has found roots in the masses and their experiences in the struggle it must become an agitational and finally an action slogan”. Why is this slogan necessary? “It is not reasonable to expect that the masses of the American workers, who are still tied ideologically and politically to the bourgeois parties, will come over to the Communist Party politically at one step (!) in a period not immediately revolutionary” the platform replied. Wherein does this position of the inevitability of the labor party, and the need for Communist leadership of the movement in this direction, differ from the present Lovestone position? Not in a hair’s breath!
The change on the question of “radicalisation” is likewise a step forward.
Further. The present theses no longer speaks of “our group” position previous to the actual organization of the Left Opposition. That is, we are no longer the “Cannon group” (in the historical sense). In fact, the abandonment of the above position on the future of reformism in the United States marks an important departure from that group’s position.
The thesis states: “The unevenness of social development rendered particularly acute and jerky in the present epoch of imperialism, may easily advance the United States toward the head of the list.” The thesis in attempting to take sharp issue with the general conception of the American Communist movement that the revolution in the United States is a thing of the distant future, exaggerates the state of affairs. The essential truth of the statement lies in the fact that revolutionary upheavals in Europe which characterize post-war imperialism considerably hasten the forces making for revolution in this country. However, the probability of the situation, and that is precisely what we should base our perspectives on, is that the proletarian revolution will first come in Europe; a Soviet United States of Europe will be formed which will find itself in irreconcilable conflict with reactionary capitalist United States. This perspective outlined with such lucidity by comrade Trotsky in Europe and America (1926) still holds good today.
A few brief comments on some of the smaller shortcomings of the thesis.
The first section mentions in disconnected form the position of France in Europe today. Instead of showing the importance of this position (the last important capitalist country to enter the crisis, its immense stock of gold) the thesis rests satisfied with the mere statement of it. It should be clearly stated that France is becoming ever more nn outstanding creditor nation; that on the European continent it is more and more replacing England as a creditor; that this promises future serious conflict between France and the United States.
The section of the thesis which polemizes against the Stalinist conception of a narrowing of the “base for social reformism” should be strengthened along the following lines: The party leadership confuses the ground or base for the growth of social reformism with the “social basis” for it. The latter which rests on the ability of American capitalism to bribe sections of the working class is undoubtedly becoming even more limited. But the basis for the growth of social reformism is more than that. (We are speaking of its growth among the working class only.) It feeds on the first signs of the awakening of class consciousness of the workers as well as the blunders and mistakes of the Communists. The mechanical “economic determinist” interpretation of the Stalinists, of course, leads to serious tactical mistakes. The thesis, while essentially correct should include the above thought. The Economic Crisis
On the present economic crisis, the thesis states: “The present crisis is distinguished from many which preceded it in the history of capitalist production by its virtually planetary character” is this correct? No. This is not sufficient. The thesis should state clearly and with emphasis that the present economic crisis develops on the basis of the post-war crisis of imperialism. One can, of course, find the essential features of the latter mentioned in various sections of the thesis. But this is insufficient. They should be enumerated as part of a whole. At this time, I will not attempt to discuss the prospects of the American crisis.
Comrade Field in his article on The Meaning of the American Crisis (which we intend returning to at some other time) tells us that there is a contradiction in the thesis when it states: (1) that America will get itself out of the crisis, and (2) “the prospect of struggles ahead that will increase in breadth and depth and militancy”. Although there is absolutely no contradiction between the two statements, the thesis is undoubtedly incomplete on this important question.
The thesis correctly states that the American workers, because of the absence of struggles – and therefore defeats – in the previous period will have vitality for militant struggle. But – and this is unfortunately overlooked – these struggles are primarily defensive. Can we expect the present defensive struggles of the workers to be converted into the counter-offensive against the capitalists during the present crisis? It is hardly likely. Comrade Field implies that a liquidation of the crisis means a perspective of decreasing battles. On the contrary, the re-entrance of workers into industry – that is, the beginnings of economic revival – when they are materially more secure, morally stronger, a decreased unemployment, will mark the beginning of the counter-offensive of the workers. The thesis should contain this important thought.
 



Amidst the fires and flames of World War, at a time when international socialism had collapsed, the national socialist parties had (with few brilliant exceptions) turned social-imperialist, the socialist youth assembled at Berne, Switzerland, unfurled the banner of proletarian internationalism. It was there, in April 1915, that the first Sunday of every September was set aside for the mobilization of the working youth against capitalist militarism and war.
The kindled sparks served as torches to light up the path towards proletarian revolution. The socialist youth, actively aided by the Bolsheviks, inspired by Lenin, Liebknecht, and Luxemburg, courageously led the struggle against opportunism and social patriotism. Hand in hand with the revolutionary socialists of the social democratic parties it forged ahead, organized Left wings, held demonstrations, defended the principles of revolutionary Marxism.
The victorious October gave unprecedented impetus to this development. In November 1919, in Berlin, a few months after the Comintern had been formed, amidst tumult and uncertainty, victories and defeats, the Young Communist International was born. Continuing the best traditions of the Socialist Youth International, it made International Youth Day a living expression of its anti-militarist work. The traditions of I.Y.D. were enrichened, made more glorious, enshrined in the heart of every young revolutionist. Growing thousands of youth rallied to the call of the Y.C.I. against militarism, armaments, war. The fight against militarism was intimately connected with the struggle against wage slavery, with the winning of the youth for Communism. The Y.C.I. was becoming the acknowledged leader of the international proletarian youth.
Today more than ever since the last war, the need for systematic anti-militarist work exists. The present worldwide economic crisis compels the imperialist powers to intensify their search for new markets. The increased armaments, the numerous peace conferences, the wide spread militarization of the youth, the offensive of the capitalist governments against the Communists, the divers campaign against the Soviet Union are a few of the outstanding signs of the day.
Are the Leagues prepared to play the same role that the socialist youth did in the last war? Can they mobilize the youth for the defense of the Soviet Union? Will they be able to carry on a revolutionary struggle against their own capitalist class?
The absence of systematic and effective anti-militarist activity, and the virtual sterility of the Leagues caused by the revisionist theories, false strategy and tactics and bureaucratic regime predominating in the International Communist movement, spell a serious danger. Just as in 1915, the revolutionary socialist youth, who were in the forefront in the struggle against militarism, led the fight against opportunism in the revolutionary ranks, so today the Communist youth should rally around the Left Opposition in its struggle for revolutionary Marxism, against opportunism, for the regeneration of the Communist movement.
We should greet the seventeenth International Youth Day – resolved to emulate the young comrades who came before us; to carry on their work until final victory.

Young Communists! Struggle for the unity of the Communist youth movement! For the unity of the world Communist movement!
 
Against opportunism! For revolutionary Marxism!
 
Young Communists, young workers, young students! Demonstrate on September 8th against capitalist militarism and war!

 



Our Youth Thesis
The August 15th issue of the Militant contained the thesis on the youth question proposed for our pre-conference discussion by the National Youth Committee and the National Committee. To date we have had only one discussion article on it.
What do the other youth comrades think about the thesis? Is it adequate? Are we too modest in our proposed steps?
How about the adult comrades? Are they frankly disinterested? Or perhaps skeptical about all youth work?
Both youth and adult comrades should send critical articles on the thesis to the Militant. In this way the coming Conference will be in a better position to make plans for our activity among the young workers.
* * * *
The Y.C.L.
The Young Communist League districts are again making plans. This decision was arrived at following the letter of the Y.C.L. to its sixth Convention which apparently served as a substitute (!) for a youth thesis. It makes one sick to read this letter (Young Worker – 8-31-31).
Once again we hear about “‘Left’ and Right deviations”, “failure to” do this, that and the other thing, incorrect leadership, “we must”, etc., etc. It is an identical repetition of the Y.C.I. letters of the last few years. The proposals are the same. For example: “The ‘arm chair’ system of work, the making up of unpractical bureaucratic plans of work must be done away with. At the same time it ts necessary to decisively remove from the leadership those elements that have become bureaucratic and are incapable of struggling in practise for the line of the Y.C.I.”! A novel suggestion indeed!
Everyone was frightened. Some districts started “plans” without figures! The Chicago district put for itself the goal, among numerous other things, of 150 new members in the next three months. The N.E.C. criticized this as too modest. If the number is substantially increased at least one blessing will result: The members of the N.E.C. will not function in the Chicago district!
Neither the Y.C.I. letter nor the Chicago district plan says as much as one word on the need of the education of the youth inside and outside the League!
Our youth comrades especially in New York and Chicago should get busy. Speak to the Leaguers; organize them into study groups in Communism, youth problems, or the platform of the Left Opposition.
 



The Draft Thesis on the Youth Question attempts to state in concise terms the position of the youth under capitalism, the need of a Communist youth league, its attitude toward other youth organizations and finally the tasks of the Left Opposition youth. We essayed to include only that which is essential.
The scantiness of the discussion on the youth is one of the none too few signs that there is not enough interest in this field of our work. Among the youth comrades there are many who have never been in the Y.C.L. or carried on activity among young workers; others are too absorbed in the general Opposition activity. The adult comrades also do not appear to understand the importance of youth work.
From this follows the necessity of making the young comrades “youth conscious”; proving to the adult comrades that youth work is essential and can be done. Towards this end, the Draft Thesis proposes: the issuance of an internal youth bulletin, the publication of the Young Vanguard as a semi-monthly section of the weekly Militant on the one hand, and the selection [1] of a National Youth Committee of five, the election of at least one comrade in each branch to be in charge of youth work, the organization of a fraction in the Y.C.L., and the organization wherever possible of a youth club. If this work is successful we will be in a position to issue a separate youth paper by the next conference.
The aim of our youth is “the organization, education and consolidation of a revolutionary, capable, and advanced Communist youth cadre”. In the immediate sense this means the -winning of the Communist youth for the Left Opposition. Through participation in the work and affairs of the Y.C.L., through classes on fundamentals of the Communist youth movement, Communism, Marxism, etc., by spreading the Militant, and our literature we can attract the young Communists. At the same time through open-air meetings, independent work in factories where our young comrades are, and by improving the Young Vanguard, making it more of an educational page we can win young workers who have never gone through the Y.C.L. for Communism. If these activities bear fruit we can be assured of a youth club in at least several of the cities which have functioning branches. In New York, immediately following the Conference it is planned to take steps for the organization of a youth club.
The success of this work depends on first, the participation of all of the youth comrades and second, a clear idea of Communist youth work and our aims and tasks. The Thesis endeavors to answer these questions. An important thought expressed in it is that:
“Limited experience with Communist youth work requires that youth tactics, demands, slogans and special oragniza-tional forms should be put forward not as dogmas or finished products which have universal validity but rather with a view of testing them in practise, examining the results, and (hereby laying the ground for more effective tactics, slogans, etc.”
This, in my opinion, would be ever before us when discussing youth methods and means of work.
The old slogan of the Young Communist International “Clarity and Action’’ should be revived. The educational and cultural character of the youth emphasized in the thesis. We should not forget that “Communist training and education requires the intimate linking up of the theoretical with the practical, the studygroup with the field of the class struggle”. It falls upon us to carry out as much of this work as our forces will permit.
Comrade Bord (Shortcomings in the Youth Thesis, Militant, 8-22-31) takes us to task for a number of omissions and commissions in the thesis. I will briefly touch on the points raised.

The thesis treats “the youth as though it were some queer product of society complete in itself, and having no relation to anything else.”! If this were so then it would be wrong to say, as comrade Bord does in her opening sentence, that “The thesis on the youth question on the whole treats the problem well.” On the contrary, I would favor the complete rejection of such a thesis.

But fortunately the criticism cannot be accepted. Throughout the thesis, it is stressed that the youth is a section of the working class, that the problems of the class are the problems of the section, etc. In the section on Youth in America it is explained in some detail. In fact, the first sentence of the thesis reads: “Capitalism draws the youth of the proletarian families into the productive process.” Does this imply a “queer product of society complete in itself, and having no relation to anything else”?
 
The slogan of “equal pay for equal work”. The thesis does not enumerate any youth demands. We intend carrying on a discussion after the Conference, on this question in our internal youth bulletin. At the same time I would like to comment as follows: The above demand was taken from the program of the Y.C.I. which holds good for European conditions. As a general demand in this country it is wrong because (1) in unskilled trades, automobile, textile, coal, etc., there is little wage discrimination between adult and youth who do the same work; (2) In other industries, demands for the youth have to be formulated on the basis of the specific conditions and position, in many of these cases the slogan “Equal pay for equal work” will apply. (3) For workers under 18 years special hours (and therefore labor performed) should be formulated.
 
On the question of youth auxiliaries. The thesis states: “A thorough examination of the functions of Youth auxiliaries and the actual activities of the existing ones is needed. If this is not done, this important part of League activity will continue to yield no results.” In other words we do not come out against all auxiliary youth organizations. Sport clubs united into the Labor Sports Union, under certain conditions, youth educational clubs are accepted forms of auxiliaries. What the thesis takes issue with is the formation of such organizations as the Youth Liberators, the Young Defenders (Youth of the I.L.D.), and Youth Section of International Workers’ Order. These were formed after the Y.C.L. had failed to live up to its task: Become the cultural center and political leader of the youth. Their existence facilitates the conversion of the Y.C.L. into a youth party.

For example, the youth section of the I.W.O. states: “We give expression to the cultural, athletic and social requirements of the youth.” Who will be attracted? Primarily the youth sympathetic to the Left wing and Communist movement; children of adult Communists. These can be won directly to the youth league – assuming correct tactics, organizational methods and leadership.

At the same time we, the Left Opposition youth, should work within these youth auxiliaries and thereby gain contact with the League members and sympathizers.
 
On the other points raised: Work in the Y.C.L., educational work, independent work wherever possible there is general agreement. The National Youth Committee will have to concretize these tasks and outline definite ways of proceeding. The youth comrades will be called upon to aid in this work.


Footnote by ETOL
1. In the printed version this word was “section.”
 

.: Letter on Yalta (May 1945)





Joseph Carter Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers’ Index  |   ETOL Main Page

J.C.
Correspondence
Letter on Yalta
(May 1945)

From New International, Vol. XI No. 4, May 1945, pp. 126–127.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

Dear Editor:
Knowing you as I do, I’m sure you will welcome a bit of criticism of the NI. I refer to the appraisal of the Yalta Conference on the March issue.
“Power ruled ... naked power ... force will decide ... force alone decides.”
And who has this power? This force? Who is flushed with victory? Who has one trump card and another and still a third? STALIN!
What makes matters worse, to bolster the monotonous litany and deepen the political sin, there is dragged in the empirical profundities of Walter Lippmann and other writers for the Herald Tribune and the Saturday Evening Post.
Such a simplified pattern of reasoning may be expected from a Philip Simms or a James Wechsler. Should it be parroted by an exponent of “revolutionary Marxism”?
Certainly Stalin’s troops may soon be in Berlin. Not so long ago Nazi armies scoured over most of Europe. Today the Nazis are being annihilated. Germany from east to west is a shambles. But Russia’s best industrial and agricultural lands also are very thoroughly devastated. Many of the Soviet Union’s largest and oldest cities are utter ruins and it will take years to rebuild the destruction wrought by the war.
It is needless to repeat that the Red Armies, to rout the invader, received not only armaments from the United States and Great Britain but food for themselves and the vast civilian population.
The number of Russia’s casualties is not known, but it is estimated they exceed the combined total of the other belligerent nations. We must bear in mind, too, that Russia still asks for food from the United States, is getting it and must continue to receive it to prevent a famine that would make the bleak years after the last war seem like a picnic.
These are not idle speculations They are the “confessions,” though in more diplomatic language, of representatives and apologists of the Stalin bureaucracy. What, therefore, is more accurately a pinpoint picture of Russia – a picture shorn of all schematicism – of bourgeois hogwash?
Russia is bleeding profusely. As conditions are, the Stalin bureaucracy can look only to Wall Street imperialists for raw materials, machinery, long-term credits, food and other forms of relief to help in the rehabilitation of a ravaged and pillaged country. It must feed 180 hungry millions, among them aged men and women, helpless orphans, incapacitated and incurable veterans by the millions. Trump cards, indeed!
Thus the overstrained observation by the NI that Stalin will be Eastern Europe’s boss upon the close of hostilities and that a deal has been made by the Big Three on that basis is neither convincing nor original. Most of those high-salaried newspaper columnists and radio commentators who offer the “inside of the news” have been edifying their constituents with similar revelations for many months. But anyone who even casually checks their mental excursions knows that they are either fools or plain charlatans and that more often than not the prognostications of these “experts” have no relation to facts.
Would you say that Stalin remained silent while British machine guns mowed down thousands of his own stooges because he wanted to demonstrate to the world the enormity of his strength? Of course you may say correctly that Stalin is an old and callous hand at slaughtering his comrades, but all such acts of murder are committed as a rule to save the Kremlin despotism. Hence the tragic drama in Greece reflected, if anything, not Stalin’s “power,” but his weakness.
In Rumania he has a “friendly” regime but he has not dared to tamper with the capitalist political or economic forms of government. And in Bulgaria his Red Army is helping to maintain the supremacy of the land barons over the peasantry and protecting the few remaining industrialists from the wrath of the masses.
As for Yugoslavia, Tito is unquestionably Stalin’s flunkey. That is why the situation there is peculiarly interesting. Witness, for example, the recent pronouncement of Dr. Ivan Subastich, the country’s Foreign Minister. I do not recall the exact words but the essence was to the effect that he wants for Yugoslavia the kind of government as exists in the United States because, he said, it became the richest and most powerful nation “through its brand of democracy.” What is good for the United States is good for Yugoslavia, he concluded. Not only was this a sharp and unqualified slap at Stalinism, but what followed his statement was even more” impressive. Tito gave the word to the Stalinists to end their criticism of the government and be quiet. More Stalinist power!
At this point a few words about the late Roosevelt will not be amiss. Not only did he know what was in the best interests of American “democratic” capitalism, but he always placed first and above all the welfare of the ruling class and he was by far its ablest spokesman. Nothing that happened since his death has changed the aspirations of American imperialism and his successor is himself no novice at representing Wall Street’s aims. What are these aims?
It would be needless to emphasize here that Wall Street wants economic hegemony over Western Europe and the Pacific areas, as well as the Orient. Yes, and American imperialism seeks financial domination over Eastern Europe, too.
The United States is today the world’s only creditor nation and native big business knows that all countries, large and small, look to it for assistance. Grant to American imperialists a monopoly over foreign trade and they are content to let the other powers fret and haggle over territorial boundaries. That always has been and continues to be the role of U.S. diplomacy.
The late President had said publicly that he favored extradition of German slave labor for reconstruction projects in Russia. Undoubtedly Truman is of the same view. How would that circumstance affect this country? The more manpower Russia can muster for work, the more raw materials and machinery she would require from the United States.
It should be obvious that Donald Nelson, Eric Johnston and other big business leaders did not visit the Soviet Union “for their health or to inspect the Moscow subway.
As an experienced and foresighted politician, Roosevelt patently must have known that Stalin’s imported slave-labor program, while a boon to U.S. business, would win for the Kremlin despot the undying hatred of the majority of the German workers and middle class.
There is no denial that it is not the United States which seeks help for survival from Russia, but that the precise opposite happens to be the case. The Soviet Union is the needy borrower, the U.S the shrewd, cold, calculating lender. Is that significant and all-important factor another indication of Stalin’s “force” and “power”?
 
Twilight of the British Empire
But what about Great Britain and Churchill, “who slumps lower in his chair at each succeeding conference”?
According to the NI, the decadent British Empire is tottering, is on the verge of collapse, is in the twilight of its existence and what-not. The number of prophets who in the last decade predicted the imminent fadeout of the Empire, mounts to Lend-Lease figures. Yet each time that John Bull seemed to be down for the count, he bounced back to his feet and sent fists flying in all directions.
True, Great Britain is financially bankrupt. However, she was insolvent at the close of the last war. Nevertheless, she managed to annex some German colonies and when, in the 1930’s, the crisis seriously dislocated U.S. economy, Britain was forging ahead and enjoying one of the most prosperous periods in her history.
Churchill’s words about being appointed not to preside at the liquidation of the British Empire were uttered not for their rhetorical effect.
What he said was a studied forerunner to Foreign Minister Eden’s more recent assurance to the House of Commons that the conquered Africa Empire would not be returned to Italy! In that statement reposes much of the question of victors’ spoils.
Italian Somaliland and Eritrea are rich in stock-raising, agriculture and the production of oil, gum, hides, kapok and ivory. Somaliland produces half of the world’s supply of incense. Large sections of Libya could be made fertile and there is plenty of room for industrial development and exploitation of native labor. Tripoli and Cyrenaica could be sliced up between Britain and France. Britain’s troops patrol all these vanquished lands.
Is it any wonder then that Churchill is so magnanimous to Stalin in the case of Poland? The Tory Prime Minister is most willing to drop a crumb into Stalin’s hand, while he takes a truckload of loot. Besides, should anyone condemn Britain for another example of imperialistic robbery, Churchill could point an accusing finger at Stalin and exclaim: “He started it!”
In a word, Churchill is not groveling before any of the looters. The only thing that could dismember the British Empire is widespread revolution and the prospects for that are not any too bright. But such an evntuality would also topple the Kremlin bureaucracy.
Ergo, Stalin retains the same power he had before the outbreak of war, to wit: his OGPU still watches, terrorizes and holds in miserable subjection Russia’s workers and peasants. And Stalin still hovers on the horizon as the Jehovah of the Browderites and their prototypes abroad. For the rest, all the talk of any newly-gained decisive power by Stalin is just flagrant guesswork.
To conclude, the foregoing is intended only as a reply to certain parts of the NI article and should not be construed as an attempt to fashion a complete thesis on Yalta.
J.C.
Reply by the Editors
 



The sharpening of the class struggle in India finds the proletariat of that country in the absence of a conscious vanguard, a Communist Party, unable to take the leadership in the rising movement against British Imperialism. The bourgeois and petty bourgeois nationalists are able to get control of the movement, lead it into “safe” channels and ultimately betray it. The attempts of sections of the nationalist movement, i.e., the All-Indian Youth League, the workers and peasants of Peshawar, the railroad workers, the textile workers of Bombay, etc., to break away from this leadership have met with only partial success.
Why is there no Communist Party in India today? This question which confronts every Communist and class-conscious worker must receive a definite answer.
 
The “Two-Class Party” Policy
The Comintern under the leadership of Stalin and Bucharin (1924–28), basing itself on an incorrect estimation of the degree of stabilization of world capitalism and the relation of class forces, separated the question of bourgeois democratic revolution in the colonial countries from that of the proletarian dictatorship and consequently based its activities in these countries on dual composition class parties. (In China the bloc of the four classes in the Kuomintang and later the “Left” Kuomintang, in Japan, “the Workers and Peasants Party”, in Mexico “Workers and Peasants’ Bloc” – in India “Workers and Peasants Parties”.)
Every once ia a while one read of a declaration of the “Communist Party of India” or representatives of much a “Party” would appear at Congresses, Plenums, etc. In reality there are only a handful of individual Communists, according to a leading member of the Anti-Imperialist League, about 75 scattered throughout, the country, having no central organisation and no collective activity. Most of them, under instructions from the E.C.C.I. worked hand in hand with petty bourgeois elements in building “Workers’ and Peasants’ parties.”
But, a combination of events forces a “change”. This was the joint pressure of the Left Opposition led by comrade Trotsky, the change in the correlation of class forces in the Soviet Union, the crushing defeat of the Chinese proletariat due in great measure to the criminal subordination of the C.P. of China first to the Kuomintang and later the “Left” Kuomintang, etc. The occasion for this “change” was the Sixth Congress of the Comintern (August-September 1928).
At the time the Comintern leadership was compelled to admit, that it was responsible for the “Workers’ and Peasants’ parties in India” and officially to repudiate such tactics. Sikandar Sur, the reporter on the Indian Question, in his summary, stated:
“The Workers’ and Peasants’ Parties exist owing to the wrong tactics and instructions of the Comintern. The last report of the Annual conference of the Bengal Peasants’ and Workers’ parties show that the party is falling into the hands of philanthropic petty bourgeoisie. Our comrades do not hold office there. Comrade Shubin (Soviet Union – J.C.) is absolutely wrong when he talks of the inadvisability of forming a Communist Party on account of objective difficulties. But should we surrender to obstacles or should we overcome them?” (Inprecorr – Vol. 8 No. 78, p. 1473)
Even here, we have no real repudiation of dual composition class parties, but such parties in which “our comrades do not hold any offices.”
The official colonial theses of the Congress had this to say in reference to the question at hand. “Special ‘Workers’ and Peasants’ Parties’ whatever revolutionary character they may possess, can too easily at particular periods, be converted into ordinary petty bourgeois parties, and accordingly, Communists are not recommended to organize such parties.” (Inprecorr, Vol. 8 No. 88 – p. 1670). Communists are not recommended, not advised to build workers’ and peasants’ parties! Since when does the Comintern hand out mere advice and recommendations to Communists? It is obvious that this “literary change” in policy is meant primarily for the record. It also leaves the door open for a repetition of Stalin’s sophistry on the Kuomintang. That is the argument that the Communists did not “organize” the party but came into it in order to get to the masses.
It should be also noted that the phrase “at particular periods (can) be converted into ordinary petty bourgeois parties” is an underhanded attempt to excuse the Comintern’s policy of building such parties “at particular times”.
 
After the Sixth Congress
Not only was a Communist Party not formed after the Sixth Congress, but the official Comintern press continued to speak of the “Workers’ and Peasants’ Parties” as a legal expression of the Communists in India. For example, the erstwhile Comintern specialist on India, M.N. Roy, writing on the municipal elections in Bombay stated:
“Owing to the doubtful position of the Communist Party (!) and the general antagonism to Communism that characterizes the present bourgeois political atmosphere of the country, the election was contested (by the Communists – J.C.). In the name of the Workers’ and Peasants’ party” - – and later adds “By contesting the election the Communists gave another sign of their political independence (sic!). Most resolute fighters for national freedom, they will defend the interest of the working class not only against foreign imperialism, but also native capitalism. By these tactics of the revolutionary class struggle the Communists will mobilize and lead the proletariat as the driving force of the national revolution.” (Inprecorr – Vol. 9 No. 12 – March 1st, 1929)
What could be plainer? Roy and his political allies, Lovestone and Brandler, demogogically criticise the Stalinists today for not having built a Communist Party in India! These individuals who share the responsibility with the Stalins and Kuussinens for the past Kuomintang tactic now call for the building of a Communist Party side by side with a “national revolutionary party”. But what will be the role of the Communist Party? The objective logic of their policy means the subordination of the C.P. to the “national revolutionary party”, the duplicating of the events of 1925–26–27 in China.
Again, after the Sixth Congress, the hitherto scattered and unconnected Workers’ and Peasants’ parties, for the first time organized a national party, the “Workers’ and Peasants’ Party of India”. What was the attitude of the Comintern towards this conference?
 
The “Workers’ and Peasants’ Party”
Discussing the Conference of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Party Roy wrote:
”Meeting in this atmosphere of revolutionary development from all sides, the Workers’ and Peasants’ Party, whose driving forces are the Communists, was objectively the most important event of the moment. The Workers’ and Peasants’ Party is not the Communist Party (sic!), although the Communists play in it the leading and dominating role. Several years ago it appeared on the scene as the first sign of radicalization of the nationalist masses. As such the Communists supported it and aided its growth. Practically all the great strikes of the last two years were led under the banner of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Party. The object of the Communists was to make this new party the rallying ground for all the nationalist revolutionary elements, to develop it into a revolutionary mass party which is a crying need of the moment”. (Inprecorr, Vol. 9 – No. 6 – February 1, 1929)
The above is a precise summary of the tactics of the Comintern in India for the past few years.
Roy however criticized the Conference for not having made provisions for united front action with the “League for Indian Independence” (the organization of the petty bourgeois intellectuals which Roy wished the Workers’ and Peasants’ Party, and the Communists to unite with to form his Indian “nationalist mass party”).
Immediately Roy was rebuked. The Conference, a Comintern representative wrote, did make provision for united front action with the “League for Indian Independence.” Roy is wrong, says the writer, Communists must not try and build “a mass nationalist party”, but must build a Communist Party. But how about the Workers’ and Peasants’ Party? The writer states that confusion exists in the party; although it is showing signs of a “decided improvement”; its confusion is due to its character, in its “composition of two classes, which is bound to result in rendering vague the proletarian line itself.” (!) The implications of the writer P. Sch. are clear. The line of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Party must be a class (!) policy; the Communists must organize themselves in a C.P. but at the same time struggle for a class line in the W. and P. party. (Inprecorr, Vol. 91 No. 16, March 29, 1929.) Nowhere in his article does P. Sch attempt to repudiate Roy’s above quoted characterization of the role of the Communists in India. The Comintern, through P. Sch offers the conception of a “Left” Kuomintang as against a “whole” Kuomintang.
In April 1929, that is only a few months; after the National Conference of the “Workers’ and Peasants’ Party of India”, the British and Indian governments started a general offensive against strike leaders, revolutionary workers and Communists. Thirty one were arrested for carrying out the orders of the Comintern in India and being in favor of the violent overthrow of the government. The Workers’ and Peasants’ Party broke down under the offensive. In a few months there was no Party. (Clemens Dutt, Labour Monthly – July 29, 1929) This again compelled the official Comintern press to speak about the necessity of a Communist Party in India.
 
Safarov’s Apologetics for Stalin
In a recent issue of the Communist International (Vol. VII No. 5, English Edition) G. Safarov, a former Oppositionist, with an even more flexible spine than his fellow-capitulators, discusses the situation in India. After condemning Roy’s position on India be writes: “Of the same worth are the accusations of another careerist (!), a Max Shachtman, in the Militant, who accuses the Communist International of ‘resisting the formation of a Communist Party in India.’ (Militant, Feb. 8) Both the Right and the ‘Left’ renegades ignore the real facts, for the birth of the revolutionary working class in India in 1928–29 is an indisputable fact ... That did not and could not take place until the development of the class struggle had aroused the masses, until the slogans of the Comintern had turned into class reality. They could only be embodied in the real life of India thanks to the self-development of the working class, in the process of the revolutionary struggle against imperialism.” (p. 48). Safarov undertakes a task never before attempted in the Party press – to explain why no C.P. was built in India.
First, he does not deny the accusation of comrade Shachtman that the Comintern resisted the formation of a C.P. in India. Secondly, who denies the existence of a revolutionary working class in India in 1928–29? Certainly not the Left! Third, if one is to make sense of this quotation one must interpret Safarov as saying: There was no revolutionary working class in India until 1928–29, because the development of the class struggle had not aroused the masses; therefore a Communist Party could not be built. Let us dissolve the Communist Party of the United States because there is no revolutionary working class in this country!
It is the Communist Party which must help intensify the class struggle. Fourth, a C.P. could not be built in India “until the slogans of the Comintern had been turned into class reality” (Page 48). Who was to propagate the slogans of the Comintern? the Workers’ and Peasants’ Parties, individual Communists? What slogans had to be turned into class reality? The “democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry” or perhaps (and we are not very far from the truth) the realization of a “powerful mass Workers’ and Peasants’ party”?
The official press once again carries reports of leaflets issued by the Workers’ and Peasants’ Party without comment of its own. The Stalinist press gives little information as to what the Comintern is actually doing in India today.
The Daily Worker from time to time speaks of the formation in the “near future” of an All-Indian Communist Party. In one of its issues (Wednesday, May 21, 1930) it carries on its front page photostatic copies of two issues of the Workers’ Weekly. The story underneath it runs:
“The first Marxist-Leninist paper published in India is shown above in the headings of two issues. The Workers’ Weekly began publication in Bombay on January 26, and is acting as the ideological leader and organization center for the forces of the working class in the Indian Revolution.”
The April 30 issue of Inprecorr available at least one month before the Daily Worker story, carries an article by V. Chattopadhayaya (one of the secretaries of the World Anti-Imperialist League and the latest of the Stalinist writers on India) with the following:
“The Workers’ Weekly, the new organ of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Party, points out in its last issue that the movement has gone far beyond Gandhi and the Congress, and calls for a general strike throughout India.” (The Revolutionary Situation in India – V. Chattopadhyaya, Vol. 10 No. 21)
How are we to explain this? Is the Comintern at present building a “Left” Kuomintang in India or doing nothing at all? What efforts are being made to build a Communist Party? What has happened to the All-Indian Communist Party that was to be formed in the near future? What is this “revolutionary Marxian Workers’ Party?” These questions must be answered.
 



The so-called Russian question has been and remains the touchstone of international Marxist politics. The twentieth anniversary of the Russian Revolution is not only an occasion for the celebration of this great event but simultaneously the moment to evaluate the meaning of the present crisis in the Soviet Union and how it can be resolved in the interests of revolutionary socialism.
This task is undertaken by M.S. Mautner, for the Lovestoneites, in Workers’ Age (Nov. 20, 1937). In line with the resolution on the Soviet Union of the “International Communist Opposition” (see W.A., August 14, 1937), Mautner justifies his group’s defense of Stalinism against Trotskyism in the past on the ground that the Soviet bureaucracy then played a progressive role.
 
Belated Echo
“Trotsky himself declares that it would be criminal to deny the progressive work accomplished by. the soviet burocracy ...,” the author tells us. And adds: “But it is equally true that this progressive mission has been completely exhausted in the past, its (Stalinism) positive and constructive aspects predominated: it was the builder of socialism. Today it has entered its negative and destructive phase: it is undermining, degrading, endangering its own achievements.”
In so far as the above is correct, it is a belated echo of the Trotskyist analysis. However – and this is the nub of the matter – the Lovestoneites saw (and see) no connection between the yesterday and today save Stalin’s organizational methods which are completely divorced by them from his general program, social, economic and foreign policies.
Trotsky’s objective analysis of the progressive role of the bureaucracy referred to one side of the function of Stalinism, which it performed despite itself, its own reactionary program and pracise: under the pressure of the kulaks, private traders and imperialists on the one hand, and the Trotskyist opposition on the other. (This is clear by an examination of the origin and development of the First Five Year Plan.)
For the Lovestoneites, reference to yesterday’s progressive role of the bureaucracy serves merely as an apology for its defense of the Stalinist program, internal and foreign policies.
 
The Sources of Stalinism
Mautner, however, clearly reveals the untenable position of the Lovestoneites. He tells us that the sources of the present crisis in the Soviet Union are not to be found in the “Thermidorian reaction” but rather: “in the specific conditions in which the Russian Revolution has developed, in the incredible handicaps it has faced of the backwardness of the country and its own isolation in a world of imperialism.”
For the solution of this crisis, he adds; “And it is the International socialist revolution alone that cam break the fatal isolation of the Soviet Republic in the world of imperialism.”
With this, Mautner not only goes beyond the analysis given in the resolution but “sinks to the depths of Trotskyism!” For he presents the crux of the Trotskyist argument against Stalinism – the impossibility of constructing socialism in one country alone, without the aid of the international socialist revolution: that is, the objective conditions for the “Thermidorian degeneration.”
Or is this an exaggeration ? Let us listen to Jay Lovestone in August 1935:
 
Yesterday’s Position
“... The Soviet workers themselves with their own forces, without armed proletarian aid from outside can build a socialist society in Russia.” (Soviet Foreign Policy, Pg. 28). Even more, he adds: “If the C P S U were not correct in concluding that the Soviet proletariat was capable of overcoming fully all capitalist elements within its country, that is, of building a socialist society, then it would really have no reason for maintaining power. We should then stop fooling the workers in the USSR and everywhere else and give up power to another class.” (Pg. 28).
And today, Mautner-Lovestone tell us quite casually that the internal crisis is due to the “fatal isolation” of backward Russia which can be broken only by “international socialist revolution.” In other words, the Russian workers by “their own forces, without armed proletarian aid from outside” cannot build socialism!
To follow Lovestone’s old logic he should today conclude that therefore “We should stop fooling the workers in the USSR and everywhere else and give up power to another class” (see above)! But his “logic” was as deceptive as his theory (of socialism in one country); today he abandons both without the necessary re-evaluation.
 
The Stalinist Constitution
The Stalinist Constitution, the trials and purges, the foreign policy (in which are included the policies of the Comintern) are not merely symptoms of the present situation but necessary prerequisites for the bourgeois counter-revolution from within.
The Constitution expresses in legal terms the political expropriation of the proletariat and the omnipotence of the bureaucracy. The trials and purges destroy actual and potential defenders of nationalized property relations. Soviet foreign policy (and Comintern policies) aims to maintain the absolutism of Stalinism against Fascist destruction and prevent at all costs a working class revolutionary victory in Western Europe which would make impossible Stalinist absolutism in Russia and threaten the Stalinist policy of subordination of the working class to its “democratic” imperialist allies.
The new constitution was hailed by the Lovestoneites:
“The new constitution of the Soviet Union is living proof that the proletarian dictatorship makes for the full development of the rights of the toiling masses. As a result of the new constitution the Soviet state is nearing its goal of abolishing the state altogether,” we read in the Workers Age of Nov. 14, 1937.
Seven months later we are told by these same people that the articles of the constitution “read like a gruesome mockery.” (I.C.O. resolution, June 25, 1937, W.A., August 14, 1937). Mautner does not even mention the constitution.
 
Moscow Trials
The Zinoviev-Kamenev and the Radek-Piatakov trials were likewise defended by the Lovestoneites. Like pleading attorneys they asked the jury to overlook the “circumstantial evidence” which pointed to frame-ups, the inconsistency between the politics of the defendants and the charge of individual terror, discrepencies in testimony and indisputable falsehoods. The trials should be viewed with “historical objectivity”, hey insisted; and pretentious analogies were made with the revolutionary terror of the Jacobins. (See Workers’ Age, Feb. 6 and Feb. 13, 1937)
An editorial of February 20th declared:
“When objective judgement is passed on the Moscow trials, it must surely be done primarily on the basis of the all-absorbing question: Is it Stalin or the Trotskyist opposition that by and large represents the basic interests of the socialist revolution in Russia, that is the bearer of the fundamentally sound policies of socialist construction? And on this question our position has been made clear more than once. The course of events itself, moreover, has pretty generally confirmed the viewpoint of Stalin as against that of Trotsky.”
But life itself so ruthlessly threw to the winds the despicable apologetics of Lovestone, that following the execution of Tuchachevsky, the arrest of Yagoda, etc. the I.C.O. resolution of June 25, 1937 stated: “Such methods (Stalin’s terrorism) deal communism the most disastrous blows it has received at any time from any source.” (W.A., August 14, 1937).
Could anything reveal greater bankruptcy! The Lovestoneites now unwittingly admit that they mistook Stalinist counter-revolutionary terrorism for revolutionary terror.
Nor were the Lovestoneites more successful in understanding Russian foreign policy or its relation to the policies of the Comintern. In August 1935, Lovestone wrote:
“The Trotskyist theory that there is a fundamental cleavage between the interests of ‘Russian state policy’ and the interests of the international proletariat is false from top to bottom.” (Soviet Foreign Policy, Pg. 27)
He polemized against those who declared that, for example, the social patriotism of the French Communist Party was due to Russian foreign policy.
And today? Lovestone (and Mautner) remain silent. However, August Thalheimer, their international theoretician, presents a hitherto not unknown view:
“What is responsible for the change in the policy of the Communist International?” he writes in the British New Leader (August 20, 1937), “The crisis in Russia is the explanation. Because of the absence of proletarian democracy, Soviet Russia is going back and the bureaucracy is defending itself under terror.
“The rulers of Russia are satisfied with Socialism (!) in their own country and status quo in other countries. Their policy is the Isolated Socialist State.”
Is it not clear how critics of Stalinism must “borrow” (more accurately, plagiarize!) from the basic views of Trotskyism which they yesterday declared “counter-revolutionary”?
We thus see that the Lovestoneite fundamental theories, analysis, logic and conclusions on this basic question have been refuted by history itself, as inadvertently admitted by the Lovestoneites themselves.
What remains? Bewilderment, spiced with critical bits taken from Trotskyism; apologies for their old position, and a utopian conception that although in Russia “There can be no hope for any kind of democratic rights either inside or outside the party” the removal of Stalin (that is, the overthrow of the bureaucracy) “can take place thru the channel of evolution” (ICO resolution, June 25).
And with this eclectic program the International of Lovestone-Thalheimer-Brockway-Gorkin is to be organized!
 

eph Carter: Negroes and Whites Call Demonstration in Detroit Against Jim Crow, Apr. 11 (April 1943)




Joseph Carter Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers’ Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Joseph Carter
Negroes and Whites Call Demonstration
in Detroit Against Jim Crow, Apr. 11
(April 1943)

From Labor Action, Vol. 7 No. 14, 5 April 1943, p. 1.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

DETROIT – A mass demonstration to combat the increasing discrimination against Negro workers in this city has been called jointly by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the United Automobile Workers (CIO) for Sunday afternoon, April 11.
More than 15,000 Negro and white workers are expected to participate, according to NAACP President James J. McClendon. The demonstration will begin as a parade at 2:30 p.m., starting at Theodore and John and ending at Cadillac Square, where there will be speaking at the monument of Sojourner Truth.
Charging that the recent work stoppages at Packard, Vickers, U.S. Rubber and other plants were organized by the revived Ku Klux Klan and other anti-democratic groups, Gloster B. Current, executive secretary of the NAACP, told your correspondent that these elements were out to provoke race riots and destroy the union movement. The Negro workers, he added, are loyal and active members of the unions, and are determined to assert their full democratic rights. Skilled Negro workers with many years of seniority have been refused upgrading by the managements, and in view of the “job freezing” cannot leave their jobs.
Mr. Current cited innumerable cases of discrimination against Negroes throughout the city in restaurants, bars, amusement places, jobs and in housing. Trained Negro women are refused work in most plants and in many cases when hired are given either menial jobs or work which is too difficult for them and in violation of the labor code of the state.
The federal agency has refused to permit Negro war workers to live in the Willow Lodge Housing Project at Willow Run. The Detroit Housing Commission continues its segregation policy by refusing to allow Negro war workers to live in war housing projects now being built in the City of Detroit and plans to designate a segregated project at Eight-Mile Road. Mr. Currant stated that the only way to abolish these Jim Crow practices is through the planned, organized efforts of Negroes and whites, such as the joint NAACP-UAW demonstration.
Recently at Ferndale, a Detroit suburb commonly called “Shacktown,” Negro and white school children engaged in fighting with knives. White hooligans, according to reports, notified the Negroes that if they didn’t leave the town they would be run out by violent means. Mass rioting was avoided, these sources state, by the intervention of state troops and the local police.
Numerous stories of discrimination against Negroes are heard throughout the city. According to one of them, a meeting was recently held by the workers in a plant who had refused to work with Negro women who were put on machines. A government official present explained, the story continues, that discrimination against Negroes interfered with the war effort. Whereupon several workers inquired why they have to work side by side with Negroes when the government itself maintains a Jim Crow policy in the armed forces and at its housing projects. The reply of the government official was not reported.
 

.: Financing Big Business (December 1942)





Joseph Carter Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers’ Index  |   ETOL Main Page

J.C.
Books in Review
Financing Big Business
(December 1942)

From New International, Vol. VIII No. 11, December 1942, p. 348.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

Financing The War, A Symposium
The Tax Institute, Philadelphia. 336 pages and Index
This book is a symposium on a subject of interest to everyone in the country. The mass of workers have become tax conscious – most of them will be paying an income tax (or the five per cent victory tax) for the first time next year (and expect to have additional tax obligations thrust upon them, perhaps as “forced loans”). They know that this is equivalent to a wage cut, or what is the same thing, a rise in the cost of living as effective as that which would follow an inflationary rise in prices.
In fact, that, and not the raising of revenue, is the main reason for including the lower-income brackets, that is, the workers, in the new income tax law. The same aim – the reduction of the purchasing power of the masses in face of a declining output of consumer goods and an increasing production of war materials – lies behind the drive among the workers to obtain their purchase of war bonds.
Through taxation and borrowing, as we are told in the first chapter in the volume under review, the state has taken over the distribution of national income and the allocation of national output. More exactly, these techniques of war finance are the “pecuniary counterpart” of the war economy supplementing and complementing such methods as priorities, allocation, price and wage controls and rationing.
What are the objectives of war financing policy? The chief objective is the diversion of the resources of the country for the production of war materials. To this is added the objective of so distributing national income “as to cause a minimum of impairment of the existing pattern of the social structure – the so-called national culture or ‘way of life’ – the preservation of which is the presumable objective of the military effort.” And here is the key to any discussion of war finance.
 
Preserving the Bourgeois Profit System
The existing pattern of the social structure, that is to say, capitalism, the private monopolistic ownership of the productive resources by big business and the gross inequality of income, must be preserved whatever the emergency measures undertaken. If the old “price system” is replaced by state control of the economy, the old property relations and the old increasing inequalities must be maintained by the state through war finance.
The contributions to Financing the War are therefore discussions of the various methods of best achieving these ends. From this viewpoint they are by and large interesting and informative. The most valuable chapter is the one on the Influence of Excess Profits Taxation on Business Policy, contributed by Frank E. Seidman, a certified public accountant. While the recent tax bill has resulted in increased excess profits tax rates, the basic features of the act are the same as those considered by Mr. Seidman.
It is not surprising to learn that “one immediate effect that this program had on business was almost completely to cure the unemployment problem among lawyers and accountants”! Examples of how these experts advised the big corporations to comply with the law and avoid or minimize excess taxes are given by Mr. Seidman. For example: under the law the invested capital of a corporation includes not only the amount paid in for its shares, but accumulated earnings as well. Corporations adopting the invested capital method paid out less of their profits in dividends, thus accumulating greater profits, increasing the “invested capital” and thereby decreasing the tax. Or then again the law permits 50 per cent of borrowed capital to be included in invested capital and allows the interest on the non-included debt as a deduction in arriving at excess profits income. Dividends for preferred stock are not deductible for income or excess profits tax. So many corporations replaced their preferred stock, and in some cases common stock as well, by bonds in order to reduce their excess profits tax obligations. They further borrowed money at low interest rates even though they did not actually need the money for business. (The new excess profits tax provisions now encourage the unloading of these bonds and debts – obtained to avoid tax payments under the old law – by permitting corporations to use the 10 per cent credit of their excess profits tax payments for liquidation of these debts!)
 
Big Business Is the Winner
One more method employed by the big corporation to avoid paying excess profits taxes should be mentioned.
“One of the most popular indoor sports in recent months, however, is that of acquiring more or less defunct corporations that have large initial capital investments. Under the law, an operating deficit of a corporation does not have to be taken into consideration in computing invested capital. Thus, if a corporation has $10,000,000 of capital originally paid in and $9,900,000 of deficit, its invested capital is not $100,000, but $10,000,000. Furthermore, if such a corporation has sustained operating losses during the past two years, these losses can be carried forward and applied against subsequent earnings. Also, if a corporation has not absorbed its excess profits tax credit in the past, these too can be carried forward and applied against subsequent earnings. It can be readily seen what tremendous tax appeal a corporation in this position may have.”
Mr. Seidman’s conclusions are worth quoting. He writes:
“The major fault with the present act is that it literally writes profiteering into law. This is accomplished by giving corporations the option to establish unusually high deductions in computing excess profits taxes. As I have already indicated, the tax rates only begin to operate after profits have passed the average earnings in the four-year base period, 1936-39, or if earnings have passed an eight per cent return on the first million dollars of invested capital and a seven per cent return beyond that amount. The way this formula works out, the strong corporations inevitably will become stronger and the weak ones weaker.
“Corporations that were fortunate enough to make large earnings in the pre-emergency period earn big profits without paying any excess profits taxes. This means that the railroads, the heavy industries and many other ‘war baby’ corporations, which are really getting the major benefits of war orders, escape this tax almost completely. Thus, for instance, United States Steel, whose profits in the preceding four years had averaged about $46,000,000, had a net in 1940 of $102,000,000 and did not pay a penny in excess profits taxes. Republic Steel, with a four-year average of $7,000,000, passed a $21,000,000 net in 1940 and went excess profits tax free. The railroads, whose profits have enormously increased as a result of the defense program, have to date escaped the excess profits tax almost completely ... It is an amazing situation in view of the anti-war-millionaire label that was attached to this tax.”
 


Proofread by Einde O’ Callaghan (May 2013).

The Reply
Johnson’s views on Russian economy as a capitalist system are well known to readers of The New International. He has presented them at length in these columns. Now he seeks to buttress them with the aid of statements made by Leon Trotsky in an article written over a decade ago, and reprinted in the Archives section. However, the greater part of his letter is a criticism of another statement made by Trotsky in the course of the same article. I propose to show that Johnson understands neither Trotsky’s article nor the meaning of the Marxian concepts involved. In the course of this criticism I hope to throw some light on a few essential aspects of Marxian economic theory.
I. Johnson begins his letter by taking issue with Trotsky’s contention that the Marxian formulae of extended reproduction “are in no way limited by national boundaries” and are “not adapted to national capitalism.” Johnson insists, on the contrary, that “the formula is carefully adapted by Marx to precisely a national capitalism.” (We will consider later the strange substitution of “formula” for “formulae.”)
The point in dispute seems clear: Trotsky wrote that the condition premised by Marx was an abstract capitalism in which there are no national boundaries, that is, a pure world capitalism; whereas Johnson holds that Marx specifically assumed “a national capitalism.” Clear enough, that is, until we read further in Johnson’s letter (cf. his Point I c) that the Marxian theory “is strictly adapted to a national capitalism, excluding all foreign commerce.” (My emphasis – J.C.)
But with this qualification, how would Johnson’s “national capitalism” differ from a hypothetical pure world capitalism? If it is taken in complete isolation, does this not mean that it is studied as though it were a pure world capitalism? In which case, Johnson appears to be merely repeating Trotsky’s contention against which he previously polemized! But why then should he insist on counterposing “a national capitalism” to world capitalism? This would make sense if his “national capitalism” has specific national, that is, political features – though it would then be in conflict with Marx’s premise of a pure capitalism, one free of non-economic factors. However, I do not think that this is Johnson’s meaning. Rather, his criticism of Trotsky flows from his hazy grasp of Marxian economic theory and his misunderstanding of what Trotsky wrote. (On the latter point, cf. II below) It would not be surprising that, when Johnson wrote that Marx “strictly adapted” the formulae to “a national capitalism,” he had in mind a passage in the first volume of Capital which declares the exact opposite!
We here take no account of export trade [Marx stated] by means of which a nation can change articles of consumption into means of production or means of subsistence, and vice versa. In order to examine the object of our investigation in its integrity we must treat the whole world as one nation, and assume that capitalist production is everywhere established and has possessed itself of every branch of industry. (Capital, Vol. 1, page 636. Charles Kerr edition)
As we shall also see later, Johnson has a strange knack of apparently paraphrasing Marx and in reality saying the exact opposite! It is obvious here that when Marx excluded foreign trade and treated the whole world as one nation he thereby identified the world with the nation, that is, assumed that it was the only economy on the planet, to wit, world economy. Elementary enough, yet Johnson presents us with “a national capitalism” in opposition to world capitalism! Whatever the source of Johnson’s mistake, his first criticism of Trotsky is invalid; he contradicts his own criticism and reveals confusion on an elementary aspect of Marx’s methodology.
 
The Scope of the Formulae
II. His confusion is further expressed in his statement that it follows from Trotsky’s contention (discussed above) that “the workers cannot buy back the product and therefore the capitalist is compelled to seek markets abroad.” (cf. his point I b.) [1] How and why does this follow? It is true that for Johnson’s “national capitalism” which excludes all foreign commerce, there is no problem of “markets abroad” because there are no “markets abroad.” But how can such foreign markets exist on the premise of a pure world capitalism? Are these markets on the planet Mars or the planet Jupiter! If not, then what does Johnson mean? I can arrive at only one conclusion: that he interprets Trotsky’s statement to mean that Marx’s premise was a real world capitalism consisting of national economics connected by foreign trade. In a word, the reverse of what Trotsky did write! For, when following his exposition of the Marxian concept of a pure capitalism, Trotsky declared that the formulae “are in no way limited by national boundaries” and “are not adapted to national capitalism” he was thereby stating that national divisions, and thus, foreign trade and markets abroad, are assumed to be non-existent! And Johnson’s misinterpretation of Trotsky’s thought also partially explains his confused criticism discussed in point I above.
III. However, Johnson’s confusion goes much deeper than a mere misinterpretation of this or that passage from Trotsky or Marx. It extends to the very formulae with which his letter is concerned. What are these formulae, according to Johnson? He tells us: “The only formula in the chapter on Reproduction on an Enlarged Scale is the formula I (v + s) must be greater than II c, if accumulation is to take place.” Simple enough – a single formula. Yet, is it not strange that Trotsky constantly referred to many formulas? Is it not even stranger that despite the numerous controversies among Marxists in regard to these formulae, not a single disputant denied the validity of the formula cited by Johnson? [2] A single formula? Yet even a cursory glance at the aforementioned last chapter of the second volume of Capital – not to speak of a study of the chapter or a knowledge of Marx’s theory! – reveals a whole series of formulae without which Marx’s theory would be meaningless!
However, let us examine the formula which Johnson tells us is the differentia specifica of extended reproduction and accumulation under capitalism.
Marx divided total social production into two great departments. The industries manufacturing producer goods (or means of production), he called I; and the industries producing consumer goods (or means of consumption), represented by II. The products of each department (as the products of each industry) are the sum of constant capital (the employed means of production), symbolized by c; variable capital (the value of the labor power paid the workers in wages), or v; and surplus values (the new value produced by the worker but owned by the capitalists), or s. Thus:
I c + v + s Total Producer Goods
II c + v + s Total Consumer Goods
However, the products of these departments are not only values, embodiments of socially necessary labor, but also particular use values – machines, buildings, raw materials; food, shoes, clothing, etc. If, then, in a given economic cycle, let us say one year, the total producer goods manufactured only equal, both in value and in material form, the means of production used up in that period, the production during the next year can only be on the same scale as in the previous year. This would mean that the capitalists would directly consume the surplus value produced. Marx called this simple reproduction. If, however, there is to be an expansion of the scale of production, new producer goods must be manufactured in excess of the means of production required for mere replacement. This is what Marx called extended reproduction. And the conversion of part of the surplus value into new capital for expansion – possible only on the above condition – he called accumulation.
 
What Marx Really Meant
Expressed in Marx’s algebraic formula we get:
I c + v + s (or total producer goods manufactured) must be greater than I c + II c (or total producer goods used up), if accumulation is to take place. Or more simply: I (v + s) must be greater than II c.
Here, then, is the formula which Johnson informs us is valid for capitalism alone. And apparently this is the great contribution of Marx. But what does the algebraic formula tell us? Merely this: that if there is to be accumulation and productive expansion, more producer goods must be manuactured than have been used up. An important but quite axiomatic proposition!
It goes without saying [Marx wrote] that as soon as we assume a process of accumulation, I (v + s) must be greater than II c, not equal to II c, as it is in the case of simple reproduction. (Capital, Vol. II, page 601. My emphasis – J.C.)
Johnson’s “only” formula – that which is supposed to distinguish capitalism from all other economies – “goes without saying,” according to Marx. This should not be surprising since, despite Johnson’s view, the formula can be an algebraic expression of a necessary premise of accumulation in any economic system taken as a whole. In every economy, extended reproduction and accumulation are possible only if more producer goods are made in a given economic cycle than are used up. The products of every economy are a sum of the means of production used, living labor, and an excess produce above these material and human resources (no matter how measured). If then, we abstract the specific class meanings of the terms of Marx’s formula (c, v and s) so that the terms symbolize the most general form of the three elements of the total products, we can state that I (v + s) must be greater than II c if accumulation is to take place.
Thus the algebraic formula cited by Johnson taken abstractly does not in itself describe the specific social character of the accumulation; nor does it tell us anything about the mechanism regulating the process of accumulation; how and why more producer goods are put out than consumed. Nor, whether extended reproduction and accumulation are a result of class exploitation. More precisely: the formula describes a necessary condition for capitalist accumulation only if the terms are actual capitalist categories – constant capital, variable capital, surplus value. Therefore one cannot prove that, e.g., Russian economy is a capitalist system – as Johnson seeks to do – by showing that the formula describes a necessary aspect of its process of accumulation. On the contrary, one must prove that the terms of the formula, the social relations of production, are in fact capitalist.
In economic forms of society of the most different kinds [Marx wrote] there occurs, not only simple reproduction, but, in varying degrees, reproduction on a progressively increasing scale. By degrees more is produced and more consumed, and consequently more products have to be converted into means of production. This process, however, does not present itself as accumulation of capital, nor as the function of a capitalist, so long as the laborer’s means of production, and with them, his product and means of subsistence, do not confront him in the shape of capital. (Capital, Vol. I, page 655)
And if Johnson had read Trotsky’s article with care he would have noted that his alleged specific capitalist formula is nothing but an algebraic expression of Stalin’s formulation of the Marxian theory of accumulation against which Trotsky’s article is directed! Stalin had declared: “The Marxist theory of reproduction teaches that contemporary society cannot develop without annual accumulations, and it is impossible to accumulate without extended reproduction year in and year out. This is clear and evident.” And Trotsky commented: “It cannot be clearer. But this is not taught by Marxist theory, for it is the general property of bourgeois political economy, its quintessence ... ‘The Marxist theory of reproduction’ refers to the capitalist mode of production.” (The New International, November 1941, page 281)
Of course, Trotsky is not denying that for accumulation there must be extended reproduction. He is emphasizing that it is not the contribution of Marxism, i.e., that there is nothing specifically “Marxist” in this conception. Johnson did not know he was repeating Stalin because he does not understand the meaning of the Marxian theory of accumulation and the algebraic formulae.
 
Extended Reproduction and Accumulation
IV. It is not necessary or possible for me at this time to treat in any detail the highly complex question of the function of Marx’s algebraic formulae of capitalist extended reproduction. However, some additional remarks are relevant to the present dispute.
(a) Marx sought, with the aid of these formulae, to determine the mechanism whereby in an unregulated, anarchical system in which the individual capitalists are interested solely in profits (and not in the particular use values which the [sic] produce) they can nonetheless find the necessary material goods for progressive expansion. For, unless the required producer and consumer goods are manufactured in proper proportions, progressive accumulation becomes difficult; and if the disproportions are very great, impossible. Of course, such balance is never attained under capitalism (except by accident), and dislocations, overproduction and crises occur. However, to discover the inherent tendencies of the, system, Marx assumed a pure capitalism in perfect equilibrium – that is, constructed what the scientists call “an ideally isolated system.” On the one hand, he assumed that there were only workers and capitalists (and their retainers); that there were neither non-capitalist elements nor non-economic capitalist factors involved; that the workers received the full value of their labor power; that commodities exchanged at their value, etc., etc. On the other hand, he assumed that the development of production from one cycle to another took place at a constant rate of increase, e.g., the capitalists in each period converted only one-half of the surplus value into money capital; which in turn they transformed into (invested in a fixed proportion of constant capital (means of production) and variable capital (labor power).
Then he showed how, in such a system in equilibrium, the circulation of capital and commodities could take place so that there could be extended reproduction and accumulation. This requires not only that the production of producer goods in excess of the means of production used up in both departments of production (the formula cited by Johnson); but that these new producer goods (both as to their value and their use value) are manufactured in a proper relation to the output of consumer goods, and in accordance with the requirements of the economy for means of production for expansion. For example: if the producer goods put out exceed the needs of the economy for expansion (that is, cannot be converted into capital which would yield a profit to the capitalists!) then there is an overproduction of producer goods; and if this excess piles up, there follows a temporary breakdown of the system, crises. Or, if more consumer goods art: put out than can be bought, accumulation can cease as a result of this overproduction even though I (c + v) is greater than II c. And so on.
Johnson does not understand the abstract-hypothetical premises of Marx’s formulae and, therefore, cannot comprehend that the formulae are not supposed to “apply” to a concrete, real capitalism or to “a national capitalism” – let alone Russian economy.
(b) The regulating principle of capitalist accumulation, according to Marx, is the insatiable drive of the capitalists for profits. This is the unique driving force of capitalist extended reproduction flowing from the capital-labor relations of production, and without which the contradictions and antagonisms of capitalism cannot be explained. In fact the social difficulties of accumulation arise precisely because capitalism is a profit-economy. Strange to say, for Johnson profits are not an essential feature of capitalism!
 
A Capitalism Without Profits
For example, in this article, Russia and Marxism (The New International, September 1941), he defines capitalism without a single reference to profits. He tells us that capitalism “is organized and must be organized for the production of surplus value (production for the sake of production).” And further, that its “main aim ... is nothing but the expansion of this accumulated labor.” So that, he adds, in Russia also (1) “the main aim of production (is) the production of surplus value for the specific purpose of increasing production” (page 215). Then why do the capitalists ever cease producing? Because they cannot produce “surplus value” or because they cannot “realize” surplus value? But why should they be interested in these obstacles if their “specific purpose” is “increasing production”?
Johnson here shows that he has read Marx ... but without much success. Again, he tries to paraphrase a major thought of the Marxian theory of capitalist accumulation but forgets the essential element, i.e., the driving force of this accumulation! It is precisely the drive for profits which compels the capitalists constantly to produce, expand and accumulate in order that they can realize greater profits – or perish as capitalists in the competitive struggle! However, Johnson’s failure to mention profits in his definition of capitalism was not an oversight – he simply does not comprehend what they are.
Profit is only a “peculiar form” of surplus value [he once wrote]. Surplus value can take the form of capitalist wages “for quantity and quality of work performed” (in Russian today its distribution takes very unusual forms). But it can be produced in only one way. (The New International, April 1941, page 57)
In other words, in Russia there is “surplus value” but not “profit.” Profit is only a “peculiar form” of surplus value? Quite right; this is what Marx stated. But Marx referred to profits as the peculiar capitalist form of surplus value or surplus labor!
And now let us take profit [Marx wrote]. This definite form of surplus value is a prerequisite for the new creation of means of production by means of capitalist production. It is a relation which dominates reproduction ... Furthermore, the entire process of capitalist production is regulated by the prices of production. But the regulating of the prices of production are in turn regulated by the equalization of the rate of profit and by the distribution of capital among the various spheres of production in correspondence with this equalization. Profit, then, appears here as the main factor, not of the distribution of products, but of their production itself, as a part in the distribution of capital and labor among the various spheres of production. (Capital, Vol. III, pages 1028–29. My emphases. – J.C.)
 
The Formulae and Russia
Let us grant, then, that in Russia there is “surplus value” but no “profits.” But then it is not profits (in the capitalist sense) which regulate the distribution of the material and human resources to the various spheres of production, which determine the prices of production, and the process of reproduction. Of course, there is class exploitation and surplus labor. The ruling class, the bureaucracy, is interested in the production of more and more surplus labor as the source of its increased revenues (higher living standards) and its accumulation-fund for expansion – essential for its class security and development. The peculiar character of Russian economy, however, which determines its specific process of reproduction and accumulation flows from the fact that the bureaucracy owns the means of production and exchange through its control of the state, and the enslaved character of the working class. The process of accumulation is then consciously directed through the state, and the state alone. It is this “special manner” in which the factors of production are united, this specific way in which surplus labor is extracted from the working class, that differentiates bureaucratic collectivism from capitalism.
Of course, since Russian economy is a system of class exploitation (and based on modern machine technology) and since it operates in a world dominated by capitalism, it necessarily has many features in common with capitalism. However, the basic class relations and therefore the specific character of the economy and its process of accumulation are qualitatively different. (Cf., my article, Bureaucratic Collectivism, The New International, September 1941)
V. Now let us return to Trotsky’s article. Johnson calls to our attention Trotsky’s statement that the Marxist formuae of extended reproduction are valid for capitalism alone. He therefore asks: Do the formulae “apply” to present-day Russian economy?
I have already showed that:

Trotsky correctly wrote that the Marxian formulae taken as a whole assume a pure world capitalism – and “apply” to neither “a national capitalism,” nor Russian economy of 1930. Not even Johnson will contend that present-day Soviet economy is “pure” or a “world capitalism.”
 
The specific formula cited by Johnson taken in its most abstract form is merely an algebraic expression of Stalin’s statement (of the “Marxian theory of extended reproduction”) against which Trotsky’s article is directed.
 
In its abstract form this formula does describe a premise or necessary condition for accumulation in any economy and therefore in Russia; but then this formula, divorced of its specific capitalist terms, cannot indicate that Russia is a capitalist economy. (How else, by the way, would Johnson formulate in algebraic terms the elementary premise of exended reproduction under a workers’ state or even socialism?)

* * *
In addition, it should be added that, despite some ambiguity, Trotsky used interchangeably the Marxian theory of exended reproduction and the formulae of the second volume of Capital; that is, he did not deal with the algebraic formulae in their most abstract form (as explained above) but only in their general capitalist form. Thus, he wrote that the formulae of capitalist extended reproduction have as their “central point ... the pursuit of profits.”
In fact, in Stalin’s speech there is no direct reference to the formulae, but only to the Marxian theory of extended reproduction. – (Cf. International Press Correspondence, Vol. 10 No. 2, January 9, 1930, page 18)
In any case, it should be clear from a reading of Trotsky’s article that his thesis is that the Marxian theory of accumulation was not valid for Russia of 1930, or for socialism; and that it is valid for capitalism alone. In this I, of course, agree completely with Trotsky. And this is the real issue which Johnson raises by his letter as he makes clear when he writes that the matter in dispute is “Marx’s theory of reproduction and extension of the total social capital.” (Cf. his point I c) And as previously stated, this theory, whose central point is the pursuit of profits, does not explain the process of accumulation in present-day Russia.

Footnotes
1. I do not propose to discuss the validity of the quoted statement taken by itself. This would take us too far afield, to a consideration of the theory of “underconsumption,” held by bourgeois economists, and the Marxian theory of crises.
2. Johnson writes that “some of the greatest controversies in Marxism have hinged upon” the question of whether the premise of Marx’s formulae is “a national capitalism.” Apparently he is here referring to the famous dispute around Rosa Luxemburg’s work on the accumulation of capital, and/or the earlier dispute in the Russian movement between Lenin and the Narodniki. In either case he is gravely mistaken as to the nature of these disputes. None of the disputants denied that Marx postulated a pure world capitalism. The differences, in the main, revolved around the question of whether on the basis of this abstract hypothesis there could be any accumulation at all under capitalism; that is, whether the capitalists could convert the surplus value into capital on the basis of a pure capitalism; or whether, even in theory, a non-capitalist market was indispensable for this accumulation. Rosa Luxemburg held the latter view; and from it she developed her theory of modern imperialism and her theory of capitalist collapse. Lenin, Hilferding, Bauer, Bukharin, etc., held the former position. But whatever the merit of either view, both sides accepted the fact that Marx assumed a pure world capitalism as the premise of his formulae.
 



NEW ECONOMIC POLICY AND SOCIALIST CONSTRUCTION
Volume IX of the Selected Works
by V.I. Lenin
xi+505 pp. New York, International Publishers, $2.00.
Lenin, the theoretician of the Bolshevik party, was also its political leader. In the selection of his speeches, articles, letters and notes under review – covering the period of 1921–1923 – he was preoccupied with the immediate, practical problems of Soviet power. Available now for the first time in English are his speeches on the trade union question – against Trotsky and Bukharin; his speech at the Tenth Party Congress on the New Economic Policy and his articles against bureaucracy, notably on the reorganization of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection and Better Fewer, But Better.
In the New Masses (May 10, 1938) Joshua Kunitz in a review of the volume, entitled Additional Light on Trotsky and Bukharin, writes that the more one reads Lenin’s polemics against Trotsky and Bukharin on the trade union question “the more uncannily revealing and prophetic they seem, especially in the light of the Moscow Trials”. The political errors of Trotsky and Bukharin “distract” the party from practical work; their “factionalism” is unwarranted by the nature of the differences, etc., wrote Lenin. And Kunitz adds: such behavior was not episodic but characterized their conduct at every decisive stage of the revolution – finally taking the form of treason, spying and murder.
If Kunitz had been consistent in his insipid falsifications, he would have charged that Bukharin’s “factionalism” was dictated by the German Foreign Office! For according to the latest Moscow trial, Bukharin (whom Lenin, two years after the dispute, called “not only the most valuable and biggest theoretician of the party, but also may be considered the favorite of the whole party”) was already a foreign spy during the trade union discussion!
Neither does Kunitz discuss the political and personal relations on the Central Committee following the dispute. For it is well known that in the last two years of Lenin’s life the latter struggled against the growing state and party bureaucracy with Stalin at its head; that the article on the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection contained in the present volume was directed against Stalin – and for that reason was almost suppressed by the Central Committee.
The Stalinist editors of Lenin’s works are also “selective”. They do not publish Lenin’s letter against Stalin on the national question; nor his letter breaking off all personal relations with Stalin; and certainly not the last letter which Lenin sent to the party calling for the removal of Stalin as general secretary of the party, and expressing high esteem for Trotsky, Pyatakov and Bukharin.
During the period of 1922–1923, Lenin sent several letters to Trotsky asking him to take up the cudgels against Stalin on the national question and the struggle against bureaucracy. The letters were put at the disposal of the Commission on the History of the Party, but never published!
In fact events have been moving so fast in the Soviet Union, that the present volume had to be published in English without any notes at all! In the preface the editors state: “Developments during the past years, however, imperatively call for a thorough revision of these notes [of the Russian edition. – J.C.] and the MEL [Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute] is now engaged in revising them for publication in Russian.” Since the task is taking longer than anticipated Volumes IX, X, XI and XII of the Selected Works will be published in English without any notes!
Lenin’s writings are difficult to understand without extensive explanatory notes; the difficulty is multiplied a thousandfold when the annotations are in accordance with the latest Moscow frame-up trial. In this sense we can be grateful for the absence of any notes! One will find Trotsky’s letter to the committee on party history (included in the Stalin School of Falsification) a most valuable commentary on Lenin’s writings during this period.
The trade union dispute (1920–1921) is described by Trotsky as “a search for a way out of an economic blind alley”. At the end of the civil war, industry and agriculture were at a standstill. The peasants, now that the armed civil war was over, opposed forced requisitions of grain. Among the workers, dissatisfaction developed in face of the inability of the Soviet regime to satisfy their material needs. At the same time a tremendous bureaucracy had developed – an officialdom, separated from the masses, and composed in large measure of bureaucrats and specialists of the old regime.
What was to be done? There were no ready-made formula. Inside the Bolshevik party serious differences arose. Different individuals and groupings put forward one or another policy.
In February 1920, Trotsky proposed a modification of War Communism by the establishment of a progressive tax on agricultural produce in place of the forced requisitions, permitting peasants to sell their surplus products in a delimited market. The aim of the proposal was to encourage agricultural production, supply industry with raw material, satisfy the pressing needs of the workers and strengthen the relations between the Soviet state and the peasantry. The proposal was rejected.
In May of the same year, Trotsky, in the name of the People’s Commissariat of Ways and Communications, issued the famous Order 1042 for the reparation of locomotives. This plan, based upon the experiences of the Red Army, brought excellent results. Trotsky, generalizing this plan, proposed in December 1920 that the trade unions become direct instruments of the Soviet economic bodies for the revival and development of industry. As he later put it: when his proposal for the modification of War Communism was rejected he sought a way out of the economic impasse “along the opposite road, i.e., along the road of rigid management and closer inclusion of the trade unions – not as mass organizations but as administrative machinery – into the system of economic management under War Communism” (Stalin School of Falsification, p. 30).
Lenin did not agree with this policy. He contended that “the trade unions are not state organizations, not organizations for coercion, they are educational organizations, organizations that enlist, that train, they are schools, schools of administration, schools of management, schools of communism” (p. 4).
Trotsky held that the old role of trade unions as class struggle instruments of the proletariat was outlived under the proletarian dictatorship. In this he was repeating the argument which up to that time was common to all Bolsheviks in their struggle against the Menshevik conception of the “independence” of trade unions. Lenin now, however, modified this partial truth. Even under the Russian Soviet regime, he contended, the trade unions must defend the class interests of the proletariat. But is there not a workers’ state in Russia?
“Actually we have a workers’ state; with this peculiarity, firstly, it is not the working class that predominates in the country, but the peasant population; and secondly, it is a workers’ state with bureaucratic distortions”. (p. 33)
The trade unions should defend the class interests of the proletariat against the bureaucracy, the bourgeois specialists and the pressure of the peasantry upon the Soviet apparatus, according to Lenin. At the same time they should participate in the Soviet economic bodies responsible for management of industry, learn how industry is operated, prepare themselves for the taking over of direct management of economy (the goal set for the unions in the Bolshevik program).
Within the Central Committee of the party Lenin proposed to solve the differences on the trade union question in a “practical, businesslike” way. A commission was elected for this purpose but Trotsky refused to serve on it. He stated that
“... until I am permitted, equally with all other comrades to discuss these questions in the full scope of the party press, I expect nothing from this cloister discussion of these questions, and hence from the work of the commission” (cf., Lenin, p. 58).
Lenin thought that in view of the nature of the differences and the condition of the country a public discussion on the question was not warranted. However Trotsky insisted upon the discussion, and the Central Committee concurred – Lenin found himself a minority in the CC. This origin of the public discussion accounts for the sharpness of Lenin’s polemic. For he made it clear at the outset:
“We shall not find anything serious in the sphere of differences in principle no matter how diligently we search for them.” (p.6)
Nor did this dispute interfere with the common struggle of Lenin, Trotsky and Bukharin against the Workers Opposition (led by Shlyapnikov and Kollontay) which proposed a complete reorganization of Soviet economic management; the immediate transfer to the trade unions of direct management and control of industry.
The party membership was asked to solve these differences. All groupings were permitted to present their views to the members and seek to win delegates to the Tenth Party Congress, March 1921. Lenin’s trade union theses were adopted. However, at the same Congress Lenin, with the warning of Kronstadt before him, proposed the New Economic Policy – an agricultural tax instead of forced requisitions, limited “free” market, private trade and a system of economic concessions to foreign capitalists under state supervision. The Congress adopted this policy as a way out of the existing economic impasse. The new relations resulting from the NEP soon required a new trade union resolution. The old dispute between Lenin, Trotsky and Bukharin disappeared. The 11th Congress (1922) adopted the new resolution.
The Tenth Congress condemned the Workers Opposition platform as expressing “a syndicalist and anarchist deviation” and decided that the “propaganda of these ideas” is incompatible with party membership. At the same time the CC was instructed to issue symposiums and other publications where the problems raised by the Opposition could be discussed from all sides. But how could the Congress condemn the propagation of particular views and at the same time provide a medium for their expression? Lenin replied:
“Do you not see – you agitators and propagandists in one form or another – do you not see the differences between the propaganda of ideas in fighting political parties and the interchange of opinion in special publications and symposiums?” (p. 129)
Faction formations on the basis of differences resolved by the party Congress – for the time being at least – were prohibited. However, the existing differences could be discussed, should be discussed, according to Lenin, without interfering with the practical work of the party as guided by the adopted decisions. The theoretical discussions could then merge with the “political” discussions in the next pre-congress period.
Party congresses were held annually in the first period of the Russian Revolution: from 1917–1922, six years, six congresses! In 1923, Lenin was too ill to participate actively in party work; Stalin had already gotten the upper hand. There was no congress that year. From 1924–1938, fourteen years of Stalin rule, five congresses!
These figures are however only symbolic.
One has only to compare the character of pre-congress discussions and the proceedings at the congresses to see the deep chasm which separates the two periods. Discussion of differences was the very life-blood of Bolshevism under Lenin. Sham unanimity, violent suppression of all oppositions, totalitarian rule are the “party” methods of Stalin.
Lenin in his last period of political activity saw a growing bureaucracy which threatened further to separate the vanguard from the masses and bring about the destruction of the Soviet regime. His proposals for checking the bureaucracy were all within the limits of the dictatorship of the Bolshevik party whose “old guard” was but a “thin stratum” of the party. They can be found in the articles, How to Reorganize the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection, and Better Less, But Better. It is debatable whether these measures would have achieved the desired results. In any case, they called to the attention of the entire party the need for struggling against, checking, limiting the bureaucracy. Others, notably the 1923 Opposition led by Trotsky, were the continuators of Lenin’s struggle; their victory might have resulted in the revival of Soviet democracy.
The objective conditions – the cultural backwardness of the country and the defeats of the workers’ revolutions in Western Europe – militated against their victory. Lenin, at the Tenth Party Congress, reiterated the old view of the Bolsheviks that in Russia “... the socialist revolution can be completely successful only on two conditions: first, on the condition that it receives timely support from the Socialist revolution in one or several advanced countries ...” (p. 108). The absence of such “timely support” strengthened the reaction in Russia. Stalinism, the child of this reaction, became the father of greater defeats, catastrophes and counter-revolutions.
In the struggle for world socialism an understanding of Lenin’s writings and the early policies of Bolshevism are indispensable. The approach to such an understanding is supplied by Lenin’s advice to the communists of Transcaucasia (April 14, 1921):
“Do not copy our tactics, but think out for yourself the reasons why they assumed these peculiar features, the conditions that gave rise to them, and their results; apply in your republics not the letter, but the spirit, the sense, the lessons of the experiences of 1917–1921.”
 



WORLD REVOLUTION 1917-1936:
The Rise and Fall of the Communist International
by C.L.R. James
429 pp. New York, Pioneer Publishers, $3.50.
C.L.R. James is a leader of a British Trotskyist group. His book is an outline history of the last two decades of the world socialist movement. The only other book which covers the same period and scope is Rosenberg’s History of Bolshevism (1934). Rosenberg, who is a former leader of the German Communist Party, presented the widely accepted explanation of Stalinism: it is the legitimate offspring of Bolshevism whose character was always bourgeois-democratic or Jacobin rather than socialist. From this he deduces Lenin’s conception of the party and argues that already in 1921, at the Third Congress of the Comintern, the International was subordinated to the national-state interests of Russia. Stalin merely completed the process.
While James does not directly polemize against Rosenberg’s basic views on the Bolshevik Party, he nevertheless supplies in positive terms a refutation of the view that national-socialism had its origin in Lenin’s leadership. He disposes of both this and the more directly Stalinist view on Lenin’s conception of the relation between the Russian Revolution and the world revolution.
The dispute between the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks in 1917, he shows, was not as to whether Russia was ripe for socialism but rather whether the Russian working class should seize state power in order to give an impetus to the maturing socialist revolution on the entire European continent. Lenin reiterated time and again that Russia by itself could not build socialism but that world capitalism was rotten ripe for socialist transformation. He considered the Soviet state and the Communist International as two instruments serving a common aim: the world socialist revolution. West European social-democracy set out to “prove” the theories of its Russian co-thinkers: with state power in its hands it destroyed the revolutionary workers’ movements, helped restore capitalist stability and handed back power to the traditional bourgeois parties.
The repressive excesses of early Soviet Russia, the limitations on political democracy, the suppression of rival parties – which necessarily led to restrictions in trade union and Soviet democracy – were due not to the centralist conceptions of Lenin but to the need, in the condition of frightful isolation and hostility made possible by social democracy, to maintain workers’ power in a backward country; and thereby further the world working class struggle for emancipation. These emergency measures undoubtedly facilitated the victory of Stalinism.
As political relations between workers’ Russia and the capitalist world, and internal economic conditions improved, Lenin and Trotsky put forward plans for the struggle against bureaucracy and the gradual extension of workers’ democracy (1922-1923). However, the defeat of the German working class in 1923, which made possible a new period of capitalist stabilization, facilitated the victory of the more conservative strata of Soviet society. Stalin rationalized the views and feelings of these strata, particularly the bureaucracy: its lack of faith in the working class revolution, its desire for peaceful co-existence with the capitalist world, in a word, its conservative nationalism. The result was the reactionary theory that Russia by its own forces, without revolution in other countries, could build a socialist society within its national boundaries if ... there were no military intervention. Here is the fountain-head of the conversion of the communist parties into mere appendages of the Russian Foreign Office (and more recently of the GPU).
James however assumes that Stalin (and national-socialism) completely triumphed in 1923. In any case he underestimates the decisive effect of the economic, social and political events subsequent to this date on the definitive victory of Stalinism.
Most striking is his treatment of Stalin’s relation to the German events of 1923. He mars his otherwise valuable chapter on these events by an interpretation expressed by the title of the chapter, Stalin Kills the 1923 Revolution. To substantiate this view he cites two facts: Stalin’s letter to Zinoviev and Bukharin in 1923 wherein he expresses his views on the German situation; and Stalin’s conversation with Zinoviev and Brandler, when he urged the latter to form a coalition government with the left social-democrats in Saxony. But these merely prove that Stalin shared the views of the others and therefore shares their responsibility. James finds this insufficient: “Stalin, master of the apparatus, imposed his views.” He calls the International of 1923 the “Stalin-ridden International” and Zinoviev “his [Stalin’s] mouthpiece of these days”. In this he mistakes the beginning of the process for its culmination. He therefore overlooks the most important specific lesson of the German events, viz., the inevitable crisis of leadership on the eve of revolution, when a sudden break must be made with the old habits of life and methods of work. Brandler’s share of the responsibility is overshadowed; he is pictured as a political puppet of Stalin – which is a gross exaggeration of the actual situation.
The real weakness of the book is its treatment of the role of the party and leadership. James constantly reiterates the paramount importance of this problem but offers the most hazy view of Lenin’s conceptions. He accepts Lenin’s 1903 position as applicable today. Yet in his explanation of it he writes that it was conditioned by the existence of Tsarism. He does not succeed in conveying a clear picture of the specific episodic disputes of 1903 and differentiate them from the more permanent aspects. Nor is it correct to write that Lenin favored “democratic centralism” in 1903. Lenin’s views were avowedly centralist at that time. Nor did Lenin receive a majority on the organization question at the 1903 Congress of the Social-Democratic Labor Party. He was in a minority (23 votes for Lenin, 28 against. Martov’s proposal was adopted by a vote of 28 for, 22 against, one abstention). Lenin’s followers received the name Bolshevik when later at the same Congress, after the Economists and Bundists had left, Lenin received a majority on his propsal for the composition of the editorial board of Iskra.
James of course does not pretend to give a history of this period. Despite the above criticisms his book is a very valuable summary of the causes for the degeneration of the Comintern. He effectively explodes the myth that Stalin is responsible for the industrialization and collectivization plans in Russia. His treatment of the Anglo-Russian Committee, the Chinese revolution and the origin and significance of the People’s Front is an excellent introduction to contemporary events. The book has already made its mark in England where it has been favorably received.
If there is to be another edition of the book a few errors should be corrected:

P.39: Bernstein, Liebknecht, Bebel and Kautsky are incorrectly credited with having “... preached the necessity of the working class seizing the State-power by armed insurrection”.
P.57: “This plan of linking the proletarian revolution with the agrarian revolution was ... Lenin’s own.” The phrase “proletarian revolution” is obviously out of accord with James’ correct exposition of Lenin’s view.
P.78: James incorrectly cites Lenin’s “third of the Letters from Afar, March 21” as the occasion for the latter’s adoption of Trotsky’s theory of the permanent revolution. The date is undoubtedly a typographical error, the letter of March 24 is meant. But a closer reading of this letter will show that Lenin repeats his old views – though in more advanced terms; he repeats his slogan of “democratic dictatorship” and does not exclude a capitalist development for Russia.
P.203: “Fourth Congress” should read “Twelfth Congress”.
P.283: “Fifteenth Party Conference” should read “Fifteenth Party Congress”
P.310, footnote: “It seems that Stalin is the only leading member of the party whom he [Lenin] ever asked to remove from an important position.” As a footnote to “Witness his treatment of Zinoviev and Kamenev”, the remark is incomprehensible. Lenin had advocated the expulsion of these two leaders on the eve of the revolution.
P.417: “Friedrich Adler has proved, in the Witchcraft Trial in Moscow, that Abramovitch in a trial in 1931, confessed to committing crimes in Russia at a time when he was being photographed at a Conference of the Second International.” Adler did not write that Abramovitch confessed, since the latter was not at the trial. Others “confessed” for him.

These errors do not detract from the real merit of the book: a popularization of the Marxist criticism of the theory and practise of Stalinism.



THE CONFERENCE OF THE International Bureau for Revolutionary Socialist Unity held in Paris, February 1938, is hailed by its organizers as “A New Hope for World Socialism”. [1] The active participants of the conference are old adherents of the Bureau: the Independent Labour Party of England, the Socialist Workers Party (SAP) of Germany, the Workers Party of Marxist Unity (POUM) of Spain, the Italian Socialist Party (Maximalists); and in addition the International Communist Opposition (Brandler-Lovestone group which for about two years has been working with the Bureau). Among the other organizations represented at the conference are the Revolutionary Socialist Workers Party (RSAP) of Holland and the Archio-Marxist Communist Party of Greece; observers were present from the American and French Socialist parties.
In August 1933 almost five years ago, the International Communist League (the predecessor of the Fourth International) proposed to the chief organizers of the recent conference, the ILP and the SAP, mutual collaboration in the elaboration of programmatic documents for a new Fourth International. The ILP rejected this proposal out of hand: “Now is not the time to build a new international.” In reality it was still flirting with the Communist International. The SAP formally acepted collaboration with the Bolshevik-Leninists but in practise chose the Norwegian Labor Party and the Doriot group instead. It also shouted: “Now is not the time to organize the new international. We must wait until objective conditions are more favorable. With this as a pretext the SAP did not proceed to work out common documents for a new international; or criticize the documents submitted to it (in draft) by the International Communist League. It preferred to organize the still-born “International Committee for the Struggle for Peace” on a program calling for disarmament, for “international democratic control over war preparations”, etc. (See Leon Trotsky, Centrist Alchemy or Marxism? On the Question of the Socialist Workers Party (SAP) of Germany, New International, July 1935.)
During this period the Brandler-Lovestone group, whose strategy was the reform of the Stalinist International, condemned the Trotskyists as counter-revolutionists who were becoming the leader of centrist groups. The first two Moscow trials were defended by it as proof of the validity of its attack on Trotskyism. The counter-revolutionary attacks of Stalinism against the Spanish revolution and the POUM and the purging of the Red Army shook it out of self-complacency. However, instead of re-evaluating its own past, its support of Stalinism and struggle against Trotskyism, instead of probing the roots of the catastrophic destruction of the Russian Bolshevik party and the Comintern – the only guide to revolutionary politics today – it tenaciously defends the fundamentals of its old course. Today as yesterday this group remains the inveterate opponent of Trotskyism, that is, consistent revolutionary Marxism.
The Paris Conference marked the formal marriage of the Brandler-Lovestone group and the London Bureau. Its decision to organize a world center of revolutionary socialists “who, without adopting the position and the sectarian and factional tactics of Trotskyism, stand for the principles of the proletarian class struggle”, a center that would be preparatory to “a Revolutionary Marxist International” was merely a reiteration of the old position of the London Bureau.
Had the London Bureau and its affiliates reacted correctly to the world-shaking events of the past years? Did experience show that changes in policy, in method, in organization were necessary? Or did it vindicate the previous program of the London Bureau?
Fenner Brockway, who made the main report, repeated the well-known criticisms of the Second and Third Internationals but had not a single word to say about the past policies and activities of the London Bureau and its affiliated organizations. The omission is hardly accidental. In fact, it is the key to the real character of both the old and “new” London Bureau. For a critical analysis would have revealed the platonic nature of its revolutionary socialism and internationalism; the contradiction between its words and deeds; the absence of agreement on any fundamental question; its belated condemnation of the Moscow trials, not to forget Brockway’s proposal for an “impartial committee” to investigate the Moscow trials (four social-democrats) which would also be an “enquiry into the role of Trotskyism in the working class movement”.
Nor do we find a bill of particulars on “the position and sectarian and factional tactics of Trotskyism”. What position? Which tactics? War? People’s Front? Spain? Soviet Union? Moscow Trials? Nothing in the report indicates that any discussion took place on Trotskyism. In any case, the conference agreed to condemn it – each participant for his own particular reason. All were anxious to avoid a serious analysis of the Trotskyist criticisms of the London Bureau, the ILP, POUM, SAP, ICO, etc. For their unity, platonic “revolutionary socialist” resolutions and a joint attack on Trotskyism were sufficient! All the characteristic traits of centrism mark the Paris Conference!
 
1. Basis for Collaboration
The seven-point basis for collaboration (included in the invitation to the conference) repeats the general revolutionary formulae on the class struggle, rejection of Popular Frontism, against civil peace in wartime, support of the colonial peoples, defense of the Spanish revolution and the POUM, defense of the Soviet Union and for proletarian democracy in Russia, for the overthrow of the capitalist state apparatus and the establishment of a proletarian dictatorship which will destroy the capitalist power, provide the maximum of workers’ democracy and “not repeat the errors and terror of the Stalinist regime”.
Collaboration on the above program “does not mean the formation artificially [!] of a new International” (p. 10). On the contrary, it spells the continuation of the old line of the London Bureau, the complete national independence of each affiliated group which in practise will be free to violate the abstract “revolutionary” resolutions on the pretext of “national peculiarities”.
At a time when a strong international center is the crying need of the working class movement, the Paris Conference decides on three practical steps: publication of an international news service, publication of an international discussion journal, and an international fund for revolutionists suffering from persecution. The actual preparation of a new International, the elaboration of programmatic documents, the formation of a strong center, these are postponed to the indefinite future. The old formula of the London Bureau is constantly presented anew at each international conference.
For Lovestone the present London Bureau is practically tantamount to his “new International”:
“We need an International that will be a world federation of parties standing firmly on the same international foundation of revolutionary socialism but each self-reliant and independent in its organization, each itself determining its policy, strategy and tactics on the basis of its own conditions and the needs and interests of the masses.” (Workers Age, March 19, 1938.)
 
2. The People’s Front and Spain
For example, we may add: the London Bureau long ago condemned People’s Frontism. The SAP supported People’s Frontism on the grounds of the peculiarity of the German situation. The POUM entered the Catalonian People’s Front government of Companys, the Stalinists and the anarcho-syndicalists in view of the “national peculiarity” of Catalonia and the “peculiar” character of its petty bourgeoisie.
At the Paris Conference the SAP and the POUM support the resolution against Popular Frontism. Yet, the conference “places on record its agreement in principle, without reserve, with the fundamental political line” of the POUM. The SAP’s Popular Frontist line is overlooked. Why interfere with the “self-reliant and independent” sections so long as they accept revolutionary-sounding resolutions!
Not that criticism is forbidden. On the contrary, even affiliates of the London Bureau may criticize one another. But not at conferences; not in resolution form, in a word, not in a meaningful manner!
At one time, for instance, Fenner Brockway did criticize the POUM’s entry into the Catalonian government. Writing after the May events in Barcelona, he stated:
“The entrance of the POUM into the Government also reflected a considerable departure in policy.”
When the government included socialization of industry into its program, Nin entered the Generalidad.
“Before long the Economic and Military Councils were abolished and the Government took over their duties.
“This was the second stage in the restoration of the power of the capitalist State machine.
“At the time the danger was not fully recognized though Marxist principles should have provided a warning. What has subsequently happened in Barcelona proves how accurate was the analysis of the founder of scientific socialist theory.” (The Truth About Barcelona, emphasis in original.)
Brockway of course does not add: “and how justified was the sharp timely criticism of the POUM’s policy by the Trotskyists” at the moment it was being supported by Brandler, Lovestone and Brockway himself!
“Marxist principles” were reiterated at the Paris Conference but in a characteristic abstract, academic manner, unrelated to the actual experiences or practises of the participants. To criticize the POUM or the SAP at the conference would have been ... “sectarian and factional Trotskyism”! But what is the value of Marxist principles – and what is involved is the Marxian theory of the state! – if they can be violated with impunity?
 
3. The Struggle Against War
Similar “internationalism” is displayed in connection with the struggle against war. The conference resolution [2] condemns “the illusion that peace can be maintained by any ‘Collective System of Peace’ operated by Governments in a Capitalist world, and above all, by the League of Nations ...” (p. 25). In another resolution the policy of appealing to capitalist governments for sanctions against Japan is criticized as “wrong in principle and dangerous in practise” (p. 39).
Taken seriously, these views are in conflict with the position of the Brandler-Thalheimer-Lovestone group. A little over two years ago, during the Italo-Ethiopian war, Thalheimer went to great lengths to defend the position of collective security. (I do not know of any repudiation of this position since then.) In the pages of Controversy, the discussion organ of the ILP (Jan. 1936), he polemized against the ILP opposition to government sanctions and advocated “pressure on the capitalist governments and the League in the direction of application of sanctions against Italy ...” (p. 13). He alleged that the British workers were becoming class conscious only “because the working class raised the demand of sanctions towards the capitalist government” and that an opposition to this policy “is obviously for the benefit of Mussolini, and it has a damaging effect on the struggle for independence of the Abyssinian, the Egyptian and the Italian people ...” (p. 13). The ILP position against sanctions was welcomed by Trotsky, he wrote, “on the ground that it leads actually, and objectively, into an hostile position towards the line pursued by the Soviet Union in the Abyssinian conflict” (p. 14). Apparently Trotsky opposed sanctions because they would help the Soviet Union! Today Brockway and Thalheimer join forces to condemn “the position and sectarian and factional tactics of Trotskyism”.
But has the Brandler-Lovestone group changed its position? It is true that the Workers Age criticizes the Stalinist collective security proposals and at the same tune advocates a governmental embargo or economic sanctions against Japan! (See editorial, Dec. 25, 1937.) It supports the program of the “Keep America Out of War Committee” which demands “American cooperation for peace”. Combine the two proposals and you have international cooperation for economic sanctions against Japan, collective security!
Lovestone can support an independent working class, anti-sanctionist position at Paris and, in New York, carry out the opposite in practise. He can support the “above-class” Keep America Out of War Committee – with its non-working class appeal and set-up – and make speeches in Paris against those who seek to build an anti-war movement not based upon the working class. In all this he does not violate his own conception of “internationalism”.
 
4. The Soviet Union
The Conference did not adopt a definitive resolution on the Soviet Union. The majority draft – proposed by the SAP and adopted as a basis for discussion – avoids all consideration of the class character of the Soviet State; by implication it denies that it is a workers’ state. “It sees in the system of collectivism in USSR, even though it be bureaucratic, an enormous advantage for the world-wide proletariat. This requires of us the defense of the USSR” (p. 53). The resolution further condemns the Moscow trials, the social and foreign policy of the Stalin regime and calls for a return to proletarian democracy “expressed through the application of full democracy within the Communist Party and in an electoral system which gives political freedom to all workers and peasants” (p. 54).
There is no analysis of the causes of Stalinism nor the general strategy for the restoration of proletarian democracy in Russia. It is precisely the failure of the London Bureau to undertake a thorough analysis of the situation in the Soviet Union which resulted in its miserable – at best, petty bourgeois liberal – reaction to the first two Moscow trials. Now it seeks to perpetuate this situation, to satisfy itself with general phrases about the Soviet Union instead of making an exhaustive study of the problem, or a direct critical analysis of the documents of the movement for the Fourth International on the subject.
For the present, it suffices to say that the majority resolution proposal for “the application of full democracy within the Communist Party” is a Utopian demand which shows a complete failure to understand the situation in the Soviet Union and the needs of the working class.
The ILP, the ICO and the Socialist Party of Sweden introduced their own minority resolution on the Soviet Union. (The official report on this and other questions gives the impression of complete unanimity. A summary of the report of the spokesman for the majority resolution is given, no mention is made of a minority nor is the minority resolution itself given.) From the Workers Age report (April 2, 1935) we learn that the resolution “called for the defense of the Soviet Union as a workers’ state with a socialist [!!] economy; for democracy in the CPSU, the Soviet trade unions and the Soviets; for the struggle against Stalinism and solidarity with the revolutionary opposition to the Stalin regime in the Soviet Union”.
In other words, the Brandler-Lovestone position that the CPSU is basically sound, “only” Stalin has to be removed – a task which can be accomplished by “peaceful” means. (The gyrations of Brandler-Lovestone on the Soviet Union have been analyzed in the Socialist Appeal and in the April 1938 and current issues of The New International.) There is little sense in asking Lovestone (or Brockway) what “revolutionary” opposition they propose to support in the Soviet Union or how they intend supporting them. For their resolution on this question will remain as platonic as the others.
It is not accidental that Lovestone in his speech at the conference, where he briefly dwelt on the origin of the Communist International, “overlooked” Lenin’s attacks on centrism in the wotking class movement. For Lovestone (as for Brockway) the term centrism no longer exists in his political vocabulary. For a centrist the term is merely an epithet!
It is thus seen that the centrist parties and groups – now joined by the shell of the old Brandlerist “International” – insist upon continuing their old course. Despite them, however, the need for creating a strong international center of revolutionary Marxists is now greater than ever before. The British New Leader compares the Paris Conference with the left wing Zimmerwald conference of 1915, but forgets that even then Lenin demanded the formation of the Third International. (By the way, how many “Zimmerwalds” does Brockway desire? His bureau has been in existence for about six years!)
The task of the international conference of supporters of the movement for the Fourth International which will convene shortly in Europe is enormous. Despite its small numbers, it will have to take bold steps forward in the creation of the world party of the working class, the Fourth International. The movement will be built against the sham internationalism of the London Bureau and its adherents. For revolutionary Marxists the struggle for proletarian revolution dictates a merciless struggle against centrism as well as reformism and Stalinism. Along this road the masses, including the proletarian revolutionists in the centrist parties, will be won to the banner of Marx and Lenin, the program of world socialism.
 



With the complete approval of Hitler and Mussolini, Russian troops occupied Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina following a twenty-four hour ultimatum to the Rumanian government calling for the ceding of these territories.
Hitler gained control over Rumania and the Balkans, as King Carol accepted the ultimatum and renounced the guarantee of protection pledged a year ago by Anglo-French imperialism. The country is now facing complete dismemberment as Hungary demands the return of Transylvania, a province taken from her after the first world war, and Bulgaria asks for Dobrudjo, a province seized from her in 1913. Hitler will decide how and when these demands will be met.
At some points the Russian troops clashed with the Rumanian army because of the rapid occupation of the ceded territory and, according to reports, because they went beyond the frontiers established by the agreement, apparently by mistake. Fighting also broke out between Stalinists released from prison and local police, and as a result of the increased anti-semitic drive in Rumania which caused Jews to flee to Russian-occupied territory.
At the same time there are persistent reports that Stalin has demanded from Rumania naval bases at Constanza and at the mouth of the Danube; and from Turkey, participation in control of the Dardenelles, the narrow straits linking the Black Sea and the Mediterranean. These reports although not confirmed ore in harmony with the general course of the Stalin-Hitler alliance.
The official Russian explanation for its new annexations are given in Molotov’s ultimatum-note of June 26. The communique declares that the Soviet Union has never reconciled itself to the seizure of Bessarabia by Rumania at the end of the last world war. It claims that the overwhelming majority of the people of that province are Ukrainians and should therefore be united with the Ukrainian Soviet Republic. This change, it continues, is made both possible and necessary by the new military strength of Russia, and the “present international situation;” and is connected with the need af transferring to Russia Northern Bukovina whose people are bound to the Soviet Ukraine by language and national composition. At the same time the transfer of this province would also be a partial compensation for the 22 year domination of Bessarabia by Rumania. The note concludes by demanding the two provinces within twenty four hours, by June 27.
 
Germany Agreed – Stalin Moves
Meanwhile, speculation was rife as to the meaning of Russia’s invasion and as to what Stalin’s next steps would be.
Both Berlin and Rome affirmed that they had approved Russia’s action beforehand, and had advised King Carol to accept Stalin’s demands. According to a United Press dispatch from Berlin:
“A tri-power agreement between Germany, Italy and Russia dividing zones of interest in Southeastern Europe opened the way for the Soviets’ ultimatum against Rumania, it was stated in well-informed Nazi quarters early today.” (New York Times, June 28)
Stalin’s action was therefore no surprise to Berlin or Rome. Nor was Washington unaware of the agreement for control of the Balkans by Germany, Russia and Italy. Last week Labor Action quoted Frank L. Kluckhohn’s Washington dispatch, written before the public announcement of the ultimatum:
“Germany has an agreement with the Soviet Union under which the Russians will be permitted to take over Bessarabia and the Reich is urging the recently constituted Rumanian government to concede this territory without fighting, it was reported in well-informed diplomatic circles here today.” (New York Times, June 26)
In the same dispatch Kluckhohn wrote that Stalin will seek to give his annexation move a “stop-Hitler” appearance. And it appears that he has succeeded in this.
With Russian troops only 100 miles from the Rumanian oil fields, vital source for Hitler, and apparently in control of the Danube, London looks at Stalin’s actions as anti-German, and some people here credit the new British ambassador to Moscow, Sir Stafford Cripps, with proposing it. The dominant view in the press of this country follows the British interpretation.
However, there is no room for doubt that Stalin’s new moves received the full approval of Hitler, and are part of their agreement far the joint control of the Balkans, the Mediterranean and the Near East.
 
Pact Was Basis
Ever since the Stalin-Hitler pact, signed on August 23, 1939, the two parties to the agreement have collaborated in accordance with Article III providing for mutual information and consultation on matters affecting their common interests. Thus it was with the invasion of Poland by Hitler and Stalin and their joint partition of the country. So also in the cases of Stalin’s early occupation of the Baltic countries, his invasion and annexation of a part of Finland, and his more recent seizure of the Baltic countries.
Regular consultations between German and Russian officials took place on all these occasions. Some were made public, others kept secret. For example, the Russian press agency Tass dispatch of May 3 announced that a fortnight earlier the two governments have reached an agreement on the Scandinavian countries. More recently, on the eve of Russia’s occupation of the Baltics, the same source revealed that another agreement “on frontiers” was reached between Stalin and Hitler on June 10, the day of Italy’s declaration of war. Perhaps, at a later date, the exact nature of the Russo-German agreement in regard to the Balkans will also be known.
 
Stalin Asks Hitler
But that such art agreement exists there is no doubt. Hitler permits these seizures of territories by Moscow as compensation for Stalin’s “non-belligerent” support of his war against Anglo-French imperialism; and as a means of his control of the Balkans, the Mediterranean and the Near East. While Hitler wages war on the Western Front, Russia stands as a threat over Turkey and the Balkan countries, above all Rumania, in case they should decide to join the Allies against Germany. Turkey, whose control over the Dardanelles gives it a unique position in the Mediterranean and the Near East, has been forced to break its alliance with England and France. Rumania had to follow suit. Now Hitler controls that country, and with the aid of Stalin aims to dominate the Dardanelles. While Hitler is conducting his war against the British Empire, Russia will assure the regular flow of goods from the Balkans to Germany. Stalin’s aid to Hitler flows from his own desire to increase the revenues, power and prestige of the reactionary bureaucratic rulers of Russia, whose interests have nothing in common with those of the Russian or world working class. Through his partnership with the most powerful and aggressive imperialist power, German Fascism, Stalin has taken over part of Finland, the Baltics, part of Poland, and now Bessarabia and Bukovina. Like Russian Czarist imperialism, Stalin seeks control over the Dardanelles, and with that, influence in the Mediterranean and the Near East. He is ready to share this expansion with German Fascism, and in order to do so, seeks to make Hitler as dependent on Russia as possible. At the same time these new conquests would become defense outposts in case of a German attack on Russia.
 
Russia Weakened
Stalin is working hard for the long term agreement with German Fascism. Hitler has probably promised him such a lasting division of the spoils. Naturally, neither partner trusts the other. And in case of a quick and decisive victory of Hitler over the British Empire, particularly it there is not an immediate war between Germany and the United States, Hitler will turn on Russia, and seek to reduce it to a colony.
Despite apparent strengthening of Russia’s defenses, Stalin’s entire course has in reality weakened the country. His barbaric dictatorship over the Russian people, the wiping out of the old generation of revolutionists, the suicidal purges of the Red Army officer staff, the economic chaos which has resulted from his bureaucratic economic “planning,” his brutal crushing of the national independence of the bordering states, and his destruction of the growing revolutionary working class movements in Germany in 1932–33, and in France in 1934–39. have all contributed to repelling the masses, and weakening the Soviet Union.
At the same time by his support of Hitler’s war against Anglo-French imperialism, Stalin has strengthened. German Fascism in its struggle for world domination and has thereby increased the danger of a successful Hitler attack on Russia.
 
USSR Production Speeded
Within Russia itself, new measures were adopted last week for increased production in preparation for large scale military operations. The eight hour working day replaces the seven hour working day; the seven day week is substituted for the six day week, with a revolving rest-day so that while every worker gets one day of rest in seven, factories will operate on a full seven day schedule.
At the same time warnings were issued against the growing trend among workers to leave their places of employment without permission, and heavy penalties decreed. Undoubtedly, the turnover of labor is far greater than officially admitted, and is the expression of an increasing dissatisfaction among the workers with the existing labor standards and terroristic conditions.
Commenting on these decrees Pravda (June 26) recalls the words of Stalin that “the whole of our people must be kept in a state of mobilization and preparedness in the face of the danger of military attack so that no single ‘accident’ and no tricks on the part of our external enemies may take us by surprise ...”
However, it should be remembered that every adventure of Stalin, such as in Finland or in the Baltics, was undertaken under the guise of “defense” of the Soviet Union. Stalin is now preparing for large scale warfare – as an ally of Hitler if the German Fuehrer permits, or against him, if and when Hitler decides that he no longer needs Russian collaboration and turns on his ally of today.
Whatever course Stalin takes will be dictated by his own reactionary anti-working class, anti-socialist interests. The Russian workers and peasants, supported by the workers of other countries, can defend their country against Hitler and capitalist imperialism only by the relentless struggle for the overthrow of the Stalin regime and for socialist democracy.
 



One hundred and fifty one years ago on July 14, the Great French Revolution broke out when the people of Paris stormed the Bastille, that gruesome prison symbol of the rotten system of feudal terror and oppression. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity – these were the watchwords of the history-making masses who shaped the entire future development of mankind.
Today France is under the iron heel of barbaric Fascism. In agreement with Hitlerism, French big business has established its own totalitarian dictatorship, while the German fascist hordes occupy two thirds of the country. All democratic rights have been abolished; labor organizations suppressed; the right to strike outlawed.
The new French Fascist state has “renounced” the principles of the French Revolution. What a fraud! When was big business ever loyal to the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity? While in France itself the masses had compelled the plutocrats to maintain a parliamentary system and democratic rights of the people, the French rulers, particularly following the last World War, established the second largest and most valuable empire in the world; exercising a dictatorial oppression over 65 million people in Africa and Asia.
Afraid of working class revolution which would put into practice for the first time the ideas of liberty, equality and fraternity, which would take away the banks and factories from the present rulers, and free the colonial peoples from imperialist oppression, big business came to terms with Hitler at the expense of the French people.
At every crucial period in French history when the masses sought to establish their own rule, the wealthy bankers, the big financiers and industrialists, the plutocratic military officers united with the reactionary rulers of a foreign power in order to prevent a society and government of the people, by the people, and for the people.
 
Jacobins Fought Democratic War
So it was in the early days of the French Revolution when the feudal monarchy, the rich bankers and aristocratic officers conspired with England and Prussia and Austria against Revolutionary France. It was the plebeians – the peasants, artisans and shopkeepers – who put an end to feudal servitude, separated church and state, and defeated the reactionary coalition of the mighty European powers on the battle field.
They organized their own government against the wealthy classes, the glorious Jacobin regime of 1793–94, and showed how a genuine and successful democratic defense of the nation, could be conducted. For the first time in history, the armed people replaced the mercenary army; the officers were controlled by the revolutionary representatives of the people; the rich were forced to bear the financial burden of the war. They fought on two fronts: against the internal enemy and the foreign foe who threatened to destroy the Revolution, for liberty, equality, and fraternity; for land, bread and security. They defeated the technically more qualified and experienced troops of the reactionary powers of Europe. But their revolution was destroyed from within by big business and middle class forces who feared the growing movement for real economic and political equality and freedom.
So also when following the Franco-Prussian War, the workers of Paris established their own rule in the famous Paris Commune of 1871, the French government of Thiers and the German Bismarck government cooperated in the bloody suppression of the Communards. This action was hailed by the ruling class press of England and the United States as a crushing blow to “barbarism” and “anarchy”; for whatever the differences among the economic royalists in the various countries they are united in their opposition to working class revolution since it spells the doom of their common system, of wage slavery and oppression.
 
Working Class Independence or Bloody Defeats
The great lesson of history that the working class must be organized independent of, and in uncompromising opposition to the capitalist class can be forgotten only at the cost of continued and greater defeats. The unpardonable crime of the French Socialist and Communist Parties was that they destroyed the independent workers’ movement, particularly at a time when the masses took over the factories and were ready to establish their own rule. The real gains of the inspiring general strikes and street demonstrations of 1934, the great sit-down strikes of 1936, the tremendous growth of the trade union movement were all shattered by the “Peoples Front” coalition of the workers’ organizations and capitalist parties.
The French workers, whose revolutionary traditions are second to none, have shown great recuperative powers in the past. Despite the barbaric domination of Fascism, they will once again arise in the struggle for national freedom, liberty, equality and fraternity. In irreconcilable opposition to all those who defend or compromise with capitalist imperialism, they will in united action with the workers of other countries establish the Socialist United States of Europe, as the first step to the World Socialist Federation.
 



The Christmas-New Year holidays are approaching.
As the old year is rung out, we will hear repeated everywhere the saying: “Peace on earth, good will to all men.”
But there is no peace on earth, and very little is left of good will. The entire world is being engulfed in the second and more dreadful of the two world wars. Never were the alternatives of barbarism or socialism, slavery or freedom, war or peace, posed more urgently.
The voice of the working class is being silenced or falsified. Yet it is that voice alone that is able to speak truly of a new and sanely organized civilization. It is that class alone that is able to usher in the new civilization.
Our press is devoted single-mindedly to making that voice heard. We have not lost one iota of our confidence in the working class, in its ability to reorganize world society, and in the certainty that it will accomplish its great and noble historical mission. We intend to continue being what we have always been, voice and arm of the working class.
The difficulties facing a militant labor paper have not decreased with the outbreak of the war, but rather increased. But so has our determination to continue the fight and bring it to a victorious conclusion.
Our press now asks for, and we believe it deserves, the generous aid of all its readers and supporters. The war has not multiplied the modest sources of revenue that were at our disposal. Our “foreign trade” has been all but crippled by the war. We must rely exclusively now on the aid we can get in the United States. Without increasing this aid, we ore threatened with paralysis.
It is a traditional custom to give gifts to friends on Christmas. Our press – Labor Action, the New International – is asking for a Christmas Gift from you! Relieving the financial burden now carried by the press of the Workers Party, means also mare literature published by us, more pamphlets, more organizers organizing, more speakers speaking, more activity in every field of our work.
Comrades, readers, friends of Labor Action – send in a Christmas Gift to our press! Send as large a financial contribution as you can. Send it as a donation to Labor Action. Or you can send it as a subscription to Labor Action for one of your friends, if you do not already have one yourself. In this way, you will be giving a Christmas present both to our press and to your friend.
Give a Christmas Gift and give generously. And as the post-office authorities say, “Mail early!”



Joseph Carter
Editor


Max Shachtman
Secretary



 



Last Thursday, December 5, the British Independent Labor Party introduced a motion into the House of Commons calling upon the Churchill government to state its war aims, and convene an immediate peace conference with the German government to end the war.
The motion was supported by six members of parliament: the three ILPers, John McGovern, James Maxton and Campbell Stephen; two Labor Party members, David Kirkwood and Dr. Alfred Salter; and the lone Communist Party representative, William Gallacher. The motion was defeated by a vote of 341 to 4, since two ILPers acting as tellers were not able to vote.
While the press reports of the motion and the debate are far from satisfactory, by combining the various dispatches the essential facts appear to be available.
 
Propose Terms
John McGovern told the House: “Do not let us be misled by statements about fighting for freedom, fighting for democracy ...” He recalled that “We (the ILP) backed a policy of appeasement because we believed that anything was better than what would happen in war.”
The House cheered when he praised the late Neville Chamberlain and declared that the latter “will have a bigger place in history than he has at the moment.”
Another ILPer, Campbell Stephen, endorsed McGovern’s speech and added that “if peace is to be based on justice and equity the time for a conference is now because the military situation is one in which the parties are fairly evenly balanced.” He proposed a two fold basis for the peace conference:
“Acceptance by the contending parties of the restoration of freedom in all countries.
“Both parties to put all their material resources which they are willing to devote to war into a common pool to bring about a new civilization in the world.”
But can either of the warring reactionary, imperialist governments accept and carry out such a peace program? McGovern declared that if Hitler refused suitable peace terms this would evoke “response over the heads of the politicians from the people of Germany.” In practical politics this means that if the Churchill government accepted the ILP proposal the latter would be just another instrument in the war of British imperialism against German imperialism. Or can the Churchill government offer a genuine democratic peace? If the ILPers reply in the affirmative, then (hey are declaring lhat Churchill can wage a democratic, progressive war against Germany.
To state the matter positively: a government waging a reactionary war cannot establish a democratic peace.
Clement R. Attlee, Labor Party Deputy Leader and Churchill’s Lord Privy Seal, speaking for the Government was able to ask the ILPers:
“If it comes to a conference and if Hitler prefers to listen to what is called the voice of reason and says he prefers his scheme and rejects the honorable member’s idea of liberty and social justice will the honorable member fight or give way!”
As to the Government’s war aims Attlee was compelled to declare: “I am not in a position to say when a statement of our aims can be made.” Of course, he added the customary and empty promise of all belligerent powers: “Our aim is to try to establish a peace of free people.” He forgot to add that an example of this aim is the British imperialist oppression of its own colonials, notably the Indian people who demand national independence now.
While the ILPers are against the war, against the imperialist war aims of the Churchill government, their opposition is of a confused, pacifist character; that is, they support, advocate and therefore take responsibility for what in practise can be nothing but a reactionary, imperialist peace.
When Churchill’s predecessor, Neville, Chamberlain, in September 1938 signed the Munich Pact giving Czechoslovakia to Hitler, the ILP members of Parliament supported this act of “appeasement” because they could see no alternatives but support of “reactionary peace or reactionary war.” However, the Munich “peace” meant the oppression of the Czechs and Slovaks by German imperialism. The ILPers in supporting Chamberlain’s “peace” unwittingly assumed responsibility for the deal made at the expense of these peoples.
So today, the Maxtons, McGoverns and Campbells, pacifists first and socialists as a secondary vocation, see no “practical,” “immediate,” alternative to the present imperialist war except the advocacy of a Churchill-Hitler peace, which can be only a reactionary peace.
 
Are We For Peace?
But are not revolutionary socialists for peace? Of course! However, we struggle for a peace based on national freedom for all the peoples, a genuinely democratic peace which Churchill and Hitler can not establish. Such a peace cannot be attained by appeals to the imperialists to establish a “new civilization” based on “justice and equity.”
Nor can it be obtained by limiting working class or socialist action to a choice between support of imperialist appeasement or imperialist war. As an opposition party, revolutionary socialists oppose both courses of their government, and do not take any responsibility for the actions of their ruling class. The general socialist tasks are patiently to explain to the workers the reactionary nature of their government’s policies and actions; to defend the interests of the masses against government and employers’ attacks on their living standards and civil liberties; to lead them towards working class power. (We are not considering here the specific demands and slogans in an anti-war program in Britain, but rather its general character.)
For example, instead of calling for e Churchill-Hitler peace conference, which if successful would mean “appeasement”, revolutionary socialists would have utilized the tribunal of the House of commons to show why the imperialists cannot establish a democratic peace. It the question were then raised how can a democratic peace be achieved with Hitler, the answer would be that if the British workers take state power into their own hands, liberate the oppressed colonials and themselves destroy British imperialism, they could then wage a genuine democratic war against Hitler: a war in which they could arouse the German workers against Fascism, without arousing among these workers the fear of a new and more oppressive Versailles Treaty in case of a Churchill victory.
Do we then oppose the presentation of specific proposals in the House of Commons? Of course not. But these must be in harmony with socialist opposition to the war and imperialism, and have as their aim the winning of the masses away from support of the government, and towards socialist revolutionary action.
This is not the case with the ILP motion for a Churchill-Hitler peace conference. On the contrary, ILP pacifism strengthens the Churchill government’s support among the workers because the masses fear ruling class appeasement of Hitler which this policy supports.
 
Whither the ILP?
Whether or not the action of the ILP parliamentary group was taken in agreement with the National Council of the party, or the support of the majority of its members is not known. The Party itself, though small, is actually a bloc of conflicting tendencies; from supporters of the war, to pacifist opponents as represented by the parliamentary fraction, to revolutionary socialists. When the parliamentary group supported Chamberlain’s Munich policy, the majority of the leadership and members of the ILP disagreed, but no action was taken against the group. The party, issues of which have reached New Leader, official organ of the this country, has generally put forward a socialist position against the war. However, there appears to be a growing tendency in the ILP for support of the war.
 



Lord Halifax has been appointed to succeed the late Lord Lothian as British Ambassador to the United States. He received prior endorsement by President Roosevelt, and is being acclaimed by the daily press as a worthy spokesman of the British people.
Now there is no doubt that he represents the British people – in fact, the “right” people, the aristocracy of wealth and privilege and power. As for the great mass of working people, Viscount Halifax – now that Neville Chamberlain is no more – has the honor of being the most hated man in the Isles. Quite a distinction!
For them Halifax is the symbol of the Tory ruling class, that powerful collectivity of rich parasites, polite hypocrites and accomplished liars; a worthy gentleman and good diplomat – if we recall that a gentleman is one who never does productive work and a diplomat is a skillful liar.
 
In the Cliveden Set
Halifax – as Chamberlain – is remembered by His Majesty’s subjects as a leading spokesman of the notorious Cliveden Set, that group of arch-reactionary bankers, big business men, army officers and politicians who helped finance and rearm Hitler, and sought to reach an agreement with him which would avoid his “muscling-in” on their own rich preserves – above all, the British Empire. They looked with great envy and hope at the growth of Fascism – envy because it had destroyed the nuisance of the labor movement and political democracy; hope because here appeared the answer to the threat of “Bolshevism”, and the power which, by war, could open the Russian market to capitalist exploitation and oppression.
They thought that Hitler, and big business behind him, would be their allies, if not their tools, in bringing order into the growing chaos. A “new social order,” to use the popular phrase. Their last heroic and magnanimous effort in this direction was the Munich “appeasement” of 1938. The big-hearted gentleman sought to “appease” Hitler by handing over to him what was not theirs: Czechoslovakia. Consult the people who were being placed under Fascist barbarism? Old-fashioned nonsense! Well then, consult the government of Czechoslovakia? Why go through with that formality!
Halifax, who was Viceroy of India from 1926 to 1931, is a past master of the art of shouting for democracy while crushing national freedom. In fact, this worthy gentleman had to be recalled by his government in the midst of the widespread civil disobedience campaign waged by the Indian people against British tyranny.
Yes indeed; Halifax is an authoritative voice of Tory Britain. Outwitted by the upstart Hitler, he and his class could not surrender their fabulous plunder – the British Empire – without a, struggle to the last drop of blood ... of the British people, and of the American people. In any case, unless a new agreement between the gangster powers could be arranged.
 
His Hands Are Full
But Lord Halifax has two tasks to accomplish in the United States. The first, is to get the maximum military aid for his cause – airplanes, tanks, battleships, merchant ships, and finally manpower. The second, and for him as important, is to drive as good a bargain for this assistance as possible. It is known that Halifax’s friends have a total investment in the Western Hemisphere of nine billion dollars. (The three billion dollars of British securities usually referred to covers only the United States.)
American big business wants this dough. Before Roosevelt announced his new three billion dollar “lease-loan” program for war materials to Britain, bankers in this country were considering another neat scheme to skin the cat. They talked of organizing a private finance corporation to finance British purchases in the United States. The British would, pay in cash as provided in the Johnson Act, and deposit their securities – bonds and stocks – as collateral for the loan. If at the end of fifteen or twenty years the British did not pay back the loan or did not meet the agreed upon annual payments, then the securities would become the property of the private finance corporation. And to cap the climax, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation – a government body already engaged in subsidizing British orders in the United States – would be called upon to help this scheme by buying and selling these securities as befits the interest of the private bankers.
Whether this ingenious plan will be a feature of Roosevelt’s new “lease” proposal or not, Halifax has the job of fighting on two fronts: not only against his German enemy, but also against his American competitors. His hands will be full.
However, if we are to believe what we read in the New York Times, the new British Ambassador has the personal qualities for this Herculean job:
“He believes in the decencies of international and individual conduct as he believes in the the ten commandments and the Sermon on the Mount.”
These are the credentials of the Christian gentleman and imperialist spokesman.
 



On January 12, 1941, a “People’s Convention” to organize a movement for a “People’s Government” for peace will be held in London, England.
The Convention Call, addressed to workers, socialists, trade unionists, the lower middle class, “democrats and anti-fascists,” is signed by a long list of names which reads like a roll call of the Communist Party. So far as is known, no non-Stalinist organization has endorsed the Convention. The Independent Labor Party will have nothing to do with it. And of course neither will the pro-war Labor Party.
The Call presents the current line of the British Communist Party. The Tory rulers are denounced for helping to place Hitler in power, and for getting the country into the war; for the profiteering, and high prices and taxes which aim to place the war burdens on the masses; for the inadequate air raid protection of the masses. The Churchill Government is attacked for its failure to grant national freedom, and for its “scarcely-concealed hostility” to the Soviet Union. The Labor Party leaders are criticized for their participation in the coalition government.
The Convention Call also proposes six points for the consideration of the delegates: defense of living standards, defense of democratic and trade union rights, adequate air raid precautions, friendship with the Soviet Union, a People’s Government, and a people’s peace.
The advanced British anti-war workers know the real purpose behind the present policy of the Stalinists and their Convention. They know that the policies of the Communist Party before and since the present war were and are dictated by the reactionary interests of the Russian Stalinist bureaucracy.
 
Stalinists Supported Present War
For example, before the present war when Stalin was united with the democratic imperialists of Britain and France, the English Stalinists were ready to support the war of their master’s imperialist allies against Hitler. When the present war broke out, the British Stalinists, as their French friends in the Chamber of Deputies who voted for war credits, supported the war of Britain against Germany. the Central Committee of the party issued a statement in September 1939 calling for “support of all necessary measures to secure the victory of democracy over Fascism.” Despite the Stalin-Hitler pact, which took them by surprise, they still expected that Russia would be allied with Anglo-French imperialism. The C.C. statement therefore summarized the Stalinist position in the first days after the outbreak of the war as follows:
“Indeed, the essence of the present situation is that the people have now to wage a struggle on two fronts. First, to secure the military victory over Fascism: second, to achieve this, the political victory over Chamberlain and the enemies of democracy in this country. These two aims are inseparable, and the harder the efforts to win one, the more sustained the activity to win the other.”
A signal from Moscow changed this line. The Communist Party was informed that the Russian-German Pact meant that the British Stalinists must oppose their own government and the war. However, the Stalinist fellow-travellers, the serious People’s Fronters, such as Harold Laski, John Strachey, Aneurin Bevin, Victor Gollanz, remained faithful to the old pro-war line.
 
Opposed Colonial Independence
Today, to cite another example, the Communist Party is for the national independence of the colonial peoples. However, when Stalin was allied with the democratic imperialists, the Stalinists were told that the national independence of the oppressed peoples had to be subordinated to “collective security” against Hitler “in the interests of defeating fascism, the mortal enemy of the working class,” to quote the words of a leader of the Communist International, Manuilsky (March 1938). The British Communist Party issued a statement on The Colonies and Fascism elaborating on the idea that the “main enemy” of the British colonials was not British imperialism but rather German Fascism; and that the “Trotskyist and semi-Trotskyist type of propaganda which, in the name of repudiating existing imperialist domination, in practice acts as the apologist of fascist aggressive aims in relation to the colonial peoples.” (Labour Monthly, August 1938). (The exact same line was pursued by the American Stalinists in regard to Yankee imperialism in Latin America).
But lo and behold, as soon as Stalin’s henchmen adjusted themselves to their Fuehrer’s alliance with German Fascism, they wrote a new statement (The Colonies and War) condemning Britain’s attempt to drag the colonies into the war (that is, the policy they themselves had advocated yesterday!), forgetting about their old bogey of Fascism as the “main danger” in the colonies, and hypocritically announcing that “Communists have always fought for the right of all peoples to complete self-determination ...” (Labour Monthly, December 1939). Of course, this time they found it inexpedient to mention the “Trotskyists”!
Their old line called for a “People’s Government,” a coalition of the Labor Party, Liberal Party and “anti-fascist conservatives” – such as Eden and Churchill! – which in alliance with Russia would wage war “in defense of democracy against fascism”.
Today, as in the Call for the January Conference, they also call for “A People’s Government, truly representative of the whole people and able to inspire the confidence of the working people of the world” and for “a people’s peace that gets rid of the causes of war.” This government would establish “friendship with the Soviet Union.”
What does this “People’s Government” mean? Why, of course, any British government which forms a military alliance with Russia! All the rest is mere verbiage. So long as the Churchill government, either because of its own interests or because of Stalin’s, does not have such a military alliance the Communist Party will be against British imperialism in the war. However, if the Churchill Government or its imperialist successor does take this step then the Stalinists will forget all about freedom for the colonies, democratic rights for the workers, and particularly the anti-war fighters, in a word, will once again be ardent defenders of Union Jack imperialism. The interests of the British workers play no role whatever in determining Communist Party policy.
 



PITTSBURGH, Pa. – Fresh from the crushing blows meted to them at the “harmony” meeting of the National Committee of the Socialist Party, the New York “Militants” won signal organizational victories at the eighth national convention of the Young Peoples Socialist League held here during the week-end of July 19 to 21.
Approximately one hundred delegates, a little less than half of them New Yorkers, were present at the convention. However, most of the delegates did not participate in the proceedings and were constantly in a state of expectancy. They did not know precisely what to expect. No pre-convention documents had been prepared. No pre-convention discussion had taken place. In many cases delegates were elected because they and none other were able to go to Pittsburgh.
 
No Political Discussions
The convention was run by the New York and Chicago top caucuses. The arrangements made impossible any adequate discussions of the problems confronting the socialist movement and the Yipsels in particular. The three evenings of the convention period were devoted to public affairs, a mass meeting, social affair and banquet respectively. The rules of the convention limited speakers on resolutions to three minutes, seven minutes allotted to reporters on resolutions and a total of one hour for any one resolution.
However, even these provisions were not carried out. No political resolutions came before the convention delegates. They were discussed in sub-committees, or referred, without recommendation, to the incoming National Committee. These included an anti-Stalinist resolution on the Franco-Soviet pact.
Breaking socialist precedent the convention was closed to the public and the press. So little was accomplished that the Yipsels, contrary to their plans, were unable to issue a press release.
The supporters of the N.Y. “Militants” controlled a majority of the convention. The other delegates were conservative Yipsels (of the Thomas-Hoan-Hoopes type). One delegate, from St. Louis, was the sole R.P.P.A.er there. The New York Old Guard had no direct supporters as they had organized a few months ago their own rival youth organization in New York, the Young Socialist Alliance.
The characteristic “Militant” policy of evading programmatic questions and substituting for them organization measures, set the tone of the convention. The New York “Militants” won a majority on the National Committee. Three of the eleven members of the new committee are Right wing socialists of the type referred to above.
In addition the national office was taken over by the “Militants.” On previous occasions the New York Yipsel organization came into conflict with the national office. Among these instances are the ruling of the old National Committee against internal statements and, far more important, the reluctance of Dancis and McDowell to support the Yipsels in their fight against the New York Old Guard. Both were dissatisfied with the action of the New York organization in withdrawing support from the New Leader, though they were compelled to endorse it at the last meeting of the National Committee.
These differences were not presented to the membership or the convention. Ernst Erber, Chicago Left winger, was elected without contest to the national chairmanship, with thirteen negative votes. Ben Fisher, former New York City secretary of the Yipsels, defeated Winston Dancis as national secretary by about a dozen votes. Dancis was however re-elected to the National Committee.
 
Political Fight Eroded
Undoubtedly an important reason for evading a political fight was the fear of the “Militants” that they could not be able to reach agreement amongst themselves and with their allies. Before the convention it was rumored in Yipsel circles that a revolutionary program would be presented to the convention. Such plans undoubtedly existed but they were not carried out at the convention.
The “Militants” chief interest is to capture organization posts in the S.P. and Yipsels in preparation for the 1936 convention. To accomplish this end, they not only put the paramount question of program into the background but penalize those who present a revolutionary position. A few weeks ago the New York city secretary and organizer of the Y.P.S.L. were forced to resign their posts because they signed a Left wing statement in preparation for the national convention. Now, a leading member of this group, considered a worthy candidate for the new National Committee was suddenly dropped from the slate because the “Militants” feared that his election would make the Yipsels a target for the Old Guard and would antagonize Thomas-Hoan-Hoopes.
A significant action of the convention was the decision to raise the maximum age limit from 25 to 30. This step is intended to strengthen the “Militant” control of the Yipsels. It is at the same time an admission of the inadequacy of the recruiting power of the Socialist Party. Efforts will be made in the party to nullify this decision.
Gus Tyler, New York “Militant,” was elected as the delegate to the International Youth Congress to be held next month.
The convention had before it an appeal for a united front from the Young Communist League. Mac Weiss and Dave Doran, national leaders of the Stalinist youth, appeared before the resolutions committee to present the case of their organization. The committee adopted a motion of thanks to the Y.C.L. delegation and took no further action.
 
Y.C.L.er Warns of “Trotskyism”
Nevertheless, the delegation’s work was not at an end. It had another task: to counteract “Trotskyist” influenced Weiss warned several “Militant” leaders to beware of the “Trotskyists.” He cited a recent statement of a leader of the French Socialist youth that the “Trotskyists” are dangerous enemies of the working class who must be expelled from the movement. This benevolent advice was met with skeptical smiles by the young socialists.
The Stalinists are fearful of “Trotskyist” influence in the Yipsels. Many young socialists are sympathetic to “Trotskyism” even though they believe that their place is in the socialist movement. They have been inoculated against Stalinism though they are not yet ready to break with socialist Centrism.
The Revolutionary Policy Publishing Committee distributed a mimeographed statement to the delegates. They explained their position on the crisis in the socialist party, the decision of the National Committee and the actions of the “Militants.”
The statement reads:
“Although the situation appears black and nothing seems to bring hope, let us not despair. The principles for which Marx and Engels fought, for which our own Gene Debs carried on, call aloud for reaffirmation and adherence. We can go forward to a party that will not be the Left wing of the Roosevelt administration as the Right wing intends; nor a party that builds its hope and aspirations on the foundations of the sand and water of compromising, Centrist principles. Our party can still become revolutionary by fearlessly endorsing Left wing principles. Towards this end we of the R.P.P.A. believe that we have made contributions.”
The statement further urges the Yipsels to consider the R.P.P.A. program and offers its press and teachers to the young socialists. The ineffectiveness of the R.P.P.A.,. leaving aside its programmatic position on many vital questions, is clearly shown by its weakness in the Yipsels, where a Left wing should have its greatest support.
The Yipsel convention revealed the true condition of the Yipsels and their “Militant” leadership. Until now dependent upon Thomas-Hoan-Hoopes, they did not carry their fight outside of New York City. Now they are out to capture posts. Program and policies on the burning questions of the day, these are put into the background. The result is not only the impeding of a Left wing development but the organizational stagnation of the Yipsels. Little effort is made to educate the ranks. Even the inadequate organization steps taken are done without the members understanding the reasons.
 
Genuine Left Wing Needed
The results of the convention once again affirm the need tor a revolutionary Marxian Left wing in the Yipsels. “Broad” and thereby ineffective – in a revolutionary sense – “Militant” groups are possible only by the refusal to adopt a program. The fraud of “unity at all costs” was revealed for what it is worth by the disruption of the bloc between the N.Y. “Militants” and Thomas-Hoan-Hoopes formed at the Detroit convention at the recent National Committee meeting of the S.P.
A Left wing which can make valuable contributions to the American revolutionary movement can be founded only on a revolutionary Marxian program, distinguished in. theory and practice from all shades of reformism and Centrism.
It will not arise spontaneously out of “growing militancy” but only by the conscious efforts of Left wing socialists. The next step of revolutionary socialists, too long delayed, is the formulation of such a program and the constitution of a genuine revolutionary Marxian group.
 




The Young Communist International has decided to dissolve itself! Such is the meaning of the report of the Sixth Congress of the Y.C.I. recently held in Moscow given by Gil Green, national secretary of the Young Communist League of the United States and member of the Executive Committee of the Comintern.
The Daily Worker (Nov. 2, 1935) informs us:
“Asked what new developments in the life of the Young Communist League would result from the Sixth Congress, Comrade Green stated:

“‘In the first place, the Congress established a new policy which proposes the reconstruction of the present Y.C.L. into a non-party mass organization which while clearly supporting a socialist goal will not take a position on how socialism is to be concretely accomplished, thus opening the way for organic unity with the Young People’s Socialist League in all countries.’”
 

Capitulation to Right Wing
Reconstruction? Organizationally, it means a fusion of the Y.C.L. and its innumerable youth clubs with the Y.P.S.L. and the countless liberal and semi-radical youth organizations which favor “a new social order” but are “vague” on how it can “be concretely accomplished.” In a word, the conversion of the American Youth Congress into a membership organization – an “American Youth League”!
Politically, it signifies capitulation to the right centrist wing of social democracy, an explicit disavowal of the conception of a revolutionary youth movement established by the early congresses of the Comintern and Y.C.I. and an admission of failure and bankruptcy.
However, this “new policy” – as all organizational lines – results from basic political conceptions. In this case the politics underlying the new course were adopted by the Seventh Congress of the Comintern. In all essentials the decisions of the congress are identical with the position of the right centrists of the Second International, Theodor Dan of the Russian Menshevik party, Otto Bauer of the Austrian Social Democratic Party, Jean Zyromski and Amedeo Dunois of the French Socialist Party. (Compare their theses on Socialism and the War Danger – Socialist Call, Oct. 12, 1935 – with the decisions of the Seventh Congress. It is worth noting that the October issue of the Communist, official organ of the American C.P., reprints these theses.)
 
Social Patriotic Organic Unity
Given this basic agreement between the social-patriots, is it not logical that the same congress should decide in favor of “organic unity”? And now, in order to hasten this process, the Y.C.I. proposes organic unity with the Young Socialist International; and prepares itself by “reconstruction”: abandonment in theory what it long ago deserted in practice, the revolutionary road to socialism.
What will this new organization offer as the solution of imperialist war. of Fascism, of capitalism? Not the revolutionary struggle for socialism, but a medley of pacifist and social-patriotic claptrap!
This at a time when large sections of the Young Socialist International are taking the road of revolutionary Marxism! As they move to the left, away from reformism and social-patriotism, the Stalinists openly accept basic social democratic conceptions and offer organic unity on a program which omits the quintessential of Marxism: the road to socialism.
In France they have prepared the road for organic unity by directing the expulsion of the revolutionary Socialists of the Seine district who fought against social-patriotism. (Two leaders of the Y.C.I. were sent to France with that as their mission!)
 
Young Socialists Move Left
In Belgium, among the Young Socialist Guard, they failed to make any impression. The leader of the Revolutionary Socialist Action group, which is very influential in the organization of young Socialists, has recently through its secretary, Walter Dauge, openly pledged solidarity with the expelled French youth in their struggle against social-patriotism.
In the United States the Young People’s Socialist League, particularly on the question of war, is far to the left, that is, closer to revolutionary Marxism, than the Young Communist League. At the American Youth Congress held early this year in Detroit, the Y.P.S.L. together with the Spartacus Youth League fought against the Stalinist youth (Y.C.L. and N.S.L.) in favor of a resolution opposing the United States government in any war that it may undertake. (The Stalinists were against this resolution because of its meaning in case of a military alliance between the United States and the Soviet Union!)
Far more striking Is the manifesto issued by the national office of the Y.P.S.L. for International Socialist Youth Week, October 1 to 7 (Socialist Call, Sept. 21, 1935) The manifesto scores pacifism, the social-patriotism of the Communist International and, what is of special significance, the “social patriotism wherever it exists in the Socialist movement.” Though not a clear statement of revolutionary, it marks a great stride forward in that direction.
 
Manifesto of Yipsels
To quote the salient points:
“Pacifists who hold out the prospect of peace through arbitration or disarmament confuse and weaken the fight of the working class against war. Only the struggle of the workers of each country against their own war-making capitalist class can delay the impending conflict. Only the conquest of power by the working masses, and the destruction of capitalism can bring permanent peace to the world.
“At this most critical time, when a brief period for the mobilization of the labor movement against all capitalist war yet remains, we witness the spectacle of the Communist International bidding its seventh congress and adopting a position identical with that of the social-patriots of 1914. To support ‘democratic’ governments against fascist governments, to refuse to take part in the revolutionary struggle against those imperialists who happen to be allied with the Soviet Union, to speak of ‘progressive’ wars fought by the capitalist governments in this day of imperialism is to desert even the pretense of being a revolutionary movement.
“We oppose all imperialist war. We agree with the St. Louis Proclamation of the Socialist Party in 1917 that the only war that justifies the workers taking up arms is to free the working class from the chains of capitalism.
“Our task is to educate the entire membership of the League to understand the Socialist position on war and to train them to better carry on our anti-war activity. As part of such education and training must be a merciless criticism of pacifism and social-patriotism wherever it exists in the Socialist movement.”
This is new language for the young Socialists. The Y.P.S.L. however, has never defined what it means by “conquest of power.” A major task in the education of the young Socialists is precisely in the significance and form of the revolutionary road to socialism. On the question of war, it is essential that simultaneous with the clarifications of the general problems which it poses, the immediate practical issues be understood and coped with. These include the support of colonial and semi-colonial peoples in their war against imperialism (as in the case of Ethiopia today), the question of sanctions, “neutrality,” and what constitutes a platform for the united front against war. In practice this will lead to a closer collaboration of the Y.P.S.L. and the S.Y.L.
The new course of the Young Communist League will, not be welcomed by the militant young Socialists: except as another proof of Stalinist bankruptcy!
How will it he met by the members of the Y.C.L. who were never consulted prior to the adoption of the policy and are now presented with an accomplished fact – and asked “to discuss”? In so far as they have trained at all it has been the barracks training of soldiers receiving orders from above. Most of the young workers who enter the Y.C.L. to participate in the revolutionary labor movement reply to these orders by, after a few months stay, leaving the Y.C.L. Others remain “faithful” soldiers. Still others raise questions or dissent from the order and are expelled, usually for “Trotskyism.”
However, the abrupt turn of the Young Communist International will undoubtedly awaken many of the young Stalinists out of their uncritical position. They will be compelled to re-evaluate the program they formerly accepted and be more receptive to revolutionary Marxism, the program of the Workers Party and the Spartacus Youth League.
The growing desire among the youth for revolutionary unity which is being distorted by the Young Communist International must be utilized for the genuine revolutionary movement. The turn to the right of the Y.C.I. as well as the turn to the left of the Y.P.S.L. present the Spartacus Youth League with exceptionally favorable conditions for presenting its program of revolutionary Marxism as the basis for the regroupment and unity of the militant youth in the struggle against imperialist war, Fascism and capitalism and for working class emancipation.
 




Last Friday’s New York meeting of the Young Communist League on the new turn of the Young Communist International was converted into a forum against Stalinist social-patriotism.
The several thousand youth, mostly students, who came to the meeting were given innumerable pieces of anti-Stalinist literature by the Spartacus Youth League, the Young People’s Socialist League and others. As a prelude to a dry humanitarian speech by Gil Green the audience was treated to some soothing music. The young Socialists were given the platform following Green’s speech. The chairman announced that two representatives of the Spartacus Youth League had asked for the floor but that there was not “sufficient time” for any more discussion. This after only two Yipsels and no one else had been permitted to speak!
Following the meeting a group of Spartacans assembled in the street and lustily sang revolutionary songs and shouted slogans, most popular of which was “I knows it Browder” and the slogan of “Fourth, Fourth, Fourth International.”
 
Green Sees the “Light”
Green dished out the new line of the Young Communist International. He sounded like a Y.M.C.A. director who had just seen the “light” and urged “the unity at all costs of the young generation against war and Fascism.” Nothing new was added to his interview in the Daily Worker and Young Worker on the “reorganization” of the Y.C.I. preparatory to organic unity with the Young Socialist International.
The Young Communist League is today nothing but a “young Communist party,” he stated. It must become a mass youth educational organization not directly affiliated with any political party. He denied that this meant the “liquidation” of the Y.C.L. but avoided any explanation of the omission of the road to power in the proposed program of the “reorganized” league.
Green declared that the “communists” In this broad league would “democratically” urge that the organization have fraternal relations, engage in joint activities, etc. with the Communist Party. If organic unity were achieved between the Y.C.L. and the Y.P.S.L. then the young Socialists would have the right to propose that the new youth ^organization have certain relations with the Socialist Party. This, he stated, would be a step to organic unity of the S.P. and C.P.
The response of the audience indicated that the young Communists present were uneasy about the liquidation of the Y.C.I. but seemed to be reassured by the remarks of Green.
Green had apparently forgotten all about the struggle against capitalism! Nor did he even attempt to explain the program of the Y.C. L. on the struggle against war and struggle against Fascism. Only bare formulas were presented: “unity of all non-Fascist and progressive youth,” “organic unity of the Y.C.L. and the Y.P.S.L.”
 
YPSL Denounces Social Patriotism
The young Socialists who spoke – in “semi-official capacity” since the Y.P.S.L. had refused to send an official spokesman – followed the line of the leaflet issued by their organization. This is the first leaflet ever issued by the Yipsels to the Y.C.L. in New York and follows on the heels of a young Socialist leaflet which greeted Browder’s meeting in Chicago several weeks ago.
The leaflet scores the “liquidationism” of the Y.C.L. “as an abandonment of the struggle for a Socialist revolution.” (The inference might logically be drawn from this that the Y.C.L. directly affiliated to the C. P. is a revolutionary organization.)
The social-patriotism of the Comintern is attacked.
“The Comintern justified the split 15 years ago mainly on the ground that the International had to exclude all remnants of social-patriotism, all those who had supported the imperialist war because they considered their bourgeoisie to be aligned on the ‘just side.’ Today a similar situation is developing. Again we find sections of the working class (including the Communist International) beating the war drums in the name of the revolution. The C.P. frankly states that if, in the next world war, the U.S. finds itself aligned on the same side as the U.S.S.R. (against Japan or Germany) then it will support that war by the Government.”
Here is a clear cut statement against social-patriotism.
 
The Twenty-One Points
But strangely enough, this statement appears in the same leaflet wherein the twenty-one conditions for admittance to the Communist International (adopted 1920) is attacked as the cause of the split in the international working class movement.
“We are glad that they (the leaders of the Comintern – J.C.) now wish to take measures to overcome the split in our movement which has lasted since 1919 and for which the famous ‘21 points’ were largely responsible. At that time, it was the theory of the Communist leaders that it was inadmissible for revolutionaries to be in the same party with the reformists and centrists. It was with this guiding idea that they drove toward the thoroughgoing split which your leaders are bemoaning at present.
“We of the Y.P.S.L. agree with the goal of a homogeneous revolutionary party, disciplined and centralized, which will be capable of overthrowing the capitalist state. But we consider that such an end can be achieved only by a process of discussion and self-development within the party, not through an artificial split engineered from without as the Comintern leaders believed. We therefore welcome the new turn of the C.P. and the Y.C.L. toward organic unity as a complete repudiation of the organizational principle upon which the C.I. was founded and which gave it Its reason for separate existence.”
Here we have a combination of an ignorance as to how the Comintern was formed and a confusion on the conception of a revolutionary party.
 
Let History Speak
In the first place the split in the labor movement was caused by the social democratic betrayal during and following the World War. Strangely enough, this was stated, by the young Socialist speaker at the Y.C.L. meeting – who is the author of the leaflet!
Second, the organizational split with the social-patriots was not “an artificial split engineered from without.” One has but to read, for example, the history of the origins of the French and American Communist parties. In the first case Lenin urged the Communists to stay in the S.P. and it was more than a year and a half after the, Comintern was formed (March 1919) that the Communists won a majority in the French S.P. (Dec., 1920)! The party affiliated to the Comintern.
In the United States the majority of the S.P. was expelled in the most arbitrary fashion because of its support to the program of the Third International. They “agreed with the goal of a homogeneous revolutionary party, disciplined and centralized” (present statement of Y.P.S.L.) and. attempted to achieve this end – which means a break with the social-patriots of all stripe “by a process of discussion and self-development within the party.”
 
Green Nods His Head
The leaflet confuses Stalinism with the early Comintern under Lenin. Stalinism has repudiated, the 21 points in regard to the political struggle against social-patriotism because it has adopted this treacherous program as its own. And therefore it proposes organic unity to the social-patriots of the Second International!
Gil Green’s reply to the young Socialists’ charge of social-patriotism was an admission of the accuracy of the charge. He did not deny that the Y.C.L. would support the United States if it were in alliance with the Soviet Union in the coming war. He stated very dramatically that “we would force the government to support the Soviet Union in case of war”!
The young Stalinists present were undoubtedly impressed by the anti-Stalinist literature given to them. The statement of the Spartacus Youth League clearly explained the political basis and significance of the new turn of the Y.C.I.
 



Fascism and Social Revolution
by R. Palme Dutt
289 pp. New York, International Publishers 1934, $1.75.
John Strachey has called Dutt’s latest book “incomparably the best book on Fascism that has yet been written”. Undoubtedly it is most comprehensive in scope; for it begins with the socio-historical basis for Fascism, enters into an analysis of the theory and practise of Fascism, its victory in Italy, Germany, and Austria; the tendencies towards Fascism in Western Europe (France) and the United States, the relation between Fascism and social democracy, etc.
It is obvious that Dutt has been assigned the Sisyphus task of systematizing the Stalinist theory in this field in popular fashion and to supply a suave apology for the capitulation of the German Communist party to Fascism. Only an author whose style and reputation as a Legal Marxist – having refrained from active participation in the decade-old struggles which have racked the world revolutionary movement – could make palatable – for some! – that which when served by less skilled hands is entirely indigestible.
Dutt has now more openly come out as an apologist for Stalinism. This is as was to be expected. (See our review of Dutt’s Lenin in The New International, August 1934.)
However, his skillful evasiveness and apparent objectivity still remain. To an average reader, his book, which reads interestingly, is almost convincing. Though an active politician he, unlike his higher ups – and even such newcomers as John Strachey – does not even mention the disputes on Fascism within the revolutionary movement. In a word, it is a sort of division of labor within which Dutt – so far? – still assumes the “scholarly” form of Stalinist apologetics.
Dutt summarizes his conception of Fascism as follows:
“Fascism, in short, is a movement of mixed elements, dominantly petty bourgeois, but also slum-proletarian and demoralized working class, financed and directed by finance capital, by the big industrialists and landlords and financiers, to defeat the working class revolution and smash the working class organization” (p. 82).
This sounds fairly good. But a few pages earlier Dutt quotes with approval from the program of the Sixth congress of the Comintern (why does he have to go as far back as 1928 for an official definition of Fascism?) that “the principal aim of Fascism is to destroy the revolutionary labor movement, i.e., the communist sections and leading units of the proletariat.” Nothing is said in this definition, or in the program, about Fascism smashing all working class organizations, as Dutt definitely implies in the above quotation.
To accept the Sixth congress conception of the aim of Fascism – and the subsequent plenary sessions of the Executive Committee were even cruder – Fascism was impossible, for example, in Austria, for there was no “revolutionary labor movement” in that country! Even more. Wherein lay the common basis for a united front with social democracy, so far as the latter was concerned, if Fascism aimed to crush only the revolutionary section of the labor movement?
Later, Dutt designates as Fascist the regimes in Poland, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Spain under de Rivera. But do these governments comply with his definition of Fascism? Hardly. Then why the designation? In order to show the compatibility of a Fascist regime and a legal social democratic party, that is, to “prove” the theory of social Fascism.
For a Marxist, the fact that in Hungary, for example, a middle class movement never was the basis for the Horthy regime, that an amputated parliament, reformist trade unions and a loyal opposition in the form of the social democracy are tolerated, is precisely what distinguishes the dictatorship in Hungary from Fascism. But Dutt is not interested in scientific analysis.
He gets around this indiscriminate gathering under one roof of different phenomena by calling the regimes of Mussolini and Hitler “complete Fascist” and the others merely “Fascist”. He then gracefully drops the word “complete” from the description of the German and Italian governments (as in his definition) ; does not define what incomplete “Fascism” is, and – presto! – he smuggles in a defense of the theory of “social Fascism”.
Nor is Dutt any clearer on the question of whether the social democratic party is a working class organization. If it is, then according to Dutt, it follows that it would be smashed by Fascism; but this would contradict the theory of social Fascism. If it is not, then the working class united front with social democracy is impossible; but this would contradict the present united front tactics of the Stalinists!
Dutt was given the impossible task of defending the old theory and the new practise, at a time when one may well speak of the withering away of the theory of social Fascism.
He further states that the theory is substantiated not only by the legality of social democracy in Hungary, etc., but even in a “fully completed Fascist dictatorship”, such as Italy or Germany:
“Both [Fascism and Social Democracy – J.C.] exist together; and each performs a distinctive role, supplementing one another.”
But in these countries the social democratic parties and the trade unions have been smashed. Quite right, replies Dutt, but only organizationally! Since Fascism cannot possibly find a mass basis within the working class, and social democratic ideology still dominates the proletariat, social democracy remains the chief social support of the bourgeoisie.
This mystical theory was of course concocted after the destruction of the German social democracy by Hitler! As befits his station, Dutt concludes the discussion of this matter by stating that Stalin was correct when he wrote in 1924:
“Social democracy is objectively the moderate wing of Fascism!”
The problem of how Fascism came to power in Germany is solved by Dutt with the formula: Social democracy! To make a credible story of this one-sided conception, he is compelled to omit all references to the strength of the CP in 1923; the fact that political power was within its reach in October of that year and that it failed; the policies of the German Communist party in the class struggle which led them to that isolation which Dutt depicts – but which the Stalinists vociferously denied in the pre-Hitler days.
Suffice it for Dutt to repeat the Stalinist fable of their four united front proposals to the social democracy and to state that the Comintern never rejected in principle the “united front from above” (p. 121). The united front is now called the “crucial question”, the instrument which would have crushed Fascism. Since the social democracy rejected it, it is responsible for Hitler’s victory.
In the first place, none of the four so-called proposals was, according to the available evidence, made directly to the executives of the social democracy and the trade unions. Second, Dutt records that on July 20, 1932 the social democrats stated that they were ready to accept a non-aggression pact with the communist party as a pre-condition for a united front. The CP rejected this. Why was it wrong to accept a non-aggression pact in 1932 and good “Bolshevik policy” in 1933–34?
Third, that the united front from above was rejected in principle (despite some inconsistencies common to all Stalinist policies) is well known, particularly to Dutt. For he and his colleagues of the Central Committee of the British CP were reprimanded in 1932 for forming a united front with the ILP leaders “in spite of numerous decisions of international congresses and conferences [of the Third International – J.C.] on the need of adopting the united front tactic only from below ...” (Communist International, March 15, 1932, p. 161.)
Dutt the “Marxist” sees no connection between an evaluation of the role of social democracy – as in the theory of social Fascism – and the united front. The two questions are put into two separate, air-tight compartments. It would indeed be embarrassing for Dutt to inter-relate them.
Dutt’s apology for Stalinism is the best available. Yet, what a feeble product!
 



“When the Commune was set up in Paris after the war of 1870, we know what bloody work had to be done by French soldiers to rescue the capital and the country from the deadly menace.” (New York Times, February 8, 1934)
In these words the spokesmen of the American master class rightfully consider themselves the heirs of the butchers of the heroic Paris Commune of three score and four years ago. And four days after this editorial the bloody work against the Communards was repeated in the civilized Europe of today, by the reactionary, Fascist soldiers of Dollfuss against the Austrian workers.
Violence against the oppressed, against the masses, that is patriotism and justice; but violence of the masses against the handful of exploiters for the purpose of building a free and human society, that is treason, a “deadly menace” against which all means are justified.
“All this calumny, which the party of order never fail, in their orgies of blood, to raise against their victims,” wrote the founder of the modern militant workers’ movement after the suppression of the Paris Commune, “only proves that the bourgeois of our days considers himself the legitimate successor to the baron of old, who thought every weapon in his own hand fair against the plebeian while in the hands of the plebeian a weapon of any kind constituted in itself a crime.”
How true this is to this day! The march of Fascism in Europe, the growth of the vigilante groups in the United States, the terrorism against the trade unions, the Hearst red-baiting campaign, these are the acts of an outlived, but desperate parasitic class which glories in its Paris Commune traditions.
 
Deadly Menace to Whom?
“The Commune was a deadly menace to the old world, founded on slavery and exploitation,” wrote the incomparable leader of the international and Russian working class, Lenin. Provoked by the reactionary national government, the workers, supported by the small shopkeepers of Paris, established their own government on March 18, 1871.
In the seventy days of workers’ rule, the church was separated from the state, education was taken out of the hands of the priests, the system of fines for workers was abolished, night work for bakers was prohibited, plans made for the taking over by workers’ associations of factories and shops abandoned by the former owners.
The standing army, which stood apart from the people as a power for its oppression was replaced by the armed people. The Commune abolished the old apparatus of government and replaced it by an administration in which the officials received the equivalent of the average wages of the Parisian workers. In a word, they rid themselves of the reactionary government and put in its place “a truly democratic proletarian government”.
This was too much for the parasites who were accustomed to live by the labor of the masses! The national government of France could not suppress the rebellious workers by itself. The French “national patriots” did not hesitate to call upon their yesterday’s enemy-in-war, the Germany of Bismarck, to supply hordes to suppress the Paris Commune, murder French workers, destroy Paris. And Bismarck willingly supplied the aid. Once again showing the internationalist character of the class struggle, which knows no national borders! An excellent lesson for the workers!
 
Toll of the Bloody Work
The bloody work was successful. 30,000 Parisians were brutally murdered, about 45,000 were arrested, some executed, thousands were exiled or imprisoned. 100,000 victims was the toll paid by the heroic Paris Communards. In this way, the narrow-minded and short-sighted reactionaries thought that they would once and for all do away with the threats of workers’ revolution!
What an illusion! For the development of capitalism itself, bringing workers together in large factories, mines and mills, creates the conditions for renewed workers’ struggles, for trade union and political organization, for revolutionary action. From the defeat of the Paris Commune the workers learn the lessons of their future conflicts.
The Communards had no strong trade unions or clear headed, trained workers’ party. The Parisian workers of 1871 were in the main artisans or workers in small factories. The development of capitalism had not yet reached that stage where the working class could be sufficiently developed to unequivocally go forward to socialism. They had little experience of past workers’ battles to go by.
That is why the Communards did not understand the need of concentrating the political power in the hands of the Central Committee of the National Guard, starting an immediate offensive against the national government at Versailles, taking over the national bank, before proceeding with the elections for the Commune.
 
Russian Workers Learn Lessons of Commune
Drowned in blood, the Commune has remained an inspiration for the producing masses the world over. As the first example of a workers’ government it served as the guide to the victorious Russian working class.
They built their revolutionary leadership, the Bolshevik Party, with a clear understanding of the tasks of the revolution.
The Bolshevik Party understood that the old state apparatus, whether its form be that of a monarchy or of a democratic republic, had to be smashed and replaced by workers’ institutions. Out of the Russian class struggle arose the Soviets, the councils of workers from the factories, soldiers from the barracks and forts, peasants from the fields. Later the Soviet form arose also in Western Europe, showing that it is not a purely Russian phenomenon.
Under the leadership of the Bolshevik Party, the Russian workers and peasants, organized in Soviets, overthrew Russian capitalism and established their workers’ government as the first stage of the world revolution to usher in international socialism. On the basis of the experiences of the Commune they succeeded in warding off internal counter-revolution and imperialist intervention. That is how the present workers’ state, the Soviet Union, was established.
 
Commemorate the Commune – Build Workers Party
The lessons of the Commune and of the Russian revolution must become part of the living movement of the American workers. In the present period, the need of a revolutionary organization which unites the most intelligent, courageous and experienced workers on the basis of these lessons which form an integral part of Marxism, and puts these lessons into daily practise, is greater than ever. The true commemoration of the Paris Commune is the building of the Workers’ Party of the United States as a section of the coming Fourth International of revolutionary labor.
 







The Lovestone group, which continues to talk about the “reform” of the Comintern after its social-patriotic betrayal, has been challenged to debate in the following letter. The New Militant will print the reply to this challenge as soon as it is received.





September 18, 1934
Communist Party (Opposition)
51 West 14th Street
New York City
Comrades,
In view of the Seventh Congress of the Comintern and the decisions of your recent national conference, the Workers Party proposes that representatives of our respective organizations debate the question: the Fourth International or the reform of the Comintern?
You no doubt recall that the debate on the same subject a year and a half ago between Jay Lovestone and James P. Cannon aroused great interest. Comrade Cannon has signified his readiness to defend the Fourth International in a second debate in the light of the new developments.
We urge that you consider the matter and reply at an early date. A joint committee can make all the necessary detail arrangements.



 


Fraternally,
Joseph Carter
Educational Dir.



 



The tragi-comedy known as the Seventh Congress of the Communist International is now being enacted in Moscow. The stage settings were carefully prepared; the actors well primed. The world capitalist press laughs at the farce while the militant workers are amazed at the social democratic theme songs which the Comintern has accepted: social pacifism, social patriotism, capitalist coalition governments.
“No single previous congress has revealed such ideological and political unanimity as this,” proudly proclaims Dimitroff, giving eloquent testimony to the hand-picked nature of the Congress delegates. What was once the world staff of international working class revolution has now become a chorus for acclaiming the infallibility of Stalin.
Despite the tragic defeats of the past years, Stalin has constantly postponed the Seventh Congress of the Comintern. Though its statutes call for a congress every two years, the Third International congress is now meeting for the first time in seven years. Not even the destruction of the German working class organizations by Fascism, which impelled the Labor and Socialist (Second) International to hold an immediate congress, could cut short the criminal policy of Stalinism and lead to a congress which would put an end to its fatal course.
The Stalinists feared a Congress. Immediately following the German debacle the leading theoretical organ of the French Communist Party carried “critical” articles of the German Communist Party. These were denounced as “Trotskyist.” Doriot, leader of the St. Denis section of the Communist Party, drew some of the more obvious lessons from the German catastrophe – only to find himself expelled. In Czechoslovakia leaders of the Communist party mildly questioned the course of their German comrades – and were quickly quieted.
 
The “New Course”
Once “unanimity” was restored, the Thirteenth Plenum of the Executive Committee of the Comintern (December 1933) decided that the Seventh Congress would be held “during the second half of 1934.” However, this date and several others later set were also postponed. The reason: Stalin was preparing a “new course”; the Franco-Soviet Past was in the making. Once signed and then re-enforced by the infamous Stalin-Laval communique, one other task had to be completed before the Congress could be held, viz., an agreement with the French Social Democrats for organic unity between the Socialist and Communist parties with the proviso that the “Trotskyites” be expelled from the Socialist party and the Young Socialist League. This achieved, the settings were completed for the Seventh Congress.
The speeches at the Congress merely repeated what the director had ordered. In the name of a rejection of “stereotyped phraseology, pedanticism, and doctrinarism,” the essentials of revolutionary Marxism, abandoned in practice by Stalinism a long time ago, is now overthrown even as to theoretical formulations.
Dimitroff summarizes the “new task”:
“We must learn to interlink the tremendous doctrine of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin with Stalinist determination, with irreconcilability of principle against the class enemy and deviations from the line of Bolshevism, with Stalinist intrepidity in the face of difficulties and with Stalinist revolutionary realism.” (Daily Worker, August 15, 1935)
Let us examine this “Stalinist revolutionary realism.”
 
The Struggle Against Fascism
Wilhelm Pieck in his opening address declared:
“It is not immaterial to us what political system rules this or that country. Where parliamentarism and remnants of democratic freedom exist, there in spite of capitalist interference, where it is possible for open fighting organizations of the proletariat to exist, there we defend parliamentarism and democracy against fascism and continue to struggle for the proletarian dictatorship.” (Daily Worker, July 27, 1935)
This from a leader of the German Communist Party who yesterday denounced as “counter-revolutionists” those who called for a working class defense of democratic rights! Even after Hitler came to power the Executive Committee of the Comintern (December 1933) attacked the “contrast between democratic countries and the countries of the fascist dictatorship in principle.” Now the defense of parliamentarism and the contrast between Fascist Germany and the “democratic countries” is the main axis around which Stalinist politics revolve.
How is bourgeois parliamentarism to be defended against Fascism? By an “anti-Fascist people’s front.” Not the united front of the working class organizations for the defense of democratic rights, the arming of the people, the organization of workers’ militia against Fascism but a bloc of workers’ organizations with capitalist parties for the defense of parliamentarism. The model is the French People’s Front: the bloc with Daladier and the Radical Socialist Party. Daladier who, although he had a parliamentary majority behind him, on February 6, 1934, capitulated before the Fascists! These are the warriors against Fascism!
The People’s Front is to struggle for governmental power. Dimitroff told the Congress:
“A situation may arise in which the formation of a government by the proletarian united front or anti-fascist People’s front is not only possible but necessary, even before the revolutionary seizure of power by the proletariat. At the appropriate moment the Communist Party, supported by an upsurging united front movement, will seize the initiative in forming such a government. The Communist Party will actively support such a- government if the government has a platform against Fascism and reaction regardless of whether the Communist Party enters into the government or not.” (Daily Worker, July 27, 1935)
Support of a bourgeois “anti-Fascist” government! Nay, even participation in such a capitalist, coalition government!
And in preparation for such a “people’s government” the Communist parties are to seek organic unity with the Socialist party. Even for the United States this step is contemplated. Earl Browder informs the Congress that:
“In the process of the struggle we will eliminate the prejudice among the Social Democratic masses that the Communists are splitters of the labor movement, we will further their healthy desire for unity, and discuss with them the question of organizationally uniting all the adherents of socialism.” (Daily Worker, August 13, 1935)
The time-worn centrist prattle of organic unity of “adherents of socialism” is now the slogan of the Stalinists! Fascism and Struggle Against War On the struggle against imperialist war, the Seventh Congerss again repeated the social patriotic program of social democracy. Pieck declared:
“Should German fascism attempt to conquer the small European states, their war against Fascism will be a righteous war which we will support.”
What is this but a plagiarism from the Vanderveldes and De Mans, the Belgium patriots? But, the Stalinists reply, in the last war the small nations were pawns in the hands of the imperialist powers. Quite right! And what reason is there to believe that a war of German Fascism against the small nations today will not involve imperialist powers on both sides?
But, they reply, German Fascism’s attack on the small nations is the first step towards an attack on the Soviet Union. Quite true. However, if France despite the contrary assertion by Maurice Thorez, is an ally of the Soviet Union, the war will be an imperialist war in so far as imperialist France is concerned.
In his War and the Second International (1916), Lenin made this clear when he declared:
“In brief, war between imperialist great powers ... or a war in alliance with such powers, is an imperialist war.”
Perhaps for the Stalinists this is “stereotyped phraseology, pendanticism and doctrinarism”! For Marxists it is an essential of the revolutionary program against war.
The French Stalinists are ready to support imperialist France if it is allied with the Soviet Union against Fascist Germany. “Defense of democracy against Fascism,” “national defense of our country” are now the joint slogans of Stalinism and Social Democracy.
Only yesterday, after Hitler’s victory the Thirteenth Plenum of the Comintern (December 1933) declared in its theses:
“The French Socialists (as well as the social democrats of Czechoslovakia, Poland, etc.) carrying out the ‘sacred unity of the nation’ under the slogans of ‘defense of democracy,’ and ‘defense against German Fascism,’ actively participate in the preparations for war against Germany.”
Perfect! And now the French Communist Party accepts the same program and proposes organic unity so that the “sacred unity of the nation” can be more effective! The Stalinists, whether French, Czechoslovakian, Polish, German, of American now speak about “our country” in the same sense as the social democrats. The dictum of Marx that the working class has no country under capitalism has been replaced by the social patriotic nationalist conception.
Even the Stalinist Sixth Congress of the Comintern (1928), in its resolution on war, declared on this score:
“The proletariat has too country until it has captured political power and has taken the means of production from the exploiters. The expression ‘national defense’ is nothing but A catchword, and mostly a petty bourgeois catchword to justify war.’’
The Stalinists further consider, for example, that the French army, could be supported if the Fascist officers are ousted. The same theses of the Sixth Congress stated:
“In imperialist states the attitude of the proletariat towards armies is determined by the following:

“No matter what their form of organization may be, armies are a constituent part of the bourgeois state apparatus, which the proletariat, in the course of its revolution, must not democratise, but break up.”

To repeat this conception in the French Communist Party today is considered “anti-Soviet” and sufficient grounds for expulsion!
 
“Organizational Decentralization”
The Congress resolution on Pieck’s report contains the following instructions to the Executive Committee:
“While shifting the main stress of its activity to elaboration of the fundamental political and tactical lines of the world labor movement, to proceed in deciding any question from the concrete situation and specific conditions obtaining in each particular country and as a ride to avoid direct intervention in internal organizational matters of the Communist parties.”
The aim of this section is twofold: first, to permit the Communist parties in different countries to pursue diverse tactics depending upon the division of nations into “pro-Soviet” and “anti-Soviet”; and second, to permit organic fusion with the Socialist parties, leading to the organizational liquidation of the Comintern, at least in its present form.
The second aim is brought out clearly in the statement of Dimitroff in another connection:
“We are even ready to waive the formation of Communist fractions if necessary in the interests of trade union unity.” (Daily Worker, August 15, 1935)
Already, the provision for the prohibition of political groups in the trade unions have been accepted by the French Stalinists as a condition for unity between the reformist and Stalinist unions in that country. Trade union fractions have always been considered a principle of revolutionary party organizations. It still remains a principle. But the Stalinist parties are no longer revolutionary organizations!
Social patriotism, class collaboration, ministerialism or capitalist coalition governments, these are the policies of Stalinism! Treacherous betrayal of the working class can be the only result; betrayal on a far larger scale than we have witnessed in the last ten years of Stalinism. Only one instrument can stop such betrayal: the world party of revolution, the Fourth International.
Around this banner, tens of thousands are already rallying. The proceedings and decisions of the Seventh Congress will open the eyes and minds of thousands of others. It is becoming clearer to the more advanced workers that the Comintern is no longer the International of Marx and Lenin.
 


Proofread by Einde O’ Callaghan (December 2012).

THE COMMUNIST PARTY of the United States leads the largest movement in this country against American participation in the Second World War. Yet, paradoxically enough, it is the greatest obstacle in the labor movement for the development of working class and socialist opposition to Roosevelt’s war course.
The paradox flows from the very nature of the Communist Party. Whatever the episodic policy (be it “class against class” or “People’s Front,” “Democratic Front” or “a people’s peace to end imperialist war”) the program of the Communist Party remains unaltered, viz., to defend Stalinist totalitarian Russia by any and every possible means. All else is either a specific way of executing this program or sheer demagogy and rationalization.
However, the main source of the strength of the Communist Party, through all its dizzy turns, is not the tremendous material resources at its disposal, but rather the ability of its leaders to convince large masses that Stalinist Russia is the “socialist fatherland” whose interests and policies are identical with those of the working class of the capitalist countries. This success is facilitated by the bankruptcy of the capitalist world, the treachery of social democracy, and the inability of the revolutionary socialists to build parties with mass influence among the workers and capable of reaching the Stalinist workers with the truth about Russia and the Comintern.
 
I.
In his Criticism of the Draft Program of the Communist International (1928), Leon Trotsky wrote that the Stalinist doctrine of national socialism would lead to the degeneration of the Comintern.
“The task of the parties in the Comintern assumes, therefore, an auxiliary character; their mission is to protect the U.S.S.R. from intervention and not to fight for the conquest of power. It is, of course, not a question of the subjective intentions but of the objective logic of political thought” (page 61).
The events of the last thirteen years have proved to the hilt the validity of this prediction.
However, in the same study, Trotsky saw another consequence of the theory:
“If it is at all possible to realize socialism in one country then one can believe that theory not only after but also before the conquest of power. If socialism can be realized within the national boundaries of backward Russia, then there is all the more reason to believe that it can be’ realized in advanced Germany. Tomorrow the leaders of the Communist Party of Germany will undertake to propound this theory. The draft program empowers them to do so. The day after tomorrow the French party will have its turn. It will be the beginning of the disintegration of the Comintern along the lines of social-patriotism. The Communist Party of the capitalist country which will have become imbued with the idea that its particular country possesses the ‘necessary and sufficient’ prerequisites for the independent construction of a ‘complete socialist society,’ will not differ in any substantial manner from the revolutionary social democracy which also did not begin with a Noske but which tumbled decisively on August 4, 1914, over this question” (page 72).
In other words, Trotsky foresaw two possible roads which the Comintern would travel on the basis of the program of national socialism. It is clear now that these roads are alternative ones. A genuine social patriotic development of the national parties was in conflict with their role as mere agents of the Kremlin. During the People’s Front period it appeared as though both functions had been fused and many predicted that in case the need for a choice between the Russian masters and the national bourgeois ruling class arose, the Communist parties would choose the latter. The contrary took place. With a few isolated exceptions following the Stalin-Hitler pact and the outbreak of the war, the leaders and members of the Communist Party followed their Kremlin leader in his break with the democratic imperialists.
 
The Character of the C.P.’s
Trotsky’s error on the social-patriotic evolution of the Comintern – which means the mistake of our movement – arose from the fact that he analyzed the Communist parties, in this respect, too much in terms of the development of revolutionary social democracy into reactionary social democracy. However, the social democratic parties were national working class parties, decisively influenced by their particular bourgeois-national as well as working class pressures. The Communist parties, on the other hand, particularly following the complete liquidation of factions in early 1929, were and are merely national detachments of the Stalin regime operating within the labor movement of the various countries. Though subject to national influences, bourgeois and working class, these influences have had, and have, no significant independent weight in determining the policies of the national sections. They have importance only in so far as they affect Russian foreign policy, and thereby the orders given by Moscow for a particular country.
It is the peculiar bureaucratic and totalitarian character of Russia and the Comintern which closed the genuine social patriotic road of development of the national sections. The Communist parties are alien to the indigenous class struggle within the capitalist countries. This unfortunately does not mean that they have no effect on it. Serving a foreign reactionary power they seek to utilize the working class and through it the middle classes and the bourgeoisie, in the interest of this power. The working class, confused, misled and deceived by Stalinist demagogy, is the chief victim in all cases while, the bourgeoisie is the chief beneficiary.
The specific differences between reactionary social democracy and reactionary Stalinism are of the utmost importance for understanding the policies and evolution of each. On the eve of the present war (in July, 1939) Trotsky wrote:
“Just as the international social democracy constitutes the left flank of democratic imperialism, led by Great Britain and under the supreme control of the United States; just so the Comintern – the direct instrument of the Soviet bureaucracy – is, in the last analysis, subject to the control of the very same imperialism. Following in the footsteps of the Second International, the Comintern has today publicly condemned the colonial struggle for emancipation. Atlee and Pollitt, Blum and Thorez work in the same harness. In case of war the last remaining distinctions between them will vanish. All of them together with the bourgeois society as a whole will be crushed under the wheel of society.” (Progressive Paralysis: The Second International on the Eve of the War, Fourth International, May, 1940 (pages 15–16. Emphasis mine. – J.C.)
 
Two Kinds of Independence
Though written at a time when it was expected that Russia would be an ally of British and American imperialism against Germany, the analysis is wrong even on the basis of this assumption.
In the first place, the nature of the “control” of international social democracy and the Comintern by democratic imperialism is essentially different. Trotsky, of course, understood this fact, but only partially, not in its full meaning. He was convinced that in a new World War the distinction between the two “will vanish.” But even if Russia were a war ally of Britain against Germany, the role of Atlee and Pollitt would not be identical precisely because Atlee’s direct masters would be the British ruling class while Pollitt’s would remain the Stalinist bureaucracy in whose interests he would support British imperialism. Attlee and Pollitt would be allies, the difference between them would not “vanish,” but rather would be expressed in every conflict between British imperialism and the Stalinist regime in the further course of the war. Such, for example, was the relation between Blum and Thorez during the People’s Front period.
In the second place, it is precisely because of the distinction between social democracy and Stalinism that the latter unlike the former could become an ally of German fascism. Since the Stalin-Hitler pact Russia has been under the “control” of German imperialism, and the Communist parties changed their policies correspondingly. Such “independence” or flexibility is excluded for international social democracy by the very character of the movement. (Within Nazi-occupied territory, however, the Communist parties are illegal. Even though the Norwegian Communists did not attack the German invasion of Norway – they confined their attacks to British imperialism and the Norwegian social democrats! – they remained legal only for the briefest period, and then their usefulness to Hitler was over; and so, they were forced underground. Fascist totalitarianism, like Stalinist totalitarianism, permits only a single legal party in countries under its rule – its own party.)
So that of the two possible roads that Trotsky predicted the Comintern would travel – which we can call the Russian bureaucratic (or Stalino-patriotic) and the bourgeois (social patriotic) – the second was blocked and destroyed by the first. Predictions which were made on the course of the Comintern on the basis of Trotsky’s prognosis that the Communist parties would be reduced to organizations whose sole mission is to protect the U.S.S.R. from “intervention” have been strikingly confirmed by life.
To cite one example (others, no doubt, can be found). During the Stalinist period of “collective security” and “democratic front,” in May 1938, Max Shachtman wrote:
“The important and often decisive point is nevertheless this: the bourgeoisie understands perfectly well that the Stalinists are ready to defend its ‘democratic’ rule only as a function of their subservience to the Moscow bureaucracy; that, for example, if it served Stalin’s policy to make the alliance with Hitler which he tried to achieve in 1933, the communist parties everywhere would once more discover that the Versailles peace treaty and the status quo are viciously reactionary and bourgeois democracy a hoax and a snare.” (New International, July 1938, pages 202–203)
 
II.
In a speech delivered on September 11, 1940, Earl Browder explained that for several years the New Dealers welcomed Communist Party support. He continued:
“Now, realizing its mistakes, the Roosevelt Administration is as viciously hostile to the Communist Party as formerly it was friendly and helpful to us when it needed and received our help. But we are the same party; it is not we who have changed, but rather the Roosevelt Administration.” (The Most Peculiar Election – The Campaign Speeches of Earl Browder. Workers Library Publishers, page 13. Emphasis in original.)
We can readily agree with Browder that the Communist Party is the same organization it was when it supported Roosevelt. However it must be said in all fairness to the President that his administration is pursuing today the same general interventionist course as in the period when the Stalinists were his allies – only more openly and more aggressively. The break between Browder and Roosevelt is the direct outcome of the switch in Russian foreign policy from one of alliance with the democratic imperialists against German fascism and Japan to that of an alliance with Hitler (and more recently, friendship with Japan).
The attitude of the American Communist Party towards the Roosevelt Administration can be divided into three periods: 1933 to late 1935; late 1935 to late 1939; late 1939 to the present date. At each stage Stalin’s foreign policy and Roosevelt’s attitude towards it determined the policy of the Communist Party.
During the first period when Roosevelt sought to solve the social crisis primarily on the national arena and pursued the policy of “neutrality” and “isolationism,” the Communist Party was against the President. When Stalin shouted for “collective security” against Germany and Japan, Roosevelt was deaf to the plea. So the Communist Party stated that “American capitalism is more and more fascizing its rule. This is particularly being performed by the Roosevelt Administration under the cover of the ‘New Deal.’” (Resolution of the Eighth National Convention, April, 1934. Communist, May, 1934)
 
The 7th Congress of the C.I.
In August 1935, the Seventh Congress of the Communist International, which inaugurated on a world scale the policy of the “People’s Front,” called a halt to the anti-Roosevelt course of the American Stalinists. As Roosevelt’s foreign policy became more and more interventionist (reaching a high point in his famous October 1937 speech in which he called for a “quarantine of the aggressors”) the Communists became his ardent champions. They presented the President as the great leader against fascism at home and abroad. In their election platform of 1938 they declared:
“We propose an American peace policy in line with President Roosevelt’s October, 1937, speech to quarantine the war makers, to promote concerted action with France, Great Britain, the Soviet Union and the other democratic peoples and governments of the world in order to halt and isolate the fascist war makers, to assist their victims and to guarantee world peace. We oppose the expenditure of billions on armaments and war preparations as a substitute for concerted action for peace.”
In accordance with this line the Stalinists were ready to support the United States government in a war against Japan and Germany. For example, in early 1938, when the Japanese sank the United States ship Panay – carrying Standard Oil supplies – Browder was asked:
“Q. Assuming that war between Japan and the United States arises out of the situation in China, as illustrated by the Panay incident, would the communists support the Roosevelt Administration in such a war?”
His answer, though embellished with all the characteristic Stalinist verbiage, was clear enough:
“A. All of our proposals are directed toward creating such a relation of forces as to prevent war and to rectify wrongs without resort to war. If in spite of all our efforts to this end, war between Japan and the United States arises out of the present world situation, it is our firm conviction that the cause of progress and democracy everywhere would demand the defeat of Japan. We would support the American government in such a war to the extent that its policies and methods contributed toward the national independence of China and the protection of democracy and progressive policies at home and abroad.” (Questions and Answers, New Masses, March 22 and 29, 1938. See Fighting for Peace, by Earl Browder, pages 77–78)
A just war, a war for “democracy and national independence” in the Stalinist vocabulary is always a war which serves the interests of the Russian Stalin bureaucracy. That is why the Communists were ready to support American imperialism against Japanese imperialism. That is why the American Communist Party denounced the Trotskyites in Latin America for telling the masses that Yankee imperialism is their main enemy. In this connection, William Z. Foster wrote:
“In raising the slogan of Yankee imperialism as the main danger they (the Trotskyites – J. C.) are insidiously spreading a smokescreen for fascist domination of Latin America. And in so doing, they demonstrate themselves to be real agents of fascism.” (See The Communist, July, 1938, page 607) 
What the Line Really Was
But perhaps the American C.P. considered “German-Japanese-Italian fascism” as the central danger in Latin America because of Roosevelt’s “Good Neighbor” policy? This fraud is easily exploded by the fact that the British Stalinists followed the same course for the British Empire! The main enemy of the Indian masses, they proclaimed, was not British imperialism but German fascism! Throughout the world they gave up the struggle for national independence of the colonial peoples in order to cement the alliance between the democratic imperialists and Russia against Germany.
They became the champions of American imperialist interests in Latin America and the Far East. At that time Browder wrote:
“Let us put the question in the simplest possible terms, such as even a business man can understand. The United States must either come to terms with the Berlin-Rome-Tokyo war alliance, which means abandoning the Pacific and most of Latin America to those powers, not to speak of fascist domination within the United States itself, or it must organize resistance to the war makers.” (April 25, 1939. See The Second Imperialist War, by Earl Browder, abridged edition, page 18)
What to do? “Cooperative arrangements” with Russia “will cost less than half as much as it would without the Soviet Union.” (Ibid., page 18.) Appealing to the “business man,” that is, to those with investments in the affected countries, he urged that a Soviet-American alliance “would provide the most effective conceivable protection of American national [!] interests in the Far East and in Latin America.” (July 5, 1939. Ibid., page 30.)
These speeches were made only a few months before the Stalin-Hitler pact, the outbreak of the Second World War and the change of policy of the Communist Party towards Roosevelt and his war schemes. Then, as now, Browder denied that the C.P. was an agency of Russian foreign policy.
“They cry out against us, the Communists, that we are agents of a foreign power trying to get America to sacrifice its own interests in favor of the Soviet Union. But such hysterical jingoism reveals its true face ...
“Defense against the aggression of the Rome-Berlin-Tokyo war alliance has now become a life and death issue for all the rest of the world, including the United States. And defense today involves armaments, although armaments is not the sole answer, as some seem to think, nor even half the answer. But an unarmed people in the world of Hitler aggression is the predestined victim of fascist conquest. The United States, with the rest of the world, must choose between uniting the anti-fascist and democratic forces for common defense – a defense by arms in the last analysis – or submitting to fascist world conquest.” (January 20, 1939. Fighting for Peace, pages 227–228.)
What a different tune is sung now by Browder! No, it isn’t Roosevelt who has changed! Nor has the Communist Party changed its real program – it has only changed its demagogic verbiage to suit the interests of Moscow. Or more exactly, their Russian masters unexpectedly ordered a change in tune.
A few months before Stalin joined hands with Hitler and occupied Poland in violation of his non-aggression pact with that country, Browder declared in a challenging tone of voice:
“... there is the argument that the Soviet Union cannot be depended upon, that it may at any moment go over to Hitler and double-cross the rest of the world. But when has the Soviet Union ever in its history failed to keep an obligation?” (April 25, 1939. The Second Imperialist War, by Earl Browder. Abridged edition, page 17.)
Browder is now serving four years at Atlanta as a result of Stalin’s “double-cross” of the democratic imperialists! For if Russia were today a war ally of British and American imperialism against German fascism, Browder would not be in jail today; he would be shouting with the most extreme jingoists for convoys and outright U.S. entrance into the war. Of course, under these conditions he would find that American imperialism was fighting for “democracy against fascism.”
The spokesmen of the Communist Party openly acknowledge that this would be the case. In The War Crisis, Questions and Answers, by William Z. Foster (January 1940) we find:
“Q. How can you call this war imperialist when the Soviet Union might well have been in it had Great Britain adopted the mutual assistance pact proposed by the U.S.S.R. in August:

“A. ... As A.B. says in the October issue of The Communist:

“‘... if despite everything, England, France and the Soviet Union would have had recourse to the force of arms, this would have resulted from an anti-imperialist fight for the liberty of small nations ... Such a war would have been a just war, a democratic war, a liberating war. In such a war the working class, its allies, and all democratic forces would have had to fight in the front ranks.” (page 54)

Could anything be clearer? If Russia were on the side of England and France (and the United States) in the present war it would be ... “an anti-imperialist fight!”; the Communist parties would be in the “front ranks” of the jingoists! Churchill, Daladier (and Roosevelt) would then be anti-imperialist fighters!
This means that if tomorrow Stalin is compelled to jump back to the camp of the democratic imperialists the Communist Party, faithful to its real program, would once again be in the advance guard of the warmongers – and the chief finger-men against the militant opponents of the war.
 
III.
The post-Stalin-Hitler pact line of the Communist parties, proclaimed after a few weeks of bewilderment during which time the French and British parties supported their respective governments in the war, and the American C.P. continued its pro-Roosevelt policy, was stated by Georgi Dimitroff, general secretary of the Communist International, in October 1939:
“The character of a war, as Lenin taught, ‘depends not on who attacked and on whose side the “enemy” is, but on which class is waging the war, what policy is being continued by the goven war.’
“Now, as in 1914, the war is being waged by the imperialist bourgeoisie. This war is the direct continuation of the struggle between the imperialist powers for a new repartition of the earth, for world domination.” (War and the Working Class, page 5. Emphasis in original)
How well the devil quotes scripture! If what Dimitroff wrote is true – and it is – then the whole previous course of the Comintern stands condemned. This course, according to the Stalinists, was based on the principle that the democratic imperialist powers (and Russia) should unite against the “aggressors” and defend the “attacked.” Compare Dimitroff’s quotation from Lenin with the above-cited statements of Browder and Foster!
But why does Dimitroff now discover and quote the well-known views of Lenin? Simply because Stalin is an ally of the “aggressors” and himself has attacked the small states whose defense was a major item in the Communist propaganda yesterday (Poland, Latvia, Esthonia, Lithuania, Finland, Rumania).
Dimitroff therefore finds that while all the belligerent ruling classes share “responsibility” for the war, “... the imperialists of Britain and France have passed over to the offensive, have hurled their peoples into war against Germany, endeavoring in every way to win a number of other states to their side. What is more, it is the British and French imperialists who now come forward as the most zealous supporters of the continuation and further incitement of war.” (Ibid., page 7)
 
The Stalinists Turn Again
The American Stalinists repeated this line in a statement on October 15, 1939. All the belligerents “are equally guilty” for the war, it stated, but did not have a single word of direct criticism of German fascism.
In November 1939, Stalin himself placed the responsibility for the war even more squarely solely on the shoulders of the democratic imperialists and whitewashed the role of German fascism:
“(a) it was not Germany that attacked France and England, but France and England that attacked Germany, thereby assuming responsibility for the present war;
“(b) After hostilities had broken out, Germany made overtures of peace to France and England, and the Soviet Union openly supported Germany’s peace overtures, for it considered, and continues to consider, that the earliest possible termination of the war would radically improve the position of all the countries and nationals;
“(c) The ruling circles of England and France rudely rejected both Germany’s peace overtures and the attempt of the Soviet Union to secure the earliest possible termination of the war.
“Such are the facts ...” (See History of Soviet Foreign Policy, by M. Ross, Workers Library Publishers, December 1940.)
Hitler’s ally dares not mention Germany’s conquest of Poland, for his pact gave the signal for this action and was followed by Russia’s annexation of eastern Poland. As to Hitler’s peace gesture: it was a clever, demagogic appeal in order to place the exclusive responsibility for the war on the British and French governments and thus strengthen his own prestige among the German people. Stalin and the Communist parties conspired with Hitler to put across this trick!
And so long as the war was confined to western Europe and the Scandinavian countries, the Communist parties dropped their propaganda against German fascism and concentrated their attack – in all countries, including Germany! – exclusively on Britain and France. When the German army occupied Norway, the Communist Party of that country (as its brother parties in Britain and the United States) directed its fire at Britain for provoking the Nazi attack, and at the social democratic leaders who went underground. For a short while the Norwegian Communist Party remained legal and continued publishing its official organ – under the martial law of Hitler.
The German Stalinists followed the same line – the main enemy for them was not Hitler, but rather British imperialism and the Thyssen (anti-Russian) group in Germany. As the German Communist leader Ulbricht wrote:
“If Hilferding and the other one-time Social Democratic leaders direct their war propaganda against the German-Soviet Pact, it is simply because the British plan has the less chance of success, the more deeply the friendship between the German and Soviet people is rooted in the working masses. Therefore not only the Communists but many Social Democratic and National Socialist workers regard it is their task not in any circumstances to permit a breach of the pact. Those who intrigue against the friendship of the German and Soviet people are enemies of the German people and are branded as accomplices of British imperialism. Among the German working class greater and greater efforts are being made to expose the followers of the Thyssen clique, who are the enemies of the German-Soviet pact. There have been many demands that these enemies shall be removed from their army and government positions, and that their property shall be confiscated. [Hitler has carried out these demands! – J.C.]
“The fight of the German working people against the agents of British imperialism, against the Thyssen clique and their friends among the Social Democratic and Catholic leaders in Germany ...” (Quoted in the British New Leader, March 22, 1941. Emphasis in original.)
On October 9, 1939, the Russian official government organ, Izvestia, declared:
“One may respect or hate Hitlerism, just as any other system of political views. This is a matter of taste. But to undertake war ‘for annihilation of Hitlerism’ means to commit criminal folly in politics.”
Opposition to fascism “is a matter of taste”! And Stalin’s “taste” changed when he became an ally of Hitler.
 
IV.
Describing Hitler’s technique of conquest, R. Palme Dutt, British Stalinist theorist, once wrote that his “non-aggression” agreements are “not pacts for the maintenance of peace, but pacts to immobilize and paralyze collective defense against aggression and enable Nazi Germany to devour its victims one at a time.” (World Politics – 1917–1936, page 258)
How well this depicts the Russo-German pact!
Yet one additional feature must be added. Article III of the pact calls for mutual consultation and exchange of information on matters affecting both parties. Stalin became an active partner in the devouring of the victimized peoples. The partners agreed on the conquest and partition of Poland. In September, 1939, their representatives met and demarked the exact frontiers of their spoils. (In the words of Stalin, the friendship between the two regimes was “cemented by blood,” the blood of the Polish people.) In April, 1940, they reached an agreement on the Scandinavian countries; in June, 1940, in regard to the Baltics; the same month, on Rumania, etc. In each case Stalin sanctioned Hitler’s moves and received “due payment” for his “non-belligerent” friendship. This is what the Communist Party calls Russian “neutrality”.
However, the conflicting interests of these allies were not eliminated by their agreement. Stalin – as everyone else – did not expect the Nazi blitzkrieg victory over France, and feared the growing might of his partner. Their differences cropped up in acute form, especially in the Balkans – the old powder-keg of Europe – in which Russia, Germany and Italy each has its own “interests.” Each power sought to subordinate the Balkan countries to itself. Hitler tried to mediate the differences among the three powers, “appease” each – at least for the time being. In June, 1940, he partitioned Rumania, giving Stalin his allotment. Mussolini, however, was not satisfied and on October 27, 1940, invaded Greece. From all available evidence, it appears that this action was undertaken without Hitler’s consent. The Italo-Greek war opened up the Balkan front which both Hitler and Stalin sought to dominate without military hostilities. When Britain took advantage of this situation and the Italians suffered catastrophic defeats. Hitler was compelled from a military viewpoint to intervene.
 
The Germans Propose
The German Fuehrer then proposed that Russia join the Berlin-Rome-Tokyo Axis in a pact of mutual assistance. This offer, made in November 1940, was rejected by Stalin. He did not choose to be reduced to a mere puppet of Hitler, as in the case of Mussolini. At the same time he did not relish engaging in a war with the democratic imperialists in view of the increasing intervention of the United States – the one power in the world outside Germany for which the Russians have great respect. And given the present internal situation in Russia, Stalin’s participation in any large scale war would be too risky for the present regime.
Hitler, it is to be assumed, made Stalin an “attractive” offer: the division of the booty among the four powers (Germany, Russia, Japan, Italy), with Russian participation in domination of the Balkans, joint control of the Dardanelles and the Near East. Though Stalin finally turned down this offer the mere fact of the proposal is of the utmost significance: German fascism asking Russia to join the original “anti-Comintern” bloc in a mutual assistance pact!
The first Russian announcement of this offer was made six months after the fact, in connection with the recent Russo-Japanese agreement.
Pravda, Russian Communist Party organ (April 20, 1941), reports:
“In November 1940, a proposal was made to the Soviet government that it join the tripartite pact of mutual assistance and turn this pact into a four power pact. Since the Soviet government did not find it possible at the time to accept this proposal, the question of a pact between Japan and the U.S.S.R. came up again.” (Daily Worker, April 21, 1941)
While Stalin “did not find it possible at the time to accept” an open military alliance with the Axis partners. Hitler was compelled by military necessity to enter the war in the Balkans. When the Nazis received “permission” to transport their troops across Bulgaria, the Russians informed the government of that country that such cooperation “doesn’t lead to the consolidation of peace but to the extension of the sphere of war.” (Daily Worker, March 4, 1941) This was the first time since the outbreak of the war that Russia placed the responsibility for its extension on Hitler.
The following month, on April 5, after an overturn of the pro-Nazi regime, the new pro-British Yugoslavian government signed a “treaty of friendship and non-aggression” with Russia. The treaty provided that: “In the event of aggression against one of the contracting parties on the part of a third power, the other contracting party undertakes to observe a policy of friendly relations towards that party.” (Daily Worker, April 7, 1941)
The next day the Nazis invaded Yugoslavia. Stalin – this time true to his promise! – ordered the Communist parties to support Yugoslavia (and Greece) against the Hitlerites. Though this order has had no practical effects on the war in the Balkans, it is Stalin’s warning to his ally as to what course he will pursue if Hitler muscles in on Russia’s “spheres of influence.” At the same time it was a friendly gesture to retain what little is left of Russian influence among the Balkan peoples.
According to a Moscow dispatch of April 20, 1941:
“The Communists of Germany, Austria, Czechoslovakia and Hungary are calling for the support of the just war of the peoples of Yugoslavia and Greece against the foreign invaders ...” (Daily Worker, April 21, 1941)
 
Another Turn
Another Moscow dispatch of the same day informs us that the May Day manifestoes of these parties emphasizes “that the resistance to national oppression is being more evident in the occupied countries and that people who have been attacked, as the Yugoslavs and the Greeks, are waging a just, defensive war.” (Ibid.)
These dispatches also report that both the German and British imperialists are attacked by the Communist parties.
Thus, with the outbreak of the war in the Balkans a new stage in Russo-German relations – and thereby in Communist Party policy! – has opened up. Not only have the European Stalinists been given the signal for an anti-Nazi policy; the American Communist Party has received similar instructions. For the first time since the outbreak of the war, it has held anti-fascist (“Free Thaelman”) mass meetings throughout the country.
Whereas until now the Stalinists have denounced the defense of the small nations in the present war, ostensibly because they were tools of Britain and the United States, now they have become defensists in these countries (including the Nazi occupied nations of western Europe and Scandinavia). How different they spoke when Poland, Denmark, Norway were occupied by the Nazis (not to mention Stalin’s own annexations!) When it serves the interests of the Kremlin master his puppets denounce defensism; when these interests require opposition to the war, the puppets quickly oblige.
 
V.
The half-turn of the Stalinists reflects the contradictory, hesitant position of Russia at the present stage of the war. Caught between the Anglo-American and the Axis blocs, Stalin fears that a decisive victory of Hitler in the Balkans will jeopardize his own power. On the other hand, if he joins England and the United States against Germany the latter would be in an excellent position to invade Russia and get Japan to attack in the East.
In order to prevent such an outcome, the Russo-Japanese “neutrality” pact was signed, giving Nippon the “green light” to attack British and Dutch colonies in the Far East (which would inevitably involve the United States) and thus diverting Japanese military forces from the Russian frontiers.
The pact at the same time serves Hitler’s aims since he desires the diversion of British and American forces in a Far Eastern war and has little to gain from an invasion of Russia before he has settled scores with the British Empire and the United States. That is why, since his agreement with Stalin, Hitler has put pressure on both Russia and Japan for a “non-aggression” pact or a “mutual assistance” pact. Though Russia has thus far rejected these types of agreement with Japan, it has accepted a friendly relation of a lower order, involving less direct responsibility and immediate risks, and permitting greater flexibility for the future.
In commenting on the pact, Pravda (April 20, 1941) chided British and American writers who attacked it because their “masters fear for their interests in the Pacific, where they evidently have weak positions, and would want to divert Japan’s attention from those vulnerable spots by stirring up conflicts between the U.S.S.R. and Japan.” (Daily Worker, April 21, 1941.)
And so the Communist Party has for the time being dropped its slogan for an American-Russian alliance against Japan – the latter is now “friendly” to the “socialist fatherland.”
What Stalin’s next moves will be depends on the further development of the war, and particularly the results of the Battle of the Mediterranean and Hitler’s actions in regard to the Dardanelles and the Near East. He will seek to maintain his alliance with German fascism so long as the latter permits it.
While one cannot predict the exact future course of the Communist parties, it is clear that their policies are determined for them by the Stalin bureaucracy and will change only in accordance with the needs of the Russian reactionary rulers. The interests of the working class, in Russia, in the United States and elsewhere play no role whatsoever. If tomorrow Stalin would decide to line up with the democratic imperialists, the American Communists would join the pro-war chorus. The Communist Party is alien to the country in which it operates, alien to the working class and socialism.
The victorious struggle against Stalinism is an indispensable requisite for the struggle against capitalism, fascism and their imperialist war, and for socialist victory.
Joseph CARTER
 

eph Carter: Bureaucratic Collectivism (September 1941)




Carter Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Joseph Carter
Bureaucratic Collectivism
(September 1941)

From New International, Vol. VII No. 8 (Whole No. 57), September 1941, pp. 216–21.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’ Callaghan.

HITLER’S INVASION OF Russia brought sharply to the fore the conflicting views in the Workers Party on the class character of the Soviet Union. Until then those holding diverse positions on this question were all united by a common conception of the reactionary character of Russia’s rôle in the Second World War and common political conclusions. However, the new turn in the war once again raised the problem: Is Stalin conducting a progressive or reactionary war? Should we retain our position of revolutionary opposition to all the camps in the Second World War or become supporters of Russia in the war?
For our party these questions necessarily raise the fundamental problem of the class nature of the Soviet Union. Only on this basis can we establish clear and consistent criteria for deciding the character of Russia’s war and our political tasks. Even more: the dispute on this question has already revealed confusion and uncertainty on fundamental concepts of Marxism which far transcend in importance the “Russian question” itself. There is little doubt that in this problem, as in other matters, our generation of Marxists has failed to analyze adequately the new phenomena of our times, to examine critically our old doctrines in the light of new experiences, to revise the views found wanting, and thus failed to prepare ourselves for the rapidly moving events and tasks. Not only have the old movements failed, but the new movement for the Fourth International has likewise not met the theoretical and practical tests which the social crisis and the war have created.
It is imperative that this fact be frankly acknowledged; so that starting from a clear recognition of the existence of a crisis of Marxism – for it is nothing less than that – we can proceed collectively to re-evaluate our old views and thus sharpen the theoretical and practical instruments indispensable for socialist victory. So far as the present author is concerned, the basis of such re-examinations remains the great scientific teachings of Marx and Engels, which, employed in the critical spirit advised by the masters themselves, alone furnish the guide for our present needs and for working class emancipation.
In the present article I propose to discuss the class character of the Soviet Union, particularly the views of Leon Trotsky, and present my own position in positive form.
 
I. Trotsky’s Analysis of Stalinism
Trotsky once wrote: “You will agree that a theory is in general valuable only in so far as it helps to foresee the course of development and influences it purposefully.” (The Defense of the Russian Revolution, pp. 22f.) Let us apply this sound concept to Trotsky’s analysis of Stalinism.
The origin of the Russian Trotskyist Opposition dates back to the sharp factional fight which broke out in the Bolshevik Party after the death of Lenin. Trotsky analyzed this struggle as follows: In view of the fact that the Bolshevik Party had a complete monopoly of political power (that is, excluded all rival parties), the interests of the conflicting classes sought expression through factions of the ruling party. The Right Wing represented the Thermidorian faction; the pressure of the capitalist restorationist elements (the kulaks, Nepmen, the old petty-bourgeois specialists) and the labor aristocracy (the better paid workers, white collar employees, and trade union officialdom). On the other hand, the Left Opposition represented the interests of the working class. In between these two class forces was the Stalin faction, the “bureaucratic Centrist” wing of the party, representing no independent class, but wavering between the two fundamental factions, veering in the long run towards the Right, viz., toward bourgeois restoration. The defeats of the West European socialist revolutions strengthened both the Right and the Center; these two united against the Left on the basis of “socialism in one country alone.”
The main internal danger, continued Trotsky, came from the capitalist elements, and politically the Right Wing. The latter favored a slow tempo of industrialization and collectivization, and increased concessions and conciliation with the rich and middle peasants. The Stalinists were attacked primarily for constantly conceding to the Right Wing. Trotsky spoke of the existence of elements of dual power in Russia, bourgeois and proletarian. He warned that the destruction of the proletarian wing of the party would spell the victory of the Russian Thermidor, that is, the destruction of nationalized property and the establishment of capitalism. Such, according to Trotsky, was the objective meaning of the factional fight in the Bolshevik Party and the logic of its development.
Early in 1928 Trotsky wrote:
... the socialist character of industry is determined and secured in a decisive measure by the rôle of the party, the voluntary internal cohesion of the proletarian vanguard, the conscious discipline of the administrators, trade union functionaries, members of shop nuclei, etc. If we allow that this web is weakening, disintegrating, and ripping, then it becomes absolutely self-evident that within a brief period nothing will remain of the socialist character of state industry, transport, etc. The trusts and individual factories will begin living an independent life. Not a trace will be left of the planned beginnings, so weak at the present time. The economic struggles of the workers will acquire a scope unrestricted save by the relation of forces. The state ownership of the means of production will be first transformed into a juridical fiction and later on even the latter will be swept away. (The Third International After Lenin, p. 300.)
Trotsky’s prognoses were refuted by history. The First Five Year Plan, put into effect a few months after he had penned the above lines, strengthened and centralized state ownership and control over the trusts and factories and extended the planned economy on a scale never reached before. The Bolshevik Party was destroyed, both its Left Wing and Right Wing liquidated politically and physically. The proletarian “web” was broken, but the Stalinists extended their totalitarian domination over economy. At the same time the bureaucracy destroyed virtually all the old capitalist elements in the economy. Contrary to Trotsky’s predictions the destruction of the Bolshevik Party did not mean the end of state property and planning; Russia did not travel the road of Thermidorian, capitalist restoration. On the contrary, the Stalinist counter-revolution took a new, hitherto unknown path, the road of bureaucratic absolutism.
Yet Trotsky in the above quotation (and on innumerable other occasions) stated that “the socialist character of industry is determined and secured in a decisive measure by the rôle of the party, the voluntary internal cohesion of the proletarian vanguard, etc.” That is, the socialist character of state industry was determined by the domination of the proletarian party in the state and through it in the economy. Or, put in another way, the economic power of the proletariat rested on its political power.
Confronted by the unexpected development of the destruction of the political power of the working class and the strengthening of state property and planning, Trotsky faced the dilemma: either to maintain his old criterion and affirm that Russia is no longer a workers’ state and its economy no longer “socialist”; or to revise completely the Marxist conception of the workers’ state. He chose the latter course, and thereby abandoned the Marxist view which he had held until then. He now affirmed that it was the state-owned character of property which determined the socialist character of the economy and the proletarian nature of the state. The bureaucracy’s expropriation of the political power of the working class, he added, only signified that Russia was a “degenerated” workers’ state, politically dominated by a Bonapartist bureaucracy.
Unfortunately, Trotsky never subjected his old analyses to a thorough critical examination. He never sought to explain why, contrary to his predictions, Russia did not travel the Thermidorian, capitalist road of counter-revolution even though the political power of the working class was destroyed. It is true that he often declared that “the bureaucracy after a stubborn resistance, found itself compelled by the logic of its own interests to adopt the program of industrialization and collectivization.” (The Kirov Assassination, p. 25. Emphasis in original.) But this would only indicate that the logic of the bureaucracy’s own interests was not capitalist restoration (or socialism) but its own absolutist rule in the state and economy,
And in retrospect, was the Right Wing of the Bolshevik Party the “Thermidorian” faction? Here again Trotsky never re-examined this question in great detail. However, he did write in 1938:
The latest judicial frame-ups were aimed as a blow against the Left. This is true also of the mopping up of the leaders of the Right Opposition, because the Right group of the Bolshevik Party, seen from the viewpoint of the bureaucracy’s interests and tendencies, represented a Left danger. (Program and Resolutions of the Founding Conference of the Fourth International, pp. 46f. Emphasis in original.)
This correct appraisal of the relation between the Right Wing and the Stalinists involves a serious revision of the old view as to the “class struggle” in the Bolshevik Party. It is strange indeed that the Right Wing, the “Thermidorian” faction, whose policy was that of resistance to rapid industrialization, was to the left of the bureaucracy which “by the logic of its own interests” adopted the program of rapid industrialization and collectivization. Strange, that is, from the viewpoint of those who hold that Russia is a workers’ state. It should be recalled that in 1929 there were Russian Oppositionists who advocated a bloc with the Right Wing against Stalinism. Trotsky at that time wrote a vitriolic attack on this proposal as “unprincipled,” because it would mean a united front of the Left and the Right against the “Centrists.” In this case, as in others, the false analysis led to incorrect politics.
 
II. Stalinism and Bonapartism
Trotsky defended his new position, that the Stalinist state is a workers’ state though the working class has no political power, by citing the bourgeois Bonapartist régimes. Under Bonapartism (and fascism) the bourgeoisie is deprived of all political power and is in fact politically oppressed. Despite this, the bourgeoisie remains socially the ruling class and the régime is bourgeois in character. Stalinist Bonapartism, according to Trotsky, has an analogous relation to the Russian working class.
The analogy would be valid only if the political expropriation of the working class had been accompanied by the strengthening of its economic and social power, its domination over society. Such was the case under all Bonapartist regimes: the political expropriation of the bourgeoisie was accompanied by (or more exactly, was the precondition for) the strengthening of its economic and social power. (In a more complex form this holds true for fascism.) Marxists have adduced abundant empirical evidence to prove this contention.
But what does the evidence show as regards Russia? Simply this: that the working class has been deprived of all economic and social as well as political power. The strengthening of state property and planning, which allegedly signifies the social rule of the proletariat, resulted in the increased economic, social and political oppression of the working class. Here is a process which is the exact opposite of what occurs under Bonapartism!
By his analogy, however, Trotsky revealed an important methodological error which permeates his writings on Stalinist Russia. In seeking to explain the different possible forms of working class rule by citing the diverse forms of bourgeois rule, Trotsky failed to give adequate recognition to the decisive, qualitative differences between proletarian and bourgeois rule. In other contexts, for example in his theory of the permanent revolution, Trotsky proceeded from the basis of the totally new character of proletarian rule as compared to all previous class rule, to wit, the working class must first conquer political power, and through its own state organize economy. (And with successful socialist revolutions internationally, build a world socialist economy which would lead to the dissolution of the workers’ states and the proletariat as a class, to the triumph of a world socialist classless society.)
Every ruling class has its own laws of development and its own forms of economic, social and political domination (rule). The bourgeoisie, for example, first develops its economic power (capitalist ownership of the means of production and exchange) in the womb of feudalism, and then struggles for political and social power. In bourgeois society, in other words, the rule of the capitalist class rests basically on bourgeois private property. The state power defending this property may be in the hands of a semi-feudal aristocracy, a military clique, a parliamentary government controlled by the big bourgeois or petty-bourgeois parties, a Bonapartist bureaucracy, a fascist bureaucracy, etc. Quite the contrary is the case of the proletarian revolution and proletarian state. The proletariat is a propertyless class. Its control over economy and its domination in society is possible only through first winning political power. It is through its state power that the working class becomes the ruling class and develops the conditions for the abolition of all classes, the socialist society. Without political power the working class cannot be the ruling class in any sense.
Of course, the workers’ state may assume different forms. But whatever the form the state must express the political power of the proletariat. Once it is acknowledged, as Trotsky and everyone in our movement has, that the Russian workers have no political power whatsoever, that is tantamount to saying that Russia is no longer a workers’ state.
But can there not be a sick, degenerated workers’ state? History has given the answer: the régime of Lenin and Trotsky was a sick, bureaucratized, revolutionary workers’ state – as Lenin and Trotsky themselves often affirmed. In a healthy workers’ state there would be complete democracy, the working class exercising its power democratically through Soviets, trade unions, rival parties. This state of affairs, as is known, never existed in Russia. The political rule of the working class was expressed almost exclusively through the dictatorship of the proletarian party, the Bolsheviks (with extreme limitations on Soviet and union democracy from the earliest days). The administration of the state and the economy in culturally backward and isolated Russia, while controlled by the Bolsheviks, was in the hands of a bureaucracy. The Bolsheviks expected, and worked for, the extension of the Russian Revolution into the more advanced industrial countries which would break the imperialist encirclement, raise the Russian industrial and cultural level, and thus create the preconditions for complete workers’ democracy.
When these conditions did not materialize the Stalin faction which controlled the party apparatus expressed the dominant desire of the bureaucracy for a peaceful and stable national existence. The old Bolshevik (and bourgeois) elements of the bureaucracy were eliminated, and a new bureaucracy created. The theory and practice of national socialism, “socialism in one country alone,” was developed as the great social rationalization (“ideology”) of the bureaucracy. With the Stalin faction as its representative it utilized its centralized administrative control of the state and economy to conduct a civil war to destroy its internal opponents, proletarian and bourgeois. On the one hand, it destroyed the limited workers’’ democracy that had existed, liquidated the old Bolshevik. Party and converted the Communist International into the world detachment of Stalin’s Office and G.P.U. On the other hand, it wiped out virtually all remnants of the old capitalist elements in the economy, strengthened state property and extended the industrialization and collectivization of the country. Thus when the Stalinists announced “the complete and irrevocable victory of socialism,” they were indeed proclaiming to the world the triumph of bureaucratic collectivism.
 
III. Bureaucratic Collectivism: What Kind of New Society?
Stalinist Russia is thus a reactionary state based upon a new system of economic exploitation, bureaucratic collectivism. The ruling class is the bureaucracy which through its control of the state collectively owns, controls and administers the means of production and exchange. The basic motive force of the economy is the extraction of more and more surplus labor from the toilers so as to increase the revenue, power and position of the bureaucracy. The economy is organized and directed through state totalitarian planning and political terrorism. The toilers are compelled by the state (as well as economic necessity) to labor in the factories and fields. Forced labor is thus an inherent feature of present-day Russian productive relations.
The relations within the ruling class – the share which individual bureaucrats receive of the wealth produced, their relative power and position, the manner in which persons enter or are forced out of the ruling class – are determined by non-economic, primarily political factors.
Through the state monopoly of foreign trade the bureaucracy has a complete monopoly over the internal market; for the exploitation of the abundant material and human resources of the country, for the investment and for sale of goods. This monopoly is indispensable for the Stalinist imperialist exploitation and oppression of the national minority peoples of the Soviet Union (the Ukrainians, the Georgians, etc.)
While bureaucratic collectivism has succeeded in raising the industrial level of the country, its productive relations are tremendous obstacles to the real growth of the social productivity of labor, the raising of the living standards of the masses, and the economic and political freedom of the workers and peasants. Despite the organizational advantages of state-owned monopoly of social property and the vast internal market, and totalitarian planning (aided by the importations of advanced capitalist technique), Stalinist Russia has experienced a growing decline in the annual rate of increase of industrial output and an increasing disproportion between the income of the bureaucracy and the “new intelligentsia” on the one hand, and the income of the mass of workers and peasants on the other. (In recent years the yearly rate of increase of industrial production has been, according to official figures, only twice the rate experienced under Czarism.)
The terroristic regime which is an integral part of bureaucratic planning (the bureaucratic productive relations) leads to constant disruptions in production; disproportions in the output of the various industries dependent upon one another and therefore large-scale economic waste; low efficiency of production. The constant purges of the bureaucracy leads to vast disruptions of planning and production. The low wages, speed-up and poor housing have led to such large turnovers of labor, despite laws restricting labor mobility, that far stricter laws carrying penalties including death sentence, had to be proclaimed to maintain production. The progressive, organic and long-range development of the productive forces, the real growth of the social productivity of labor, and the raising of the standard of living of the masses demand scientific planning, that is, democratic planning by and of the masses. This is the antithesis of Stalinism.
Then again, bureaucratic collectivism is a nationally limited economy (or, more accurately, confined to a single backward “empire,” Stalinist Russia). In relation to the capitalist imperialist states, Russia occupies the position of a huge national trust which by monopolizing the home market intensifies the contradiction existing within these countries between the tendency for the unlimited increase of the capitalist productive forces and the growing limitations of the markets for capital investment and for the sale of commodities. From the standpoint of Russian industrial and cultural development, the overthrow of world capitalism is an indispensable condition for the liberation of its own nationally confined productive forces, so that it could benefit fully from advanced Western technique and take its place as an integral part of a progressive world economy. Here also, bureaucratic collectivism (Stalinism) reveals its socially reactionary character in its role as an assistant of outlived capitalist imperialism in the task of destroying the independent working class movement for socialism.
Thus, from the day of its birth the new Stalinist society is a reactionary obstacle to the development of Russian and world society toward socialist freedom and security. From a historical viewpoint, Russia has taken a bastard path backward from the régime established by the Bolshevik Revolution. It is from the start torn by contradictions and antagonisms which exclude its assuming a progressive road comparable to early bourgeois society. It arrives on the scene of history as an expression of world social reaction; at a time when the world economic conditions already exist for a great leap forward from class exploitation to socialist freedom and plenty; and when the working class is the only social power which can bring about the progressive transformation of society.
The class-conscious workers have no interests in common with this new system of exploitation and oppression, bureaucratic collectivism. In wartime as during peace the revolutionary socialists must not give any support to the Stalinist state. Our task is that of awakening the working class to socialist struggle against bureaucratic collectivism, fascism and democratic imperialism; and for working class power and socialism.
 
IV. Shachtman’s Theoretical Confusion
What are Shachtman’s views on Russian society? A quick reading of his article, Is Russia a Workers’ State? (New International, December 1940) would suggest that he is in fundamental disagreement with Trotsky on the nature of Russian economy and society; and in basic accord with those who hold that Russia is a new, reactionary, exploiting society. However, as I propose to show, the appearance belies the reality. While accepting the latter position in “form,” Shachtman has adopted the former position in “essence.” The result is an illogical, eclectic combination of incompatible ideas which is called a third position.
Let us see. At the last Plenum of the National Committee of the Workers Party, Shachtman declared that in our movement only two contributions (aside from Trotsky’s) had been made to the clarification of the Russian question. First, that introduced by Carter on the qualitative differences between the state rule of the proletariat and the state rule of the bourgeoisie. (Already discussed in the first sections of the present article.) Second, the distinction between “property forms” and “property relations” introduced by Shachtman himself.
On the latter question, Shachtman writes in his article: “... Trotsky speaks interchangeably of the ‘property forms’ and the ‘property relations’ in the country as if he were referring to one and the same thing.” It is true that under Stalin “state ownership of the means of production and exchange continues to exist ... However, what is crucial are not the property forms, i.e., nationalized property, whose existence cannot be denied, but precisely the relations of the various social groups in the Soviet Union to this property, i.e., property relations!” The state owns the property but the bureaucracy controls the state and is “the ruling class of an unstable society which is already a fetter on economic development.”
Thus summarized it would appear that there is complete agreement between Shachtman and those who declare that Russia is a reactionary bureaucratic collectivist state. What is “crucial” are the property relations, writes Shachtman. But what are “property forms” as distinct from property relations? Shachtman defines them by giving examples: private property form – as under capitalism and other class societies; state or collectivist form of property as under Leninist Russia and Stalinist Russia.
Now, it is true that Trotsky identified Russian state property (the “property form”) with the property relations established by the Russian workers’ revolution. But he did this not only “as if he were referring to one and the same thing,” as Shachtman writes, but because he was consciously referring to one and the same thing. In other words, his error was not terminological – a confusion of phrases – but an error in analysis. When Marxists speak of the “form of property” they invariably mean social form of property, that is, property relations; as feudal form of property (and economy), capitalist form of property (and economy), socialistic, transitional form of property (and economy), etc.
If for the sake of greater clarity on the new Russian phenomena Shachtman chooses to introduce a terminological distinction between “form of property” and “property relations” he can do so but only on one condition: By making clear that by “form of property” he does not mean “social form of property.” Otherwise the result is not clarity but confusion; otherwise property forms are property relations.
If property forms are to be distinguished from property relations then the only meaningful distinction is that between the general manner in which property is owned (privately or through the state) and who owns the property. So that one can say, on the basis of private property, you can have feudal property relations and bourgeois property relations. On the basis of state ownership, you can have the proletarian, socialistic property relations and bureaucratic, collectivist property relations. This would be a distinction between the technical organization form of property (and economy) and the social form of property (and economy).
This is what Shachtman appears to say in the section Property Forms and Property Relations (pages 197–199). To repeat once again: The property relations are “crucial” in determining the character of Stalinist society. Stalin, while retaining the state property forms, destroyed the property relations established by the Russian Revolution. This was a social counter-revolution.
Yet we find Shachtman writing in a latter section of the same article:
In the Soviet Union, control of the state, sole owner of social property, makes the bureaucracy the most powerful economic class. Therein lies the fundamental difference between the Soviet Union, even under Stalinism, and all other pre-collectivist states. The difference is of epochal historical importance (page 203).
Shachtman, of course, did not mean to write that the fundamental difference “between the Soviet Union, even under Stalinism,” is that the bureaucracy is the most powerful economic class, for he does not hold that this was so in Leninist Russia. But this error in composition, due to hasty writing, has a deeper significance. Without submitting it to Freudian analysis, it is clear from the context of the entire section that
Shachtman slides back to Trotsky’s view on the “epochal historical importance” of present-day Russian society; that despite his lengthy polemic with Trotsky on property forms and property relations he considers that Stalinist Russia is a socio-economic continuity of the economic system under Lenin; a continuation of the progressive economy, transitional from capitalism to socialism, established by the Russian Revolution. Immediately following the paragraph quoted above, Shachtman adds:
Of epochal importance, we repeat, for our analysis does not diminish by an iota the profound social revolutionary significance of the Russian proletarian revolution. Starting at a low level, lowered still further by years of war, civil war, famine and their devastations, isolated from world economy, infested with a monstrous bureaucracy, the Soviet Union nevertheless attained a rhythm of economic development, an expansion of the productive forces which exceeded the expectations of the boldest revolutionary thinkers and easily aroused the astonishment of the entire world. This was not due to any virtues of the bureaucracy under whose regime it was accomplished, but in spite of the concomitant overhead waste of that reign. Economic progress in the Soviet Union was accomplished on the basic of planning and of the new, collectivist forms of property established by the proletarian revolution (page 203).
 
V. Trotsky’s Concept of Soviet Economy
Here in full bloom is Trotsky’s basic analysis of present-day Russian economy. The Russian Revolution is not dead, according to both Trotsky and Shachtman; it exists in the “progressive” collectivist forms of property. To deny this, it would appear from the above, is to “diminish ... the profound social revolutionary significance of the Russian proletarian revolution” – no less. But Shachtman had written that “what is more crucial” in determining the character of Russian economy (and any economy) “are not the property forms, i.e., nationalized property ... but precisely the relations of the various social groups in the Soviet Union to this property, i.e., property relations!” (Emphasis, including the triumphant exclamation point, is Shachtman’s). If these property relations (bureaucratic class exploitation of the workers) are “crucial,” why did not Shachtman compare them to capitalist property relations and show why the former are “more progressive” than the latter? The fact is that despite Shachtman’s painstaking insistence on the basic distinction between Russian “property forms” and “property relations,” his collectivist forms of property look like, feel like and act like, that is, are, what Trotsky interchangeably called property forms and property relations. Shachtman, then, agrees with Trotsky on the social and historical significance of Stalinist Russia – as a progressive economy and society transitional from capitalism to socialism. He follows Trotsky’s method of comparing the superiority of nationalized property over bourgeois private property, and citing the economic progress experienced under Stalinism, as empirical evidence of this superiority.
Thus, in his attempt to combine the position that Russia is a new, reactionary economic system with the opposite view that it is a progressive economy established by the Russian workers’ revolution but distorted by bureaucratic domination, Shachtman adopts arguments and terminology from the first position up to the point when he reaches the crucial problems of the concrete social and historical significance of Russian economy – the core of the dispute. He then employs Trotsky’s arguments and essential theoretical conclusions, without, however, drawing other inescapable, theoretical and political conclusions which necessarily follow from them.
Several years ago Trotsky quite correctly wrote that anyone who holds that Russia is a new economic system of exploitation and agrees with what he (Trotsky) considered the criteria as to what constitutes a progressive society – and Shachtman fits this description – must be in essential agreement with him. In a polemic against a French comrade he stated that for the sake of the argument he would concede that Russia is a new class society and the bureaucracy a new exploiting class. He continued:
But that does not prevent us from seeing that the new society is progressive in comparison with capitalism, for on the basis of nationalized property the new possessing “class” has assured a development of the productive forces never equaled in the history of the world. Marxism teaches us, does it not, that the productive forces are the fundamental factor of historic progress. A society which is not capable of assuring the growth of economic power is still less capable of assuring the well-being of the working masses, whatever may be the mode of distribution. The antagonism between feudalism and capitalism and the decline of the former has been determined precisely by the fact that the latter opened up new and grandiose possibilities for the stagnating productive forces. The same for the USSR. Whatever its mode of exploitation may be, this new society is by its very character superior to capitalist society. There you have the real point of departure for Marxist analysis. (Once Again: The USSR Defense, November 4, 1937.)
Shachtman agrees with Trotsky as to what is the “real point of departure for Marxist analysis” of the historical significance of Russian society. He agrees with Trotsky’s appraisal of Russian economic progress under Stalinism. He agrees with Trotsky’s estimate of the relation between present-day Russia and capitalism. That is, he is in complete accord with Trotsky’s basic position on Russian economy and society.
But why the repetitious insistence that Shachtman agrees with Trotsky? one may ask. The simple reason is Shachtman’s articles itself: His arguments against the view that Russia is a “workers’ state,” his emphasis that what is “crucial” are property relations and not nationalized property, his characterization of the economy as a new system of class exploitation and the bureaucracy as a new ruling class – all these suggest that Shachtman does reject the fundamental position of Trotsky on Russian economy. In the not-very-brief article, he several times repeats the phrase about the “historical significance” of the collectivist form of property, devotes only a few lines as to what this significance is, and nowhere explicitly declares that he agrees with Trotsky that Russian society is progressive as against capitalism. Trotsky’s view, nonetheless, is the basic premise of the final section of his article, The Defense of the Soviet Union.
 
VI. The Basic Contradiction of Shachtman
Shachtman writes that: “The theory that Soviet economy is progressive and therefore the wars of the Stalinist bureaucracy against a capitalist state are, by some mysticism, correspondingly and universally progressive, is thus untenable.” (Note that Shachtman here does not commit himself on the question of whether or not “Soviet economy is progressive.” He is saying: Even if Soviet economy is progressive it does not follow, etc.)
He continues: When Russia fights a war which corresponds to the interests of the international socialist revolution, we will defend Russia just as we defend a similar progressive war of a colonial country. If it wages a reactionary war we will be revolutionary anti-war oppositionists. We would become defensists in the present war should its character change “into a struggle of the imperialists to crush the Soviet Union when the interests of the world revolution would demand the defense of the Soviet Union by the international proletariat.” Why? Because a victory of the imperialists would (a) reduce Russia to a colony for capitalist investment; (b) destroy nationalized property. Shachtman adds:
In these considerations, too, the historical significance of the new, collectivist property established by the Russian Revolution stands out clearly. Such a transformation of the Soviet Union as triumphant imperialism would undertake would have a vast and durable reactionary effect upon world social development, give capitalism and reaction a new lease on life, retard enormously the revolutionary movement, and postpone for we don’t know how long the introduction of the world socialist society. From this standpoint and under these conditions, the defense of the Soviet Union, even under Stalinism, is both possible and necessary. (My emphasis – J.C.)
There you have, in the most graphic language, Shachtman’s conception of the place of the new, bureaucratic exploiting society in contemporary world politics and economics.
What importance, then, have lengthy discourses on property forms and property relations, new, exploiting economy and new, bureaucratic ruling classes for one who holds these traditional conclusions of our movement on the significance, the meaning, the place of Russian society in “history” and in the present-day world? None whatsoever!
But Shachtman today is not for the defense of Stalinist Russia. This is all to the good. But why is he not a defensist? When comrades agreeing with Shachtman’s article (as, for example, Lund) today quote it against him, his answer is simple: The character of the war has not changed. Russia is a junior partner of the imperialist democracies. Just as we subordinate the defense of the national independence of Ethiopia in the present war because Ethiopia is a tool of Anglo-American imperialism, so we subordinate defense of the “progressive” Russian collectivist property.
This is mere sophistry. Would the defeat of Ethiopia in the present war have as its consequence the opening up of a long, reactionary epoch of world reaction which, according to Shachtman, would follow a defeat of Russia? Obviously not. Or does Shachtman hold that such a heavy blow at world socialism such as he depicts in his article would not be the result of a Russian defeat in the present war because Stalin is allied to Anglo-American imperialism? An affirmative answer makes no sense. If Shachtman’s view on the significance of Stalinist Russia is true, then the consequences he foretells would follow in any major war with the capitalist imperialists in which Stalin is engaged and defeated. There is no escape from this conclusion – once Shachtman’s false premises are granted.
It should be added that Shachtman’s analogy between backward colonial Ethiopia (or China) and his “progressive collectivist” imperialist Russia is also false from another viewpoint. We defend Ethiopia (and China) against imperialism because we are for its national independence. However, when Ethiopia is involved in the present war it loses its national independence to Anglo-American imperialism. (The same would be the case with China, if the war in the Far East becomes an integral part of the Second World War.) In other words, that which we were fighting for, the national independence of the colonial people, is no longer involved in the war; has already been destroyed. The contrary is the case with Russia. Stalin, in his alliance with the imperialist democracies, has not given up nationalized property, i.e., what Shachtman wants to support. A Russian victory in the war does not necessarily mean the destruction of Shachtman’s “progressive” collectivist form of property – that is precisely what Stalin is fighting for since that is the basis for his class rule. The analogy therefore is a hasty, ill-considered argument which may sound good but is, on analysis, deceptive and false.
Shachtman, therefore, has no consistent theoretical or political basis for his present position on Russia in the war. (All his other arguments are subsidiary to the main points considered above.) Once Trotsky’s fundamental position on the significance of Russian economy and society is accepted – as Shachtman does and I do not – his basic theoretical and political conclusions necessarily follow. But the re-evaluation of the Russian question, the establishment of clear and consistent criteria for revolutionary politics on Stalinist Russia, requires the rejection of Trotsky’s position along the lines indicated by those who hold that Russia is a reactionary, bureaucratic collectivist society.
 



To the Editors:
In the editorial notes to Rosa Luxemburg’s Socialist
Crisis in France your commentator takes issue with the pre-war
social-democratic demand for a people’s militia. In the July New
International he writes that it should be remembered that
Luxemburg’s defense of this demand was written forty years ago.
“It has long been clear – and, no doubt, became clear
enough to Luxemburg herself during the war – that ‘democratization’ of
the army means little so long as it is used to defend the bourgeois
state, and that the content of ‘national defense’ has evaporated in the
period of imperialism.” (p.202.)
A note in the October issue adds:
“The militia system, or the ‘people in arms’, as the
social-democrats often phrased it, was regarded by the pre-war
socialist movement as the solution of the problem of militarism. Lenin,
writing during the World War, exposed the fallacy of this demand.”
Limitations of space do not permit extensive comment on
the problem at this time. For the present the following will suffice:
1. The demand for a people’s militia as against the
standing army was part of the general minimum democratic program of
pre-war social-democracy. It was directed against the semi-feudal and
capitalist armies (and militarism) which were independent of the
respective national parliamentary bodies and formed the political
centers of internal and external reaction, Like every democratic demand
advocated by revolutionary socialists the slogan for a people’s militia
had reformist, social-patriotic as well as revolutionary implications.
That is why Marxists constantly reiterate the limited nature of any
democratic demand and emphasise the indispensability of independent
working class action for its achievement.
To cite a pertinent example: During the World War the Russian
Mensheviks and Bolsheviks both called for the overthrow of the Czarist
monarchy and for a democratic republic. Did that mean that Lenin
expected to be a defensist when the democratic republic was
established? On the contrary, he wrote even before the democratic
revolution of February that in such an eventuality he would continue
his opposition to the Russian government – though democratic – in the
imperialist war – as he later did. The majority of the Mensheviks held
the contrary view, and became defensists under Kerensky.
2. I don’t know of any writing of Lenin during the World
War – or at any other time – wherein he "exposed the
fallacy of this demand.” On the contrary, to mention only one example,
Lenin raised this slogan with great force and detail under the Kerensky
regime.
3. The Fourth International is for the demand of a
people’s militia today. The program of transition demands adopted at
the founding conference states:
“Substitution for the standing army of a peoples
militia, indissolubly linked up with factories, mines, farms, etc.”

(p.34. Emphasis in original).
4. Does
this mean that the Fourth International is for “national
defense”? The same document gives the reply:
“‘Defense of the Fatherland?’ – but by this
abstraction, the bourgeoisie understands the defense of its profits and
plunder. We stand ready to defend the fatherland from foreign
capitalists, if we first bind our own capitalists; hand
and foot and hinder them from attacking foreign fatherlands; if the
workers and the farmers of our country become its real masters; if the
wealth of the
country be transferred from the hands of a tiny minority to the hands
of the people; if the army becomes a weapon of the exploited instead of
the exploiters.” (p.32)
This is the concrete way in which we raise the demand of
a people’s militia at the present time.
Joseph CARTER

  Additional proof of the Stalinist support of Hitler in the present war is supplied by a recent article of Harry Gannes. (Daily Worker, October 20, 1939). In his zealous defense of the Communist Party’s policies of yesterday and today, Gannes succeeds in showing how at each stage his party’s course is determined by the reactionary needs of the Kremlin bureaucracy. Before the outbreak of the present war, the apologist explains, the task was the establishment of a “peace front” of England, France and the Soviet Union against fascist aggression. If war had resulted from this alliance “two factors would then have existed which do not and cannot exist in the present war. First, the alliance would have had a genuine defense program against aggression”; and second: “The whole character of the war by virtue of the action of the Land of Socialism would have changed the character of such a war, limited the objectives of the Anglo-French imperialists and worked against their domination of the world.” In other words, if Russia were allied with Anglo-French imperialism in the present war it would be the duty of the working class in all countries, according to Gannes, to support their respective reactionary governments in the war. And therefore if tomorrow the Stalin-Hitler alliance is replaced by a Stalin alliance with the “democracies” the Communist Party will once again become the staunchest supporter of Chamberlain, Daladier, Roosevelt and the pro-“democratic” warmongers. In such a war however, would these robber governments cease being imperialist, predatory regimes? Gannes contends that their imperialist aims would be “limited” by the Soviet Union. How? Would they liberate the hundreds of millions of colonial peoples they now oppress? Would England for example, give national independence to the Indian people? Would Roosevelt end his brutal military domination over Puerto Rico? Would Stalin force the British and French armies to bring national freedom to the oppressed peoples of Europe? What poppycock! Look at how Stalin’s ally, Hitler, is “liberating” the Polish people! If Russia were allied to England and France, the only limitation on their war aims – as is clear from Gannes’ own analysis – would be that at that particular moment they would not be attacking Russia. Their war would still be reactionary, imperialist. For from the viewpoint of the class conscious workers these governments can conduct only a reactionary war which can have nothing in common with genuine democratic and working class interests and aims.  Pure Hypocrisy How hypocritical therefore is the present Stalinist “support” to the growing movement for Indian liberation! If Stalin were united with Chamberlain in the war, the Communist would be in the forefront of the suppression of the colonial revolt. Their struggle “against imperialism” is obviously motivated exclusively by the fact that Stalin is on the other side of the struggle. That is why they condemn the military enemies of Stalin and Hitler, and defend the Stalinazi war alliance and “peace” plea. Gannes makes this crystal clear when, after stating that “both sides” in the present war are responsible for its outbreak, England and France alone are responsible for its continuation. The Soviet Union (and thereby the Communist Party), he writes, “accuses Anglo-French imperialism of bearing the responsibility for continuing the war ...” Hitler is exonerated from responsibility for the continuation of the war because he offered “peace”! What a shameful defense of Hitler! The whole world knows that Hitler sued for “peace” because he had already achieved his immediate aim (the conquest of Poland), and also because he wanted to show the German people that he was being forced to fight against his will.  Ready for Any Job Gannes adds that “the Anglo-French warmakers hoped by war to reshuffle the German ruling reactionary cliques in order to bring about another more dependable anti-Soviet set-up.” Isn’t this a good basis for a united front with Hitler against Chamberlain and the “more dependable (German) anti-Soviet” clique? Tomorrow we may be told more openly that Hitler is fighting a defensive war against the anti-Soviet forces and therefore should be supported by the workers of the world. The unscrupulous henchmen of Stalin are ready to corral the masses for any dirty job assigned to them by their master.   


In the early days of the First World War only a few isolated voices were raised against the criminal madness of workers lighting workers in the interest of their exploiters at home.
The powerful socialist parties and trade unions became warmongers. “For defense of little Belgium”, shouted the British turn-coats as they rallied the toilers behind the Union Jack. “For national defense!”, cried the French social-patriots. “Against Kaiserism and for democracy!”, rang the appeal of the Russian traitors to socialism as they supported the Tsarist armies. “Against barbaric Tsarism!”, replied their German comrades of yesterday as they prostituted themselves to their own ruling class.
In a word, in each country the official leaders of labor defended the imperialist war in the name of democracy and socialism. And the chorus was powerful, impressive and effective. Could anything be done to fight against the tidal wave of treachery and chauvinistic hysteria?
 
The First Anti-War Forces Appear
In little Serbia, the Socialist deputies Laptchevitch and Katzerovitch exposed the lying talk of national defense, proved that Serbia was but a pawn in the hands of the Allied powers, and therefore refused to vote war credits or support the war.
In England, four members of the Independent Labor Party voted against the war in the House of Commons, while 38 representatives of the Labor Party supported the war.
In Russia, the fourteen socialist deputies in the Tsarist Duma – Bolshevik and Menshevik – refused to vote war credits or support the war.
In Germany, the small anti-war forces assembled around Karl Liebknectit and Rosa Luxemburg. On December 2 (1914) Liebknecht in the Reichstag electrified the world by his eloquent denunciation of the war as a robber struggle between the two groups of powers. In defiance of party discipline, he answered the roll-call vote on war credits with a powerful “NO!” One man against the German Empire and the Social Democratic Party!
“The main enemy is at home!” Liebknecht declared in opposition to the social-imperialists.
But in the first months of the war only a handful followed him.
 
Lenin and Trotsky Against the Stream
Alone also were the socialist-internationalists Lenin, Zinoviev, and Trotsky, swimming against the current of reaction; analysing the causes of the war; denouncing the ruling classes and their predatory governments; attacking the socialists of yesterday who now were the lackeys of militarism; warning the workers against those who declared that a truly democratic peace could be achieved by the imperialist powers. Only the overthrow of the governments, the conquest of power by the working class, they constantly reiterated, could bring a lasting peace by destroying capitalism and establishing a socialist society.
As dark and hopeless as the situation appeared, they had faith in the recuperative powers of the working class, certain that once the masses learned from the frightful experiences of the war itself that they had been betrayed, they would turn on their old leaders and conduct a revolutionary struggle to end the war.
They were called hopeless dreamers whose wish was father to the thought, insane fanatics who were dealing with a world of their own imagination. A handful of people will stop the war by socialist revolution? No, replied the internationalists, the masses will make the revolution. Our duty is to point the road, utilize the experiences of the workers patiently to explain to them the meaning of the events, and the methods they must employ at each stage of development.
 
Anti-War Forces Gather Together
The anti-war socialists reassembled slowly their ranks. In March 1915 an International Socialist Women’s Conference was held at Berne, Switzerland. In the same city, in April the International Conference of Socialist Youth took place. Both conferences adopted clear statements against the war but were vague on what was to be done. The differences were expressed in clearer form at the conference of anti-war socialists at Zimmerwald in September of the same year.
The left wing at the conference, grouped around Lenin, insisted that opposition to the war must be expressed in explicit preparations for revolutionary action as the way out, and for an immediate split with those who either supported the war or were in an alliance with the pro-war socialists.
Those who opposed the left wing thought that the differences, with the pro-war socialists and their allies were temporary, and would be overcome once peace was again established. They did not believe that socialist revolutions would develop during the war and therefore concentrated on getting the belligerent powers to adopt “democratic peace terms.”
 
Lenin Becomes Leader of Anti-War Forces
Lenin’s position was supported by only a minority at the Zimmerwald Conference. But when the second conference was held at Kienthal in April 1916, his program had made such headway that the official resolution of the conference explicitly condemned the social-chauvinists (the pro-war “socialists”) and the social-pacifists – (those who taught that peace could be achieved by the imperialist powers through disarmament, compulsory arbitration and democratization of foreign politics). The resolution called for revolutionary action as the only way to end the war. This program was supported by the German group of Liebknecht and Luxemburg. One month after Kienthal, Liebknecht spoke at a mass May Day rally in Berlin, “Down with the war!”, he shouted. And though thrown into prison, his slogan echoed throughout the country by means of illegal leaflets, pamphlets and papers.
Strikes began to break out in country after country; reports of fraternization of soldiers on both sides began to seep through the censored press. In England, for example, army men were sentenced for acts of sedition and mutiny: in 1916, 60; 1917, 221; 1918, 676, according to the official reports.
 
The Russian Revolution Blazes the Trail
These anti-war actions were given added impetus by the outbreak of the Russian Revolution in March 1917. But the Kerensky government continued to support the Allies. The Bolsheviks unleashed a tremendous campaign to achieve the aim they had set for themselves at the beginning of the war: peace through the Socialist revolution. And with their victory in November 1917, the first great breach was made in the World War.
The Bolshevik Revolution accelerated the strike movements in the, warring countries, particularly in Germany and in Austro-Hungary. The mass actions of 1918 culminated in the German and Austrian revolutions of November. Peace was being achieved by the actions of the working class!
But only in Russia were the revolutionary socialists in control of political power. In Germany and Austria those who had supported the war, those, who were the most active opponents of the revolution, succeeded in forming the new governments. As during the war, their main task became the suppression of the revolutionary workers’ movement and the assurance of capitalist stability.
 
The Bosses’ Peace Prepared This War
The Allied statesmen and their social-patriotic agents had promised a democratic peace. They imposed the oppressive Versailles Treaty on the German people. The revolutionary Socialists time and again warned that only socialist revolutions, workers’ governments united in a Socialist United States of Europe could bring about a lasting and democratic peace. The Bolsheviks showed the way in Russia. They made clear during and after the war that unless the Russian Revolution was extended internationally, reaction and more bloody wars would follow.
How tragically accurate were the predictions of the revolutionists! What scurrilous lies were the promises of the “democratic” imperialists and their lickspittles!
The second World War is now a stark reality. Once again the masters, and their agents in the labor movement, are repeating the old slogans.
The anti-war forces are once again reduced to a handful. But as in 1914–1918 the masses will learn that they are being deceived, and will unite their forces against the war. They can stop the war, and bring about a lasting peace, only by struggling for the socialist revolution, for the Socialist United States of Europe and a World Socialist Federation.
 



The Communist Party has just announced its new line on the war situation in a Declaration to the American People. (Daily Worker, Sept. 19)
 
I. The Character of the War
1. “The war that has broken out in Europe is the Second Imperialist War. The ruling capitalist and landlord classes of all the belligerent countries are equally guilty for this war,” it declares.
But ... the day after England and France declared war on Germany, following the latter’s invasion of Poland, the Daily Worker wrote.
2. “There are, broadly speaking, three fronts: the front of fascist aggressive imperialism which has been waging the war for the past two and a half years. There is the camp of bourgeois democracy, against which this war is directed, but had been retreating. And then there is the third front, the real peace front, which, so far, includes the Soviet Union as its main country along with the many forces and peoples throughout the world who support it.” (Daily Worker, Sept. 4, Questions and Answers)
 
II. What Should the Masses in the Belligerent Countries Do?
1. The recent Declaration of the C.P. states:
“Communists in all the belligerent countries are exposing the imperialist and predatory character of the war, they will vote against war credits, they go among the soldiers at the fronts and the masses at home explaining that this war will bring the people nothing but misery, burdens, destruction and death.”
But ... the Communist Parties of France and England voted for the same war, told the soldiers at the fronts and the masses at home that the war is for “national security” and “against fascist aggression”!
2. The Daily Worker endorsed these treacherous actions of their colleagues:
“Maurice Thorez, general secretary of the great French Communist Party, has presented himself for military service with the army of France ...
“Now that Munich has led to war, Thorez, the Communist leader beloved of the French people, offers his life to defend the national security of France.” (Daily Worker Editorial, Sept. 6)
The next day its London correspondent reported that the Communist Party of England “vigorously proclaimed that it continues to work more actively than ever ‘to help win the war against fascist aggression’.” (Sept. 7)
 
III. What Should the American People Do?
1. The latest line states:
“First, allow no single measure to be taken for purposes of giving American help to either side of the imperialist conflict; second, find the most effective means of keeping the U.S. out of war, without any regard to whether these means incidentally happen to confer some small advantage to one side or the other.”
It finds peace and pro-war forces on “both sides” of the dispute on raising the arms embargo and condemns those “who demand the repeal or revision of the Act for the purpose of U.S. help to British and French imperialism, and thereby drawing America into the war.”
2. Two weeks ago, during the present war, the Daily Worker declared in a leading editorial:
“In his radio speech to the nation following the outbreak of war in Europe, President Roosevelt voiced sentiments which it seems to us have the approval of the majority of the American people ...
“When the President spoke of a ‘true neutrality’ for America we feel that American interest demands the repeal of the false Neutrality Act which now stands exposed as being the opposite of a ‘true neutrality.’ It is obviously not in America’s interest, not in the interest of ‘true neutrality’ that America shut off its trade with Poland, England, France, Canada and Australia.” (Sept. 5)
The “slogans of action” adopted by the national committee off the Communist Party on Sept. 4 include:
“Full moral, diplomatic and economic help for the Polish people and those who help Poland defend its national independence.
“Embargo Japan and Germany for the defeat of fascist aggression and for establishing a democratic peace.” (Sept. 5)
So that on the question of the character of the war, the measures that the workers in the belligerent countries should take, and what the American people should do, the Communist Party has renounced the position which they defended in the first days of the war (to say nothing of the pre-war Stalinist program).
 
Kremlin Autocrats Dictate C.P. Line
The zig-zag course of the Communist Party cannot be understood unless one all-important fact is kept in mind: the policy of the communist parties in every country is determined at each stage by the dictates of the autocracy of the Kremlin. An occasional misunderstanding of the Master’s orders may exist or the orders may be carried out clumsily by bewildered henchmen – particularly when they are changed so suddenly!
Browder, Thorez and Pollitt received their line of yesterday and of today from Moscow.
Their change of policy corresponds to the shifting needs and tactics of Stalin.
The first phase of the second world war opened with the German invasion of Poland immediately following the signing of the Hitler-Stalin Pact.
Stalin desired a prolonged war between Anglo-French imperialism and German Fascism. Even after he signed the pact with Hitler, probably including secret terms for joint division of Poland, the Baltic countries, etc., he feared above all, a quick victory of Hitler in Poland, and a reconciliation of the hostile camps by a German march into the Russian Ukraine, that is, a “new Munich.”
That is why at this stage Stalin assigned to his agents in the “democratic” countries the task of arousing mass movements of pressure on the respective governments for the most vigorous prosecution of the war by Anglo-French imperialism against Hitler. They were instructed to attack the alleged indecisiveness of Chamberlain and Daladier and to warn against their betrayal of “independent Poland” by a new Munich.
However, events move with lightning rapidity. Hitler conquered the western sections of Poland, and Stalin decided to invade the eastern regions of Poland. The second phase of the war was thus opened by Russia’s open military alliance with Germany for the partition of Poland.
Stalin sent out new instructions. The Poland of Beck and Smigly-Ridz, which yesterday was to be defended by the people of the world, suddenly became a fascist and imperialist country. The support of Anglo-French imperialism by the Communist parties in the first stage, is now to be converted into an opposition to the war as a robber war of conquest. Browder’s support to Roosevelt’s program of lining up the United States in support of England and France is now changed into an opposition to the President’s proposal to lift the embargo and a campaign against those who seek to drag the United States into the war.
The Communist parties have been ordered to do all in their power to help the victory of the Stalin-Hitler alliance. As agents of these dictators naturally they speak against the opponents of their masters, that is, against English, French and American imperialism. These unscrupulous tools seek to utilize the militant traditions of the working class against all imperialism and against war for the reactionary purpose of serving their bosses. That is the real meaning of the new line of the Communist parties.
(The Socialist Appeal will continue the analysis of the new C.P. line in coming issues. – Ed.)
 



QUESTION: What are the aims of President Roosevelt in the present war?
ANSWER: As the representative of the common interests of American big business, he seeks:
1. To establish monopoly control of the Latin American goods and investment market by replacing German and English trade in the countries to the south, at a time when the latter powers are unable to continue their normal business. In this way the economy and politics of the nations of South and Central America are to be made completely dependent upon Wall Street and Washington.
The recent Panama Conference (for which see Socialist Appeal, Oct. 10, 1939) was a big step in this direction.
2. To prepare for a military struggle against Japan in order to open up the markets of China to American capital and trade.
That is why Roosevelt has concentrated the American Navy in the Pacific Ocean.
3. To give material and moral aid to Anglo-French imperialism against Germany so as to defeat Hitler and thereby reopen the markets of Poland and southeastern Europe (what was once Czechoslovakia, and the Balkans) for American big business.
That is the reason for Roosevelt’s drive to lift the arms embargo; his protest to Russia – the ally of Germany – for its attitude towards Finland; his support of the recent conference of the Baltic countries and the clear cut general pro-Allied policy of the Administration.
4. To utilize the present war situation to achieve what six years of the New Deal failed to accomplish: a serious upturn in industry and business and a decrease in unemployment by supplying the Allies with arms, airplanes, and other goods.
This is another reason for Roosevelt’s campaign to lift the embargo. (In addition he wants by this way to increase the productive capacity of American industry for war materials of all types.)
5. To dictate the terms of peace after the war so as to establish American big business domination over the world, for which purpose he is preparing to throw the military power of the U.S. directly into the war.
That is the most general aim, of the Roosevelt program; the meaning of his tremendous armament expenditures, now to be increased; the significance of the campaign for a “two-ocean” navy which could fight Japan in the Pacific and Germany in the Atlantic.
 



As agents of the Stalin-Hitler war alliance and “peace proposals” the Communist Party has begun an open attack on Roosevelt and the New Dealers as spokesmen of American imperialism who seek to drag the US into the present war.
“Pressed by the imperialist bourgeoisie,”declares the latest resolution of the Political Committee of the Communist Party, “the Roosevelt government despite its avowed intention of ‘keeping out of war,’ more and more takes a course which threatens to involve the the USA in the imperialist war.” (Daily Worker, Oct. 15, 1939)
In the present situation, we are told “the slogans of anti-fascism no longer give the main direction of the struggle of the working class and its allies as they formerly did in the period of the struggle for the anti-fascist peace front and people’s front.” Under such conditions the difference “between the New Deal and anti-New Deal camps is losing its former significance. Both are parties of the bourgeoisie and seek in various ways to realize and promote the predatory interests of American imperialism in the war and both are following policies which threaten to involve the US in the present war.”
 
Alliance Dictated Turn
As foretold by the Socialist Appeal, the abrupt turn-about-face of the Communist Party from enthusiastic support of Roosevelt’s war program to opposition to it, was in the cards as soon as the Stalin-Hitler military alliance was signed. So long as Stalin sought a military alliance with the democratic imperialist powers and believed that American imperialism would be his ally in a war against German Fascism and Japan, the Communist Party was ordered to support Roosevelt as the champion of the people against Wall Street monopoly, the democratic opponent of the imperialist section of the capitalist class. Whoever challenged this lying propaganda was condemned as an agent of fascism.
The Stalinists hailed every pro-war move of the President as a blow for democracy and against imperialist war. They supported his policy of “national unity” for “continental defense,” that is, imperialist domination over the Latin American peoples, and his pledge to aid Canada in case it was attacked. They supported his rearmament program, and his drive to lift the arms embargo so as to help Anglo-French imperialism.
Even after the outbreak of the war in Europe, the Daily Worker greeted Roosevelt’s fake promises to keep America out of the war as good coin. In the trade unions, at the conventions of the Rubber Workers Union, the Transport Workers Union, and the recent CIO congress the Stalinists supported resolutions which endorsed Roosevelt’s “peace” policy.
 
Talk Militant – But Why?
Now the Communist Party has thrown overboard these polices. Has it suddenly discovered that Roosevelt, the New Dealers and the Old Dealers are class enemies of the toilers, imperialist spokesmen irrespective of the secondary differences among them? Hardly!However, yesterday Roosevelt was a potential ally of Stalin; today Roosevelt is already an ally of Chamberlain and Daladier who are engaged in a war against Hitler, the present partner of Stalin. Roosevelt has already lined up against Stalin by his letter to the Kremlin on Finland.
These unscrupulous henchmen of the Kremlin autocrat now use the phrases of militant working class struggle against capitalism and for socialism. How strange it must be for members of the CP to read the present resolution of their Political Committee. Their leaders have drilled into their minds that the democratic sections of the capitalist class must be supported against the fascist sections; that democratic imperialist governments could conduct a just war deserving the support of the masses; that anyone who denied these bits of Stalinist wisdom were enemies of the working class, progress and socialism. Now ...
“The merciless enemy of the workers al-ways has been, is and will be: the capitalist class. This is so regardless of the particular political face with which the capitalist class appears, regardless of the political form in which it shields its domination, regardless of the lying and hypocritical slogans with which it masks the imperialist aims, whether in times of war or peace.”
 
Drop Criticism of Fascists
What honest and intelligent worker can any longer be fooled by the lying and hypocritical slogans of the Stalinists who mask their own reactionary aims – the victory of the Stalin-Hitler war alliance – with the cloak of independent workers’ action against war?
The opposition of the Communist Party to Roosevelt’s War Deal has as little in common with genuine working class opposition as the campaign of the German Bund – the agents of Hitler in the US – against American intervention in the present war. The immediate aims of Earl Browder and Fritz Kuhn are identical: the victory of the joint war of their paymasters!
The “united front” of the Communist Party and the Nazi Bund has gone so far that there is not a single word of criticism of fascism in the resolution of the Political Committee of the CP! In fact the resolution prepares the war for open support of German Fascism by the Communist Party.
While stating that all the belligerent powers “are equally guilty” for the present war the resolution states that one of the main aims of Anglo-French imperialism in their war against Hitler is “to try to bring to power in Germany that section of the bourgeoisie which will immediately engage in military intervention against the USSR”.
 
A New Theory Being Born
Yesterday the policy of Peoples Frontism was defended on the theory that fascism (particularly, Hitlerism) represented the most reactionary, most chauvinistic, most imperialistic and most anti-Soviet section of the bourgeoisie. Therefore, it was concluded, a bloc was necessary with the “democratic section”of the ruling class against fascism. Would it be surprising if tomorrow the Stalinists concoct a new theory that a bloc is necessary between the working class, and the sections of the German bourgeoisie which are not in favor of an immediate war against the Soviet Union – the supporters of Hitler, who apparently are less reactionary, etc. – against the extreme German imperialists who are allies of Chamberlain? The new resolution opens the door wide for this development.
 

